  
  
  
  
  
  
MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  
Volume  1,  No.3  
January  1939  
  
A  Monthly  Publication  of  
the  "Meher  Editorial  Committee"  
  
  
An  Avatar  Meher  Baba  Trust  eBook  
July  2011  
  
  
All  words  of  Meher  Baba  copyright  ©  2011  Avatar  Meher  Baba    
Perpetual  Public  Charitable  Trust,  Ahmednagar,  India  
  
  
  
  
   Source  and  short  publication  history:  The  Meher  Baba  Journal,  a  monthly  magazine,   was  published  from  1938  to  1942.    This  eBook  reproduces  the  original  edition  of  the   Meher  Baba  Journal  published  by  the  "Meher  Editorial  Committee"  (Meherabad,   Ahmednagar,  India).  
                    

   eBooks  
at  the  Avatar  Meher  Baba  Trust  Web  Site  
   The  Avatar  Meher  Baba  Trust's  eBooks  aspire  to  be  textually  exact  though  non-facsimile   reproductions  of  published  books,  journals  and  articles.  With  the  consent  of  the  copyright   holders,  these  online  editions  are  being  made  available  through  the  Avatar  Meher  Baba  Trust's   web  site,  for  the  research  needs  of  Meher  Baba's  lovers  and  the  general  public  around  the   world.        Again,  the  eBooks  reproduce  the  text,  though  not  the  exact  visual  likeness,  of  the  original   publications.  They  have  been  created  through  a  process  of  scanning  the  original  pages,  running   these  scans  through  optical  character  recognition  (OCR)  software,  reflowing  the  new  text,  and   proofreading  it.  Except  in  rare  cases  where  we  specify  otherwise,  the  texts  that  you  will  find   here  correspond,  page  for  page,  with  those  of  the  original  publications:  in  other  words,  page   citations  reliably  correspond  to  those  of  the  source  books.  But  in  other  respects--such  as   lineation  and  font--the  page  designs  differ.  Our  purpose  is  to  provide  digital  texts  that  are   more  readily  downloadable  and  searchable  than  photo  facsimile  images  of  the  originals  would   have  been.  Moreover,  they  are  often  much  more  readable,  especially  in  the  case  of  older   books,  whose  discoloration  and  deteriorated  condition  often  makes  them  partly  illegible.     Since  all  this  work  of  scanning  and  reflowing  and  proofreading  has  been  accomplished  by  a   team  of  volunteers,  it  is  always  possible  that  errors  have  crept  into  these  online  editions.  If  you   find  any  of  these,  please  let  us  know,  by  emailing  us  at  frank@ambppct.org.      The  aim  of  the  Trust's  online  library  is  to  reproduce  the  original  texts  faithfully.  In  certain   cases,  however--and  this  applies  especially  to  some  of  the  older  books  that  were  never   republished  in  updated  versions--we  have  corrected  certain  small  errors  of  a  typographic   order.  When  this  has  been  done,  all  of  these  corrections  are  listed  in  the  "Register  of  Editorial   Alterations"  that  appears  at  the  end  of  the  digital  book.  If  you  want  the  original  text  in  its  exact   original  form,  warts  and  all,  you  can  reconstruct  this  with  the  aid  of  the  "register."      The  Trust's  Online  Library  remains  very  much  a  work  in  progress.  With  your  help  and  input,  it   will  increase  in  scope  and  improve  in  elegance  and  accuracy  as  the  years  go  by.  In  the   meantime,  we  hope  it  will  serve  the  needs  of  those  seeking  to  deepen  and  broaden  their  own   familiarity  with  Avatar  Meher  Baba's  life  and  message  and  to  disseminate  this  good  news   throughout  the  world.     
  

Contents

SHRI MEHER BABA ON GOD AND THE INDIVIDUAL

1

NEW YEAR SUFI THOUGHTS ARANGAON DISPUTE THE VAISHNAVITE SAINTS OF SOUTHERN INDIA AND THEIR HAGIOLOGY
SHRI MEHER BABA IMPRESSIONS
HAZRAT MEHER BABA ST. TERESA OF SPAIN THE CONCEPT OF LIBERATION
BABA AND HIS ADHERENTS SPIRITUAL ANECDOTE SHRI MEHER BABA'S TOUR OF NINE DAYS THROUGH CENTRAL INDIA
YOU MUST BELIEVE IT HOW I MET THEM AND WHAT THEY TOLD ME
MY MASTER'S LOVE IS THE GREATEST
AS I SAW IT GATHER US IN (Poem) QUESTION BABA ANSWERS EXISTENCE SHRI MEHER BABA AND HEALING
NOTES FROM MY DIARY POEM

Abdul Karim Abdulla
Dr. Abdul Ghani Munsiff
Elizabeth C. Patterson
C.V. Sampath Aiyangar (Late of Madras Judicial Service)

12 15 16 20

Princess Norina Matchabelli
Dr. Abdul Ghani Munsiff Will Backett Dr. C. D. Deshmukh, M.A., Ph.D. (London) Adi K. Irani Dr. Abdul Ghani Munsiff Princess Norina Matchabelli

24
29 37 42
50 56 59

Dr. Abdul Ghani Munsiff Abdul Kareem Abdulla
M. R. Dhakephalkar
Princess Norina Matchabelli George Matheson Dr. Abdul Ghani Munsiff F. R. Workingboxwalla Countess Nadine Tolstoy
F. H. Dadachanji "Munsiff"

67 69
76
79 82 83 86 88
92 100

"I have come not to teach but to awaken" -Shri Meher Baba

VOL. 1

MEHER BABA
JOURNAL
JANUARY 1939

NO.3

Shri Meher Baba on God and the Individual

God is infinite. He is beyond the opposites of good and

bad, right and wrong, virtue and vice, birth and death,

pleasures and suffering. Such dual aspects do not be-

GOD IS THE ONLY REALITY

long to God. If we take God as
one separate entity, he becomes one term in relational existence.

Just as good is the counterpart of bad, God becomes

the counterpart of not-God, and the Infinite comes to

be looked upon as the opposite of the finite. When we

talk of the Infinite and the finite, we are referring to

them as two, and the Infinite has already become the

second part of the duality. But the Infinite belongs to

the non-dual order of being. If the Infinite is looked

upon as the counterpart of the finite, it is strictly

speaking no longer infinite but a species of the finite,

for it stands outside the finite as its opposite, and is

thus limited.

2 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

And since the Infinite cannot be the second part of the

finite, the apparent existence of the finite is false. The

Infinite alone exists. God cannot be brought down to

the domain of duality. There is only one being in

reality and it is the Universal Soul. The existence of

the finite or the limited is only apparent or imaginary.

You are infinite. You are really everywhere. But you

think that you are the body, and therefore consider

yourself limited. If you think you are the body which is

THE APPARENT
EXISTENCE OF THE FINITE

sitting, you do not know your true nature. If you look within
and experience your own soul in its true nature, you would realize

that you are infinite and beyond all creation. But you

identify yourself with the body, and this false

identification is due to ignorance which makes itself

effective through the medium of the mind. Ordinary

man thinks that he is the physical body. A spiritually

advanced man thinks that he is the subtle body. The

saint thinks that he is the mind. But in all of them the

soul is not having direct self-knowledge. It is not a

case of pure thinking unmixed with illusion. The soul

as soul is Infinite--aloof from mind or body. But

owing to ignorance the soul comes under the sway of

the mind and becomes a 'thinker'--sometimes

identifying itself with the body and sometimes with the

mind. And from the limited point of view of such a

person who has not gone beyond the domain of maya,

there are numberless

GOD AND THE INDIVIDUAL

3

individuals. It seems that there are as many individuals

as there are minds and bodies. In fact there is only one

Universal Soul, but the individual thinks that he is

different from other individuals. One and the same soul

is ultimately behind the minds of seemingly different

individuals, and through them it has the multifarious

experiences of duality. The One in the many comes to

experience itself as one of the many. And this is due to

imagination or false thinking.

Thinking becomes false owing to the interference of

sanskaras accumulated during the process of the

evolution of consciousness. The function of con-

THE CAUSE OF FALSE THINKING

sciousness is perverted by the
operation of sanskaras which manifest themselves as desires.

Through many lives consciousness is continually being

burdened by the after-effects of experience. And the

perception of the soul is limited by these after-effects.

The thinking of the soul cannot break through the

hedge created by sanskaras, and consciousness

becomes a helpless captive of illusions projected by its

own false thinking. And this falsification of thought is

present not only in cases where consciousness is partly

developed, but also in men where it is fully developed.

The progressive evolution of consciousness begin-

THE SCOPE OF FULL CON-
SCIOUSNESS

ing with the stone stage culminates in man. History of evolution is the
history of gradual development of consciousness; and the

4 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

fruit of evolution is full consciousness which is chara-

cteristic of man. But even this full consciousness is

like a mirror covered by dust. Owing to the operation

of the sanskaras it does not yield clear and true

knowledge of nature of the soul. Though fully deve-

loped it yields, not truth but imaginative construction,

since its free functioning is hindered by the weight of

the sanskaras. Moreover it cannot extend beyond the

cage created by its desires, and therefore is limited in

its scope.

The boundary in which consciousness can move

prescribed by the sanskaras and its functioning is also

determined by the desires. But as desires aim at self-

THE INDIVIDU-
ALISATION OF CONSCIOUSNESS

satisfaction, the whole consciousness becomes self-cent-
red and individualised. The individualisation of conscious-

ness may in a sense be said to be the effect of the

vortex of desires. The soul gets enmeshed in the

desires, and cannot step out of the circumscribed

individuality constituted by these desires. It imagines

these barriers and becomes self-hypnotised. It looks

upon itself as being limited and separate from other

individuals. It gets entangled in individualistic

existence and imagines a world of manifold separ-

ateness with many individuals with their respective

minds and bodies.

When the rays of the sun are made to pass through a

prism, they get dispersed and become separate owing

to refraction. If each of these rays

GOD AND THE INDIVIDUAL

5

SEPARATENESS EXISTS ONLY IN
IMAGINATION

had consciousness, it would consider itself as being separate from the other rays, forgetting entirely that at source and on the

other side of the prism it had no separate existence. In

the same way the One Supreme Being descends in the

domain of maya and assumes a multiplicity which does

not in fact exist. The separateness of individuals does

not exist in reality but only in imagination. The one

universal soul imagines separateness in itself. And out

of this division there arises the thought of 'I' and 'mine'

as opposed to 'you' and 'yours'. Although the soul is in

reality an undivided and absolute unity, it appears as

being manifold and divided owing to the working of its

own imagination. Imagination is not a reality. Even in

its highest flight it is a departure from truth. It is

anything but the truth. The experience which the soul

gathers in terms of the individualised ego is all

imagination. It is a misapprehension of the soul. Out of

the imagination of the universal soul are born many

individuals. This is maya or ignorance.

Side by side with the birth of the separate and

limited individuality there also comes into existence

the objective universe. As the limited individuality has

OBJECTIVE UNIVERSE

separate existence not in fact but only
in imagination, the objective universe also has no independent and separate

reality. It is the One Universal itself appearing in

6 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

the second role of manifestation through the attributes.

When the soul descends in the domain of maya, it

takes upon itself the limitations of manifold existence.

This self-limitation of the soul might be looked upon

as its self-sacrifice on the altar of consciousness.

Although it eternally remains the same Infinite

Absolute, it suffers a kind of timeless contraction

through its apparent descent in the world of time and

variety and evolution. What, however, really evolves is

not the soul itself but only the consciousness, which,

owing to its limitations, gives rise to the limited

individuality.

The history of the limited individuality is a history

of the development of triple entanglement with mind,

energy and matter (body). Duality prevails in all these

THE TRIPLE
ENTANGLEMENT AND DUALITY

domains, and the soul gets entangled in this duality,
although it is in essence beyond duality. Duality implies

the existence of opposites limiting and balancing each

other through mutual tension. Good and bad, virtue

and vice are examples of such opposites. The ignorant

soul enmeshed in duality is in the clutches of both

good and bad. The duality of good and bad arises due

to ignorance. But once the soul gets entangled with it,

it comes under its sway. During the evolution of the

triple entanglement with matter (body), energy and

mind, the ignorant soul is continually in the grip of

wanting. It wants good and bad of the gross world; it

wants good and bad of the

GOD AND THE INDIVIDUAL

7

subtle world; and it wants good and bad of the mental

world. And owing to the distinction of good and bad,

wanting itself becomes good and bad. Wanting thus

comes to be inevitably limited by the perpetual tension

of the opposites. This gives rise to unending oscillation

from one state to another, without arriving at the

unlimited state which can only be discovered in the

unchanging and eternal aspect of life. The Infinite is to

be sought for beyond the domain of duality. And this

becomes possible only when consciousness can step

out of the limited individuality by breaking through the

barriers of sanskaras.

We have seen that the possible field of con-

sciousness is limited by the sanskaras. This limitation

creates a division of the human psyche into two parts.

THE CHASM BETWEEN CONSCIOUSNESS AND UNCONSCIOUSNSS

One part falls within the range of consciousness part
falls beyond it. This unconscious part taken in its
full extent is identical with

the power which is also behind matter. And it is

referred to as God by the orthodox religions. The

Ultimate Reality which symbolically represented

through such concepts can be known in its truth only

by bringing the unconscious into consciousness. An

extension of consciousness consists in being conscious

of that which was formerly unconscious. The

progressive conquest of the unconscious by the

conscious culminates in consummate consciousness

which is unlimited in scope

8 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

and unhindered in function. Between this highest state

of consciousness and the limited though full con-

sciousness of average humanity there are about forty-

nine degrees of illumined consciousness. They mark

the important stages of growing illumination.

The gulf between the clouded consciousness of

average humanity and the fully illumined conscious-

ness of a Perfect Master is created by sanskaras which

SPRITUAL ADVANCEMENT

gives rise to egoism. These can
be removed through perfect character, devotion and selfless

service. But the best results in this direction are

attained through the help of a Perfect Master. Spiritual

advancement consists not in the further development of

consciousness (for it is already fully developed in

man), but in the emancipation of consciousness from

the bondage of the sanskaras. Although in essence

consciousness is the same in all the different states of

existence, it can never be consummate unless it can

reflect the knowledge of Infinity without the least

shadow of ignorance, and also extensively cover the

whole stretch of the universe illumining the different

spheres of existence.

Every time you go to sleep you are unconsciously

united with the Infinite Reality. This unification

involves the extension of unconsciousness over con-

DEEP SLEEP

sciousness. It thus bridges over the chasm between the unconscious and

the conscious. But being unconscious of this union you

do not con-

GOD AND THE INDIVIDUAL

9

sciously derive any benefit from it. This is the reason

why when you wake up again from deep sleep you

become aware of the self-same hum-drum individual,

and you begin to act and experience exactly as you

acted and experienced before going to sleep. If your

union with the Supreme Reality had been a conscious

union, you would have awakened into a completely

new and infinitely rich life.

A Perfect Master is consciously united with the

Infinite Reality. In his case the chasm between

consciousness and unconsciousness is bridged not by

CONSCIOUS UNION WITH REALITY

the extension of the unconscious over the conscious
as in the man who enjoys

deep sleep but by the extension of consciousness over

unconsciousness. The waxing and waning of

consciousness is applicable only to the limited

individual. In the case of the Perfect Master the

conquest of the unconscious by the conscious is final

and permanent, and therefore his state of self-

knowledge is continuous and unbroken, and remains

the same at all times without any diminution. From this

you can see that the Perfect Master never sleeps in the

ordinary sense of the word. When he rests his body he

experiences no gap in his consciousness.

In the state of perfection full consciousness becomes

consummate by the disappearance of all obstacles to

illumination. The conquest of the unconscious by

10 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

THE STATE OF PERFECTION

the conscious is complete, and the
person continuously dwells in the full blaze of illumination or as one

with illumination. He becomes illumination itself. As

long as a person remains under the sway of duality and

looks upon the manifoldness of experience as being

true and final, he has not traversed the domain of

ignorance. In the state of final understanding a person

realizes that the Infinite, which is one without a

second, is the only reality. The Infinite pervades and

includes all existence leaving nothing as its rival. A

person who has such realization has attained the

highest state of consciousness. In this state the full

consciousness which is the fruit of evolution is

retained, but the limitations of sanskaras and desires

are completely transcended. The limited individuality,

which is the creation of ignorance, is transformed into

the Divine individuality which is unlimited. The

illimitable consciousness of the Universal Soul

becomes individualised in this focus without giving

rise to any form of illusion. The person is free from all

self-centred desires, and he becomes the medium of the

spontaneous flow of the supreme and universal Will

which expresses divinity. Individuality becomes

limitless by the disappearance of ignorance. As it is

unimpaired by the separateness of maya and

unentangled in its duality, it enjoys the state of

liberation, in which there is objectless awareness, pure

being and unclouded joy. Such a person has no longer

any illusions which

GOD AND THE INDIVIDUAL

11

perplex and bewilder man. In one sense he is dead. The
personal ego which is the source of the sense of separateness has been for ever annihilated. But in
another sense he is alive for-ever-more with unconquerable love and eternal bliss. He has infinite
power and wisdom, and the whole universe is to him a field for his spiritual work of perfecting mankind.



NEW YEAR
1939
BY ABDULKARIM ABDULLA

The new measurement of im-
measurable time commences with the beginning of the year 1939 and we take
this opportunity to offer our hearty best wishes for a spiritually happy New
Year to all people the world over for the New Year starting on January first,
the New Year already in force since the recent Pateti of the Parsis and Divali of
the Hindus and the New Year that will shortly commence for the Muslims in
Moharrum. According to the law of cause and
effect, as long as space remains to be accounted for, time has necessarily to
be reckoned with. If religion and philosophy start with a definite beginning
and a distinct end for time in the ultimate Reality, science and mathe-
matics end in admitting an incalculable past and an unfathomable future for the
same in the ever-shifting and never-stationary present.
For everyday purposes mankind rightly measures time in years and, in

spite of the glaring diversities in the
day-to-day affairs in life, humanity is fortunately one in the method of
calculating year by year this fundamental factor of all earthly life. A re-
markable feature in this connection is the worldwide consistency in main-
taining a common compass of a comprehensible hold on the fast slipping
time. The last point to which the mass mind can conveniently stretch and
strain itself backwards appears again to be an unanimously fixed limit of about
two thousand years. Even those who claim the origin of their culture and
civilization in the hoary past have found an outstanding event of singular
importance in history to hook on the immediate present within this period. In
fact all the outstanding current eras on the face of the globe are well within
this particular orbit. Hindu 1995 Sanvat;
Christian 1939 A.D.; Muslim 1358 Hijri;
Zoroastrian1308 Yazdezardi.

NEW YEAR

13

Amongst many other unmistakable
signs, the approaching end of the 20th century in which all the other eras are
passing through almost their last quarters, portends producing one
universal New Year at no distant date. Time alone will tell the exact day when
Baba speaks and the first New Year 'after Silence' begins to enable
hopelessly divided humanity to drown its petty selfish differences into the past
of pardon and forgetfulness. In the meantime we join in the
ensuing joys and prayers of another year in the spirit of the immortal Hafiz:
"Transitory is life, its pain, and pleasures,
Then to laugh out of it, the wise one prefers."
To laugh into the New Year with merry-making is a good beginning to
pass out of it happily. But only a few succeed to this end. The majority who
indulge in the New Year festivities of laughter and lights, do it simply in a
sense of superstition as if the happy beginning of a year is in itself a pass-
port to peace and plenty of succeeding days and months.
There can be no better example to

belie such a notion than the Muslim
New Year that always commences in mourning with the month of Mohar-
rum, since about thirteen hundred years, on the tenth of that month, the
two grandsons of the Arabian Prophet preferred to lay down their lives than
give up the principles of truth and fair play. In spite of the dutiful mourning of
the Mahomedan world every New Year in commemoration of one of the great-
est spiritual tragedies on earth, the history of Islam differs in no way in the
usual ups and downs of time and tide compared with any other history in the
world. We pray that India, the land of
saints, will soon succeed to put an end to the unhappy struggle long going on
between the Hindus and the Muslims, the sons and the daughters of the same
motherland regarding the two different aspects and two diverse manifestations
of the same Truth which will ever remain One without a second.
When ordinary buildings in a thickly populated area are pulled down,
extraordinary is the cost to build better ones and make good the incidental
damages. The sacrifices re-

14 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

quired to atone for pulling down vio-
lently the structures of settled humanity and disrupting whole countries seething
with men, women and children is beyond calculation and imagination. It is,
therefore, all the more necessary to pray for strength and fortitude for the
apparently fortunate countries to be able to bear the colossal suffering and
infinite privations destined to follow in the wake of their gigantic undertakings
for the supposed betterment and welfare not only of themselves but
other nations and races that necessarily involve numberless sins of commission and omission against God's own creation.
The little message of hope and cheer that we can give to races that appear for
the moment to be unfortunate is, that it is better to be sinned against than to
sin, and that one of the greatest spiritual blessings and boons is, uncalled for and
uninvited suffering. Sooner or later, as surely as daylight follows darkness,
such calamities are bound by the universal law of nature to bear fruit of
freedom and salvation. We cannot at this juncture forget to

remind those homeless, friendless and
helpless victims of natural calamities like flying storms and forging floods,
raging epidemics and heart-rending accidents that there is no new life
without its twin of a birth pang; for all its horrors are soon rewarded with a
greater happiness. It is beyond us to say anything in the
limited language of the lay mind for those grand souls consciously basking
in the sunshine of the spiritual path, but we wish many happy returns of the day
to all those who may have even once remembered God for the sake of God,
or done even a whit of service, or loved anyone or anything for the sake of love
without hope of return and longing for reward, without fear of punishment and
fettish of privileges. We dare say that a New Year is an
occasion of deep lamentation for those who consider the world to be the 'be all' and 'end all' of life, and who have consciously and actively done nothing towards understanding life's true purport. The year passed is certainly a
year lost for them. Although during the last fourteen
years of Baba's silence

SUFI THOUGHTS

15

it has been repeated more than fourteen times, nothing can yet be sweeter for

his group to hear .that Baba will speak and speak soon.

Sufi Thoughts
VERSIFICATION By Dr. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF
SACRIFICE Stint not wealth, to preserve life,
A precious gift from God; Spare not both -- wealth and life,
One's honour to safeguard.
If Truth be endangered, To save it sacrifice
Wealth, honour, everything, Nay even your life.
If luckily a Master comes, And offers God-realization;
Without scruple, surrender all, Wealth and honour, life, religion.
God is the goal of all creation, Be ready for the call;
By losing everything for Him, In Him you regain all.
--Kabir


Arangaon Dispute
BY ELIZABETH C. PATTERSON

Staying at "Meherabad" I feel that I live everywhere and nowhere. Yet
through Baba this speck on the map of India which is unknown to the world
seems like the pin of the hub that fastens the giant wheel, with its spoke
radiating out to the throbbing cities, the arteries of civilization, and to the
furthermost ends of the earth. Colourful local events assume
importance which could have their counterpart in other communities of the
world, only against different backgrounds.
The little village of Arangaon about a quarter mile from "Meherabad", the
temple bells of which we can hear from our hill top, has four hundred in-
habitants. It had its importance, together with Ahmednagar in the time
of the brave Mahomedan Queen, Chandbibi, who lived several hundred
years ago in the Mogul period and led her armies to victory, although she,
riding on her white horse, was killed in

the battle. At present in Arangaon there are interesting architectural facades,
doorways, windows and other relics of past grandeur including parts of the old
wall, but the place is crumbling and poor. The great picturesque fort in
Ahmednagar which is large enough to house whole barracks of British troops
today, was constructed by Chandbibi. There is an ancient feud existing, in
Arangaon, the true details of which are lost, but it is kept alive in the village
through the inhabitants taking sides, and two 'parties' have long been
formed. The village has always been divided against itself, despite the fact
that the inhabitants are practically of one caste.
On Baba's birthday, or other occasions when the villagers come to see
him, or they invite Baba to their village for a fete, are the rare occasions when
they come together (both parties) peaceably. Recently Baba was invited
by the headman of Arangaon, as spokesman, to come to their great

ARANGAON DISPUTE

17

fete day and give the villagers Darshan
or blessings. Knowing that his Western disciples had never seen anything of the
kind, Baba invited us to accompany him on what turned out to be a touching miniature "triumphant tour", for every villager was there lining the cobble-
stoned streets and throwing flowers before the car in which Baba rode. He
smiled upon them as the divine parent, which he is in truth, and we could feel
their hearts respond. The headman of the village together with musicians and
native dancers who were escorting, slowly walked or danced the half a mile
distance from 'Meherabad' to Arangaon with its winding streets. At a place
especially prepared for Baba near the ancient gateway on the far side of
Arangaon, the villagers each in turn passed in front of him and, in the
manner which is as old as the East itself, prostrated themselves before his
feet, and he touched their heads in blessing. Baba always lets happen that
which is prompted by the human heart. It occurred a few days later that
some minor crime was committed in Arangaon and the ancient feud flared

up, the village party was on the point of
killing the other when they remembered Baba. They sent a delegation to
him saying that only Baba could settle their differences. He returned word that
he would meet a contingent from either side, both at the same time, at the
Ashram in "Meherabad" that evening. As we rode up the two 'parties' were
seated, divided on either side of the building, and Baba arranged that they
were kept waiting for a few moments and then suddenly called into the
Ashram. In this way they came inside all mixed as one 'party', and Baba
requested them at once to be seated on the floor. One villager with murderous
thought against the other, found himself seated next to another of the
opposite party--but they were so intent upon putting their side of the question
before Baba believing him to be the True Judge--that they did what on
other occasions would have been impossible without bloodshed. Baba
had several of his able, staunch men disciples conduct the gathering and, if
more than one villager spoke at a time, they were quietly

18 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

but strongly kept in order. Baba
showed extreme patience and listened to about forty anguished souls, with all
they had to say. Finally one old woman came forward and swayed back and
forth, almost as if she were reciting an incantation of all the woes of the race.
One of the village men stepped forward and pushed her aside, as even they
could not stand so many woes! At another point, when evidently the
particular offender was speaking, about ten men arose and commenced yelling
at one another. Baba smiled benignly and then clapped his hands for silence.
The effect was instantaneous and amazing, for the men so rough and
loud, with Baba so gentle in comparison and not speaking, but with only a
hand clap of command abated their storm of passion. On his board, inter-
preted by one of his disciples, he informed the gathering that as evidently
they had made up their minds not to be peaceable, there was nothing to do but
to leave the matter to take its course, and when it reaches the authorities,
they would deal with it in their own way. Baba arose to leave. Upon this the

villagers who were enjoying their ill
feelings towards one another and wished to talk all night, were taken
aback and their faces visibly fell, for suddenly the arguers were left without
an argument, as fire without fuel ! Baba paused at the doorway, and
seeing them crestfallen, stated that he would remain only if they would abide
by his decision--to which they agreed. First he took the headman to task for
not having kept better order in the village. Some began to feel rather sorry
because they felt in their hearts that they were really to blame in the matter.
Then he told the dissenters that they must "Forgive and forget and become one." As long as they had two 'parties' they could never accomplish this. There
was much discussion amongst themselves, and I thought, of course, they
were objecting to giving up the two 'parties', but instead there was objection
to eating together, as it had been proposed that a village feast be held. The
question at issue appeared that one side would not accept food from the other.
In Indian custom if both parties accepted to eat

ARANGAON DISPUTE

19

together it becomes a bond; the same as
in our Christian Bible if refers to "breaking bread together" as something
sacred, but we in the West have lost the significance that the East still has for
this rite. It was agreed finally that if Baba
himself would give the food, they would both accept from him and
thereby become one family. In this concrete manner, a few days after Baba
thus blessed this flock of black and white sheep, by uniting them from
ancient hatred into fellowship. On twenty-sixth of November last, as
the Arangaon villagers wished to express their appreciation to Baba and to
cement their union by coming to him, a gathering was arranged which com-
menced at sunset time. A long line consisting of the four hundred inhabitants,
together with their children. came up the hill where we are residing, led by
their musicians who kept time in a slow rhythm of dance. Baba was seated on
the ground in front of the place where once he had retired in seclusion for a
year and where now there is erected,

over his cave, a white domed structure.
The evening ceremony consisted of a bhajan, or sacred recital, sung before
Baba. Until now the former 'parties' had kept back one thing, which Baba knew,
and that was sitting next to each other in the temple. Instead they held the
weekly bhajans separately. This sacred song recital in Baba's presence com-
menced by one of the former 'parties' singing accompanied by bell-like in-
struments and then, that which had not happened for years occurred, the other
party joined in unison. At this point Baba, who knows so well the child-like
need of the people for a material symbol, gave to the villagers a long-
shaped drum, which is an ancient sign of 'peace of unity'. Hereafter at the
bhajan in the temple they will sing together accompanied by its rhythmatic
beat, which in their orchestration is played as recurrently as the beat of the
human heart. All the assembly of men, women and
children came forward to receive Baba's Darshana and Prasad before
returning to their homes and took leave with song and blessings in their hearts.



The Vaishnavite Saints of Southern India and their Hagiology.*
THE LIFE OF ST. TONDAR--ADI--PPODI AZHVAR
(ORIGINAL NAME--VIPRA NARAYAN) BY C. V. SAMPATH AIYANGAR

The path of loving devotion secured by Juana and Karma, which is the
burden of Vedanta teaching as taught by Visishtadvaitins, is best illustrated
by the life of our Saint Vipra Narayan. That also shows how one suffers when
he forgets his kinship to God, and how he enjoys his life when he is recog-
nized. God is in us and we should not forget Him. As Dr. F. W. Faber so
beautifully said : "God possessed, our own God, that is Creation's Home, that
our Last End, there only is our rest. O that the winds of Grace would blow
that we might sail more swiftly over this broad sea to our Eternal Home!
Another day is gone, another week is passed, another year is told--Blessed
be God then, we are nearer to the end. It comes swiftly; yet it comes slowly

too. Come it must, and then it will all be but a dream to look back upon."
Our Saint was born in Southern India, at Mandangudi (in 2 Chola
Country).§ The month Margasirsha (December-January) is consecrated to
Lord Shree Krishna, and it was in this month that he was born in a Brahmin
family. Even in his youth he learnt all the sacred lore, the four Vedas, the six
Angas and the other sciences useful for successfully living this mundane life.
But, in the language of Thomas A. Kempis, he said to himself addressing Him, "Most beloved spouse of my Soul, supreme source of Light and Love, and
sovereign Lord of Universal Nature! When shall I lose in the Love of Thee,
all perception of myself, and have no sense of any being but Thine?" He went
on a visit to Sriranga,

________________________________________________ * Continued from December 1938 issue.  A set of philosophers, followers of Shri Ramanuja. § One of the four important old kingdoms of Southern India.

THE VAISHNAVITE SAINTS OF SOUTHERN INDIA

21

the sacred town which is between the
two branches of the river Kaveri, and settled there in the temple of Shri
Ranganatha, the Lord Resident of the place. There he spent his time in divine
contemplation, concentrating his mind on the Divine Beauty of the One cause
of everything. Everyday he used to prepare a floral wreath with eight select
species of flowers, and offer it to Him who is the Lord of all beings. The
esoteric meaning of this very interesting fact is this: It was typical of the
chief eight kinds of mental worship and service to mankind. They are:
1. Non-injury (Ahimsa), 2. Conquest of the senses (Indriya Nigrah), 3.
Kindness to all creatures (Sarva bhuta daya), 4. Forgiveness (Kshama), 5.
Prayer (Dhyana), 6. Austerity (Tapas), 7. Mental culture (Jnana), 8. Truth
(Satyam). Worship with these flowers is the real communion with God. That
joy with God is really above all other joys. It was in such a state of ecstatic
bliss that Saint Nammazhvar exclaimed that he seemed to be all in all in the Almighty's creation which contained heaven and hell. To a person who

enjoys such a bliss, says the commen-
tator, heaven and hell make no difference.
Our Saint was called Tondak Adipodi (meaning the dust of the feet of the
slaves of God). He loved humanity and worked for their salvation. And to him
all things reminded of God. The great Saint Nammazhvar wrote
on the days and nights of the soul of vicissitudes in spiritual life. Referring
to this Thomas A. Kempis says, "This vicissitude of day and night in the
spiritual life is neither new nor unexpected to those who are acquainted
with the ways of God; for the ancient prophets and the most eminent saints
have all experienced an alternative of visitation and desertion." As an instance
of this, the royal prophet describes his own case. "When I was in prosperity,"
says he, "and my heart was filled with the treasures of grace, I said I should
never be moved." But these treasures being soon taken away and feeling in
himself the poverty of fallen nature he adds: "Thou didst turn Thy face from me and I was troubled." Yet in this disconsolate state he does

22 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

not despair, but with more ardour raises
his desire and prays to God: "Unto Thee, O, Lord, will I cry, and I will make my supplication unto my God." Our Saint had his own vicissitude of
day and night in his spiritual life. When his love to Him departed, a chaos wide
and vast and dark as hell was opened in him. But when the departed love re-
turned, the gloomy scene was past and he saw the One God Supreme above all
others. This is the incident in his life to which I refer.
In the town of Tiru-Kkarambanur there lived one Devadevi, a courtesan
of matchless beauty. She was connected with the Court of the King
Chola, whose capital was Uraiyur. She, on her way home, halted in the flower
garden of our Saint. She, with her maids, was taking rest under a shady
tree. A thousand trees there were of various kinds. Beautiful birds of var-
ious colours were singing their rapturous songs. This beautiful garden was
a veritable garden of Eden, and there amidst the music of the spheres rested
the young damsel. She saw our Saint working in the parterres. He was

watering the plants and collecting
flowers. The damsel saw him, but his mind was concentrated in his work.
Devadevi and her maid wondered why he did not see them at least once. How
could he be so indifferent to their fascinating charm? The maid said that
he was wholly absorbed in divine service, and was, therefore, indifferent
to what took place around him. She then said that Devadevi could not capti-
vate him, but the latter swore that she would. So saying she removed all her
jewels and sent them home through her maids. She then went and stood before
our Saint. Then she prostrated before him. The Saint saw her and asked her
who she was. She said that she was leading a vicious life, and that she came
to him for redemption and salvation. She agreed to work in the garden and
help him in all possible ways. She worked under him, and he shared his
frugal fare with her. Some days passed. and one day she was allowed to
shampoo his weary limbs. He then became a slave to her furtive glances.
and fell. "Ah! how I have virtue
forsworn!

THE VAISHNAVITE SAINTS OF SOUTHERN INDIA

23

Her anklets gingling, me unnerved!
Oh! how her eyes so wide and dark
Has witching spelled my Saintly Soul!"
The God's garden became Cupid's parterres! The wily strumpet stripped
Vipra Narayan of all his worldly goods and left him helpless. He ran after her
and submitted himself to all the indignities of an unscrupulous harlot. He was
lying helpless at her door side. He then thought of Him: And it was truly said
that it is the only sovereign remedy for all ills. King Chola had a dream about
our Vipra. He was told that the latter had suffered at the hands of Devadevi
on account of his past deeds, and that the end of justice was satisfied. When
the king met Vipra the next day and

told him about the dream, old recollections came to our Saint, and there he
stood regenerate. So far as Devadevi was concerned her association with the
Saint completely reformed her. She also became a new being. In his
beautiful devotional hymn Tiru-malai, the Saint sings :
"Whom dare we fear now? So panoplied are we
With His All-holy name, E'en death from our door Oh, ousted, headlong flies." It teaches that the soul must always
work subject to the will of God. In his second work, Tirup-palli-Yezhucchi
(Waking of the Lord), he teaches that the only way to salvation is disinter-
ested service. For 105 years he lived in the sacred town of Shrirangam, preach-
ing what he felt and saw of God.

To be continued)


Shri Meher Baba
IMPRESSIONS*
BY PRINCESS NORINA MATCHABELLI

So often in still contemplation, sitting
in groups around Him we spend hours of supreme inspiration when into the
awed stillness of our hearts His unfathomable words resound: "I am the only Reality."
To someone kneeling before Him in
adoration, He says: "She is all love--no desire--I am above purity."
To another among His children, demonstrating love in their own
individual way, He says: "It is all the same love."
Someone of fierce nature, a man insatiable in self-satisfaction of life,
spiritually yet immature, too proud to dare to be confronted with one like Shri
Meher Baba, who after having met Him said: "I went determined to oppose, my
mind was full of doubts. When I entered the room, I felt disarmed by His
look as of a pure child. That experience I can hardly describe. I

thought I was going to see a man, but I
met someone far above the ordinary. His form, though looking natural and
human, was of different texture. He appeared translucent. He knew all
about my life as if it were His own. He read my most remote thoughts. He
moved within me a realm of feeling which I had ignored, one commonly
calls it heart; but it is that real heart which we know only because through-
out all life, we long for its better feelings. When I told Him about my
struggles, I saw that my suffering had left traces of its unworthy drama on His
face. I had to kiss His compassionate face. I shall never forget His super-
human kindness and tolerance and His child-like humour. We talked about
things worldly and matters of everyday. I realized that all was the clean clear
expression of some unfathomable just and lawful plan which since I have
accepted by the grace of faith that

______________________________________________________________________  Continued from December 1938 issue.

SHRI MEHER BABA

25

He awakened in me."
Someone else said to Him: "As soon as I saw Him I broke out in
loud laughter of joy. He and I at once felt like two pals on some vacation
game. I embraced Him like my nearest friend. He appeared so white. I thought
I had dreamt of purity when I was a boy, but I can, for the first time, say I experienced Purity."
Children are more able to recognize
Him. How often do we witness the intuitive feeling guiding them, making
them see what we cannot see; in the most unexpected manner they are
caught in His Divine Ray. Once, while walking in the private grounds be-
longing to one of His Swiss disciples, He approached a little girl of seven
picking apples from under a tree. Baba graciously bending over her looked
deep into her eyes. Startled, in awe, by the blessing that she had received, she
ran to her mother to share her sweet experience calling out: "O Mummy,
Mummy, never has anyone looked at me with so much love."
Wherever He appears, here or there in East or West, His miraculous body

of superhuman texture projects the
divine fluid substance with equal grace to respond to the need of all.
In New York in one of the greater gatherings held in the private home of
one of Baba's friends, this startling fact happened. Many people are standing in
line to pay their respects to Him, when suddenly, Baba, interrupting the cere-
mony, is pointing to a person standing far back in the crowd, a lady none of us knew. Baba's persistent sign meant for the person to come to meet Him before
any other. To the message given by one of us she responded in embarrassed
manner as if wanting to evade the call apologetically, explaining that she
merely had come to accompany a friend. Baba repeats the insistent sign
for the second time. Her attitude suddenly changes and she walks toward Him as if irresistibly drawn. Baba's hand stretches toward her with visible
expression of joy. Her embarrassment grows almost to a state of confusion
which Baba with the following words instantaneously counteracts: "Do not worry," He said, "I know everything and I will help you." Involuntarily she
sheds tears. After a few moments

26 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

Baba bids her leave, and again she disappears in the crowd while the
reception is ordered to continue. He has found the old needing soul which, for
some unfathomable reason, that day was due to meet Him. A week later this
stranger calls me over the phone. She said: "I am the woman you so gra-
ciously introduced to the Master. May I come and see you as something
wonderful has happened to me?" On acquaintance she told me her life story
and impressed me with the sorrowful and tragic conditions in her family life,
because of the hatred between herself and her own child, a girl of twenty.
Mother and child had persecuted each other for twenty years. The mother
said, "I have never been able to understand this as my child was born in love.
Never have I been able to overcome the detestation for my child; I have never
felt inclined to kiss her. When the Master asked me to meet Him I did not
know why. My own unhappiness had become so much of a habit that I did
not even know that I was in need of help. When the Master greeted me with
so much kindness I did not remember

being impressed in any way, not even to have been able to objectively ob-
serve Him. I was like one in a dream who suddenly wakes up and feels
carried off, led by an invisible friend for some good reason. This morning I
awakened from an unusually deep sleep bathed in ecstasy of love and bliss. I
could not understand what had happened to me. It was so powerfully
active making me react without the use of my will. I rose from my bed and
walked into the room of my child who was still asleep. Drawn by irresistible
love I embraced her...For the first time, in both of our lives, did we feel a
bond--a bond that was more than mother love and child love. My ex-
perience was contagiously felt in her, and is today a tender relationship which
reflects happiness for the whole family. Dear friend," she continued, "who is this
man? I remember similar stories about Jesus imparting Grace of Love."
"I am in you, with you always," He says.
If one of us fell ill, He feels it. From a distance before we call for help, He
cables, advising some cure that He the

SHRI MEHER BABA

27

Knower of all science, diagnosing our
condition as no scientific ordinary expert can, knows is right.
I have a friend, a Catholic and superstitiously drawn to anyone who de-
monstrates physical miracles. She was introduced to Baba at a time when very
ill, with a tumour in the brain and paralysis of her right arm. Baba is
indifferent to demonstrate powers, for whosoever it may be, but He granted her a short audience of 'only two minutes'. Without giving her time for
explanation or complaints, He passed His hand over her forehead and over
her arm, prescribing by the following statement the cure to follow: "Do as I say and I shall heal you." The woman, accustomed to conventional formalities
felt shocked at Baba's short and matterof-fact informal ways. Three days later
she was attacked by acute fever and had to be taken to the hospital. In the third
night Baba appears before her like a luminous projection. He holds between
His finger tips a reddish bullet on which He blows His divine breath and
makes it vanish. In that same instant the woman feels life re-entering her arm;

she has a sensation of immediate
release in her head. The tumour in her brain, naturally bursting, releases the
poisonous matter. The woman is healed. Today she is one of those who,
by reason of a physical miracle, believes in Baba's superhuman exis-
tence. We have witnessed more than one physical healing of which this is
one of the many. But the spiritual healing which cannot be reckoned by any
science is of far greater importance to our life in need of resurrection in the
spirit. Shri Meher Baba says: "I have come
not to teach but to awaken." Shri Baba's internal and external
work is all one. While standing before a Christian Chapel one Easter morning in
Murree, Himalayas, in 1933, He said: "All worship returns to me. The sigh
whithin the prayer is the same in the heart of the Christian, the Mahomedan,
the Jew. They are indivisibly longing for the same God." They are
unconsciously drawn to Him. They all unconsciously feel the same, but
express it through different languages. There is only one fundamental Faith,

28 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

and that is the pure form of religion
which Shri Meher Baba will reawaken in the heart of man.
His word is the will of divine origin. We often realize the immediate effect
of the power of His word, and wonder in awe over the mysterious reaction. He
is uninterrupted conscious action in the mental, subtle and gross spheres. In the
one all pure form of 'Impersonal Love' He performs God-action. He practises
God-Life. He will create God-like human beings.
We earn through Him the feeling that we in Him participate in the 'indivisible divine life,' that we and God are one pure function--one life--one working
will sharing in the scope of all existence. That living trial one calls life,
directed and used by Him, turns to be impersonal blessing. We do no more
worry to lose advantages in being bad, nor do we speculate to be good for our
own sake. Surrendered in Him, good or bad, our contribution in good or bad
results immune.

Through the blending of head and
heart we earn the impersonal viewpoint. In that viewpoint is peace.
He does not preach ... He gives us the example ... He shows us how to be tolerant, to recognize in everyone's individual viewpoint the right, yet veiled,
impersonal standpoint. In a case of two opposite opinions He, the wise im-
partial Friend, will turn toward either of the opponents and create in both the
same selfless reaction that makes them give in and understand. He will say:
"How can there be misunderstanding when there is Love?" The mysterious
adjusting power of His word makes personal motives vanish into unimpor-
tance and the pure impersonal standpoint prevails in the tranquilized minds.
Some may use strong temper to impose his own will on some one else.
To the one who is weak and feels hurt He will say: "Why do you feel hurt?"
and to the other who did willingly or unwillingly create pain He merely will
smile in compassion. We then know. He does not teach--He awakens.

(to be continued)


Hazrat Meher Baba
FROM A SUFISTIC STANDPOINT *
By Dr. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF
Some realize after great research, Some find Him without seeking; Some long for Him with no response, With some He ignores dealing.

The Sufis classify saints into two main categories, namely Kasbi (self-
acquired) and Wahbi (Divinely ordained), as described in the first two
lines of the above quatrain. This division is rather arbitrary and is not the
whole truth. It implies injustice and favouritism by God. This viewpoint is
the result of Islamic belief in predestination and the absolute will of
God. Although well conversant with the law of cause and effect and the
spiritual fact that nothing goes to the undeserving, the early Sufis under the
aegis of a disciplinary church, could think of no better way of escape than
fall into line with the orthodox mentality. They endorsed the latter's theory
of Divine grace, with regard to saints suddenly lifted to spiritual heights irre-

spective of their previous form and life record.
Evidently Hazrat Meher Baba belongs to the second category. Looking
to the early part of his life as a student in Deccan College, no one would have
marked him out for a spiritual career. Undeniably, really great events in one's
life do happen when least expected. And the unexpected, in the case of
Meher Baba, was his memorable meeting with Hazrat Babajan (a lady
saint of Poona) in the year 1913. One kiss on the forehead by the venerable
old lady gave him God-realization (mushahida-e-zat) and the rest of the
work, the return to normal consciousness (mushahida-e-sifat) was comp-
leted by Sadguru Upasani Maharaj of Sakori. Hazrat Meher Baba, judged
from the

____________________________________________________________________  Continued from December 1938 issue.

30 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

spiritual preparedness of this life of his, may be classed as Wahbi (Divinely
ordained), but those who understand spirituality can see in him but a
triumphant culmination of a long extended evolutionary struggle--yet
another crest of a wave in the sea of cosmic consciousness.
Hazrat Meher Baba, a Persian Zoroastrian as far as can be ascertained, is
the only non-Muslim saint of the present century except Upasani Maha-
raj who has attained spiritual perfection from a Muslim saint. As if they would
be anyway nearer to judging the standard of his saintliness, the Muslims
very often inquire, "Has Meher Baba accepted the Muslim faith?" "Is he
Bashara (conformist) or Bayshara (non-conformist)?" In this small sym-
posium, answering silly and sectarian questions like the above born of
ignorance would be to no purpose. For such a class of people blissful igno-
rance would certainly be of more spiritual benefit than any frivolous and
insincere attempt on their part to become wise in such matters, as it
would react by making them lose faith

in what they are already believing and doing. Herein our only concern is for
the intellectuals and the self-styled Sufis who ought to know better than
give an air of finality to what they already know. To such the study of
Hazrat Meher Baba from the highest Sufistic standpoint, would be illumin-
ating and worthwhile. There is no measure as yet evolved
by which the spirituality of a person can be gauged. The only material
available is the record of the ecstatic and inspired utterances of saints, that
furnishes a clue to seeking minds, for determining the particular state and
stage of their spiritual experience. Very often it happens that there are con-
flicting statements coming from the same spiritual personage or between
different Masters discussing a common subject or experience. The reason for a
saint contradicting himself, is a sign of his outgrowing that particular spiritual
experience embodied in his utterance. Similarly saints, giving a different ver-
sion of the same subject, is due to their different angle of experience, as a
result of their different stages. For instance,

HAZRAT MEHER BABA

31

an astronomer, studying the sun, from an observatory, would describe it in a
certain way. This description would materially differ if the astronomer were
to study the sun, by stationing himself a million miles nearer to it. Again the
difference in experience would be greatly accentuated if the distance be
decreased by ten million miles. The sun is the same, but the various stages of
approach have caused all the apparent contradiction. The gnosis of self-
realization, however, is never selfcontradictory. Spiritual perfection de-
livering itself in any language and through any person, can rarely be
missed. It is the highest Sufistic standpoint that affords a rational approach to
the understanding of Hazrat Meher Baba and his spirituality.
Al-Quran, the first and last text book on Sufism, in the opening verse, clearly
enjoins upon the Sufis to believe that the Lord of the universe has provided
equally all peoples of the earth, not only means of material and physical
sustenance, but also He has bestowed on all equal opportunities of spiritual
unfoldment and growth. It is unthink-

able for a Sufi to imagine for a moment that the Almighty God has favoured
one particular race or class of people to the exclusion of all others. The Quran says: "There was no nation but had its teacher." Again it says, "A Divine
Messenger was sent to every class of men," also "Every nation has been
blessed with a guide." (XXXV 24 and X 47). Hence on the authority of Quran
itself, all Prophets and Teachers of mankind, belonging to any creed and
country, have a spiritual status which must be recognized. Is the attitude then
of the average Muslim and the socalled Sufis quite in keeping with the
spirit of the above Quranic texts? Do they really recognize all teachers of
mankind, besides the names mentioned in the Quran, as Prophets and Mes-
sengers? The Muslim world computes the number of Prophets sent for the
guidance of man by Divine Providence, near about one lac and twenty-four
thousand. Tackle any Muslim, well informed in Islamic mythology, and he
would find it impossible to enumerate and name Prophets from Adam to the
present

32 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

day, aggregating to more than fifty. Such illustrious names like Rama,
Krishna, Buddha, Confucius, Zoroaster would never occur to them, as being
idolators and Mushrik (dualists). Even if they do, the Muslims would maintain
that the culmination of all Messengers of God is the final and perfect man-
ifestation of Prophet Mohomed. The Sufis, however, aver that the terminus
of Prophethood does not necessarily mean the end of spirituality. If Islam,
after the demise of the Arabian Prophet, has produced Saints of a high
spiritual calibre, other races too have amongst them perfectly illumined
souls. It is the free-lancers amongst Sufis, who have outgrown the
devotional and ascetic stage and have developed a pantheistic experience, that
have dared to utter the truth to those who desire to know and assimilate
without being shocked. Syed Mahomed Husain--a disciple of Shah Abdul
Aziz, when questioned about the spirituality (Fakiri) of Hindus and
Muslims said, "There is no difference whatsoever in the spirituality of the
two; the apparent

difference is in the terminology." A visitor once asked Ghaosali Shah
Qalander, "Sire, I have heard it said that no other race besides Muslims
produces Masters charged with spiritual duty (Ahle­Khidmat)." The Saint re-
plied, "True, the Muslims think that way, but other races also claim this
monopoly. The truth is, all races more or less produce spiritual chargemen.
The works of God do not depend on any single race or religion exclusively."
Hazrat Meher Baba does not conform to the external form of any
religion, not even the religion of his birth. The Zoroastrian world is
indifferent towards his activities for personally discarding the external signs
and symbols of their religion. The Muslim, very condescendingly, would
guarantee Meher Baba spiritual perfection, if only he accepts the
Islamic faith. If the Muslims are told that the Perfect Masters of the present
century, Baba Tajudin of Nagpur, Sai Baba of Shirdi and Babajan of Poona
were all nonconformists (Bayshara), they would say, that the said saints
were at least born

HAZRAT MEHER BABA

33

Muslims and as Qalanders (an order of unconventional saints), they are held
excused from religious formalism. Hazrat Meher Baba says, "Religion is
for man, but man is not for religion. I have become one with Truth; all
religions are my religions and I have no religion." Bearing on this assertion,
some ecstatic but irreligious utterances (Shathiyat) of perfect Sufis are worth
recording. "One who is eternally in prayers
(Realization) has no need of external prayers."
--Fazal Ayaz. "Ordinary people have to abstain
from sin. I abstain from uttering 'LaIlaha-illalah' (there is no other God but God)."
--Buali Sindhi.
"One who has seen God, has overstepped the limits of religion
(Shara), and one who has become God, has overstepped duality implied in
seeing God." --Yasin Bin Husain Razi.
"One who is not for realizing God in this life, God occupies him in prayers
and worship. Not finding such an one fit for knowledge of Him (Gnosis), God

includes him in the common crowd." --Abdul Husain Muzeen.
"Our primary duty (Farz) is to be God; our optional duty (Sunnat) is to be
Rasul (Mohomed)." --Ahmed Ghazali.
"One who enjoys worship, is a worshipper of worship and not of God."
--Abdul Rehman Jami. "Abstinence from prayers due to
alcoholic intoxication is respect for religion; abstinence from prayers on
account of Divine intoxication is respect for Truth and Reality."
--Mulla Shah, (Spiritual Master of Darashakoh).
The second question that automatically follows is with regard to the
quality of spirituality attained by Hazrat Meher Baba. Muslim Sufis
would straight off class Hazrat Baba as a Mawahid (one who has realized
Divine unity), and according to this viewpoint generally all non-Muslims
who have reached the Unitarian state are styled as such. In Tasawwuf (Isla-
mic theosophy) there are two types of Mawahid (unitarians); one is called
Mawahid-Haneef (informal unitarian) and the other Mawahid-tabay (formal

34 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

unitarian). The former attain Taoheed unitaratian state without the inter-
mediation of Prophets. To them, compliance to external form of prayer and
behaviour laid down by such Prophets is optional, although at heart they
acknowledge their messengership on earth. This class comprises of both
Muslims and non-Muslims. MawahidTabay (formal unitarians) consists of
all Muslims who conform in all details to the external law (Shariat) of
Mohomed the prophet. The above classification is rather
vague and far-fetched and evidently dictated by expedience. Not a few
perfect Sufis maintain that all those attaining Taoheed (Divine unity)
through the grace and mediation of a Perfect Master, cannot but recognize
and experience the spiritual state called Haqiqat-e-Mohomedi (the reality of
Mohomed). This Haqiqat-e-Mohomedi is the name of a state or stage and not
the name of a person, and this stage is open to Muslims and non-Muslims
alike. Those stationing themselves in the stage of Haqiqat-e-Mohomedi after
realizing Taoheed (Divine unity) are

termed Ahle-Maratib (men of grades) and from these, Ahle-Khidmat (men of
duty) on the earthly plane are recruited. Strictly speaking, a Mawahid (Uni-
tarian) is one who acknowledges and desires for no intermediary between
him and God; no Prophet, not even a Master. Such instances are very rare
and usually to be found amongst Yogis. There have been some Sufis of a very
extreme type, who from the standpoint of Absolute State of Unity (Taoheed-e-
Tanzihi) consider even gradations, connoting authority and duty born of
Haqiqat-e-Mohamedi as falling short of the mark and not true Fakiri (spiritua-
lity). To them prophethood and duty seem an encumbrance, which they
would feign do without, and the following are a few quotations illustrative of
this attitude. "My banner of Huyat (absolute one-
ness with God) is much more exalted and high than that of Mohomed."
--Bayazid. "In the path of Truth pay no consid-
eration to Mohomed, Abram or Moses. By all means reverence them, as they
represent God devolving into man. Beyond this attach no more

HAZRAT MEHER BABA

35

importance to them." --Abubaker.
"La-ilaha-illalah (there is no other God but God) is Shirke-Khafi (latent
duality) and Mohomed Rassulallah Shirke-Jali (manifest duality )."
-- Fariduddin Attar. "In the prayers of Mohomed, the
archangel Gabriel has no place; in my retirement within, there is no room for Mohomed."
-- Ainul-Qazat Hamdani.
"If after experiencing Zat (absolute oneness) one returns to Sifat (relative manyness), one does not know the Zat."
--Abu Abbas Sayyari.
"After seeing the light of Mohomed all believers Momin became Kafirs
(infidels) ". --Ainul-Qazat Hamdani.
Now it goes without saying that if non-Muslims can attain spiritual
perfection they can also make others spiritually perfect. For those who are
interested in matters spiritual, they will find many instances of non-Muslim
saints imparting spirituality to Muslims and vice-versa. Ghausali Shah Qalan-
der (1804-1880) had contacted nineteen Murshids (spiritual Masters), out of

them eleven were Muslims and eight Hindus. Hazrat Babajan had two
spiritual Masters, a Hindu and a Muslim. Sai Baba gave his spiritual
charge to Upasani Maharaj and Hazrat Meher Baba derives perfection from
Hazrat Babajan and Upasani Maharaj. It is thus patent that God and Truth is
the heritage of the eligible and not the exclusive preserve of a sect or creed, as
sung by the Sufi poet Jami: -- "Love's devotee, oh Jami, has no
caste or pedigree. No special status has this Path, for
parentage and piety." The wailing prayer of Dr. Iqbal "The
Spiritual taverns of India have remained closed for more than three
hundred years and oh Saqi (cup bearer), bless the world once again by your
Divine Manifestation" evidently calls upon a Muslim manifestation. Like the
generality of Muslims, he forgot to associate Spiritual Perfection with the
Qalander type Masters of the century like Sai Baba, Baba Tajuddin and
Hazrat Babajan and other nonMuslims. Anyone taking pains to study
the evolution of Islamic theosophy, would be confronted with the know-
ledge that there is never a dearth of

36 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

Spiritual Masters and neither any decline and deterioration in Spirituality. 'Seek and ye shall find' is foreign to the make-up of the present age which
believes in advertised goods. According to Sufis, the end of the hierarchy
of Saints functioning on the earthly plane will synchronise with the end of
the world. The fact is the present age from the
spiritual viewpoint is the Qalanderi age characterised by irreligiousness. It is
common knowledge that all the religions at the present time are ex-
periencing a wave of irreligiosity, and the present Spiritual Masters according
to the law of causation are the natural outcome of the prevalent atmosphere.

The spiritual economy also is governed by the principle of supply being in
accordance with the demand. It is thus evident, the world would miss the spiri-
tual millenium, if it were to look for it through sectarian glasses. Hazrat
Meher Baba, the Perfect Qalander, on all counts, is the spiritual index of the
time, and if looked at dispassionately is assuredly what the world needs at the
moment, the common denominator who can be approached and claimed by
all, without loss of prestige, cultural and religious. The avowed spiritual
mission in the life of Hazrat Meher Baba, the Perfect Sufi, can best be
described in his own words: "I have come not to teach but to
awaken."



St. Teresa Of Spain*
Adapted by Will Backett (London)

Teresa's facility for describing her own inner experiences renders her a
practical theologian and psychologist of real value to those who lack a spiritual
Director. Those who are so fortunate to have a Master, owe much to 'His love and pre-vision' by which some difficulties are avoided.
Teresa shared with some other Saints and those who journeyed on the
Path similar experiences of vision, trance and ecstasy, and heard voices
guiding her, divining words of counsel from Saints like St. Clare, St. Joseph,
etc., uttered to her soul without audible sound. She also experienced deceptive
visions, learnt to discriminate, and warns all against seeking supernatural
and extraordinary experiences. One of her nuns who thought she was having revelations "made her eat and sleep more, and she also reduced her pen-
ances," curing her of a subtle tendency to egoism.

After the vision had passed away, the valuable experience would follow in its
fruition, when ordinary senses cease to function..."I do not say that the soul
sees and hears when the rapture is at its highest. I mean by 'at its highest' when
the faculties are lost, because profoundly united with God--for then it
neither sees nor hears nor perceives as I believe.
"When our Lord shows the soul much of His grandeur and majesty it
would be impossible for the soul to endure it if our Lord did not succour it
in a most supernatural way by throwing it into a trance of ecstasy whereby the
vision is lost in the fruition thereof ."  Such manifestations of finer con-
sciousness and states of being, involve a most sensitised physical condition,
often accompanied by suffering. Others have described this, as did Teresa and
Anna Kingsford who passed through the

______________________________________________________________________
* Continued from December 1938 issue.  Extract from "Autobiography of St. Teresa."

38 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

heaven worlds, when in vision in Paris on 23rd July 1877. She saw the ancient
Gods of Greece, India, Egypt and Scandinavia, and beyond these a vision of
Deity. "Forth from His right hand streams
the Universe, projected by the omnipotent repulsion of His will; back to
His left... returns the Universe, drawn by the attraction of His love."
But Anna Kingsford also had the higher Truth given to her: "Within thee,
o man, is the universe, the threshes of all the Gods are in thy Temple. I have
said unto men, 'Ye are Gods. Ye are all in the image of the Most High.' No man
can know God until he first understands himself. God is nothing that man is not.
What man is God is likewise. As God is the heart of the outer world, so is
God the heart of the world within thee. When the God within thee shall be
wholly united to the God without, then thou shalt be One with the Most High.
Thy will shall be God's will, and the

son shall be as the Father." § The Infinite is beyond all forms. "In
themselves the Gods have no forms. They, however, assume forms for the sake of mortals." ¶
"Consciousness alone has direct con-
nection with God. It is not by the multiplication of phenomena, however
subtle, that progress is made ... The life of an ordinary good man in the world
seeking to fulfil his duty, is of more value spiritually than a Yogi's spent in
exploring the heaven worlds... There is marked difference between the path of
the occultist and the mystic, the former being concerned in the development of
'powers' by which to explore the wonders of the heaven worlds. Consci-
ousness alone has direct connection with God." 
Teresa and her friends were at first puzzled at her recurring states of
unconsciousness. On the spiritual path, the soul, turning inward, has conscious-
ness on the inner

______________________________________________________________________
 Quotation from Shri Meher Baba's "Journey of the Soul through Creation to the Oversoul." § "Clothed with the Sun," by Anna Kingsford. ¶ "Chaldean Oracles" by G. R. S. Mead.  Extract from "Autobiography of St. Teresa."

ST. TERESA OF SPAIN

39

plane, and so the physical plane is superceded while it continues. This is
called by the Sufi Fana, is succeeded by Baka 'the state of abiding'. The 'fruition' experienced by Teresa probably corresponded in some measure to
this. Teresa uses the simile of the Interior Castle of the Soul "made of
diamonds of most clear crystal, in which are many rooms, as in heaven there are many mansions."' The seven rooms therein symbolize the seven
stages of the soul, and in the innermost dwells the Divine Spark of the Soul
wherein the actual union with God is experienced. She realized the spiritual
gift of Grace, received in greater and increasing degree: "It is one Grace that
our Lord gives Grace, and it is another Grace when the Lord gives understanding of that Grace."*
Four degrees in the stages of Prayer
are indicated by her with deep insight, in the allegory of watering a garden, by
hand, or with engine and bucket, or from a stream, and finally by showers
of rain, when ... "The Lord waters it

without labour on our part. Throughout the earlier stages, the Soul is develop-
ing, passing from the prayer of meditation, to the prayer of Quiet, where it
begins to be recollected. It is now in touch with the supernatural. This is a
gathering together of the faculties of the soul within itself in order that it
may have the fruition of that Contentment in greater Sweetness. But the
faculties are not lost, neither are they asleep. The Will alone is so occupied
that without knowing that it has become captive, it gives a simple con-
sent to become the Prisoner of God. This is a little spark of the True Love of
Himself which the Lord begins to enkindle in the Soul. And His Will is that
the Soul should understand what Love is by the Joy it brings.
In the third degree, the Soul is awake and the rest of the world asleep and the
pleasure sweetness and delight are incomparably greater than in the former
state of prayer. The waters of the Grace have risen up to the neck of the Soul so
that it can neither ad-

______________________________________________________________________  Quotation from Shri Meher Baba's "Journey of the Soul through Creation to the
Oversoul."

40 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

vance or retreat, nor does it know how to do so; it seeks only the fruition of
exceeding bliss. The fourth degree of prayer includes
ecstasy and rapture and beyond there is spiritual Union. When thinking of what
the Soul was doing during a period of prayer just ended, the Lord said to her:
"It undoes itself utterly, my Daughter, in order that it may give itself more and
more to Me. It is not itself that then lives, it is I. As it cannot comprehend
what it understands, it understands by not understanding."
She described how "the soul seemed to come forth as gold out of a crucible,
most refined"* after a vision when some word from the Lord had
comforted her, after a misunderstanding by her confessors. She was
conscious of divine guidance through visions that showed stages of
significance, just as states of prayer increased by degrees: "It pleased our
Lord one day that I was in prayer, to show me His Hands and His Hands
only. The beauty of them was so great

that no language can describe it. A few days later, I saw His Divine Face and I
was utterly entranced. Afterwards He granted me the Grace of seeing His
whole Person. I could not understand why the Lord showed Himself thus by
slow degrees...until afterwards I knew that His Majesty was leading me according to my human weakness."*
Again she saw the Lord who warned
her against a certain friendship. "Christ stood before me stern and grave, giving
me to understand what in my conduct was offensive to Him. I saw Him with
the eyes of the soul, more distinctly than I could have seen Him with the eyes of the body."* After 26 years the Vision, so real then, remained as clear
to her as when it occurred. On June 29th 1557, she saw, or rather felt
Christ, "not with the eyes of the soul or with the eyes of the body, and He
seemed to be close beside her. Thereafter His presence was her constant
realization. Some times when engaged in ordinary affairs, elevation of Spirit
would come so suddenly

______________________________________________________________________  Extract from "Autobiography of St. Teresa."

ST. TERESA OF SPAIN

41

that she could not withstand it..."The fruits and blessings it brings with it are
in a moment mine...and this without my having had a vision, or heard anything,
or knowing where I am, except that when the Soul seems to be lost, I see it
make great progress which I could not

have made if I had laboured for a whole year. When my Soul reached that state,
my wretchedness came to an end. God is the Soul of that Soul now...giving it
grace on grace...I had read books... I had no Director...but I found I really
understood nothing until God made me learn by experience."

(To be continued)


______________________________________________________________________  Extract from "Autobiography of St. Teresa"

The Concept of Liberation
BY DR. C. D. DESHMUKH, M. A, Ph. D.

ANALYSIS OF THE CONCEPT OF LIBERATION
Liberation in itself seems to be a purely negative idea, but it implies the existence of that which is in some way limited and which can be freed from these limitations. Man knows himself to be finite owing to the many limitations of which he is always conscious. The awareness of limitation or bondage is an everyday fact which no one can deny. But this consciousness of limitation is possible only if there is some objective towards which life is striving. If a person wants to get out of a room, then alone can he have the sense of being imprisoned in that room. If he wants to remain in it, there is no sense of limitation. Most people live under a sense of limitation and restriction because of their having certain desires which cannot be fulfilled. The sense of freedom can, therefore, come only in the successful attainment of some fundamental urge; if it is frustrated there

is immediately the sense of limitation.
LIBERATION AND DESIRES
Had there been only one desire in consciousness, one could have unhesitatingly said that the freedom of consciousness consists in the fulfilment of that desire. However, we actually find in consciousness a host of desires which often come into conflict with one another. Further, most of these desires are dependent upon external things or circumstances; and the freedom which the soul may have in relation to them is, therefore, not absolute but contingent. When there is a conflict, the freedom of soul makes itself felt through choice. But choice is a process of self-torture, since the person has to rule out one or more alternative desires in favour of some particular desire. Thus, in choice, the soul experiences limitation.
The search for absolute freedom, therefore, involves the search for the ultimate purpose of the life of the individual

THE CONCEPT OF LIBERATION

43

Parama Purushartha. This is the posi-
tive aspect of liberation. This ultimate purpose is hidden by the surging of
diverse desires which dominate the stream of consciousness. However, it is
a mistake to think that desires are mere obstacles; for they can, if intelligently
handled, be turned into so many avenues which indirectly lead to the ul-
timate goal by bringing about multiform experiences and thus creating
opportunities for a real understanding about the Telos of life.
Therefore, a purely negative method which shuns life and its experiences
will not lead the individual to the perception or the realization of the goal
of life. But if the individual accepts and welcomes experience and digests it
through critical understanding, he can come closer to the final fulfilment of
his life. The capacity of an experience for awakening the individual depends
upon how rich and profound it is. The experience which is most useful in this
connection is the experience of love. Mostly the experience is not strong
enough to break down the walls of the prison of consciousness, because it is

clouded by different factors like egoism, fear, jealousy or a selfish motive. But if the power of love is freed from these encumbrances, it can lead the individual to final release and fulfilment.
THE LAW OF KARMA
The limitations of consciousness can all be ultimately traced to the effects of past actions (which include thought and feeling) which give a specific shape and character to the temperament of the individual. Just as the flow of the river cuts its own bed, so also, the action of the individual leaves behind it certain mental traces which not only serve the purpose of recalling the original situations but also operate as dispositions which give a specifically directed momentum to the subsequent mental process. The bondage of Karma can, in the last analysis, be reduced to unconscious mental habits which prevent intelligent response to the rapidly changing circumstances.
It is true that with regard to many technical achievements habits conserve a great deal of practical experience and usually save us from the need of

44 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

  

fresh efforts for adjustment and coor-

which we are here confronted may be

dination of responses, for we are there

formulated as follows: "Is the mind

concerned with recurring problems

eternally doomed to operate under the

which repeat themselves in

yoke of its own past, or is there any

uniformity. But mental habits have a

way for emancipating it from that

tendency to obstruct true perception

influence?" It is futile to expect any

of values and also to hinder the

clue from the solutions offered in

release of intelligent response,

connection with the problem of free

because every fresh situation in the

will, where a reconciliation between

life of the individual is unique and

determinists and libertarians is

therefore requires critical thought and

effected by defining freedom as self-

unique response.

determination, since, in such

For the limiting influence of Karma

solutions, the self is tacitly identified

we have, in abnormal psychology, a

with its character and the operation of

good analogue in fixed ideas, which

what is called the whole self can

introduce unhealthy rigidity in mental

hardly be distinguished from the

operations. But apart from mechani-

collective result of totality of

zation of the mind the mental habits

dispositions.

can often limit activity from another

The cardinal fallacy of such

point of view also, because most

solution lies (1) in looking upon the

mental habits are due to ignorant and

individual as having no being other

misdirected actions. They, therefore,

than his psychological products which

not only make the mind a rigid and

constitute his empirical self, and (2)

semi-mechanical instrument, but also

in hastily forming a theory of human

positively pervert the mind. The

personality without thorough

problem of Liberation is, therefore,

investigation into the nature of

the problem of freeing the mind from

ultimate values or the final purpose of

the limiting influence of past actions.

human existence. Having accepted

FREE WILL AND FREEDOM

The psychological with

question

narrow empiricism such theories have to be content with the formal freedom
of self-deter  

THE CONCEPT OF LIBERATION

45

mination which secures internal harmony but fails to assure the realization of supreme values. It is, therefore, not surprising that they ignore the other important condition of positively significant freedom which has been beautifully expressed by Christ when He said: "You shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you free."
CONDITIONS OF LIBERATION
The chief condition of freedom is that the entire personality should be illumined by a comprehensive and unifying ideal. In the last analysis it will be found that nothing short of Infinity can bring real fulfilment to human personality. Whatever is fragmentary or temporary must leave the soul dissatisfied. Even the ideal of Infinity merely intensifies human discontent so long as it is objectified and apprehended as some-thing which may be realized in future, for it intensifies the awareness of existing limitations. Thus true freedom requires the transcendence of all limitations (or the bonds of Karma) and the realization of one's own Infinity here and now.

During the process of transcending
limitations, it is however necessary that the mind should be wholly centred
upon the realization of the Infinite. So long as the mind is caught up in the
temporal process, owing to various desires, it is neither possible nor
desirable to avoid the creation and the pursuit of the Ideal. And if the ideal is
as vast as Infinity, it releases in the individual that power which enables
him to transcend his spiritual limitations.
After perceiving the ultimate goal, the life force which has so far been forging for one's self the multifarious chains of trivial desires is withdrawn
from all dissipating channels; and it comes to be released in a manner which
will in no way create a sense of limitations. Modern psycho-analysis has not
yet fully recognized (1) the possibility of completely annulling the effects of
past experiences and actions, and the possibility of complete sublimation of
the libido. But this is largely due to its being exclusively based upon abnormal
data and its somewhat ungenerous attitude towards the

46 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

entire range of supernatural experiences.
THE CAUSE OF LIMITATION
The most essential requirement for Liberation is that the individual should be able to step outside his limiting personality in the sense that his vision is no longer clouded by exclusive concentration of interest in his own self. The limitations of consciousness are ultimately rooted in some kind of deep rooted ignorance about the place and function of the individual in the totality of life. The understanding of life is perverted by the fact that the individual has a tendency to judge everything and to react to it from the point of view of the ego. The ego creates duality and all the complications of duality. It divides life into fractions and destroys its harmony and integrity. The individual, therefore, constantly lives in a sense of conflict, frustration and limitations. But if through intense love and understanding, the individual succeeds in dropping the idea of his being separate from life, he breaks through his limitations and is united with the one indivisible Reality.

LIBERATION AND EXTINCTION
Those thinkers who look upon Liberation as total extinction of life and consciousness have certainly misunderstood its true nature. This view is sometimes attributed to Lord Buddha; but there is ample evidence to believe that he looks upon Nirvana as a positive state of consciousness. Extinction as such can hardly have any fascination for the individual. For those who cannot think of any other life than the life of the ego, Liberation may look like total extinction; but in fact it is an initiation into the Life Eternal, for the individual is then united with the Infinite Reality.
Even the positive conception of Liberation, however, differs according to whether one looks upon the Ultimate Saguna Mukti.
SAGUNA MUKTI
Reality as a Personal God or as an Impersonal Absolute. The worshippers of a personal God believe in three kinds of Liberation :
(1) Salokya, or residing in the world of the God worshipped;
(2) Samipa, or living in close proximity with Him, and

THE CONCEPT OF LIBERATION

47

(3) Sarupya, or becoming like Him in nature and form.
Liberation is here looked upon as a blissful state of existence in some supersensible world; and this kind of ideal can only appeal to few persons since, for most persons, the existence of the other world is either theory or a matter of faith. Further along this view, all hope of fulfilment comes to be centred upon life after death; and the present mundane life of man tends to be deprived of all intrinsic significance since it is regarded as being merely a period of preparation for the life to come. It will also be seen that all these forms of Saguna Mukti consist of varying degrees of companionship of God. But in so far as they all equally posit irreducible dualism between God and man, they do not do full justice to man's aspiration for Infinity.
NIRGUNA MUKTI
The fourth form of Mukti, which

kind is called Sayujya, is, therefore,
looked upon as the highest of Liberation, since it consists in becoming one
with the Ultimate Reality. The duality of personal relationship is here
superceded by the realization of suprarelational identity between man and the
Ultimate Reality. This concept of Liberation appeals to those who look upon
the Ultimate Reality as an Impersonal Absolute and who long to be merged in
it. This type of Nirguna Mukti is not to be looked upon as a result of a process
whereby the individual becomes what he was not; it is rather a culmination of
a process of self-knowledge whereby he realizes fully what he already is, has
been and ever will be.* According to Sankara, Liberation in-
volves the complete merging of the individual in the Ultimate Reality so
that he ceases to have any separate existence of his own; but Ramanuja
maintains that the individual retains his separate

______________________________________________________________________
* Atma tu satatam praptah apraptavadavidyaya Tannase praptavadbhati swakanthabharanam yatha. -Sankara's Atmabodha
"Like the ornament on one's own neck, although eternally obtained, the Atman looks like something not yet obtained because of ignorance and like something obtained after its disappearance."

48 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

and unique existence although he
comes to have the most intimate relation with the Ultimate Reality.
However, in view of the fact that even ordinary experiences of love and under-
standing point out to a confluence or interpenetration of selves, it seems pro-
bable that, in the state of Liberation, the individual knows himself to be the All-
self  from the point of view of content consciousness; and he ceases to iden-
tify himself with the limited personality; but this articulate self-knowledge
of the All-self is explicitly present only in the centre consciousness which has
attained Liberation; and Liberation is in this sense purely a personal matter.
The paradox is more intelligible to us if we remember the inseparability of
the subjective and the objective factors in ordinary knowledge of the finite self.
The true function of the subjective factors is to grasp, develop and intel-
lectually appropriate the objective

world and not itself as an isolated or
self-sufficient centre. However, owing to certain psychological factors like
desires, the centre does not function perfectly, and it creates a prison for
itself in the form of the ' I ' or the ego, on the basis of the bodily existence.
Identification with the body is thus responsible for the illusion of separ-
ateness. But as the centre of consciousness frees itself from its limiting
desires, it goes beyond the artificial division between the subject and the
object and realizes the unity of the two. Just as the true function of a mirror is
to reflect all other things but not itself, the real value of the centre of consci-
ousness lies in its capacity to reveal the true nature of Ultimate Reality. It is
egoism which makes it identify itself with a narrow and finite empirical self;
but when the ego disappears through right understanding, it knows itself to
be identical with the one indivisible Reality.

_______________________________________________________________________
 Sarvabhutasthamatanam sarvabhutani catmani Ikshate yogayuktatma sarvatra samadarsinah.
-The Bhagawadgita VI 29 "The self, harmonized by yoga, seeth the Self abiding in all beings, all beings in the Self; everywhere he seeth the same."

THE CONCEPT OF LIBERATION

49

In Liberation the individual transcends duality and there is therefore for him no antithesis between the self and the society. It is equally incapable of 'selfish' and 'altruistic' actions. But this does not necessitate the cessation of all action. In fact, Liberation implies the release of perfect action which springs from a poise of love and understand-

ing. It is not born of desire and is,
therefore, not the seeking of some unrealized dream of fulfilment; but it is
at once an expression and a part of an eternally fresh and creatively self-
renewing blissful fulfilment which is unaffected by the sufferings and the
conflicts experienced by the unliberated soul.

THE SAYING OF SHRI MEHER BABA
If a so-called religious leader comes forth and proclaims that marriages between brothers and sisters are quite lawful, he will immediately have a large following; but if a God-realized personage proclaims that renunciation is indispensable to the attainment of Truth, only a few will care to follow him.

___________________________________________________________ * 3,500 years ago there lived a so-called religious leader who taught this.

Baba And His Adherents
RECIPROCITY OF CONTACT
BY ADI K. IRANI

Development of brain and intelligence is both biological and subtle and
is more or less automatic in process in the human as well as sub-human world.
Reason and intellect can be perfected by the universities. Imagination usually
associated with poets, philosophers and artists is the result of aesthetics and
culture. Inspiration and illumination, the delight of a seeker on the path of
purity and righteousness, is the outcome of self-denial and occult training;
but Freedom of Soul is difficult to attain without the grace of a living
Master. This Freedom of the soul which lifts one above pain and pleasure
and which dispels ignorance standing in the way of a true and synthetical
understanding of the entire creation and its purpose, is hardly attainable without
becoming adherents of One who Himself has realized that state. Such an One
amidst the strife and struggle of life can soar high as a kite becoming comp-

letely detached from the world, only linked to it by a thread-like passage
through which to serve the world with his beneficence and grace. Him we
make our guide and Him our Beloved and in Him we find the deep longing of
our heart fulfilled of its thirst and emptiness and our head cleared of the
misconceptions of a truly spiritual life. In His company and devotion we stick
to him like units of widely differing beings all controlled and huddled up to
His proximity in a band of obedience and love--the two symbols of 'we give' and 'we take'--that keep us adherents as one-bodied, one-minded and one-
hearted--a widely preached aspect of a perfect life-on-earth so perfectly fol-
lowed by the adherents of Baba. For the living beyond and for the complete
freedom from the tentacle of a worldengrossed life, we have the kite as our
adept in soaring high from the grossness of things to the

BABA AND HIS ADHERENTS

51

absoluteness of bliss--to whom we stick with all the allegiance at our command, through thick and thin, through peace and turmoil, through cheer and fatigue.
OBEDIENCE
We give Him obedience and absolute obedience with none of the concocted interpreting of His injunctions and a miserable show of sincerity and of love that would hardly stand His radiant look. We take up His word and against our heart we press it so deep that by the depth of our faith and courage we carry His word through to action. We like to give obedience so implicit and plain; but the surging waves of passion and conceit do modify the intensity of our action. It is only for a time we behave against His wishes, and not long before does it dawn on us the understanding that we went wrong. We wait and cogitate and we resume uncritical obedience not yet convinced of the insolence that might come again. His presence so calm, so bright and so stable poises our minds and sets right our emotions. We realize the shortness of our temper and

fickleness of our mind, and in a spirit of outspokenness we admit our fault and move further towards a life of sacrifice.
EARTHLY BELONGINGS
Our earthly belongings and our bright hopes of the dim world do not wait to gather our attention. They are expunged from the recesses of their dark hidings into the daylight of His power and laid bare to the scorching heat of His radiance to be cremated for ever in the ashes of a resurrected life. The process is a bit tough but not unnatural. In the course of an ordinary life, it takes us far long to realize that all the material belongings and hopes of possession are the unstationary props of happiness; but Baba makes you feel so within a short time of His contact. He lives the truths of an Ideal--to be practised by us--so gracefully well that He brings home to our understanding that spirituality is infinitely more to be lived than spoken or read. To live it we have to give and to give all we have to be stirred.
WE GIVE LOVE
By a deliberate attempt for-

52 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

mulating into a friction of hearts amongst us, into a friction of diverse opinion and of temperament He chops out from our heart layer after layer of morbid indifference and callous conceit and opens out a flow of warmth between Him and us and ourselves so essential to the unfoldment of spiritual life. Despite our knowledge of the 'giving' to be temporarily unpleasant we do feel hurt and offended, but the result is not far to seek; we find ourselves advanced in adherence; closer in heart and intensified in love of Him. When love in the beginning of His contact was so sincerely demonstrative, now calms down to a deeper love expressed reverentially.
REVERENCE
To give respect without loss of love becomes the solace of our heart. He also demands it, not that He wants it; He wants us to be full of it and be constantly reminded that our giving is yet incomplete.
GIVE COMPLETELY
We have loved Him; we have respected Him; we laid our possessions at His glorious feet; but we are still ret-

tentive. We have not yet emptied the
mal-contents of our likes and dislikes, our habits, our argumentation, our
sentiments, all our cherished ideas and our love of self. To do it means to sur-
render completely. We cannot benumb our mind and await the master-mind to
stimulate for us a new line of thought and action. We cannot sit silent and
expect Him to work us up without a response on our part. We can direct our
thoughts; better we can resolve that whatever we like, whatever we dislike,
whatever we do and whatever we disregard meet His active approval and
His willing sanction. It is no use having an order sanctioned by Him in the light
of our liking. He is generous and as infinitely generous as of exacting
obedience. He will react promptly positive to an inadmissible demand but
He will never overlook the shortcoming which prompted the demand.
Except in cases of fundamental orders He will not react negatively. He will
extend enough time and opportunity for one to correct himself under a res-
ponsible independence. If one is not wise enough to recover from his lost
balance of obedience He

BABA AND HIS ADHERENTS

53

will have Him ridiculed before the eyes of His other adherents. If Baba and His company does not revive him of his mental sluggishness, the thought of humiliation before his brethren will poignantly awaken him. No sooner is he set right than Baba begins 'giving us' infinitely more than 'He took'.
HE GIVES KNOWLEDGE AND UNDERSTANDING
We take from Him His love, His Infinite Love wrought in the infinite designs of His kindness and consideration to the minutest details of our moods, health and comforts. His personal touch and attention is a mighty stimulant. It does not for a moment leave us to think we are neglected or left uncared for. We feel we are backed by a source of infinite kindness and generosity beyond words. His words give us an understanding of life and its purpose and the futility of overestimating incidents which in the eye of the world are great or disastrous. Nothing is great which has no value beyond the life of toyful objects, and nothing is disastrous so long it does not deviate us from a clean and straight forward living. The des-

truction of the body is a phase of material decomposition; the destruction of mind is a mode of finer decomposition; the destruction of the ego is a complete cessation of pain and misery. From one to the other is a state of experience equally joyful of its death as of its birth. Truly disastrous are the impediments coming in our way of a progresssive life towards Freedom. Life dissipated in excesses of sense-objects is a retard to one's progress to be shunned like dead rats. They are not sinful in the orthodoxical sense; they are infectious, and once the demoralizing influence sets in, the decay in character and morals becomes irreparable. He makes us live into such convictions. Is this not some understanding?
HE MAKES US MORAL
He gives us morals and strength of character by holding us responsible for every act of moral turpitude we commit. The responsibility of an answer to be given here and now, felt and cherished through the bond of love He has created for us is so pleasingly heavy that we hardly like to escape

54 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

its strength-giving influence. We like to be protected by His influence, however binding it may be felt at the time of our moral eccentricity; because we know that no amount of the study of ethics or high-sounding sermons can effectively give us an ounce of spiritual morality that His one love-laden word commands. We imbibe what He expends and breathe in what He exhales, for He has also given us power of assimilation. The mind and the heart in the long years of eliminating process become so empty and receptive that they inhale and digest the excellence of His virtuous morality emanating from the same source that did the eliminating. Elimination precedes assimilation; the latter is pleasant since the former was painful. Painful as it was, it was easy of endurance in the beginning of our enthusiastic contact; and pleasing as it is today, it is difficult of sustenance in the sensitivity of our present state.
HE GIVES US COURAGE
So He gives the strength of heart and the breadth of mind. Where mind fails to reach the extremities of objective

feelings and revolts when its interests are shared by others, the heart steps in full fledged revival of its hard earned vigour and disperses the boundaries of mental barriers that the momentary narrowness did create; and when the heart is carried away by attachments interpreted as Love, the mind retraces the heart to reasonableness. Both are developed and made codependent so that when the mind shrinks the heart expands and when the heart freezes the mind adjudicates. To acquire the balance of mind with that of heart, and the equipoise of each, we have to have a life of liberty.
PECUNIARY SOLVED
Liberal as He is in His love, He is similar in monetary considerations. The tension of income, the excess of waste, the dearth of loss and the pride of wealth all become foreign to our nature; for we are fed, clothed and brought up as collectively efficient, as individually our needs are fulfilled. No needs are overlooked that do not promote a peaceful and healthy life, and no lives are free of tribulations relating money as we who adhere to

BABA AND HIS ADHERENTS

55

Baba in a bond of love and life. The distraction of earning is escaped but the knowledge of it is maintained. The disgust consequent to extravagance holds us not, but the greatness of heart is gauged. We are trained by the experience of collective management the art of worriless getting and spending.
HE GIVES US TRUE FRIENDS
Our love and motive is centralized in Baba but nowhere do we find so free and unperturbed exchange of friendly affection and helpfulness as amongst ourselves.

We see no ground No cause of complaint
No one so cold None so grave.
All are to each self As much as one to all
For the common ground we meet in
Lies the heart of all.
SPIRITUALITY
Who can say who gives And who can say who takes;
In Love's infinite bosom None gives none takes.
We give so much as Love's obedience; and take So much as Knowledge, Love Infinite and Fate.


THE SAYING OF SHRI MEHER BABA Do not be afraid of God, for how can you Love Him if you fear Him? Fear and love do not go hand in hand. The truly religious man is he who is God-loving and not Godfearing.


Spiritual Anecdote
BY Dr. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF
BONDAGE AND FREEDOM

Four travellers--a carpenter, a tailor, a goldsmith and a fakir (mendicant)
became associated with each other. As their journey lay through a dangerous
tract of country infested with wild animals, at nightfall they decided to
camp by the roadside underneath a shady tree. It was also arranged that
each one of them should keep watch a part of the night against possible
danger. The first watch fell to the carpenter,
who just to kill time took a twig from the tree, and with a few instruments
with him, began carving out a human figure. By the time he finished the job
his watch for the night ended and waking up the tailor, he retired.
Witnessing the fine craftsmanship of his previous companion, the tailor too
felt like doing something to while away the time. He could think of nothing
better than give an exhibition of his sartorial art. The result was a fully
draped figure of a beautiful doll.

The third watchman, the goldsmith, could not help being impressed with
what the two had done. With a few beads and pieces of wire with him, he
adorned the figure round its neck and arms with what looked like jewellery.
The last one, the fakir, was greatly amused on seeing the beautiful piece of
art, to finish which every one of his companions had contributed. At the
same time, he felt depressed in mind, at the thought of his companions looking
down upon him for being good at nothing. In this frame of mind he began
to pray ardently, saying, "Oh God, my honour and shame is in your hands:
don't make me look small in the eyes of my companions. Deign to put life into
the image; you are Almighty and Powerful."
The heart-felt prayer rendered in abject humility and helplessness was
answered; the figure was miraculously transformed into a damsel, transcend-
ently lovely and beau-

SPIRITUAL ANECDOTE

57

tiful. In the morning a battle royal of
fists and wits ensued amongst the companions, everyone claiming her for
himself. The carpenter asserted priority of his claim, on the originality of the
idea; the tailor and goldsmith based their claim, on the development and
beautification of the theme; the fakir flouted every one on the ground of his
miracle. To end the impasse, they all decided
to approach the Kazi (magistrate ) for a decision. What a maze they found
themselves in. Struck by the unsurpassable charm and beauty of the
damsel, the Kazi himself wanted to possess her. He denounced the claim-
ants as imposters and declared she was his maid-servant who was missing
since morning. There was no go, but to approach the
King, the final tribunal of justice in the land. The heavenly glamour of the
beauty before him upset the fairmindedness of the King. He declared
the damsel was one of his wives from the harem and threatened everyone with
punishment for molesting her. This was

more than they had bargained for and a
tumultuous uproar ensued. A sage happened to pass by and in-
quired as to the cause of the trouble. Taking in the situation he suggested
that all should go to the place where the cause of action developed and where
perhaps the tree may help a solution. No sooner the King, Kazi and all led
by the sage approached the spot, there appeared an opening in the tree and the
phantom of their phantasy disappeared therein. Thus eluded by the will-o-the-
wisp of their fancy, the claimants one after another sulked away crest-fallen.
Such is the predicament of man on earth. No sooner he comes into his
own, all sorts of imposters and claimants crowd upon him for recogni-
tion. The parents demand filial duty for his upbringing, the teachers insist upon
respect to them for his education, the wife and children claim his love, the
community his services, the country his patriotism and the Church its dues for
saving his soul from damnation. Distracted and torn by different
passions, to escape it all he takes refuge

58 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

in death, but the remedy proves worse
than the disease. Thus caught up in a vicious circle of births and deaths
engendering hopes and disappointments, seemingly eternal, he at long
last comes across a Master mind, who gives him the Knowledge of his Real

Self. No sooner the part of him--the
Individual Self--becomes one with the whole--the Real Self, the erstwhile
importunate claimants to his body, mind and soul, viz., the kith and kin,
community and the country, the teacher and the preacher, all vanish into the air.



THE SAYING OF SHRI MEHER BHABA
To change our outward religion for another is like going from one cage to another. Either cross the boundary of shariat (outward forms of religions) and enter tarikat (the spiritual path), or remain within the cage of the creed of your birth.



Shri Meher Baba's Tour
OF NINE DAYS THROUGH CENTRAL INDIA
BY PRINCESS NORINA MATCHABELLI

It is late at night when we approach Navasari, and unusually cold. Baba re-
calls on His board all the names of the different members of the D. family as if
He were gathering them ahead, in His unfathomable way, before entering the
outer details of their lives and personal problems. These names I have in-
scribed in my heart with the sincere wits to keep alive forever the charm of
their spiritual friendship. The four brothers, S., J., B., and A., and the
women related to them; also the younger generation numbering many
sons and daughters of the three brothers of Sorabji Desai.
Sorabji Desai is the author of an hundred volumes on a variety of
subjects--social, religious--and also on well-experienced spiritual philo-
sophy. His last book is called "My Celestial Rambles" in which he ex-
plains the purpose and lives of the great

Masters with whom he has been personally acquainted.
Usually at any Indian station where Baba has once passed it is like fire. The
news spreads in a spectacular way with leaps and bounds, from street to street,
from home to home. He is cheered like a king and hailed with cries of "Shri
Sadguru Meher Baba Maharaj Ki Jai--Hail the Perfect Master Shri
Meher Baba" resounds in swinging waves along the streets and squares.
This time His arrival is kept unofficial and private. He is received at the
station of Navasari by the intimate members of the family without
ceremony; a quick embrace and His car disappears into the night.
A real feast of Love was waiting for Him in the dear old home where He
had visited several times before. The numerous members of the family are
standing in line, with solemn mood, taking

_____________________________________________________________________  Continued from December 1938 issue.

60 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

Baba's Darshana. Baba, in His divine
easy flowing manner, suddenly breaks the conventional rigidity and puts
everyone at ease making them smile and express their true hearts filled with
joy over the arrival of their great Guest. After a few moments Baba expresses
the desire to visit 'His' dear old man and tells us to follow. We pass through
a huge library, filled with a long line of pictures hanging in uneven rows, and
the many bookshelves throwing dark shadows and filling the white-washed
walls almost to the ceiling. We enter the dimly lighted sickroom. Baba
stands before the dying man who offers no resistance, his soul extended into
Him ready to obey the call. There stands God exchanging in joy and bliss
the trial of life of a man who conscious of his fulfilling state in new realization
of life as Truth, recognized the Friend standing before him to act as Truth, as I
Divine. Baba, without solemn attitude, after a few moments, as if He had
dropped a 'veil' over the failing life, makes a sign for all to leave.
Supper is prepared in a vast passage-

space, a sort of open air dining room,
situated between the main building and the kitchen house. A long table covered
with green leaves, heavy laden with fresh fruits, nuts, sweetmeats and tea is
ready to restore us. Baba presides at the table. The Divine psychological Juggler
at once changed the rhythm in mood of everyone present. A whimsical glance,
very difficult to decipher, brings to the surface some humorous intimation.
With Baba life is never sad. Baba does not want us to mourn over passing
things, He helps us to hold free within the Vision of the Merry State in Being,
that lightness in spirit which makes one feel detached from the uncertainties of
life. We then realize that death is Truth function. We know that the 'trespassing
show' in its fluid motion is the fulfilling order of the Divine Will that is Love.
Baba clapping His hands gives the signal for all to retire. He spells on the
board: "Now all go to bed and do not worry." He embraces us one by one,
and, laying His hand on the head of each brings in stillness and deep
understanding. We are shown to a small

SHRI MEHER BABA'S TOUR

61

joint cottage, on the same estate, which
has been specially prepared for Baba and His party.
The next morning at 5-30 Baba gives the unmistakable signal for all to
rise. At 7-30 all the members of the family are to assemble in the library.
The first news is that Sorabji had a restful night. Baba pays a visit to
Sorabji entering the room alone and remains inside for a few moments.
When coming out He gives definite orders that no visitors should enter the
sick room except those who are assigned to take care of the patient.
Furthermore, He gives dispositions that the wedding feast for the three hundred
guests should be called off, and only a few near relatives and friends should be
invited to the marriage ceremony of the 27th of December. That date remains unchanged. Baba's further dispositions are to exclude the crowds for Dar-
shana, that same day, as He wants to see only those few who, later in the
evening, are asked to call and commune in silence with him. To us he
expresses the same order and states: "I

do not want to meet the masses here
now, they will come when I speak-- then no more will anyone resist."
Towards noon, Sorabji Desai who apparently feels stronger, sends a mes-
sage to Baba through his younger brother expressing the special wish for us of the party to see his 'Holy Sanctuary.' Sorabji who always was a worshipper
of Truth had collected, during many years, relics and personal documents of
saints and great spiritual souls regardless of their differences of creed or
religion, creating evidence of their holy lives through the testimony of inspiring
documents. The most valuable in the collection is a letter from Baba, written
in His own handwriting in the form of a poem dedicated to His Holy Mother of
revered memory, Hazrat Baba Jan. Sorabji's brother who, during his
illness, has become the guardian of the holy shrine, shows us also a locket
containing the snow white hair of the Holy Woman. Her hair appears brisk
and strong as if still alive with the spark of Her Divine Life. He showed us a
tiny bit of cloth which belonged to St. Therese D'Avila. This recalls a few

62 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

moments spent in Spain when, with
Baba, we were visiting the City of Avila where St. Therese had lived and
performed her remarkable life. Standing in the Cathedral Baba said: "The
Saints are like the nerves of my body; they work for me and I guide their lives."
It is a remarkable fact that lives lived
in purity of Being create Truth facts, and these permeating as atmosphere of
benediction, throughout age and time, are felt by any pure human heart.
A very interesting book, entitled "Hundred and One Names of God",
Volume V, is put before us. Most of the explanations on the subject of universal
order were directly given by Baba. The day that the last proof of the book was
submitted to Baba for verification, a very interesting phenomenon hap-
pened: Baba was holding the Book pointing on the chart to the Highest
Point in Divine Existence--God-- when a huge light in the form of an
arrow shoots forth from His head and transforming into a luminous spiral,
fills the room with golden glow which to all present be-comes evident and is
felt as 'Divine

Light' that transgressing all form is
Oneness. Before leaving the room we turn towards Sorabji to express our
gratitude for the inspiration we had obtained; he responds with a smile and
salutes us as friends. We feel after these few moments of communion with
saintly memories that the spiritual bond which already has been established is
strengthened. Later in the day a visitor finds her
way to our private bungalow. She is an Eastern lady, elegant in appearance
with manners of the world. Visible lines of suffering mark her beautiful
and noble face. The purpose of her coming is clearly determined by re-
served attitude. She comes to call on the God-man. Although her visit is
expected, nevertheless her name is carefully reported and she is asked to
wait in patience to be received. Baba wants the aspirant to be calm before
meeting Him. He needs the human apparatus, which He works through, to
be in tranquil state of mind in control of nerves and emotion. Mrs. X. is one of
the most outstanding personalities in the City of Navsari. Her husband occu-
pies a responsible position and

SHRI MEHER BABA'S TOUR

63

holds the confidence of a large com-
munity. Her life is martyrdom. In no other way can the heroic struggle be
defined that for years she has kept concealed within her lonesome heart in
order to avoid outer conflicts and unworthy situations which could shock
the perfect confidence given to her husband and herself by the community
of Navsari. The facts which strengthen her pure determination to bear this life
in struggle, are clear. Her husband cannot agree with her free interpre-
tation of religion. To her religion is practice of Truth in life; it is real expe-
rience, in purer conscience, independent from rituals and ceremonies. She
married for a noble objective--to redeem the life of her husband. She felt
endowed with the spiritual right to free him from unworthy bondage in mind,
unworthy entanglements and influences of lower order that throughout all his
life, even before his marriage, had obstructed his spiritual advancement.
She had taken up the conscious struggle from the day she met him. Their
married life was an unceasing ordeal,

for he could not readily understand;
nevertheless she carried out her duty as a true companion and wife of the High
Official in an immaculate way. Within her lonesome life, longing for the reali-
zation of Truth, she marches on under the protection of the 'Gods' which in her
revealed as the Voice. Harmonies of pure spiritual ecstasy compensated for
the tortures in her mind. Souls personifying Krishna Bhagwan, Mohomed
and other Supreme Beings many times appeared to her; nevertheless she felt
the need for the alive Human God. When she first met Shri Meher Baba
she realized that He was the Perfect One whom she had expected for so
long; that He would give new strength to her inner life to fulfil the Divine
Theme; that He would give her courage to bear the external strife; that he would
enlighten her and give her the understanding that this phase of her life is
making good and is unfolding toward the Pure End, and that she will be able
to carry out her noble duties aloof, quiet in mind. We see her walk out of Baba's room after an unusually long meeting. Passing by

64 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

where we are all standing, she remarks
with unusual poise, "I shall be again here in the evening."
It is four o'clock in the afternoon. The music of a complete Indian orches-
tra begins to swing in harmonious notes and subtle thrills tuning in with the
worship of the few who have come to commune with Baba. Baba is seated on
a low couch especially arranged for Him on a rug, leaving space for those
who want to sit nearer and feel His influence--Baba's influence that is
Peace, making Peace in all. While Baba is surrounded by loving devotees, a
message is sent by Sorabji, through his brother J., requesting Baba to grant his
last wish to take Darshana from Baba. Baba allows that he should be brought,
although it meant for the sick man to make a super-human physical effort, as
his condition is showing symptoms of life extinction. When he stands before
Baba, he frees himself from the outer help given by his brother, and drops to
Baba's feet. The dying man is performing the last surrender in external
rites with the increasing impulse of his

longing soul that knows to be near the
end that is a new Beginning. Suddenly Baba, with imperative gesture, gives
order that he should be taken back to bed, still holding in suspense his life
with His Divine will. The music stops just before six
o'clock and is to commence again at eight. Mrs. X. arrives. She comes like a
holy priestess with her women, her friends, who represent the community of her own 'Living Church within' and whom, for many years, she had inspired
and led on to the Path. She brought them to Baba that they may, from now
on, realize Truth through Him who is the Personification of Truth. Before her
Living Lord she performs the holy sacrifice of pure self-dedication using
the ancient ritual of worship, the waving of the arti. She passes the
flaming vessel before all present that in it may be burned the old life, and
resurrect in Being. She prostrated herself before the alive Idol surrendering
her whole life, that life which had to be realized beyond ecstasy, beyond
emotion, deep within the sum of all life --her Soul. She was con-

SHRI MEHER BABA'S TOUR

65

scions that her life was taking a new
turn at the feet of the Beloved, our Baba, who in no way accepts sacrifice
without return of His love imperishable, without arousing the impetus
of life divine in the one who shows the conscious courage to want to grow.
When she put on Baba the white garment embroidered with silver and
pearls which she and her friends had worked in sincere devotion, she spoke
with loud voice audible to every one present: "Beloved Lord of our age may
Thou descend on earth like Lord Krishna and bring salvation to mankind."
We have witnessed Baba arouse the
slumbering affection in the human heart. We have seen Him enlighten
within the eternal flame of the Soul. We see Him here draw back to the
Divine Source of all existence a living soul and we witness the offering of that
living soul to the alive God. The next morning we hear that
Sorabji has not rested. Baba goes to cheer him and sees him for the last
time. New dispositions are given; two things are to be observed as strict order,

no outsider should approach Sorabji
from now on, and the directions of the doctor to be strictly followed. The date
of the marriage ceremony has not been changed.
The train to Bombay leaves at 7 a. m. but Baba gives order that we should be
at the station half an hour earlier. The farewell is sweet and not sad, although
every one feels in apprehension the event of Sorabji's approaching depar-
ture. One of the younger members of the family, who had become my special
friend, made a wish before we left and begged me to take it deep into my heart; she said, "Tell Baba to call me soon." I answer, "For good?" She nods, "Yes, for good."
Many curious people stand on the
station platform and stare at Baba, unconsciously taking the benefit of His
atmosphere. One of the brothers said, "One does not speak to Baba, it is not
necessary. One realizes through the spiritual atmosphere that expands from
His Pure Being all that is good." The train leaves. We all sit still for a
while, then Baba begins to play jokes and tricks and brings everyone back to

66 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

the reality of a new day. At a station called Gholvad one of our party, R. is given an order to leave. He is to visit a family of lepers and deliver special in-

structions from Baba and return to
Bombay later in the evening. We arrive at 11 a.m. in Bombay, the 25th of December, and return to K.'s home on Frere Road.

(To be continued)

THE SAYING OF MEHER BABA Take good care of your body, but do not be a slave to it. If you think constantly of its welfare, you are like the miser who thinks constantly of his gold.


You Must Believe It*
BY Dr. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF

Once a despotic king from Northern India, given to all sorts of whims and
vagaries, ordered the court clowns on a certain festive occasion to play the part
of a real and live tiger. Failure to comply meant death, and the clowns knew
the despot for what he was. They were at their wits end. Every
passing minute of the approaching moment increased their anxiety and
perplexity. One amongst the clowns who was an advanced soul, observing
their sorry plight, comforted his companions by saying, "Don't worry, let the time come; everything will be all right."
The stage was set; the durbar hall
was gaily decorated; the king in the best of oriental splendour was seated on
the golden throne with his small son-- the heir apparent--by his side. Other
notables and dignitaries packed the hall, keyed up to an high pitch of ex-
citement to witness the impossible performance.
After the preliminaries and side roles

of the clowns, the important item of the day, 'the tiger' was announced. At a
given signal, the particular clown leapt into the arena, metamorphosed into a
live and real tiger. The audience was dumbfounded and could hardly believe
their eyes. Before they could recover themselves, the tiger made straight for
the king's son, dragged him down, and tore him to pieces. When the king
realized that the prince was really dead, he ordered the clowns, on pain of
death, that he (prince) be restored to life. The clown, who played the tiger,
said that this was only possible if someone played the part of Christ
realistically, and the only one, at the moment, capable of doing it was
Shams-e-Tabriz, a God-mad personality, roaming about in the vicinity.
Uttering this bit of information the clown disappeared.
Shams was traced down. As he was known to be fond of music, he was
lured to the

_____________________________________________________________________ * Continued from December 1938 issue.

68 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

king's palace on promise of a musical
feast. The king, very respectfully, beseeched the Saint to play the Christ
for the sake of his son and heir. Shams agreed and kicked at the dead body
thrice saying: ("Qum-be-Iznillah") "Rise in the name of God." The prince
showed no signs of returning life. Once again he kicked at the dead body and
said angrily: ("Qum-be Izni") "Rise by my order." The prince immediately
came to life and everyone concerned breathed a sigh of relief. The orthodox
divines of the day came to know of this miraculous incident. Treating the ut-
terance "Rise by my order" ("Qum-belznillah") as rank blasphemy, and how,
unmindful of his spiritual state, Shams was skinned alive is another story.
Here it would he interesting for the spiritually minded to know why 'order
in the name of God ("Qum-be-lznillah") failed and the personal order ("Qum-be-
lznillah") by Shams succeeded in bringing the dead prince to life. The
term "Allah" in Sufism signifies the impersonal aspect of God, which is All

Knowledge, All Power, All Bliss. This state is 'Absolute', devoid of attributes. qualities, motives and actions. Hence,
the action or order of bringing to life the dead, cannot be attributed to God--
the Absolute, the Impersonal. Action or attribute of doing or undoing things belongs to Personal God--Divine "I"-- the Sadguru--the Qutub--the embod-
iment of all attributes. The Divine 'I', through Shams, worked the miracle
narrated above. One may also ask as to why the
particular clown did not bring to life the prince, when he could become a
tiger and kill him. The reason is obvious. The clown not having achieved 'Perfection' could not risk his spiritual downfall. The part of becoming a tiger
was forced upon him, by circumstances, and was meant to save the life
of his companions. There was no self, working in it. The second act of raising
the dead, would have been deliberate, the asserting of his psychic Ego. Hence
he very wisely disappeared, leaving the job to be finished by the Perfect Master
Shams-e-Tabriz.



How I Met Them And What They Told Me*
BY ABDUL KAREEM ABDULLA

It was years after I had met many mystics, in the ordinary course of life
as well as out of it, that I remembered Baba's words: "You will meet many more of the type."
There can be no end to the classi-
fication of mystics, just as there is no end to the common ideas about them. If
a proper search is made, it is not beyond the pale of possibility to find
mystics to fit into every one of the popular beliefs and notions about them.
Generally, it is held that either they can only be found in far away mountains
and solitary retirements, or that true mystics are only those who mix freely
in worldly affairs, serve themselves, their own people and country, and,
amidst all that, carry on 'religious and spiritual practices.'
The fact is that the external surroundings, situation and difference in

the mode and manner of worldly life has nothing to do with a mystic. The
life of a mystic is but an attitude of the mind. The basis for this mystic attitude
and its expression, in everyday life, is again simply a question of the inherent
aptitude of the individual mind. Mystics can and do exist in all strata of
society, be it politics, business, service, household life, as well as amongst the
fakirs and sadhus. They may exist as abundantly in the throes of a busy city
stock exchange as in the caves in far away mountains. Some live openly as
mystics and some remain unknown, even to their neighbours.
But all mystics are not alike. For the five Master Mystics who constantly
and continuously are experiencing the state of perfection without change and
without end for all times and under all conditions, there may be millions of
mystics in the different stages and

_______________________________________________________________________ * Continued from December 1938 issue.

70 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

states of the spiritual path. Some
mystics may just be struggling in the initial stage. Some may be toiling to-
wards an advance into the next higher state. There are mystics for whom
nature is an open book and the past, present and future hold no mysteries.
For a few, time and space do not count, inasmuch as the latter can present
themselves in any part or parts of the universe at one and the same time
simultaneously with the thought of doing so. The spiritual position and
progress of a mystic has, again, nothing to do with his possessions and achieve-
ments in the material sphere. A mystic may also happen to be an intellectual
giant and, to all appearances, controlling the political destiny of a nation,
and yet he may, knowingly or unknowingly, be a subordinate to an
illiterate and apparently destitute beggar of a mystic who may be sufficiently
advanced to be actually controlling the fate of a whole country towards its
spiritual emancipation. There is no hard and fast rule for the
making of a mystic, nor any physical means to measure their mystical a-

chievements and progress. These are
the two main factors which lead many sincere people to run down all mystics
indiscriminately and cause those inclined mystically to over-estimate
themselves as well as to enable rogues and charlatans to deceive some of the
people, some of the time, for base and selfish motives. As long as the aim and
object of a person is purely spiritual enlightenment, no harm results even if
a bogus mystic is encountered. On the other hand, meetings with true mystics
are always of immense benefit from the spiritual point of view.
After my introduction with Mr. C., as a friend, I found him for the first few
days to be anything but a mystic. A man with average intelligence and
common sense, he lived the routine family life as shrewdly and carefully as
any other man of town. Well posted on current events with a considerable
command over general literature, he was, on the whole, an ordinarily plea-
sant man to talk with until I happened to call on him once after 8 p.m. "Every
evening I do a little bhajan-kirtan ( devotional recitations ) and it is

HOW I MET THEM

71

time to begin. If you don't mind I
would like you to keep company with me," said he. Having nothing particular
to do I accepted the invitation. Within a few minutes his family, neighbours and
servants began trooping into the hall until it was fairly full. The little
audience was serious with awe and reverence, although Mr. C. continued
talking with me lightly until he started to play with the 'tals' (a small pair of
saucer-like brass instruments). The way it all started, mechanically and in an
orderly fashion, the function appeared to be a tame family affair of daily
worship and prayers, and I felt sorry to have been caught in the dry atmosphere
of a drab ceremony. After going through the formalities
of arti-puja (religious ceremony) Mr. C. began his bhajan-kirtan. He could
neither sing nor had he a sweet voice, but his recitations bore a distinct air of
deep devotion. When he began to intercept the bhajan, with a running com-
mentary in between the poetic lines in a style peculiar to himself, he suddenly
became devotion personified. He ceas-

ed to be an individual addressing other
individuals, or the paraphernalia of worship before him. It was as if at one
and the same time he was talking to himself, with those around him and
with the stars twinkling in the sky, outside the doors and windows of the
hall. Perhaps, at that hour, it would have made no difference to him whet-
her he had an audience of a thousand people or a stone-dead wall before him.
He was practically dancing all the time on his seat in tune with his 'tals' and
flashes in his eyes now appeared full of sparking light. I will try to picturize
him a little more in cold print. ".......a thief?" He almost shrieked
out the question, abruptly stopping his twinkling music and poetry. "That does not matter at all," he replied to himself with a gesture of intense indifference
which was immediately followed by a thundering challenge, "No power dare
arrest or restrain anyone on any account." He completed the poetic line
and was now very persuasive: "Pious or sinners, both are equally welcome in this path. Nature itself is a thief," up

72 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

went his finger with decisive accusation; "Our greatest treasure has been snatched from us." There was unmistakable pity in the tone that soon changed into an assurance of confidence; "It is concealed, but it is there, safe and within reach." After bursting into a little song, he invited, "Come on," then appealed, "Come quick," and once again began to thunder: "Let's snatch it, never mind if we have to rob it, but we must get it." Again some recitaion and the twinkling of the 'tals' and then, as if defending and arguing the point to a finish, he pleaded earnestly: "Oh, you do not know what that treasure is, but it is ours, our own and not far away, I am positively certain not far away; what is wanted is a will, a strong and steadfast will."
Mr. P. was introduced to me at a hillstation as a business man from Bombay, out for a change. He was the picture of robust health, neatly dressed in simple but well cut clothes. From his scrupulously trimmed finger nails to his carefully brushed hair, he showed every sign of great care for his personal ap-

pearance. But for all the marks of phy-
sical and mental well being, he wore a mask of patient boredom, during the
half hour that we happened to be together. Thinking him to he troubled
with a lean business and financial worries, I remarked upon trade depression,
the tightening of the money market and difficulty in collection. "But for all that," he said, "Those who have few wants can have very little to worry
about. For a sensible man it is so very cheap to lead a really good life, and
business men have necessarily to be sensible." I then tried to switch from
politics to sport and from sport to society, but I failed in getting a conver-
sational response from this sphinx-like man. Learning that he was thirty-five
and still unmarried, love and disappointment seemed to be just the
subject to kill time. But I was soon up against a dead wall. "All that I love
and have ever loved is solitude and to be all myself," said he. "What do you
do?" I asked in desperation; "Read or write?" For the first time he smiled and
the mystic was unmasked when he

HOW I MET THEM

73

replied, "I enjoy." To be quite sure of his meaning I asked again, "Enjoy what?" "Enjoyment," was the one word he spoke: he spoke in a simple matterof-fact tone. "It is a pity," I said. This time it was his turn to look at me with interest through his gold-rimmed glasses and ask me pointedly, "Pity for what?" Had I known your enjoyment business earlier," I explained, "We could have amused each other better." He then discussed with me about a suitable spot in the surrounding hills to retire in solitude for a couple of months. When the plan was completed, I reminded him to make arrangements for his food, and added, by way of joke, "You have nearly an hundred pounds of fat to take care of." "Don't worry," he replied, "It is enough to take care of me during my retirement."
During the first two years of my 'field-service' with Baba (moving about from place to place, doing all sorts of odd jobs including that of a coolie and labourer as and when an occasion arose) I happened to be in Sukkur, before it became famous for one of the

largest barrage schemes in the world. It
is one of the hottest cites in Sind where in Hazrat Bachal Shah, a Muslim Mas-
ter, lived his earthly life and died. His tomb is situated on the banks of the
famous river surrounded by tall shady trees, on the same site where he worked
out his life mission. It is a place of regular pilgrimage for both Hindus and
Muslims of Sind who hold Bachal Shah in great esteem to this day. When I
went there to pay my respects, the cool and shady spot was tempting enough,
in the sweltering heat, to make me lie down for a while under one of the trees
in the garden after I had finished with my duty offering the Fatcha (prayers).
But before I could doze off I had to open wide my eyes for an old woman
moving about the grounds who appeared, from a distance, to be an exact
double of Hazrat Babajan of Poona. She was about the same height, the
same build, with an identical crown of snow-white curly hair, her face was all
wrinkles and lines and she had a peculiar knack of a continuous move-
ment about herself. This characteristic similarity to the Qutab (Sadguru)

74 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

of Poona made me mark her very min-
utely from where I was lying down. All the time she was rapidly going here and
there as if extremely busy, although I failed to mark anything definite she did
except when she filled a chetty with water. It was not long before I could
see that, unlike Hazrat Babajan, she had vacant dreamy eyes, darker comple-
xion, constant restlessness and above all a habit of loudly muttering to herself
in an incomprehensible language all the time as she flitted about. Thus, satis-
fying my passing curiosity, I fell back into the blank of a nice good nap.
By the time I was up and about the sun had gone down considerably, I pre-
ferred to take a stroll by the river-side before leaving the pleasing atmosphere
for good. At the end of a bend in the path, I came across the moving and
muttering old lady. To my utter amazement I found I was looking down into a
pair of most intelligent eyes, fixed in steadfast gaze into my own without a
flicker. Those wrinkles and lines in her face became eloquent with wisdom as
if to complete the extraordinary trans-

formation; she spoke in the challenging
tone of the 'who goes there' of a sentry in clear Urdu; "Tera Pir cown hai?"
(Who is thy spiritual guide?) The only spontaneous word I could utter point blank was, "Meher Baba". The moment she heard this, she said, "Bashah"
(King), and then after a momentary pause added, "Shahenshah" (Emperor).
With these two words, like a flash of lightning she shrank back in her vacant
dreamy eyes and resumed moving about muttering incoherently. I fol-
lowed her deliberately and managed to cross her path twice hoping to hear
something more, but she ignored me completely. For the time being the
immediate surroundings appeared to have passed out of existence for her.
Just as in special services only those on the top rung of the ladder know the
ultimate source of direction, and the subordinates merely have to carry out orders from 'above', only a few most advanced mystics can recognize the 'Sahebe­Wakhta' (The Master of the Age) in the physical plane: and many
amongst the less advanced mystics, entrusted

HOW I MET THEM

75

with the duties in the spiritual direction
of world affairs, have to carry out the intuitive instructions without neces-
sarily knowing the source of their emanation. The great 'moving muttering'

mystic, having recognized the SahebeWakhta, I could think of nothing else for the moment than to make enquires about her antecedents and local reputation which lead me into another pleasant surprise of the day.

(To be continued)

THE SAYING OF SHRI MEHER BABA God-realization is not to be confused with intellectual conviction regarding God and creation, just as the head is not to be confused with the hair, nor the thing itself with its shadow.


My Master's Love is The Greatest
BY M. R. DHAKEPHALKAR

Once Akbar, then Emperor of India, was spending time with Birbal, one of
his gifted ministers, in the beautiful gardens on the banks of the Jamna. The
moonlight was spreading everywhere. Both had kept aside the heavy re-
sponsibility of a mighty Empire, their hearts being light they joined in a
commonplace parlance. The Emperor asserted that there was
nothing to equal mother love, but the minister could not agree to this without
his characteristic reservations. When challenged to disprove the royal state-
ment, Birbal ordered one of the attendants to bring a squirrel with her young
one from the zoo in the garden and put them on a fountain pillar. The water
was then let in and it began rising all around.
As the water rose, the squirrel with her young one climbed up and up,
finally reaching the top. The water still rose. The squirrel caught her young one
and held it above her head, she was

practically neck deep in water. "Now, Birbal, look at the mother's
love: you are being defeated by your own experience. Look, there, at the cost
of her own life she is going to save her young one," said Akbar.
Birbal smiled as the squirrel was on the point of being drowned; bubbles of
air floated on the surface; just beneath was the young one. 'Mother love' had
reached its climax. Half conscious, the squirrel slipped her young beneath her
self making the instinctive effort to rise above the water. The young one was
drowned beneath her weight. At the cost of the life of her own young one
the mother squirrel saved herself. All nature was quiet--the fountain
bubbled. Akbar, the mightiest of the mighty Emperors, looked at the whole
scene and wondered. It was only Birbal's turn to break the silence: "Self
preservation is an instinct. Emperor; the instinct proved to be stronger than love."
My mother; she was ideal.

MY MASTER'S LOVE IS THE GREATEST

77

I only wanted to worship my mother
from the day I knew her. I knew no religion, I knew no God. We were poor,
we could not even get the necessities of life. My mother was the only soul run-
ning the household of a large family; grinding, sweeping, cleaning, cooking,
washing, stitching and managing without any help--without a moment's rest.
Day and night she worked and toiled. Toiled during her whole life and toiled
out of it. She refused to be ill for our sake. She knew her illness would be
our starvation. A career of fifty years she passed in her home, and never a
moment was given to despair. She bore the cross for us. We lost our father.
This is the worst lot for a Hindu woman. My mother had an only wish, that
she should die before my father. It was not fulfilled. It was her greatest calam-
ity and yet that sorrow she pushed aside for us. My mother's sacrifice was an
ideal sacrifice. Till the last, when her life was ebbing, she would encourage
us. Such love is to be experienced and not to be expressed.
I had the conviction that there is no

love equal to mother love, until I came
in contact with Shri Meher Baba, my Guru, my Master. He revealed to me a
still higher phase of love, love beyond this worldly Maya; call it love trans-
cendent, call it Love Divine. My mother's love expected a return. A very
strong tie indeed is mother's love, but binding. My Master's love is love for
love's sake. It is impossible to describe this love so far greater than mother
love. There are many who have served my Master with obedience and sacri-
fice; there are many who have left all their worldly affairs and are resigned to
him to fulfil the Path. I belong to none of the above order.
Once the disciples of my Master were assembled in the main hall at
"Meherabad". They decided among themselves that each one should take an
oath that he would serve Shri Baba in the real spirit of selfless service. A fire
was brought. Some pieces of sandalwood were supplied. All of them, one
after another, took the oath. I knew I was not strong enough to follow the
oath. X. rose in the meeting and said, "Do you not take

78 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

Baba to be God-realized? Why are you
lagging behind for the oath?" I dared to say, "I do not take Baba to be God-
realized." I spoke against my conscience. I told a lie. I took Baba for
everything. He is God-realized. He is above everything. But in order not to
go through with the oath, I spoke a lie, and still my Master loves me. I am
disobedient, and still my Master loves me. I am a sinner and still he loves me.
Is he not more than father and mother when he loves all beings with love for
love's sake without taking into consideration their weaknesses. Once this
love is awakened? all worldly love-- love for wife, love for children, love for
relations--becomes mere duty. To be near Shri Baba, to get from
him the slightest touch, is the highest reward one can obtain. It is Bliss.

When he receives me with his irresis-
tible smile, I forget the whole world. I forget myself and become conscious of
that selfless love, of that purest love of him for me without my having the
personal love for him which I have for my mother, and that is why I feel his
love to be infinitely greater. Often I think to crush myself and end
my life of all responsibility, but instantaneously do I find myself bathing in
his love which restores me. At sight of him I forget myself. I run toward him
as the gopies and their cows at the sound of the lute of Lord Krishna. I am
attracted toward my Master as iron is attracted by the magnet. I am con-
quered by him to complete submission, complete obedience, complete surren-
der. I am as a drop going back to the ocean and feeling the vastness of the
ocean and its waves of Bliss.



As I Saw It
BY PRINCESS NORINA MATCHABELLI

In 1938, Shri Meher Baba gave the following statement when interviewed
about the newly organized institution of the so-called God-mad men at Rahuri:
"I am now undertaking the last stage of preparation. As the surgeon's knife cuts
the matured cataract and restores sight, so, when the world is ripe, my blessing
shall restore the drooping spirit of the world."
The establishment of the Mad Ashram at Rahuri, since 1937, has been
shifted to "Meherabad" where the general activities of Shri Meher Baba
have been reunited in separate small settlements.
On the twenty-fifth of September of this year, Shri Meher Baba organized a
theatrical performance of the God-mad men in their Ashram in "Meherabad".
The extraordinary spectacle of Godmad men was acted in perfect order on
a regular stage with real theatrical props and original costumes suited to
the well-known Indian spiritual drama entitled "Gopichand". These mad men

were trained to memorize the text of their roles which they repeated, keeping
perfect sequence of the spoken sentences. They were directed like marion-
ettes and obeyed unconsciously as divine instruments.
At a certain moment, one of these phantom-like creatures seemed to open
up within a wider space in feeling, when, suddenly breaking away from
the learned text, he released in loud words the urge of life for liberation. We
heard the cry of the soul in bondage in the unconscious mind. The cry came
spontaneous from the inner source of life aware in deeper intuition. His
words said: "I fall at your feet; I give you my life--I die for you." Another
mad man standing near, as his partner in the play, was carried into the mo-
mentum of the exalted soul, and, with the imitative gesture of a child, but
using senseless words, automatically followed the executive control within,
without resistance, exposing unconsciously his

80 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

self-defence pleading for mercy. This
wonder of deep reaction I shall in no further way describe than in repeating
Shri Meher Baba's own words: "He saw me as the Light in the darkness of his
existence. In mind, in Being he was alight. He was sure of my Oneness in
him. He saw my Being in him in fullness."
All this was unfathomable and almost impossible to realize. I felt as one
dreaming. I was as though looking through a nightmare of life unreal,
confused, false, and see the divine mind react in its finite existence in ignorance.
I saw Shri Meher Baba's universal mind evolve through the subjective work in
mind in expiation, the objective state of mind in spirit existence. Shri Meher
Baba is the divine constructive reaction in mind finite that results universally.
The Christ show in life in Being is pure self use of life and it is real, pure work;
it is one all work in Existence. The Master Himself made the fol-
lowing statement as explanation of the subtle order of His external work:
"What does my work in mind experience; what does the Truth in mind ex-

erience; what does mind in expression
in life and in spirit experience? Mind impersonal and mind individual I react
in man conscious or unconscious. I am the extra order in mind ... give in, bring
in, do, act, react. Mind as pure intuition is a work individual in man. Man reacts
in himself as individual to the operation in mind. That is to say, man gives his
life in expansion within new conscious order as 'I' in intuition. I do the indi-
visible reaction in reaction. It is the impulse of life impersonal in mind
personal ... The expiation in mind of man is individual, impersonal, impure,
pure, good, bad, in extra show in One, as life in free order in existence. It is
the state of mind indivisible in the finite mind. It is 'two in one' the
triangle order as fact, that one is and has to bring in and out, in order to live
in and out, the secular order in expansion in conscious order in I."
The divine mind has descended into its own finite order in human existence
to speed the happy ending through the reactive show in every degree in con-
scious life in mind. May the external effect be war or

AS I SAW IT

81

peace, both ends will bring to fulfil-
ment the supreme conclusion. The real and only worthy result of it all is to
realize within the state of life conscious of the yet dormant Divine Existence.
The selfless crew of individuals belonging to the old stock of the mandali
who, for over twenty years, have served unafraid and are staunch in the hard
game of discipleship to the Perfect Master, have given an extraordinary
demonstration of selfless service of unflinching endeavour and patience to
put through the difficult scheme of the

Divine Executor. They have given an example which will remain a lesson to all. Their selfless love performed a true miracle. Shri Meher Baba made it possible that these God-mad men became instrumental for His divine plan; and those 'good helpers' who served to bring to realization the external experiment He has transformed throughout the many years of selfless dedication of their lives to Him, to become perfect agents of His directing will.
Shri Meher Baba's Will is Divine Love that can resurrect.



Gather Us In
BY GEORGE MATHESON
Gather us in Thy Love that fillest all! Gather our rival faiths within Thy fold!
Rend each man's temple veil and bid it fall, That we may know that Thou hast been of old. Gather us in.
Gather us in; we worship only Thee; In varied names we stretch a common hand.
In diverse forms a common soul we see; In many ships we seek one spirit land, Gather us in.
Each sees one colour of Thy rainbow light, Each looks upon one tint and calls it heaven;
Thou art the fulness of our partial sight; We are not perfect till we find the seven. Gather us in.
Thine is the mystic life great India craves, Thine is the Parsee's sin-destroying beam;
Thine is the Buddhist's rest from tossing waves, Thine is the empire of vast China's dream. Gather us in.
Thine is Roman's strength without its pride, Thine is the Greek's glad world without its graves;
Thine is Juda's law with law beside The truth that censures and the grace that saves. Gather us in.
Some seek a Father in the heavens above, Some seek a human image to adore;
Some crave a spirit vast as life and love, Within Thy mansions we have all and more. Gather us in.


Question Baba Answers
SERIES BY DR. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF

Question Can some idea be had of what sound
is like from higher planes? Does it in any way differ in intensity or frequency
of vibration from the sound of the physical plane?
Answer This is rather difficult to explain and
still more difficult to understand, as it relates to subjective experience. How-
ever, know this that sound obtains throughout all the seven planes differ-
ing in its expression of feeling and bliss.
The sound, sight or smell of the higher planes can, with no stretch of
imagination, be likened to what we are used to on the physical plane. It is
something altogether different in nature, quality and expression, but, all
the same, for the sake of description and analogy, we can do no better than
use the familiar terms, viz., sound, sight and smell. Our physical organs of
hearing, seeing and smelling are useless for experiencing and enjoying the

higher planes. Therein it is a different eye that sees, a different ear that hears,
and a different nose that smells. You know already that there are inner
senses, a counterpart of the external senses in man, and it is the former that
experiences the higher planes. Avoiding the mistake of likening the
sound of the higher planes as something differing in intensity and fre-
quency of vibrations to the sound of the physical plane, know it for a certainty
that there is actually what may be cal1ed 'sound' in the first three planes.
The form, beauty, music and bliss of this sound is beyond description. The
nad or celestial music (sound) is peculiar to the first plane and can be
experienced or induced by the mantric force. It is on account of this that even
an unintelligent repetition or reading of scriptures is encouraged and advocated.
As stated above, although there is sound in all the seven planes, it is smell
that is peculiar to the second and third planes; and sight belongs to the fifth
and sixth planes. In the

84 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

fourth plane the bliss of sound, smell
and sight are all subdued and repressed. The fourth plane connotes the darkest
night of the spiritual journey wherein even Jesus could not but cry out: "My
God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me?" It is for this reason the wayfarer
traversing the Path all alone, unaided by a Master, finding himself benighted
and forlorn in the fourth plane, is very strongly tempted to make wrong use of
his psychic powers of the three lower planes, culminating in the fourth as 'siddhis' (kashf-o-karmat). And what a fall this means! It means once again
going through the chain of evolution right from the beginning--the stone
state. The seventh plane stands unique.
The sound, sight and smell here is divine in essence and has no com-
parison to that emanating from the lower planes. In this plane one does not
hear, smell or see, but becomes sound, smell and sight simultaneously and is
divinely conscious about it. The different religious practices and
the yogas, after establishing contact with the higher planes, induce experi-

ences peculiar to those planes. For instance, contacting the first plane (sound) engenders inspiration; the second and third planes (smell) begets intuition; the fifth and sixth (sight) gives illumination. The experience of the fifth and sixth, the Sufis term as 'maarefat' (gnosis). The seventh plane stands for Revelation and this, according to Sufis, is Haqiqat (Reality).
Question Will the material science, in the near
or remote future, be able to probe into subtle and higher planes? At the present rate of scientific progress it ought to be possible, if there be continuity or point of fusion from the material to the subtle. Answer
You are going into deeper waters. Now listen carefully. The soul, essentially divine, infinite in existence, knowledge and bliss is, all by itself, the only Reality. Everything else exists only in imagination. The famous and oft repeated parable of the snake and rope will elucidate the point. The soul, somehow, imagined the rope to be the snake. This

QUESTION BABA ANSWERS

85

phase engendered fear which, to stretch
the simile further, we may call mind; the mind extended itself to grasp it
(snake); this is energy, and actually grappling it means body. Thus we see
mind, energy, body, although all three have no existence except in imagin-
ation, but in relation to each other they are altogether distinct, separate and
independent. Although mind emanates energy and energy in essence is mind,
nevertheless in expression and form both are distinct and apart. Similarly,
body is the outcome of energy, and, though identical in essence, the
function and formation is radically different and independent. To illustrate
the point let us take thread to be mind, and cloth made thereof to represent
energy, and clothing to signify body. The cloth here is of thread, but, in
utility and form, is altogether different from thread; the clothing, say a coat, is
from thread, but in form and expression

is obviously and distinctly apart from
cloth and thread. The making of cloth and coat from thread is easy and
possible, but the return of the coat and cloth to the state of the original thread
means the destruction and annihilation of the form and expression of both.
Similarly the emanation of energy and matter from mind is automatic and
natural, but the return of matter and energy to mind is almost impossible.
This return business is the beginning of spirituality.
You must have felt by now your question answered by realizing how
impossible it is for science to probe the subtle and higher planes. Science is, as
yet, a very long way off, it has up to now only touched the fringe of matter.
It may, at the most, touch the extreme limits of matter, but that will take ages.
And who can, till then, vouchsafe for the integrity of this--the present civili-
zation?



Existence
By F. B. WORKINGBOXWALLA

It is as inconstant as the mind.
Though limited, it is limitless, in that it is without beginning and without end.
It is limited in the sense that mind is limited. That which is impermanent and
subject to change is limited; and mind, with its limitless thoughts, has but a
limited vision. Its infinity of thoughts may make it fly from one thing to
another, but it cannot make it understand the reality of existence. Intellect
is but a tiny, evolved particle of the mind, and if, with its discoveries and
destructiveness, it claims to be the solvent of anything and everything, it is
sorely mistaken. It has, of course, its own part to play in the scheme of
things, which it does with more of mess and less of logic. But that is beside the
point. To a mind regularly given to trying
to understand it, the existence looks to be a funny thing. Tragedies and come-
dies are intermingled, and, though in fact, misery and suffering outweigh

happiness, on the whole, it strikes one
that this phenomenon, this ephemera of a universe, is a big hotchpotch! Were it
not for that, were it not for its everchanging aspect, the creation would
have been very, very monotonous indeed! And where would then have been the Lord's leela, His play? It is because of this duality, this multiplicity into
infinity that, though fickle, the existence is said to be without beginning or
end. This does not imply that it is everlasting. Everlasting is only the truth
pervading this existence. It is wonder whether it was with any
definite, settled purpose that the creation began--whether it began or
cropped up like mushrooms in wet days! It needs no stretching of the
imagination to understand that this unintelligible "something" (or nothing?)
itself denotes that it must be the outcome of nothing in particular. But
then we have the Biblical version to the effect that God took seven days to
bring crea-

EXISTENCE

87

tion into being, which means that He
the Almighty first played the Architect (but He does not appear to be a very
able Architect!), and took a period of time to shape and mould this stupen-
dous enormity which, nevertheless, is a mere atom in the indeterminable, invis-
ible planetary systems! But perhaps the Old Testament is allegorical in its
interpretation. Anyway, it is a good mental exercise
to weigh the pros and cons. True, there is regularity in nature; for we have the
seasons, the ebb and flow, night and day. But the rains are irregular; they are
heaviest in one and scarce in another place. They come down anywhere, any
time in the year, with or without their accustomed fury; the flux and reflux
are never to time; the sun is never seen rising only in one direction all the year
round, and its rising and setting vary; the proverbially inconstant moon of
Shakespeare does not seem to have mended its ways! All this goes to show
that both regularity and irregularity exist in nature. But the one marked

tendency to be noticed in nature is the
maintaining of its equilibrium. If earthquakes take place, floods over-run vast
expanse of land, pestilence and disease take their toll, wars spread death and
desolation, it is because of nature purging itself of some chronic disorders in
it. May be, it is God asserting Himself! With all that, to put it in simple par-
lance, this existence is an indescribably grand mix-up with all the inherent
changeability on an indefinite scale. At this deduction, the mind is at a stand-
still; nevertheless, since existence is there, it is inclined to the belief that
beneath this apparent inconsistency, there is One Ultimate Purpose, and that
is, preparation for a Better Life! However it be, the fact remains that
we are too much engrossed in and enamoured of our false surroundings.
That is funny in itself; but funniest of all is that mind, which constantly
hankers after change, detests and fears most one change--leaving this medley
of existence! If at all the mind is constant, faithful to one idea, it is to the idea
of Life! Or Life unto Death!



Shri Meher Bada and Healing*
BY COUNTESS NADINE TOLSTOY

For most of Shri Meher Baba's followers who never before had the
experience of work in conditions of this kind in the Free Hospital for the poor,
this test was offering most suitable opportunity for ego elimination. First
disguised under the responsibilities given to workers, soon the inner signi-
ficance, the real spiritual performance of the roles was revealed. It soon
unfolded into a real climax when the egos began to express themselves and
assert their ways and peculiarities. Then the real surgical 'operation' of the
egos by the sacred loving hands of the greatest 'surgeon' in the world, Shri
Meher Baba, revealed indeed to all the true spiritual significance of the exper-
ience. The real cure is obvious and really enjoyed after the painful moment
was well-faced and accepted. This acceptance and obedient response in
following the inner and outer orders of the Master is the sign of readiness and
real co-operation with His spiritual

work. In this process of liberation from the ego the openness and surrender of
the disciple become a real achievement on his part and lead to immediate
spiritual benefit. "Hide nothing from me."
"Bring me all your weaknesses, give them all to me, only give. I will make you free, unbound and happy."
Always unceasingly vigilant, watch-
ing, knowing everything what is going on within us, knowing our thoughts,
subconscious inclinations and feelings Baba knows all our difficulties and
inner conflicts. Subtly He guides us out of inner turmoil into serenity and
greater harmony of being, out of resistance of the ego into completeness of
surrender, He gradually breaks up all the former complexes of the mind;
having undone them one by one, He subtly utilizes and redirects the released
energies into new channels. Adjusted and again readjusted, one is infinitely
helped in experiencing an ever renewed

_______________________________________________________________________ * Continued from December 1938 issue.

SHRI MEHER BABA AND HEALING

89

higher state of spiritual well being.
The Master--the Infinite Creative Source--creates conditions of real
strength and balance, operating deep and sure in full knowledge of all
processes, on all planes and forms of creation.
But as said before, the openness and the ease of response on the side of the
follower are the necessary conditions and advantages for the disciple on the
Path. The greater the love and surrender, the deeper are the effects of the Master's blessings on us. The deeper the resistance of the inner unconscious
being, the stronger the holding back of the ego-defence eager to follow its old
instinctive tracts, reactions and claims --the less the spiritual benefit of the
unique opportunity which could be fully utilized for spiritual advancement.
And it is Divine Love of the Master which alone can win the devotion and
surrender of the devotees, so indispensable in the elimination of the ego.
Love alone can provide the alert plasticity and spontaneous response to the Master's inner orders.
One and the same task and purpose,

one and the same end has to be ac-
complished through successions of lives by each human being on earth: the
rich and the poor, the sick and the socalled healthy, the fortunate and the
miserable are equal before this immanent law of God to man.
Shri Meher Baba has made clear the main points concerning man's make-up
and its corresponding planes of being. He has given a definite understanding
of the goal of life and the individual problem of each human being.
The over-estimation of physical, material and mental values and
comforts, so connected with the ego, leads to great misinterpretation of real
spirituality. The pure spiritual tradition warns against the abuse and misuse of
spiritual force, its commands not to be used for any selfish purposes or physi-
cal and psychic cravings or phenomena. In his writings, Shri Meher Baba has
given points in regard to miracles of physical healing: true Spiritual Masters
never perform them for idle curiosity and selfish purposes; even lesser
teachers can do them and they are not the sign of real spirituality.

90 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

In the time of manifestation of the
Avatar and of the Masters in the world, they sometimes perform the miracles
for spiritual reasons. Only spiritual healing is real healing.
Only spiritual awakening helps to overcome all human ailments whatever
they may be. The problem of healing lies beyond and above the physical
plane with its psychic shadow and entanglements of the mind. Imperfect
as they are, men live an imperfect existence. The unexpressed and unful-
filled state of being is bound to lack the experience of fullness of being and its
true happiness. The crystallization within the limits of the personal ego
gives no room for expansion. The incomplete man lives an incomplete
life. Out of balance and proportion, men suffer restlessness, inner discord
and misery; the ignorant misuse of energies creates ruptures in unity of
being, throwing one out of balance in mental agony, physical pain or psychic
entanglements and abnormalities. The heart of man degenerated and
tarried in the unhappy, selfish existence

shrinks to its little world incapable of
great expansions and joys of the awakened pure experience of 1ove. So
men live as gloomy shadows, as distorted false images of primal per-
fection. The real service of a true Master
consists in giving to humanity the new impulse of spiritual growth. Knowing
the path of life He helps to speed the process of involution of consciousness
which is a conscious return to the primal source of the higher Self. There
alone permanent happiness and union are found. In Baba we have the true
Knower, the Supreme Compassionate Authority of the age. His Love and
Wisdom give best; for they give real everlasting cure to men. He came to set
them free from the traps of egoism, from the cause of all suffering and
trouble. Elimination of the ego through Love,
is the goal and method of Shri Meher Baba's guidance for reaching into the
roots of Being. "Love is the remedy," says Baba.
His grace gives an everlasting relief from ignorance

SHRI MEHER BABA AND HEALING

91

with all its disastrous consequences.
His Grace will lead those who "seek and need" to spiritual Realization and
Truth. We shall remember the inspiring

words of the Master: "Serve Him who serves the whole
universe; obey Him who commands the whole creation; love Him who is Love itself; follow Him in every walk of life."


THE SAYING OF SHRI MEHER BABA
It is one and the same Universal Being, God, who plays the different roles of stone, metal, vegetable, dumb animal, and human being, and through the existence of each of these, experiences His own gross and subtle manifestations. It is the same indivisible Being who, through the existence of a realised or spiritually perfect person, experiences His own Real State which is beyond the gross and subtle planes.


Notes from my Diary

F. H. Dadachanji

TOUR IN INDIA
Since the 8th of December 1938, Shri Meher Baba has been on tour in India with his Eastern and Western disciples, and when I am writing this, we are in the Central Provinces of India at Jubbulpore.
The object of this special tour, as of all other movements and activities of the Master, is purely spiritual. Incidentally, however, it is meant to give his closer group a glimpse of India principally of its spiritual and religious aspects, and generally of its mythological, cultural, and historical side.
The party accompanying is a cosmopolitan group of about 30, both Eastern and Western disciples--men and women--including those observing strict seclusion and discipline.
The itinerary of the tour is unknown to any member of the party, except a slight indication of the direction towards the South of India. Hence a blank page for all!
Characteristics--The usual peculiarities typical of all the Master's move-

ments and activities, particularly with
such a cosmopolitan party--complicated situations in strange surroundings,
sudden changes, quick moves, etc.-- are seen from the description given
below. General routine--As the ladies
observing seclusion have to be beyond the limits of sight and sound of man,
certain special disciplinary rules have to be observed for the strict enforce-
ment of the rigid discipline that has to be continued. Hence talks in silent
whispers. A big bus is specially ordered and
designed to suit the requirements of the party, with blue curtains and special
partition at the back of the driver's seat forming a closed compartment for the
ladies in seclusion; such is to be continued even under adverse conditions
during travels. The responsible charge of driving the
bus all the way is entrusted by the Master in the capable hands of an
American lady disciple, who has been driving her own car for years,

NOTES FROM MY DIARY

93

and has also driven Red Cross ambu-
lances in New York during the world war. To keep the car in perfect running
order and also to help loading and unloading of the personal baggage of the
party on top, two mechanical experts, specially chosen from the men dis-
ciples, travel with the party, on the front seat.
Preliminary preparations were made a month ahead. Hyderabad (Deccan)
was to be the first long stop and stay for about a month. Seeing different
sites there and making certain observations for the establishment of the pro-
posed Spiritual Centre were disclosed as the chief reason, besides other im-
portant inner work of the Master. To make preliminary arrangements for the big party's stay there, I had to go to Hyderabad thrice in a month. The prin-
cipal party who could be said to be chiefly responsible to bring the Master
to Hyderabad, preferred, for obvious reasons of his own, to be in the back
ground, although indirectly helping a great deal in making arrangements for the Master's party during their stay in Hyderabad.

The splendid bungalows situated at
Shadnagar, about 25 miles from Hyderabad and belonging to Maharaja Sir
Kishan Prasad, the Ex-Prime Minister of the State, are readily offered through
the courtesy of the ever-hospitable Maharaja for the Master and his party.
Auspicious beginning, indeed! A telegram requesting Baba to post-
pone the date of starting from Meherabad just for a day or two to enable us
to arrange a suitable place for the party's stay in Hyderabad is replied
with an emphatic "No", and a confirmation of the first order and arrange-
ment to be literally followed with regard to the dates of departure from
Meherabad and arrival at Hyderabad. Only a day previous to starting from
Meherabad, the telegram containing the contrarious news 'Shadnagar infested
with plague' is shown to the group. But plague or no plague, Baba decided to
go to Shadnagar. His loving group is ever prepared to follow the Master.
On the night of the 7th, the two boys accompanying the party, get busy loading and fixing the party's baggage--more than 50 packages on the

94 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

top of the bus. They had their breath out when they finished it after three hours.
DEPARTURE FROM MEHERABAD
Precisely on the day and hour fixed, at 9 a. m. of the 8th of December, Baba leaves Meherabad with party on tour.
The big bus, with its extra-heavy burden of the party's baggage packed and tied on the top, presented a sight of a huge unwieldy monster moving along the road. All who saw it were scared and were sceptical about its safe arrival at Hyderabad. "It would certainly be a miracle if this bus reached safe at Hyderabad," some who knew about motor transport were heard to remark! But safely it did arrive.
The party arrive at Sholapur at dusk, and make a halt at the Dak Bungalow for the night. To avoid the difficulty of unloading and reloading the beddings on top, everyone of the group willingly offers to lie on whatever they find for the night--sofas, chairs, tables and whatever is available.
Maya again! I come to Hyderabad on my third visit on the 3rd of Decem-

ber in advance of the party. The first
news I hear on arrival is totally disappointing. The grievous news of the very
serious illness of both the heads of the dear family, through whose principal
initiation and instrumentality all the arrangements in Hyderabad were made,
was first a sad note in the flute. Then came the disheartening news, the
"plague" epidemic at Shadnagar, for the first time in the history of the village, I
was told. Several cases occurred which scared the populace, and the place was
practically deserted. Maya again active, working with a vengeance to obstruct the Master's plans.
But we had the most capable and
enthusiastic group of sincere workers, deputed for us by the principal party
referred to above, to make all arrangements for the Master's party during
their stay in Hyderabad. Their hearty cooperation and advice could not be too
highly commended. They suggested another ideally suited spot for our
party, with a spiritual background and history, at Maula Ali, about 6 miles
away from Hyderabad. Here again the property of Maharaja Sir Kishan Prasad

NOTES FROM MY DIARY

95

was available, and could be easily arranged and placed at the party's disposal. But water difficulty presented a
problem, very difficult to manage! Meanwhile things looked very com-
plicated in Hyderabad. Those dear enthusiastic friends who whole-heartedly
worked to make the Master and party happy during the stay here, couldn't, out
of courtesy, tolerate the idea of taking them to a place infested with an epidemic, in spite of the Master's telegram to be unconcerned about it, nor was the
Maula Ali residence found quite suitable with its water difficulty. They
sincerely wished and worked to find a really suitable place for the party to
live. Having rejected the two ideally suited places for reasons explained, it
was difficult to find one to suit our special requirements, immediately.
Two days of hard work brought nothing. There was only one day more left
before the party arrived on the 9th. At the eleventh hour, after strenuous
efforts all around, the ancient Gosha (Purda ladies) quarters of the Ligam-
pally Gardens are reserved temporarily for immediate occupation of the party
on arrival.

With a gentleman from Hyderabad, I
go about 7 miles ahead to meet Baba and party. At 6 in the evening, we see a
huge mountain on wheels moving towards us. It presented an uncanny
sight indeed. In soft whispers, I speak to Baba of the arrangements made.
When given the choice between the Maula Ali residence and the Gosha
Quarters of the Lingampalli Gardens, Baba, for his own reasons, prefers the
latter. With our car in front, we escort the bus to the Garden where we arrive
at 7-30. After two days of continuous travel
the party now enter these Gosha Quarters, with open compound, plenty
of space and two suites of rooms on its two flanks, absolutely vacant with
nothing to lie on. Not a very welcome and inviting place! But the dear souls
smilingly and cheerfully accepted what was offered. Enlivened by the Master's
humour, everyone, though tired, became alive and gay, and the long-
deserted spot is animated with activities all around--unpacking, unloading,
shifting and arranging bedding rolls for the night's stay and rest here.

96 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

Next day, Baba is taken round the
city and shown different places. One of the good co-workers, a responsible
officer of the State, spontaneously offers his own new bungalows just
constructed and being given the last finishing touches, for the dear Master
and his party. These were very splendid indeed and could easily have accom-
modated all, but being situated in a locality surrounded with other build-
ings close by, were found unsuitable. But the gentleman didn't leave things at
that. In the Master's presence nothing could dissuade one from further efforts.
He had others in mind, but while driving in a certain direction, an idea
suddenly flashes in his mind, and he orders the car to be driven to a distant
locality known as Begampet, where the elite and nobles live. Baba's car,
running behind the one in front, is suddenly ordered to stop in front of the
gates of a palatial residence opposite the Jagirdar College, and it is the first
of the two to enter the compound. This is taken as a good omen, and it proves
to be true. The Master is shown around, and he approves. It is a palace, we are

told, kept for the brother of H.E.H. the
Nizam. An immediate shift is ordered. A
gang of workers immediately start arranging things before occupation of
the premises, the same night. The enthusiastic group of friends feel very
happy at finding a comfortable lodging for the August Visitor and his party.
Like Aladdin's lamp working wonders, the entire scene is transformed,
and the group find themselves, at the end of the day, ushered into a magni-
ficent palace, with soft beds to lie on and everything around that a life of
ease and comfort could desire. This was undreamt of and too good for a
party like ours used to live a life of simplicity, and satisfied with the bare
necessities of life. But contrasts are at times essential and beneficial, and the
Master of Wisdom deliberately offers and arranges these to give his disciples
an idea and experience of the dual and ever-changing aspects of life; to train
them to take all these changes and conditions alike, always accepting and
welcoming willingly whatever is offered by the Divine Will--be

NOTES FROM MY DIARY

97

it a rich morsel, be it a crumb.
During this stay, the Master wishes to spare the group from the usual
household duties of an established life. A very dear lady from amongst the
friends of Hyderabad offers, of her own accord, as a sign of spontaneous service
to arrange for cooking for the whole party, in her own house and under her
own personal supervision: a loving offer lovingly accepted.
The first four days, the group is shewn around Hyderabad, particular
spots chosen by the Master. He does his own inner work, while the group has an
opportunity to have a glimpse of the various aspects of life. They just touch
these on the fringe for the time being, forgetting all their material or mayawik
interests, except where they have something in common with the spiritual
aspect of life or connected with the Master's work which they observe,
through an intuitive insight that reveals much more than the physical organs of
sight. While they were thus shewn dif-
ferent sites during their rounds in the city, there was something, they felt, the
Master was working, silently in his

own realms. Everyone was told of the Master's
intention of establishing a Spiritual
Centre here, if conditions were found favourable and inviting, due to the
high1y spiritual atmosphere prevailing in this environment. And it was no
surprise to them, when one day they heard that Baba's plan had greatly
interested the party of friends here who took up the idea wholeheartedly and
offered to do their best to bring it to fruition, with the Master's blessings and
inner help. Some very interesting discussions were carried on for hours
from the practical side of this ideal project. Some suitable spots also were
suggested, and one was shewn to the Master, about 11 miles from Hydera-
bad--between two lakes--with spiritual atmosphere that the Master liked,
and approved. A Western disciple of the Master--a
well-known gardening architect of Switzerland--who was there with the Master's party, drew a rough plan of the proposed Centre from the points given
by the Master. Not only was the spiritual nucleus forming the central
idea of the unique

98 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

scheme taken in with enthusiasm, but
the ingenious external arrangements in detail to suit the different working de-
partments intended for the spiritual unfoldment and different planes of con-
sciousness were so vast and at the same time practical that would amaze all. No
wonder, therefore, that it should impress all concerned deeply, and they
offered of themselves to cooperate in the fulfilment of this great plan, for the
benefit of mankind in general, and spiritual aspirants in particular.
Thus, through this play of cause and effect, staged on a complicated
checker-board of a variety of changes and conditions, Baba seems stirring
some internal effect and force; and the plan of his universal Spiritual Centre
seems to be the main spring of all. That is why these men of great executive
ability and prominence in the State are enthusiastic to further this plan with the
best of their co-operation. Suddenly, in the midst of these very
interesting discussions of the big scheme, Baba gave all a surprise shock.
Leaving all discussions and develop-

ments at this stage, he declared that he
had to leave Hyderabad immediately for reasons of his work. If it was a
shock for Baba's own party, to make hurried preparations for a sudden move,
how intense would be its impetus on others who were quite new to Baba's
ways of working. They were all the time looking forward for a series of
similar pleasant visits and interesting talks with Baba for whom they had all
taken a liking, and were also expecting to bring and introduce some friends and
other celebrities of the State and City, who would be particularly interested in
the scheme, and who, in accordance with the custom prevailing in the State,
were expecting the honour of a return visit by Baba. This sudden news of his
abrupt decision to leave was like a strong blow that literally stunned all!
In response to their repeated requests to postpone leaving even for a day or
two, just to meet some selected few who would be interested in the great
scheme and would be a great help, Baba lovingly remarked that he was
going to Nagpur and Jubbulpore in connection with the work of the same

NOTES FROM MY DIARY

99

scheme, and that he will meet all on
return, when called, after the important practical details of the plan have been
worked out by those who had so lovingly and enthusiastically under-
taken to do it. Early morning of the 17th December,
the party leaves the palatial residence that had been so full of life and anima-
tion, but for a week! Baba instructs the driver, for specific reasons, to speed up
although it seemed risky for the huge bus with its extra-heavy load on the
rough roads which were new to her as a foreigner and would not warrant speed. The Master's order had, however, to be obeyed. Running faster all the way,
they arrive at Nander same evening at 6 p. m. just in time for Baba to spot a
particular person in the busy thoroughfare where he ordered the bus to run
faster. A night halt is taken at the Nander Dak bungalow, every one
trying again to make the most of whatever could be found to lie on and
rest during the night, without their beddings or even rugs, as the baggage
tied on the top was left untouched. Rising early next morning, all pre-

pare for another big run during the day.
Baba again issued frequent orders for faster speed, for definite reasons, so
that the party arrives at Nagpur at 7 same evening, making about 300 miles
during the day, a very high average for a heavily-laden bus.
That was the birthday of G., the wife of our host in Nagpur. The sweet will
of Baba had it so well-planned that even this small human incident was
lovingly taken care of, and her birthday was celebrated in her own home with
her dear husband, who is also a devoted disciple of Baba.
In Nagpur, Baba has a very busy half day accepting a few visitors for
darshana and for talks about his work there. Baba also visits a dear disciple
who has been ill in hospital for some months longing for a personal meeting.
It is at times in response to calls of love from dear loving souls struggling in-
wardly for the Master's darshana that he goes to meet them, even diverting
routes. There is another devotee of the Master--an advanced soul--lying in
the same hospital and eager to see him and have his darshana, but

100 MEHER BABA JOURNAL

for reasons of his own, Baba does not go with him, and leaves Nagpur at noon

for Jubbulpore where they arrive the same evening.



Poem
BY " MUNSIFF "
Beauty transcendent makes unmakes, And death comes in for blame; To lovers neglected, Beloved's plea Is modesty and shame.
Lo, the irony ! To my pulpy earth After giving name and form, Beloved Divine entrenched behind, Makes me brave the storm.


MEHER BABA JOURNAL A MONTHLY PUBLICATION Elizabeth O. Patterson, managing Editor and Publisher for the "Meher Editorial Committee" "Meherabad", Ahmednagar, India
MEHER EDITORIAL COMMITTEE C. V. Sampath Aiyangar,
(Late of Madras Judicial Service) Dr. Abdul Ghani Munsiff, Princess Norina Matchabelli, Adi K. Irani, Elizabeth C. Patterson, Estelle Gayley, F. H. Dadachanji, Abdul Kareem Abdulla.
Contributions of manuscripts will be welcomed, and it is requested that they should be typed. No manuscript will be returned unless accompanied by a self-addressed stamped envelope. All communications regarding same should be addressed to: Princess Norina Matchabelli, Literary Manager, Meher Baba Journal, "Meherabad ", Ahmednagar, India.
Enquiries concerning subscriptions and notice of change of address should be addressed to: Estelle Gayley, Secretary, Meher Baba Journal, "Meherabad". Ahmednagar, India.
Postal Money Orders and cheques should be made payable to: Elizabeth C. Patterson, Treasurer, Meher Baba Journal, "Meherabad", Ahmednagar, India.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES Twelve months subscription, India rupees 3; England sh. 8; U. S. A. $ 2. (including postage). Single copies 6 annas, or 1 shilling, or 25 cents.
Printer--R B Hiray, Mohan Printers, Near Cotton Market. Ahmednagar.

MEHER BABA JOURNAL

Vol. 1

March 1939

No. 3

NOTE

Meher Baba Journal was originally printed in India 1938-42. In these early days Indian printers and typesetters were not always at home with the English language. Naturally enough, certain mistakes in language did find their way into the original publication but, considering circumstances, these mistakes were minor and remarkably few in number. The following list of corrections is a current addition to what is otherwise original text.

page contents contents 3 6
7 8 27 27 29
37 37 39 40 45 54 56 57
62 68 73 77 79 85 86 95 96 96 98 99

column para line
2 26 2 32
3 1-2

2 16

2 17

2 14 1 21
2 46
1 15 1 24 2 28

footnote

2

1 22

2 2 10

2 2 heading

2 34

1 24

1 38 1 18 2 1 27

2 19

1 13

2 25

2 13

1 28

1 1 24

2 31

1 2 11

1 22

ERRATA
original text Machabelli Dadachandji beginon consumate
consumate catholic whithin quartrain
ecstacy ecstacy Oversoul. ecstacy annuling Pecunary trancedently themselve
phenomena "(Qum-be-Iznillah)" continuos far organzied upto hotch-potch inspite palacial Aladin
bestof palacial

corrections Matchabelli Dadachanji begin-ing in consummate
consummate Catholic within quatrain
ecstasy ecstasy Oversoul." ecstasy annulling Pecuniary transcendently themselves
phenomenon ("Qum-be-Iznillah") continuous for organized up to hotchpotch
in spite palatial Aladdin best of palatial

