The Way and the Goal
Volume 1, No.1
January 25, 1970 A publication of "The Society for Meher Baba"
© The Society for Avatar Meher Baba 121 W. 72nd, New York, NY
An Avatar Meher Baba Trust eBook August 2013
All words of Meher Baba copyright © 2013 Avatar Meher Baba Perpetual Public Trust, Ahmednagar, India
Source and short publication history: During the 1970s, Dr. Kenmore held meetings in New York City on Saturday nights at 121 W. 72nd St. His talks were taped and meticulously transcribed by a group of ardent followers. There were 19 issues of The Way and the Goal published in all, from January 25, 1970 to May 25, 1984. Volume 2 issue 6 was in progress but never materialized. The Way and the Goal was gratuitously mailed in newsletter format.

eBooks at the Avatar Meher Baba Trust Web Site   
The Avatar Meher Baba Trust's eBooks aspire to be textually exact though non-facsimile reproductions of published books, journals and articles. With the consent of the copyright holders, these online editions are being made available through the Avatar Meher Baba Trust's web site, for the research needs of Meher Baba's lovers and the general public around the world.
Again, the eBooks reproduce the text, though not the exact visual likeness, of the original publications. They have been created through a process of scanning the original pages, running these scans through optical character recognition (OCR) software, reflowing the new text, and proofreading it. Except in rare cases where we specify otherwise, the texts that you will find here correspond, page for page, with those of the original publications: in other words, page citations reliably correspond to those of the source books. But in other respects­such as lineation and font­-the page designs differ. Our purpose is to provide digital texts that are more readily downloadable and searchable than photo facsimile images of the originals would have been. Moreover, they are often much more readable, especially in the case of older books, whose discoloration and deteriorated condition often makes them partly illegible. Since all this work of scanning and reflowing and proofreading has been accomplished by a team of volunteers, it is always possible that errors have crept into these online editions. If you find any of these, please let us know, by emailing us at frank@ambppct.org.
The aim of the Trust's online library is to reproduce the original texts faithfully. In certain cases, however­and this applies especially to some of the older books that were never republished in updated versions­we have corrected certain small errors of a typographic order. When this has been done, all of these corrections are listed in the "Register of Editorial Alterations" that appears at the end of the digital book. If you want the original text in its exact original form, warts and all, you can reconstruct this with the aid of the "register."
The Trust's Online Library remains very much a work in progress. With your help and input, it will increase in scope and improve in elegance and accuracy as the years go by. In the meantime, we hope it will serve the needs of those seeking to deepen and broaden their own familiarity with Avatar Meher Baba's life and message and to disseminate this good news throughout the world.

     

DR. HARRY KENMORE ADDRESSING THE NEW YORK MONDAY NIGHT GROUP, OCTOBER 13, 1969

  

The real reason why I wanted to be with that no promise of this nature had ever

heart, then Baba will be touched in His

you Monday Nighters is the urgent and

been given to a Westerner--it was unique, heart. If worship of Meher Baba is

pressing need to complete a directive

So tonight I am using this opportunity to

employed as a gimmick, a rabbit's foot, a

issued to me by Meher Baba nearly twelve years ago. Baba had sent His "Yes" cable in October, 1957, to come to Meherazad to treat Him for an injury He sustained in an automobile accident in December, 1956. They proved to be the happiest days of my life. Four days before I left Meherazad for the States, Meher Baba requested that I tell the New Yorkers everything that happened during my visit. Baba: When you go back tell them everything that happened during my visit. Dr. Kenmore: Everything? Baba: Yes, EVERYTHING. Dr. Kenmore: Even about "the promise?" Baba: Even about "the promise." Dr. Kenmore: But that wouId make them jealous! Baba: Then let it make them jealous because they will want to love Baba as He ought to be loved, And that will make them come closer to Baba.
But in making my full report of my epicmaking visitation with the Avatar, I meticulously omitted mentioning "the promise." And throughout the years I have witnessed the regrettable reaction which stemmed from my failure to recognize that His opinion during that conversation constituted an order. Our obedience of an order protects us from the automatic punishment which is built into the order should we fail in any way to discharge it. We are punished by our disobedience--not by Baba. My rather warm multiple relationship as doctor, companion, friend, entertainer, mandali, etc., to Baba seemed to imply that no order as such had been given. The jealousy I sought to prevent was the jealousy that was created. EIeven years later, I suddenly realized the jealousy that had fallen to me as my "share of good fortune" was the direct result of that omission.
And what was "the promise?" On seven different occasions Meher Baba promised that in this lifetime I would have a Glimpse of His Real Divinity (seeing, Him as He

disclose "the promise" made to me by my Lord and my God, and I do not care whether this promise of the Avatar makes anyone jealous or not. That is how it happened; that is how it was said. The order has been given; the order has been carried out in full. I feel that a great burden has slipped from my shoulders, and it's wonderful to be free of it.
Therefore, love this Beloved Avatar of ours more and more as He ought to be loved so that one day you will have blessed Union with Him.
You know, following the Avatar is not an easy thing. It demands the "mostest" and demands the "bestest" of you. And if you don't know what either of them is, Meher Baba will certainly bring them out even as He is now--without His Human Form. The Avatar is the only One in the entire universe who can function just as effectively and more so without a physical form. This privilege is not exercised by anyone else, even a Perfect Master (Sadguru, Qutub). Were you to go to the tomb of a Perfect Master asking, beseeching, pleading for some kind of boon or benefit, and were you to receive an answer to your prayer, this answer would not be given by the Perfect Master who lies in the tomb. The material benefit is given to you indirectly through a living Perfect Master who has a human form and who also assumes the responsibility for the followers and adherents of the Perfect Master who occupies the tomb. But where the Avatar is concerned, you can go directly to Him--with form or without form--because the Avatar alone is everywhere at once; He's omnipresent. He is every atom of atmosphere. He is in everything and He is everything now and always. The Avatar is the One and onIy Creator of this entire Tamasha--all the Universes within the Universe--this Infinite shadow known as Maya. This is His game; this is His show..
You contact Him directly--Meher Baba hears every sincere prayer given up to Him genuinely and lovingly. Remember that

Santa Claus, a supermarket slot machine with a jackpot, then be prepared for dire disappointment. He has not come to provide you with false every things and false nothings; He has come to release you from all desire for these "nothingnesses." He will surely attend to your "needings," but not to your "wantings." At any time should your mind be weighed down with the desperate frustration born of life's seemingly insoluble enigmas, seek out Meher Baba as your Divine Comforter (from the Latin "com," meaning "with," and "fortis," meaning "strong") from whom you will derive mounting strength and an exhilarating feeling of well being which will lift your heart high enough to shatter your confusion with dispatch. Just as the squeaky hinges of a door need oil for ease and smoothness in their functioning, so should you go to Meher Baba lovingly in your heart to receive His Divine Love. He must give you that pure oil of Love which is the provision of your real need. Be mindful of the fact that He took human form because of Love for His Creation. He put on this heavy coat of suffering to ease your own portion of suffering in His Tamasha. And for our sake He became the Divine Cushion who absorbs the sharp pangs of pain which would otherwise be unbearable for us had He not been amongst us in human clothes out of Love for His Children. Again, as the Divine Cushion, He cushions the shock and strain of our suffering as we traverse the road with Meher Baba and to Meher Baba who is the Way and also the Goal.
When the pioneers went west to blaze a new civilization, their nearest neighbor might be twenty to one hundred miles away. There was no one to impress with sartorial splendor. The hair of the head and the beard were allowed to grow rampant, and the observance of rigid rules of cleanliness needed no strict adherence. The animals in the trees need not be impressed. Admittedly, today's social attitudes and behavior in business, politics,

really is) and that this Glimpse would stay even Krishna danced to the tunes of St.

economics, etc., still resemble the

with me. I had gathered from other Mandali Mira. If you are touched Baba in your

ruthlessness of a

     

  

  

2

jungle. The younger generation astutely perceived this analogy and unconsciously, in overt opposition and protest, assumes the garb of a humanlike jungle creature. Youth is acutely conscious of the stink generated by a deteriorating society, but this should not give it the pardonable excuse to physically outstink the social stink of which it is critical. The better way to remove the nauseating stink of the sociopolitical double talk is for youth to create its own example of observing cleanliness in body, mind, heart and purpose. Our youth today exercises a perceptive acuity which was lacking in previous generations. Therefore, this discerning younger generation also should perceive that setting a better example in constructive behavior and conduct would set a more workable pattern of social mores which their children would follow and excel when they take over the reins of society. The disorder, corruption and imminent social collapse cannot be halted until order, integrity and a sense of urgency are first registered within the hearts and minds of those who comprise our society. That's the reason for Avatar Meher Baba's Advent on earth today. His leaving the human form did not end the residence of Meher Baba amongst us. This constitutes only His initial introduction into our lives and affairs, and the power of His Advent will accelerate until it reaches the massive crest of great power lasting for about two hundred years. Now we are going through that period of Humiliation He warned us about and His Humiliation will end in His Glorification, and then all of us wiII feel that glorious and wonderful Manifestation. The whole world will know that Meher Baba was God in Human form; that Almighty God had come in Human Form to deliver it from its protracted ignorance.
Meher Baba is now the new Pulsation of our lives, who will quicken all. of our hearts. We are going to make a genuine spontaneous response to His residence in us and this wiII change the Values in our lives. What good is knowing Meher Baba unless our lives are made different and better? This world belongs to God who "whimmed" it into being. We, all of us, are His puppets--puppets of the Divine "Puppeteer." The very first Whim, that Lahar, that made this whole "shebang,' also made the very response, this very reaction we experience at this present moment in our lives in coming to meet Him, to hear about Him, to know about Him and in becoming finer people because of His concern for our Awakening.
In the summer of 1968 at Guruprasad, Baba told the Mandali that everything that has happened in the past has happened absolutely because of the Will of God, and everything that is happening now only because of the Will of God, and everything that will happen will absolutely happen only according to and because of
                 

the Will of God. It is so very difficult for us to digest this. We didn't go through an interminable evolutionary trek wending our way through seven kingdoms of evolutionary forms to finally 'make it' in the human form and proceed forward and upward through the experience of innumerable human reincarnations to arrive finally at that point in our development of consciousness where it is incumbent upon us to make that one transcendent decision: to take a pill or not to take a pill,. to get the needle or not to get the needle. Be certain of this: If we think that the ingestion of a pill can bring God into our consciousness, then, as Meher Baba said, "This God is nothing but a worthless piece of junk." It's just that the West unfortunately lives in even more abysmal ignorance about such things as God Consciousness, 'Perfect Mastership, Avatarhood, God Realization, etc. Such concepts about the ultimate destiny of man have had little place in our Western culture. Since we are not heirs to the awareness of our ultimate destiny, our younger generation has a tendency to go derelict when subjected to hangups and confusion. Consider this carefully: The only effect of the drug we may take is to irritate the irritation we already have. And this compels us in our desperation to do something, anything to ease the pressure of our hangups. People in trouble often unconsciously choose the fire after the frying pan. I have found that once we choose the path of self-destruction, we find it difficult to reverse or slow down the increasing momentum racing in the direction of further degeneration. It is as though there is "'something" in ourselves that drives us head on toward selfannihilation. But Avatar Meher Baba says that the self to be annihilated is not the physical self but the little false self--the ego-mind self-- which constitutes the barrier between us and our Real Godhood Self.
Avatar Meher Baba has come to give us the secret that man can become God. He indicated it "loud and clear" so everybody can hear, everybody can know. He didn't dare do it two thousand years ago. All He would say then was that He was the Son of God, and He was slaughtered for saying so. But now the consciousness of man has developed to that point where we feel that with our minds we can do almost anything. Heavens! We've already walked on the moon with our technology-- whereas with His technique Peter only walked on the water! Well, a fourth plane man in the sub-superconsciousness state of Real Illusion has at his disposal the entire Infinite Power of God.
The consciousness of man has been so developed that Meher Baba can let out the secret for which Perfect

Masters for centuries have been excoriated and skinned alive. And their disciples were warned again and again, "No matter if you are skinned alive or drawn and quartered, do not let out the secret." Well, God Himself in human form, as Meher Baba, has come to earth in our era and He Himself has released the secret man can become God.
Now all a psychedelic pill can do is simply irritate certain undeveloped and dormant centers located in the great "silent area" of the brain which will give you a shadow, the most shadowy of shadows, of the subtle sphere. And this phony lift-up only precipitates a phonier letdown, leading to a crackup. Remember always; a drug is a poison no matter what you think you get from it, and its continued use will certainly initiate a process of deterioration, atrophy, degeneration. Know that you're taking this drug into a body composed of organic tissue, and organic tissue is subject to injury and irreversible damage in the hands of the marijuana user, the heroin user, the LSD user. All of these so-called "consciousness-expanding" drugs (the only thing expansive about them being he title) expand nothing because when you come down, you come back to your own low-down miserable self. Actually what you've had is a "consciousness-contracting," "consciousness-crushing" experience. This "expansion" resembles a blown-up balloon, When the pin punctures the balloon, you find there was nothing in it anyway.
In order to attain that really high feeling that stays high, ever replenishing itself, ever sustaining itself, let an open heart embrace and hold on tight to that Divine Lovefeeling Meher Baba is here to give you. Why? Because He alone is the only incarnation of pure Love in our time who continuously generates and pours His Love into all the vessels who feel the need for being filled. Your questioning search for a sharper penetration into the source of consciousness demands a truthful answer infinitely more authentic than a drug. This Love of Meher Baba is ever fresh, ever cIean, ever pure. Therefore, hold on to the damaan (the hem of His garment) of Meher Baba Who entreats us repeatedly to love Him more and more, and still more and more until one day we become worthy of Union with Him. And we should always remember His ringing declaration to mankind: "I am the Highest of the High, I am the One who Loves you more than you can ever love yourself. I am the Ancient One."
AVATAR  MEHER  BABA  KI  JAI  

        
3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Reprint - Talk Given by Mrs. Rhoda Adi Dubash at Jamshed Memorial Hall, Karachi ­ July 12, 1969.

THE SILENT MASTER Meher Baba,as many of you know, is no longer in human body amidst us since January 31st this year. Today we are celebrating, His Silence Anniversary- the first since the dropping of His physical body and the 44th since the commencement of His unique Silence on July 10, 1925. For you who have come tonight to hear and know of The Silent Master, Meher Baba, I now ask the question, "why is His Silence Anniversary still being; observed, now that Meher Baba has dropped His body? "lt is, but natural that at this stage many of you are skeptical and yet would want to know the answer. You well remember that during His 74th Birthday celebration on February 25th this year, we told you dearly that the Silence of Meher Baba continues and will continue until His Glorious Universal Manifestation, which will definitely replace the present passing phase of His Self-imposed Humiliation with the breaking of His Silence and uttering THE WORD. Today, we shall accordingly endeavor to enlighten you further on this most astounding fact which is incomprehensible and unbelievable. Meher Baba, irrespective of His Spiritual Status--whatever one may take it to be--is definitely not an ordinary human being. Those of you who have heard us before., and those of you who have read of His life, know, that from absolute normality He ascended to Perfect Super-normality a ta relatively early age .. According to His repeated assertions, He is THE ANCIENT ONE --THE HIGHEST OF THE HIGH. For the last well over forty years, Meher Baba has carried on with His multiple activities under His own worded "MASTERY IN SERVITUDE" and throughout His life He has always been the supreme example. His main activity has been His Universal Work for the benefit of humanity irrespective of caste, creed or country. No one knows exactly what this Universal Work has been which He has carried out in absolute silence and during periodical seclusions, culminating in the last spiritually most significant Seclusion. Soon after this last Seclusion terminated, Meher Baba dropped His physical body. His Universal Work and His Great Suffering are evidently interconnected. Together with these, is also directly linked His unique Silence of well over forty years. In regard to His Silence, Meher Baba has said,. "My outward Silence is no spiritual exercise. It has been undertaken and maintained for the good of others." Silence, therefore, has been His mighty spiritual weapon for His mighty Universal Work. The dropping of His physical body, as we have just said. was soon after

His intense Universal Work which according to Meher Baba, was completed 100% to His satisfaction on July 30th, 1968. Before His very few intimate ones staying day and night with Him, Meher Baba said so very recently as on May 28,1968, "Now. I will have to decide when and how to give Darshan in view of THE GREAT EVENT that is: to happen very soon." Thus Meher Baba has pronounced the dropping of His physical body as THE GREAT EVENT. Why has Meher Balla said that the incident of merely dropping His physical body is a great Event? ls not death ,a daily occurrence in life? Have not saints and sages died and even Prophets dropped Their physical bodies? It is because, what is to happen is that which will be of a magnitude beyond the scope of human imagination and in a manner never before witnessed by humanity. And such a pronouncement has been made by One who is the Perfect Personification of Knowledge Infinite. In this context. we shall tell you of an identical spiritual episode, so very unique, that it can be ranked as the 'top mirade' of out age. Humanity is totally unaware of it ,except just a few. Even an incident of such magnitude as this,. Will give you but a very faint idea, of that which IS to happen very soon.
Gul Rukh was a beautifuI young daughter of a dignitary in Afghanistan. On the night of her marriage, she ran away ,in her wedding garments as she was not an ordinary girl who cared or craved for marriage, but who. in fact was desperately and madly in love with God. Years later in Rawalpindi, she was heard to utter "ANAL HUQ." This infuriated some military personnel to such an extent that they buried her alive and took good care to see that she was not dug out alive. Twenty five years later, the same military unit was transferred to Poona, where to their amazement they saw the very same person, in the very same physical body, sitting absolutely unconcerned under a neem tree, hundreds of miles away from where She had been buried alive. Realizing what they had done and to whom, they bowed down to her and asked her forgiveness. Until then, she was known as 'the mad woman of the city' but thereafter, she began to be revered as a saint under the renowned name of HAZRAT BABAJAN. Years later, it was Meher Baba who revealed the fact that she was not only a saint but a QUTUB--A PERFECT MASTER of Her time. She continued to live in the same physical body for a number of years after that most memorable incident, until at Will, she finally dropped Her physical body at a ripe age of over 120 years. Now let us see why this Lady per· ormed this 'topmiracle' of our time. The answer is, because She knew-- being the

Perfect Personification of Knowledge Infinite that She had to complete Her Mission of giving God-Realization to the God-Man of our age--Meher Baba--by implanting a kiss on His forehead, and this, as we know, She did and thus completed Her Mission many years after the incident of being buried alive.
This episode leads us to a spiritual fact of prime importance in the realm of Truth, as revealed by all Perfect Masters and Prophets of the past and about which Meher Baba has also said that the Perfect Masters, as also the Prophets, Messiahs and God-Men take human form for a definite Mission and DO NOT drop Their physical bodies until the Mission is completed by Them. The Mission includes every single activity of Theirs including the Universal Work and relates to both humanity and the Circle of disciples. So, from this unique Spiritual incident in the life of Hazrat Baba Jan, we have to ask ourselves, that if a Qutub--a Perfect Master--could and actually did perform such a miracle for the completion of Her Mission and then dropped Her physical body, what cannot and will not Meher Baba do in His present Advent for the completion of His Mission? We repeat, according to Meher Baba, His Universal Work was completed 100% to His satisfaction. But that does not mean that His Mission is completed. Meher Baba has amply testified to this by His declaration: "I WI LL break My Silence and Manifest when on one hand science reaches its highest level and on the other hand anti-God elements rise to their peak. Accordingly, My spiritual Manifestation will also be of The Highest. When I break My Silence, the world will be shaken into realization of WHO I AM. When I break My Silence, the impact will jolt the world out of its spiritual lethargy and will push open the hearts of all who love Me and are connected with Me. WHAT WILL HAPPEN WHEN I BREAK MY SILENCE, IS WHAT HAS NEVER HAPPENED BEFORE."
The present is therefore a passing phase. The dropping of His physical body, according to Meher Baba, is the height of His silent Suffering for humanity, His Crucifixion and Humiliation. Meher Baba has thus triggered off willfully His Self-imposed Humiliation which heralds the dawn of His Glorious Manifestation. Before the occurrence of The event i.e., the dropping of His physical body, Meher Baba said, "The long expected Humiliation is near at hand. The stage of Glorification to follow My Selfimposed Humiliation WILL BE when I break My Silence with The Divine Word--

4

THE WORD." So, what we have now, is a NEW LI FE PHASE on an unprecedental scale by The Silent Master of our age. As Mr. Max Hafliger, one of the devotees of Meher Baba from Switzerland, has said so aptly, "Meher Baba's (physical) death is an outer reality but not a closed event, rather a most important happening in a chain of events ..... What we have now is a 'suspense' of one phase into another, the one of His "Coming Back." .... One thing is certain sheer patience and watching the further course of time is the only attitude to follow. The suspense wiII run its course and confirm the Godness of Baba and His Avataric function. It cannot be otherwise, because the part of Meher Baba has been to the most materialistic philosophy of man, record of service for the good of others of suffering for man, of decency of life: and since the morning is the prolongation and transmutation of the night as midday is of the morning, so must time reveal the transmutation of Meher Baba's life into the future. This is a chain reaction which cannot faiI to happen, since it is both physical and spiritual law ..... And the only way out for us is to keep awake, to be ready to further awakening to come, sure to come."
In conclusion, that which is to happen will be of a magnitude beyond the scope of human imagination. For, from the depth of His Silence during His last stupendous Seclusion Meher Baba said, "THAT WHICH IS TO HAPPEN WILL BE SOMETHING GREAT. SOMETHING THAT HAS NEVER HAPPENED BEFORE; SOMETHING THAT WILL NOT HAPPEN AGAIN FOR BILLIONS AND BILLIONS OF YEARS." Soon thereafter Meher Baba further declared, "THAT SOMETHING GREAT WILL HAPPEN ALL OF A SUDDEN, NOT IN DEVELOPING STAGES. PEOPLE WILL GO ABOUT THEIR DAILY AFFAIRS UNAWARE TILL THE MOMENT OF ITS HAPPENING! In this memorable utterance, Meher Baba has made very clear the extent of the impact on mankind which will obviously be terrific. But in the same breath Meher Baba has assured us, "I know what I am doing and what I have to do. DON'T WORRY. BE HAPPY. I AM WITH YOU." Such an assurance Meher Baba, the Personification of Divine Love, has given to mankind because He knows The Divine Role He has to play and which He will play for the redemption of mankind by His Glorious Universal Manifestation. But, when will this be is the natural question in the minds of all. And the answer we have just had in the very words of Meher Baba is, that it will be when on one hand science reaches its highest level, and on the other hand anti-God elements rise to their peak. And so, whatever is to happen and whatever mankind has to experience

under the Divine Will of God, will neverthe-Iess be a Blessing for mankind who stands today on the threshold of witnesssing Universal Brotherhood and peace. This is in the offing in our very own age through the Universal Spiritual Resurrection by The Silent Master, Meher Baba.
Telegram: "MEHERBABA" Ahmednagar
Telephone No. 266 Ahmednagar
AVATAR MEHER BABA TRUST
King's Road, Ahmednagar, Maharashtra -- India
1st January, 1970 Dr. Harry L. Kenmore 121 West 72nd Street New York, New York 10023 U.S.A.
Dear Brother:
The Trustees and I deeply appreciate the response made last year by many Baba lovers who gave contributions to the Avatar Meher Baba Trust despite the heavy expense incurred by them in coming to India for the "Darshan Days."
The main concern of the Trustees is to see that the Trust is put on a firm basis financially so that all of Beloved Avatar Meher Baba's wishes as incorporated in the Trust Deed may be fulfilled one hundred percent. Unless and until this basis for the stability of the Trust is established, the Trustees will find it difficult to fulfill Beloved Baba's wishes.
To carry these out, it is suggested that each Baba lover in the West should set aside per day, the amount of 30 cents; if this is too much for some to do, then 20 cents a day, or even 10 cents a day. At the end of the year the amount from each donor would come to about one hundred dollars, seventy-five dollars, either more or less. For those who can give more, they should set aside a sum in accordance with what they feel they can. Amounts may be sent once or twice a year, or at any time convenient to the donor. A similar suggestion is also being sent to Baba lovers in the East.
This suggestion is brought to your at· tention as it wiII help the Trustees to further the development and mainte· nance of the Property at Meherabad and also take care of the beneficiaries. Contributions should be sent as a Bank Draft or Postal Money Order made out to: AVATAR MEHER BABA TRUST (King's Road, Ahmednagar, M.S., India), NOT as a personal cheque. It takes several months for a cheque to go through the Bank before the amount is realized in rupees.

If you make out your donation simply to "Avatar Meher Baba Trust," the donation will be utilized as follows:
11 percent for the maintenance and development of the Trust Estate and 89 percent to the forty one beneficiaries as mentioned in the Trust Deed.
However, if you wish your donation to be utilized exclusively for the mainte· nance and development of the Trust Estate or exclusively for distribution to the 41 beneficiaries, or on the other hand for both purposes, that is, for mainte· nance-development and the 41 benefi· ciaries in any percentage desired by you, then please state your wish clearly in a covering note to the Chairman, Avatar Meher Baba Trust, when sending your donation.
If each Baba lover would do this every year, we, the Trustees, would then find that we could carry out with greater confidence the wishes of Avatar Meher Baba as laid down in the Deed of Avatar Meher Baba Trust.
No Baba lover should feel compelled to contribute to the Trust; Baba would never want it so. Only those who feel prompted from the heart should contribute according to the suggestions in this letter, or as they feel best suited to themselves.
For your information, Avatar Meher Baba Trust has now been registered as a Public Trust with registration No. E/150, Ahmednagar, by the Assistant Charity Commissioner, Poona Region, Poona, India, on the 7th August 1969. Therefore, it is now all the more essential that all contributions and official correspondence pertaining to Avatar Meher Baba Trust be addressed directly to: The Chairman, Avatar Meher Baba Trust, King's Road, Ahmednagar, M.S., India, and no official Trust matters should be included in your personal correspondence.
This letter is being sent to each group head in the West whom we ask to please distribute to each Baba lover in their area, and also to any Baba lover whom they know does not belong to any group.
To all Baba lovers go warm greetings and a hearty Jai Baba' In the service of Avatar Meher Baba,
(T.S. Kutumba Sastrj) The Chairman
Avatar Meher Baba Trust
cc: Mrs. Elizabeth C. Patterson Mr. & Mrs. Fred Winterfeldt Mrs. Ivy O. Duce Dr. Harry Kenmore

5

FAMILY LETTERS PUBLISHED
The Society For Avatar Meher Baba has produced in a single volume the complete folio of eighty·two Family Letters, 1956-1969 written by Mani S. Irani, the sister and disciple of Meher Baba.
In her letters to Meher Baba's devotees, Mani has brought to the reader an absorbing, colorful and informative account of the kaleidoscopic activities surrounding our Avatar in His last twelve years on our planet, Copies of the Family Letters are available from the Society for Avatar Meher Baba, 121 West 72nd Street, New York, New York, 10023. All Proceeds are to be donated to the Avatar Meher Baba Trust of Ahmednagar, in India. The price per copy is:
Unsigned copies ................... $16.95* Signed copies (by Mani). .. $25.00* "Please send check or money order plus $1.75 postage if ordered by mail.
MEHER BABA'S LAST SAHAVAS By Dr. H.P. Bharucha - 48 pages
From Meher Baba's resident mandali (intimate disciples) Dr, Bharucha has woven a touching account of the last days of Meher Baba in His physical form, At the tomb in Meherabad where Meher Baba's body lay in state for seven days. Dr. Bharucha gives an account from his heart of the intimate disciples and the crowds of thousands all paying homage to their Beloved Avatar.
Copies available at the Society For Avatar Meher Baba. Price: $1.00. plus 15 cents postage.
NEWSLETTER PRODUCTION
It has been our deep feeling for some time that Meher Baba's world following could be brought together into a real Baba family by means of a frequently and widely distributed publication containing news of Beloved Baba's lovers' very lives actually becoming the Avatar's message of Love and Truth. In this way Baba's lovers everywhere could sustain one another in their attempts to respond fully to the awakening call of the Highest of the High.
The Society For Avatar Meher Baba has undertaken to publish this newsletter in New York, but it will serve its purpose of uniting us in Baba's Love and infinite Understanding only if news, opinion and personal experience are sent for publication from every center in the world for all to share.
We will try our best to make "The Way and the Goal" a monthly newsletter. A contribution to help cover printing and mailing costs will keep "The Way and the Goal" coming regularly your way.

MEHERAZAD NEWS EXCERPTS
Received by Fredella from Letter by Mani, January 25, 1970
"We will no longer be spending our summers in Poona, Guruprasad, as we used to with Beloved Baba­We have planned to stay on at Meherazad. We wanted all concerned to know this, as some may be planning their future visit on the assumption that the Mandali would be in Poona during these months. I have also informed Ellikit and Ivy about it. Of course, any lover visiting Poona at any time, will be able to have darshan of Baba's Room in Guruprasad, as one of the Baba·places of Pilgrimage. Jai Baba ... "
****
" ... It was Friday, the 23rd of January, at 5:00 P.M., when another of the Meherazad Mandali passed away: our dear Baidul, one of Baba's oldest disciples and chief Masthunter has gone to his Beloved Master. His passing away was very identical to dear Kaka's: of sudden heart failure, while he was sitting on the bench outside of Kaka's room as usual, in apparently good health and cheerful spirits (barely ten minutes before the heart attack, he was talking with Aloba). While Baidul is with Beloved Baba, his body rests next to Doctor Donkin's at lower Meherabad. What none could help seeing and remarking about, was the distinct smile on Baidul's face {even his closed eyes seemed to smile!)­we saw it while he was laid on the bed soon after expiring, and it was there to the last when his coffin was sealed by Padri at Meherabad and lowered into the grave amidst shouts of AVATAR MEHER BABA KI JAI!l! And we remembered what Baba had said about three of His close Mandali passing .way before His Manifestation ... "
BABA IS FIRE
When you feel cold And sit near the fire, It drives out your cold And makes you perspire. When you feel hungry And cook on the fire, It gives you your food For which you aspire But if like a fool Try to play with the fire, It may burn you so badly That would make hell admire.

MANDALI NEWS
Through their contributions many individuals have expressed their genuine interest in awakening their city or state to Meher Baba's Love through a visit by His Mandali during their round-the-world tour. However, it has been found that contributions from some areas have not proved sufficient to cover the many expenses that would be incurred if the Mandali were to fly to these areas,
We know that if everyone works together within each area more centers can be added to the present itinerary. We are sure that Meher Baba would be pleased if His western followers met with His Mandai and we are sure that His followers will try their best to please their Master in helping others and, in the last analysis, helping themselves, by bringing to their city or state Meher Baba's Mandali who are His Apostles and who carry the Light of the Master.
These are the areas the Mandali wiII visit (in chronological order); more areas may be added later. New York; Miami, Florida; Savannah, Georgia; Chapel Hill, North Carolina; Myrtle Beach, South Carolina; Hampton, Virginia; Chicago, Illinois; Los Angeles, California; San Francisco, California; Honolulu, Hawaii.
Dates and flight numbers will be given to groupheads of the various areas when this information becomes available from the airlines.
RADIO SPECIAL
Moderated by Lee Graham, Radio WNYC will broadcast a two part series exploring the lives of several young New York Meher Baba devotees who relinquished the drug habit after coming to know of Avatar Meher Baba. Dr. H. L. Kenmore, an intimate disciple of Meher Baba, will also appear on Part 1 of the series. In addition to Dr. Kenmore, Bob Ganz and Gary Noguera will be inter· viewed for Part 1 to be aired Sunday, March 1 at 10:30 A.M. In Part 2, Meher Baba followers who have used drugs compare their feelings and outlook with those who have not. Larry Karrasch, Gary Nedsweck, John Fornieri and Dominick Toto are the guests. Part 2 wilt be heard the following Sunday, March 8 at 10:30 A.M. Both programs will be aired over WNYC AM (830) and WNYC FM (93.9).

MEHER BABA

SOURCES OF INFORMATION ABOUT MEHER BABA

6

Ann Forbes 3340 Northwest 99 Street Miami, Florida 33147
Henry Kashouty 117 Crescent Drive Hampton, Virginia 23361
Meher Book Store, Etc. 2700 Pacific Avenue Venice, California 90291
Meher Spiritual Center P.O. Box 487 Myrtle Beach, South Carolina 29577
Mrs. Lee R. Minchey 21 Pine Valley Road Savannah, Georgia 31404
Mr. & Mrs. Darwin Shaw 2 Castine Street Schenectady, New York 12309
The Society For Avatar Meher Baba 1 21 W. 72 Street New York, New York 10023
Sufism Reoriented, Inc. 1290 Sutter Street San Francisco, Cal ifornia 94109 Fred & Ella Winterfeldt 100 W. 57 Street New York, New York 10019
AUSTRALIA Francis Brabazon P.O. Box 6, Woombye Queensland, Australia William Le Page Kalianna Crescent Beacon Hill N.S.w., Australia
ENGLAND Delia de Leon 240 Kew Road Richmond Surrey, England
Mr. & Mrs. Adi S. Irani 61 Elmbank Gardens Barnes, London S. W. 15, England
INDIA Dr. Hoshand P. Bharucha Truth Ashapuri Road Navasari, India A. C. S. Chari Komala Vilas 73 Roshbehari Avenue Calcutta 26, India

Adi K. Irani King's Road Ahmednagar, M.S.O.), India
Badrinath Kachru Kashmir Centre, Exchange Road Sri nagar (Kashmir). India
Was Deo Kain 16 President's Estate New Delhi 4, India
Nanasaheb G. Kher G. Kher's Bunglow Dharampeth, Nagpur (M.S.), India
Dr. P. N. Mishra Bilaspur Centre, Khaperganj Bilaspur (M.P.), India
Nausherwan K. Nallawalla 36 Lytton Road Dehra Dun (U.P.). India Keshav Narayan Nigam Narain Press Hamipur (U.P.). India
P. D. Nigam (Pukar) Kanpur Centre 138 N. Block, Kidwainagar Kanpur (M.P.). India
R. P. Pankraj Rear Block, Ground Floor Natru Chayya Wright Town, Jabalpur (M.P.). India
Babu Ram Prasad Meher Dham Nauranga Dist. Hamirpur (U.P.). India
K.V.S.R.K. Tulsinara Prasad Mehersthan, Kovvur (A.P.), India
K.K. Ramakrishnan Poona Centre 411/1 Somwarpeth Poona 11, India
N. V. Ramaniah Guntur Centre 2 King Road Guntur (A.P.l, India
Dr. T. Dhanapathy Rao Andhra Centre, 10-5-9 Nageswararao Street Kakinada (A.P.J, India
Majety R. M R. & Chinta S. R. Kothapet, Vijaywada-1 (A.P.). India
Sardar Amar Singh Saighal M.P. Azadnagar. Bilaspur (M.P.), India

T. S. Kutumba Sastri Vasant Ashram Nidadavole. W. G. Dist. (A.P.l, India
Kishan Singh Dehra Dun Centre 105 Rajpur Road Dehra Dun (U.P.l, India
Swamy Satya Prakesh Udaseen 3-6441, Street 5 Himayatnagar Hyderabad 29 {A.P.l. India
IRAN Mr. Haji Mohomed Saleky Saadi Avenue Shiraz, Iran
Mr. Shaw Kaikhosrow Shams Khoramsha Yezd, Iran
Mr. Asfandiar Vesal i Meher Manzil, Shamiran Kashanak, Teheran, Iran
ISRAEL Carrie Ben Shammai 28 Hiskijahu, Hamalech Jerusalem, Israel
NEW ZEALAND Anthony Thorpe 3 Flowers Track Christchurch 8, New Zealand
PAKISTAN Minoo Kharas No.1, Lilly Road, Frere Hall P.O., Karachi 4, Pakistan
EAST PAKISTAN Adi K. Arjani c/o Dacca Pharmaceuticals (FissonMarket); Ltd. G.P.O. Box 676, Ramna Dacca 2, East Pakistan
SOUTH AFRICA Irene H. Conybeare Taomina, Penhill Estate Eersteriver, Cape, South Africa
SWITZERLAND Miss Irene Billo Weidstrasse 802,8132 Egg. Zu rich, Switzerland

