The Way and the Goal
Volume 1, No.8
August 25, 1970 A publication of "The Society for Meher Baba"
© The Society for Avatar Meher Baba 121 W. 72nd, New York, NY
An Avatar Meher Baba Trust eBook August 2013
All words of Meher Baba copyright © 2013 Avatar Meher Baba Perpetual Public Trust, Ahmednagar, India
Source and short publication history: During the 1970s, Dr. Kenmore held meetings in New York City on Saturday nights at 121 W. 72nd St. His talks were taped and meticulously transcribed by a group of ardent followers. There were 19 issues of The Way and the Goal published in all, from January 25, 1970 to May 25, 1984. Volume 2 issue 6 was in progress but never materialized. The Way and the Goal was gratuitously mailed in newsletter format.

eBooks at the Avatar Meher Baba Trust Web Site   
The Avatar Meher Baba Trust's eBooks aspire to be textually exact though non-facsimile reproductions of published books, journals and articles. With the consent of the copyright holders, these online editions are being made available through the Avatar Meher Baba Trust's web site, for the research needs of Meher Baba's lovers and the general public around the world.
Again, the eBooks reproduce the text, though not the exact visual likeness, of the original publications. They have been created through a process of scanning the original pages, running these scans through optical character recognition (OCR) software, reflowing the new text, and proofreading it. Except in rare cases where we specify otherwise, the texts that you will find here correspond, page for page, with those of the original publications: in other words, page citations reliably correspond to those of the source books. But in other respects­such as lineation and font­-the page designs differ. Our purpose is to provide digital texts that are more readily downloadable and searchable than photo facsimile images of the originals would have been. Moreover, they are often much more readable, especially in the case of older books, whose discoloration and deteriorated condition often makes them partly illegible. Since all this work of scanning and reflowing and proofreading has been accomplished by a team of volunteers, it is always possible that errors have crept into these online editions. If you find any of these, please let us know, by emailing us at frank@ambppct.org.
The aim of the Trust's online library is to reproduce the original texts faithfully. In certain cases, however­and this applies especially to some of the older books that were never republished in updated versions­we have corrected certain small errors of a typographic order. When this has been done, all of these corrections are listed in the "Register of Editorial Alterations" that appears at the end of the digital book. If you want the original text in its exact original form, warts and all, you can reconstruct this with the aid of the "register."
The Trust's Online Library remains very much a work in progress. With your help and input, it will increase in scope and improve in elegance and accuracy as the years go by. In the meantime, we hope it will serve the needs of those seeking to deepen and broaden their own familiarity with Avatar Meher Baba's life and message and to disseminate this good news throughout the world.

   My Introduction to Meher Baba

  

by Delia DeLeon

Baba came to the West for the first time in

1931. A center had been prepared for Him by

Meredith Starr, an Englishman who had met

Baba in India. All of us who were destined to be

of His early English group, were somehow drawn

to Meredith's place in North Devon - East

Challacombe.

I personally had reached a crisis in my life. I

had been seeking, not for a Master, but to know

and understand something of God. This was my

great desire. I was running an experimental

theater in London but suddenly had to alter all

my plans.

I found a note in a magazine called, "The

Everyman," in which Mr. Starr spoke of the East

Challacombe Center. I wrote to Meredith and I

went. It was a converted farmhouse in the beautiful countryside· of North Devonshire; here

  

Meredith told us about the great Master he had met in India.
While I was at the Center, Baba cabled that He was coming to the West. I had to go back to London but I arranged to return to the Center and meet Him later on. Baba came to East Challacombe, however He cut short the length of His stay, and I received a call saying not to come but to meet Him at Kitty Davy's house in London.

He spent one week in London and I went every day to see Him at Kitty Davy's house. I was with Him most of the time. He went to the cinema, He saw many people and when any of us asked Baba to go out He always had a lot of people come along, not just two or three.
The night before Baba left England we played Negro spirituals. He was especially fond

Baba wanted to visit the theater, so Margaret

of "Steal Away to Jesus," and "Is There Anybody

Craske bought tickets for a musical comedy and

Here Like Weeping Mary?" He sat among us,

she invited me to come. She instructed me to

beautiful and radiant, while the songs played,

wait by the box office until Baba's party was

and we were all terribly sad because we did not

seated. I was standing there when they passed.

know when we would see Him again. He said,

They had decked Baba out in a long English coat

"Oh yes. You will see Me again." On one

and He wore a hat that was down to His nose.

occasion He said to me, "You're very lucky to

His hair was flowing. Once Baba's party had left

have met Me now," and He added, "It's not luck

the lobby, Meredith appeared and took me to His

that brings you here."

box. There was one empty seat beside Baba; they told me to sit there. He simply looked at me and patted my hand. During the performance I hardly saw or heard anything except Baba. He chuckled quite a lot because there was a funny fat man in the play and Baba always liked fat men and comedians. After the play, I just looked

That first meeting with Baba was unforgettable. Like many others I was moved by His radiant love and beauty, so much so that I wept continually. For years I cried every time I looked at Baba, because in some way I felt His great crucifixion in coming into the body.

at Him and said, "Baba, I must see you again."

He nodded.
  

Cont. on P.4
  

  

1

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

        

My Experience at the Meher Ashram by Chhota Baba   

I joined the Meher Ashram Institute August 9,

about which Shams-e-Tabriz says: "When

1927. For the first two and a half months I stayed with the grown-up disciples of the Master and

Shamsul Hacke Tabriz opened the wings of love, it made the Angel Gabriel run after Him."

could not mix with the boys of the Meher Ashram

Needless to say that by gaining this love I

proper, but on October 25 I was admitted into the Meher Ashram as a student. Besides secular

became entirely free from the snares of worldly Maya. Nothing seemed to interest me, not even

instruction, spiritual instruction was imparted to

my existence. It was through the Divine Love of

boys by competent teachers in accordance with

my Beloved Master that I was transformed into my

the commands of Shri Meher Baba. From about

present state which only a few in the world

the middle of November the Holy Master Himself

experience. One day, in January of 1928, when

began to feed us with spiritual knowledge.

the Holy Master was .imparting instruction to boys

Though we were not out of our teens the Master instilled into our minds great spiritual facts of

and disciples, I began feeling that I was losing my consciousness, and after blurting out, "Oh, Baba,"

which even yogis of the fourth cosmic plane are

I actually lost it. I became unconscious of

unconscious, intellectually acquainted us more and more with the Path, and gradually went on

everything except the Divine Form of the Master. For four days I continuously remained

imparting spirituality to those of us who were fit

unconscious of the gross world but conscious of

for it. One night, after delivering a spiritual

the Master's Divine Form which I was seeing in

discourse, the Master said to me, "Child, have faith and try your best; I will make 'gold' of you."

myself. On the fifth day my gross consciousness was

These words of my beloved Master produced a

restored to me, but with its restoration the Divine

great impression on my mind-quite out of proportion to what one would expect. The above

Form of the Master which, be it remembered, has nothing to do with His body, did not vanish. Since

words were surcharged with spirituality and they

then I began seeing it in everything, in every

made me restless ... A great spiritual longing took

body, and enjoying ineffable Spiritual Bliss for

possession of me, and every moment of my

which I have paid a heavy price. Before I attained

waking state I said to myself, "When will this dust

to my present Blissful state I had oft read and

of myself tum into gold?"

heard that this gross world is nothing but Maya. I

A great revolution was effected in me. Boys and disciples wondered at my changed state. I

could not understand properly why it was called Maya, but now I see for myself that it is really so.

myself wondered at it. Sound sleep I could not

God is Real. Everything else is unreal.

get, and all relish for any kind of food vanished. One day in the month of December, while

Ignorance is the cause of all miseries, of scepticism, hatred and egoism. All the various

partaking of dinner, I felt a sort of great sensation

kinds of impressions, all attachments and errors

in my body from the crown of my head to the

of man have for their sources ignorance and non-

soles of my feet. Tears rolled down my cheeks

discrimination. Many persons confuse the dream

and I could not restrain myself from crying loudly.

with the Reality, take bad for good, and, forgetting

Everything around seemed to whirl and then

the Soul, regard the gross world as the only

vanish. My blood became extremely hot, and heat pierced my body from inside. Then I

reality. Ignoramuses look at the mirage and think they are the body which is a mere instrument and

swooned. When I recovered I saw my beloved

not the glorious 'Effulgent Self' or Atman. When

Master sitting near me. I could not help crying

Discrimination makes its appearance, the net of

and pressing His lotus feet to my eyes. I kissed

ignorance disappears and the Reality is seen

them now and then. He calmed me and gave me

through the eyes of Discrimination. Finally, in the

a cup of milk.

words of the Sages, I say, "Neither despise any

I could now think of nothing and nobody but the Master. I simply could not help meditating on

being, nor look with contempt on others, but attempt, ·if you can, to give all a helping hand, for

him continuously. Even in school hours when I

Oneness is the secret, and the Journey is towards

was apparently reading, my heart was with my Beloved. Sometimes while meditating I used to

the same Goal. Believe in the Splendour and Glory of your own Soul. There is the treasure of

see Him with my subtle eyes sitting near me with

infinite Freedom, Power and Purity: so avoid

His right hand on my head. Mere sight of Him,

throwing an evil thought into the world. Don't think

whether gross or subtle, used to make me weep.

that you are born a bound slave full of impurity­

By the middle of December, on account of my

for this thought is forbidden. Weakness never

devotion and constant meditation, such love took

existed­but Strength; darkness never existed­but

possession of my heart that it made me, so to say, 'mad' for my Beloved. Separation from Him

Light and Love from the beginning and so for ever."

made me suffer intensely. I was contented only

when I was with Him. This love was Divine Love,
a gift from the Master - the love
  

Reprinted from The Meher Baba Journal,February,
1939 issue.
  

  

2

Arrival Through Denial? By Meher Baba
Before enlightenment shows one clearly who one is, there are the false self-assertions: I am a man, my name is Jack; I am a woman and my name is Jill.
Before SELF can assert Reality, all false self­assertions must be denied. And since his body is the source of his identity as Jack, a man, and the cause of false self-assertion, he must deny his body­wants.
The body wants food and drink­so food and drink must be denied. The body wants rest and sleep­so rest and sleep must be denied. The body wants to sit, to walk about­so sitting or walking about must be denied. But it is impossible to deny for long the body's wants. The better way, the way that is evermore delightful and easy, is to begin to forget oneself until self-forgetfulness becomes so complete and absolute that nothing is remembered except the Real Self. The various spiritual disciplines have been evolved to help one forget one's false self, and when faithfully practised they not only advance one on the Path of Forgetfulness, but, because of the law of action and reaction, all those closely related to or connected with the selfforgetting self experience some spiritual advancement. The more the self-forgetting self forgets himself the more he is remembered by all those connected with him, and the more these remember him, the more they forget themselves. Now one of the easiest ways of cultivating self-forgetfulness is to concentrate on a picture of the Master, for this helps the aspirant shift, to some extent, his concentration on himself to one who is the being and form of Perfection. And when the picture upon which he concentrates becomes alive, this is called Illumination. And this seeing of the alive picture brings about further forgetfulness of self. Soon he has no more thoughts about himself at all: his whole mind is focused on the living face and form of the Master who is the eternal Beloved, and eventually he merges in Him forever. He then knows that he himself was all along the Reality of his own concentration. This is Self-revelation, and in this is real Self-assertion: "I Am That". The forgetter of himself has become the rememberer of who he is, and all those who forget themselves in remembering him are also liberated. As it has been said of old­if one member of a family attains emancipation, with him are emancipated generations of his past and also his present connections. Self-denial is arduous, forced, and selfforgetfulness is easy and natural. Self-denial would be the quicker way if it could be done,

Enlightenment hegins in self-denial and ends in
self-revelation
Meher Baba
but it is impossible. Even if the aspirant succeeds in· overcoming, say, hunger, after awhile he begins to enjoy fasting. This is a new want­he wants to fast-so he must deny his pleasure in fasting and eat, though even the sight of food may nauseate him. Or again, he succeeds in conquering sleep and enjoys wakefulness­he wants to remain awake­and if he is to master that want he must sleep, though to sleep seems like losing all that he has so hardly gained.
There becomes no end to denial and counter-denial, and even the strongest will and the stoutest heart will break down on this path. But Self-forgetfulness can be practised by everyone and its way is easy, delightful and safe because it is always under the tender regard of the Master.

3

Letter from Myrtle Beach
Dear Anne, Please share this information with all in your
group. Pine Lodge, the house just within the Main Gate of the Center on U.S. Highway 17, will be used for the reception of visitors coming to the Center, rather than Elizabeth's residence at Briarcliffe. Kitty or Jane will be at Pine Lodge on volunteer duty to register all guests between the hours of 11 a.m. and 5 p.m. seven days a week. During these hours the Main Gate of the Center will be on the latch so that it can be easily opened for you to come inside the area of Pine Lodge. This gate will be locked after 5 p.m. Therefore, anyone coming for any emergency reason after 5 p.m. is not to attempt to enter the Center, but should go to a public telephone and call 272-5295 for instructions.
You can well understand that Pine Lodge cannot be attended twenty-four hours a day; it is earnestly expected that all visitors will make their plans to arrive between the stated hours: 11 a.m. and 5 p.m.
The usual procedure of welcoming, registering in the Guest Book, obtaining a numbered key, and assignment of cabins will be done at Pine Lodge. A new inner gate just beyond this Lodge will serve as the actual entrance to Meher Center during office hours. There will be two kitchens available at the main part of the Center and you will be assigned to the one you are to use during your stay. Upon your departure from the Center, Pine Lodge will be the place to return your key and for payment of your account.
It is more important for everyone to make reservations ahead, preferably by letter, giving full details: the arrival date, length of stay, and the full names of those planning to come together. No new person bought to the Center without prior permission by letter or telephone.
The new number at Pine Lodge to call for all reservations is Area Code 803-272-5777, also between the hours of 11 a.m. and 5 p.m.
The rules of Meher Center remain the same; they are, principally: no drugs used or carried (including marijuana), and no alcohol.
Knowing that Baba had called the Center His home in the West, Elizabeth asked Him, when He was there last, who could stay at Meher Center and Baba replied: "THOSE WHO LOVE AND FOLLOW ME, THOSE WHO KNOW OF ME, AND WANT TO KNOW MORE."
In Baba's Love, Elizabeth Patterson For Meher Spiritual Center, Inc.
MEHER SPIRITUAL CENTER, INC. BOX 487 MYRTLE BEACH, SOUTH CAROLINA, 29577

My Introduction to Meher Baba
continued from page 1.
I never felt Baba didn't speak­He was always speaking to your heart. The first message I got from Him expressed it: "Baba sends you His Love; He is always with you, in you, near you. Be happy, don't worry. "
Next Baba went to the United States where he contacted the original American disciples. On His way back to India He called a few of us to meet Him in Paris. We went to Versailles, to the Eiffel Tower, we played games with Him, and then He returned to India.
Before leaving, He told us to write to Him every week. We did and He wrote back to us. Here is an excerpt from one of His letters to me: "The world is in a state of fear and perplexity. No one knows what is going to happen, but wait and see. I know all, the present and the future, and nothing can stop the work I am here to do. Am I not the Avatar? And the world will know it and accept Me as such. Be calm; be steady and firm as a rock in your faith and love for Me. I can then use you as a channel for My work, the work of Divine Love for the uplift-ment of humanity. As you know I need none of you. I can work My Will independently, but I have chosen for My own reasons a few to help Me in that work. But· these few need a love and faith as real as Saint Francis. Let that same love of his for Christ be your goal, and love Me as he loved his Master."

Editor: Tom Mauro

Contributing Editors: Kitty Davy, Myrtle Beach Center Nicholas Kempf, Louisiana Mary Fornataro, California Curtis & Amora Smith, Pennsylvania Dominick Toto, New York

Associate Editors:

Robert Ganz

Chuek Magro

Larry Greenberg Beth Ganz

Alan Berger

Michael Levy

Composition & Design:

Mary Marino

Chris Riger

Keith Sheridan Larry Karrasch

Published monthly by the Society for Avatar Meher Baba 121 West 72 Street New York, New York 10023
Subscription $5.50 per year (12 issues). Single copy in U.S. and Canada, 50 cents.
Material contained in this publication should not be reproduced in any form without written pcrmission from the Editor.

4

