"The significance of the Mandali's visit," A talk given by Dr. Harry Kenmore at the 76th birthday celebration of Beloved Avatar Meher Baba on the evening of February 28, 1970.

Now is the time of crisis and of the Avatar. Today we publicly celebrate the birth of our Avatar. Avatar Meher Baba got Himself born into the world so that we might be born into Him. We have gotten our physical birth. In this lifetime we have but one physical birth. There is no such thing as a rebirth in this lifetime. But we can have a spiritual birth. The Avatar has come to help us make the beg-inning of breaking out of our cage of unreality and ignorance so that we may spiritually take the path of love in His name and under His direction. Then we will have the death of this little impertinent, personality self and we will be ushered into our Real Birth of Reality - our birth into Godhood, our One Self in All.
Meher Baba is the Personification of Truth as well as the Personification of Love, Beauty and Compassion. Every religion of the world makes the assertion that it alone is the truth. But when the Avatar comes to our world to live amongst us so that He can become the tangible expression of love in our lives, He comes as Truth incarnate . He is the One and Only Truth of all truths; and, as He said to me in November 1968, just twelve weeks before His passing into the invisible, "I am the God of all Gods, and I am not only the Way, but I am also the Goal."
He has clearly indicated the spiritual guideline that we are to follow into the Ocean of His Divinity which is in fact.

our own Divinity . We find ourselves unconscious of our Real Existence, and Meher Baba coming into the world is hereto make us completely conscious of our Self-Existence. It is His Love; His Compassion for humanity, which has made Him come amongst us as the Eternal Beggar, begging humanity advent
after advent to listen to His clarion call to come unto Him. This time Meher Baba has virtually said, "Come into Me." Avatar Meher Baba is the first Avatar who has not insulted our intelligence. He has not come issuing fairy tales about His beginning and about His purpose on earth. Instead, He has issued this call to our maturity. In His deathless work, God
Speaks as well as in The Everything and the Nothing and in His Discourses He appeals singularly and meaningfully to our maturity. He has opened the doorless door through Him to this Self·realization. He is the Entrance through which we gain our Ultimate. No more shall we follow the path of a philosophy which keeps us
bound like ruminants in the horizontal

roaming back and forth on the face of the earth, not knowing whence we've come, why we've come and where we are going. Rather, He has given us the complete saga of who we are.
The colossal action of Meher Baba upon this world will be met by a colossal response on the part of humanity. Why? Because He has left us His Mandali. Keep your eye on Meher Baba's Mandali because Meher Baba has His Eye on them. It will be significant to all of us to note that the manner in which He disciplined and drove His Mandali is the manner in which we will have to discipline and drive ourselves if we want to get to that Goal. How often have I thought of the Mandali who, at the time of Manonash, climbed that Seclusion Hill as many as six and eight times a day, crawling, scrambling and sliding through heavy downpours and winds of hurricane velocity. No matter what was happening to them or where it was happening, up there atop that little mount was Meher Baba. He was there. That's how they thought of Him­very lovingly. He was there! In the New Life as well as in the old life, when they were sent out on various expeditions for Baba, doing biksha (begging) or other work, they knew that His Love was with them wherever they went. And they knew that, at the end of two or three days, when they returned, He was there.
He is always there. But are we present to receive Him? This Eternal Beggar is still standing at the door of our hearts virtually begging to come in. If we

  

"THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE
MANDALI'S VISIT" (cont'd)

A talk given by Adi K. Irani on the occasion of beloved Baba's 76th birthday celebration at the Barbizon Plaza Hotel on the evening of February 28, 1970

could but realize that Meher Baba, the lncamation of Love, is standing at this eternal door of our hearts begging to come in, we would throw open wide the door and become one with Him. He is not only there, He is here. He is within us. We must become aware that His Residence within us is here to awaken us to the Reality of not only His Divine Greatness but to the Reality of our own Divine Greatness in Him. He has come not to give us a philosophy or a teaching. He has come to give, literally, the Truth about ourselves, and He is asking each and everyone of us to get drowned in His Divine Ocean of Love.
Love alone is going to provide the glue that is going to make Him stick inside and never leave us. It is this Love that is the Eternal Leaven that is going to leaven the whole lump of humanity. But it is of meagre value unless we make constructive use of it. We must knead His Love into our hearts and into our lives as the Mandali have. Wherever the Mandali go they feel Meher Baba present with them. He has left without leaving them. They feel His Residence in them even more so than when He was in human form because now He lives as He has always lived­in total invisibility and in Absolute Silence. It is from this silence in our hearts that we will feel the Word of Words that Meher Baba eternally is. And we will respond to this Word of Words with a glorious awakening to His Love and His Greatness.
Because Meher Baba is, we are. It is because Meher Baba is, all of humanity is. Only God Almighty who is possessed of Almighty Power can place Himself in a little bottle, the human form, and come amongst us in a world of unreality and make Him-self unreal so that we can partake of His Love and Compassion. And it takes Infinite Compassion to return again and again begging us to accept our own Real Selfhood which He holds out to us with Love.
Recently, someone asked, "Why haven't the Mandali gotten Realization?" Be mindful of the fact that if they did get this realization there would be no one left to tell of their mighty Master's wonderful Works. Who would tell of His Greatness? Who with authenticity, would tell of His Love, His Compassion and His Infinite Patience? The Mandali are His Apostles and now they are gone forth to communicate the Greatness of the Avatar, their Beloved Master of all Perfect Masters, to all of humanity. And let us heed what they tell us because they "tell it like it is!" JAI BABA!

Jai Baba to you all. It is a great joy that all of us, in the Love of the Only One who is so dear to our hearts, nay, who is our Real Self, have gathered here. I must thank you one and all for giving heartfelt response in joining us to celebrate the birthday of our Beloved Meher Baba. I must also thank our brother Mandali member, Dr. Harry Kenmore, for suggesting that brother Meherjee and I come over here to meet all brothers and sisters, say a few things, exchange greetings, offer our praise and prayers to our Beloved­ leaving be-hind our love to all the lovers of our Beloved, going back taking the love of all our brothers and sisters here, and sharing their love with all the brothers and sisters in India.
From the sound of His name, which is so common amongst Parsis and lranis, Meher Baba (Merwan Sheriar Irani) would seem to be so common a man to those who only saw Him as a human being because He had a body. If it were not for the fact that He is God having come down to a human form, He could not have shown the exuberance of Love and lavished that Love upon everyone who came into His contact irrespective of their religion, caste, creed or nationality. It is not only that. His Love really extends to the entire universe. It is the greatest force in life.
We cannot imagine a greater force than love in life. And this is the only force that the entire world, after going through a fire of experience, will have to take into itself in order to dissolve the hatred, the animosity, the bad feeling, the backbiting, the dissensions and the disputes amongst all the people This force cannot easily be made use of by humanity because the individual has drowned himself in running after his own desires and frustrated his energies in the name of power, gain, and authority. And for whom? For himself­ for his selfishness­his selfishness in desiring to see somebody else go low and see himself stand above others.

The Avatar comes; what a great sacrifice on His part! With His Eternal Freedom, Eternal Joy, the Highest state of AllKnowledge, All-Power, All-Bliss, ever enjoying the "I Am God" state, why should He have come down? Was there a necessity for Him to come down? But He comes. If He has to redeem humanity from illusion, He has got to come down to the illusion. Why doesn't He, by mere breath, dissolve the entire illusion, free all humanity from this illusion and give the experience of Himself to all in a fraction of a second? It is not impossible for Him to do. But He Himself has created the illusion for a purpose. And the purpose is so beautifully mentioned, so clearly mentioned in His book "God Speaks." The illusion had to come into being; it is there. When He comes into the human form, He does not want to destroy illusion because the purpose of illusion is to evolve and attain that ultimate Consciousness that God, in His Beyond the Beyond State, in His State of unconsciousness, has the whim to experience. And in trying to know Himself, He has to create the entire paraphenalia of this illusion. He comes down and, just as brother Harry Kenmore said, begs you to realize this.
I really feel that this begging on the part of Meher Baba has been some-thing very, very exceptional. His Com-passion has gotten Him to come so low to meet humanity. Somehow or other, humanity turns a deaf ear to His clarion call. But I do remind myself that this call cannot go in vain. His Manifestation, as He has said, is bound to come. It is only a question of time. He has done His work. He has apparently left us because we cannot see Him with our physical eyes. If He is everywhere, He has gone nowhere. He is there where He is. But in our ignorance, we cannot see Him without His having a body. And what is the body?­the lowest form of existence. It has a purpose to fulfill, and after the purpose is fulfilled, it is discarded. So the legacy of the great treasure of His writings, the great treasure of His messages, the great treasure of His Love, and the great treasure of His life that He has left behind, is really the greatest treasure that we can possess in our lives.
But the youth of today runs after freedom­the kind of freedom which is really a mirage. They run after the freedom looking upon it as water, and they can never find that water. They run after it and it runs away from them. So the kind of freedom the youth of the world today has adopted for itself is

really a freedom which is going
to get them into more involvement. Apparently this is a
freedom, but in effect it is not going to be a freedom at all. If
you really want freedom, be like the cypress tree­ how tall it is,
how beautifully its branches on the top enjoy the full freedom of
the air. But why does it enjoy this freedom? Because its roots are
firmly embedded in the ground at one place. So, unless and until,
by virtue of your love, by virtue of your discipline, you create a
foundation for yourself in the Love of Baba which is Eternal,
which is unchanging, you will not be able to enjoy that Real Free-
dom. In order to enjoy Freedom, you have to get yourself bound to
one thing. Baba 'says' "Get rid of the rest of the things in life, the
rest of the bindings in life, and bind yourself to Me firmly
because I am the Only One unchangeable." God as God,
God whom the world worships, is entirely disconnected from
illusion. The Avatar is no-thing but a different aspect of the
same God. Avatar is "activised" God. He is the One who
responds to the prayers of the entire world. Therefore, let the
youth of the world not delude itself into enjoy-ing only the
illusory freedom, where there is no responsibility or discipline; it
turns into license. Now, when a man receives a license from
some government authority, he has to pay for it: he can't get the
license free of charge. Similarly, if a man appropriates license in
the name of freedom, then will he have to pay for it, and the
payment will be in the form of a greater involvement with illusion,
resulting in greater suffering. Avatar Meher Baba has, in very
simple words, 'said' that Freedom can be attained. The way of
Freedom is contained in a very few things. Primarily, it is
contained in the love of God. There is no difference between
love for God and love for the Avatar for those of us who are
lovers of Meher Baba knowing full well that the Avatar is God.
Secondly, the Avatar is most concerned with your life­with
your living, with your character and with your love.
If we claim ourselves to be the lovers of Meher Baha, and want
to do some work of propagating His message of Love and Truth,
then we should not really delude our-selves into thinking that we
can lead any easy life we want. Our words will then bear no
effect. Our work should begin with ourselves. We must prepare
our· selves to do that work. Socalled "work" can be done by
anybody in the world if he has the means, if he has the friends,
if he has the money. But that work does not become effective
at all. Meher Baba's work is not an advertising work. It is not a

commercial advertising work. It is
the real work of something Real to be given to human beings; and that "Real" cannot come out of you 'unless you have it. And if you don't have it today, you can have it tomorrow. And the way to have it depends on three things alone, i.e., your love for Him, your conduct and your character. So, as they say, charity must begin at home. Baba's work should begin with yourself. All
talk of differences has really no value whatsoever. They are all surface and temperamental differences and we should not waste our time with them. It doesn't take anybody anywhere. Any Baba person who has come out to do Baba's work with a sincere heart, life and character should say, "Maybe I was something else yesterday, today I make a determination to lead the life Baba
wants me to lead," and then come out into the world and make an effort to do His work. Create a foundation for your-self to build the super-structure of your work. Without the foundation, the little super-structure you may be successful in building will topple down, will fly, will be demolished in no time. It is no good building castles in the air. When we fight amongst ourselves, when we talk
cruelly of others, we are simply wasting our time.
Why is Baba recognized as the Avatar? There was a time when Baba did not give any messages at all. He gave only Love. His life was evidence enough for people, and they recognized Him. It was much later that He started giving messages, and dictated His writings. And even if He had not done that, do you mean to say that He would have been
accepted by all those who accept Him today as the Avatar? He would have been accepted because of His life, because of His Love, because of His Compassion.
We must go to the fundamentals, and stop disputing each others' views, and throwing cold water on the enthusiasm of work that some-body else wants to do. Wherever Baba's work exists, wherever it is done, we have to cooperate 100%. We may
have our temperamental differences; everybody has his own opinion and everybody has his own interpretations. But we should create a harmony amongst ourselves in spite of our differences. But I tell you again that if you look upon the Mandali as having some experience having spent the precious years of their lives with Beloved Meher Baba, consider the conclusion I have come to: one has really to take up himself first, see to
his life, see to his love, prepare himself for the work he wants to do. We can't afford to do Baba's work beginning at the other end; we have to begin with our-selves first. And unless and until we do it, we are never going to be successful. It will all be superficial work. Your word will carry no weight. Your presence will carry no impression. Baba's work cannot be built on mere talk, it has to be built on the foundation of one's life, one's

character, and above all, one's love­a selfless love, in which there is no trace
of any selfishness at all. One's love should be very pure. If it is mixed with a selfishness, then that part of the work that is done with selfishness stinks.
The Avatar of the age has come down to make us free from this illusion. He has done His work and the Manifestation of His work will take time and will flower. In the light of the suffering He has done for us, in the light of the messages He has left behind, in the light of that Love which He has given abundantly, let us play our part to the full­let us do what little we can. And, if in doing that, we have to suffer, we should not bother about that suffering because our Beloved Meher Baba suffered all His life. He said Christ suffered once under Crucifixion, but He (Baba) suffered every moment of His life. Com-pared to His suffering, what does the suffering amount to that everyone of us is undergoing? We get our food on time, we have all the conveniences of life, and actually, the suffering that we feel is created by our imagination. Baba, through His work, has made things so easy for us. When we receive the little humiliations here and there when people ask questions about Baba's Declaration and statements and we find ourselves unable to answer, we feel we are suffering. Not at all. I don't think anyone really suffers in the sense that those who lived with the previous Avatars suffered. Baba has saved us from the humiliations the previous Avatars underwent. So, we are all very, very fortunate. Do not think that in the eyes of the world we will appear to be only a handful of people. The strength does not really lie in the numbers. The strength lies in the quality. So, coming back to our point, we should guard against disobeying Baba, and prepare ourselves to do His work; we must begin doing His work with ourselves first. Dear sisters and brothers, I honestly look upon all of you as equal to me, and many times I sincerely feel myself very unworthy of the great work that Baba's men do all over the world. Whether somebody started twenty years ago or today, or whether somebody started working three years ago, like our brother, Dr. Harry Kenmore, it makes no difference. It is always the quality of work that counts.

Editor-in-Chief Bernard Barshay

Contributing Editors Dominick Toto, New York Mary Fornataro, California

Associate Editors

Irwin Luck, Florida Jeff Wolverton, Canada

Robert Ganz

Nicholas Kempf, New York

Thomas Mauro Amora & Curtis Smith, PA

Iris Young

Designer

Published monthly by the Society for

Larry Karrasch Avatar Meher Baba

Photography Chris Riger

121 West 72nd Street New York, New York 10023 Single copy in U. S. and Canada, 25 cents.

LETTER

THE WAY AND THE GOAL

DROP

Some this week-end and some the middle of the week, others next

We invite you to support the "Way and the Goal" through contributions of

week-end. The Muirs from Wash-

articles, stories and letters. The life of

Dear Harry,

March 3,1970

ington will stay outside in a motel. Edward Luck came by and told us how really wonderful your evening

this newsletter is sustained by the active support of Saba followers everywhere. Feel free to participate

Jai Baba, and loving greetings to you. This letter I am sorry is too late to send you greetings for beloved Baba's Birthday, but I do wish you a very happy and fruitful Baba Year in His love and service. I appreciated receiving your Newsletter very much, including the fine

was at the Barbizon·Plaza. He played a tape.
Love, Elizabeth C. Patterson Myrtle Beach, S.C .
·····

so that "The Way and the Goal" can become the possession and the instrument of Beloved Baba's worldwide family to strengthen itself for the attainment of Avatar Meher Baba's victory. JAI BABA!

talk you gave to the Monday-nighters

I would like a copy of each issue sent ______________________________________________________________

to me, and have enclosed a bank draft for $5.00 which 1 trust will cover costs for a year's issues. There is no need to send it airmail, seamail is quite sufficient.

AN ACCOUNT OF ADI AND MEHERJEE'S VISIT TO MYRTLE BEACH By Domoniick Toto

It was a gift to have among us in the West two members of Beloved Baba's

connected with Baba, the Ancient One, in past Avataric periods in one

With love as always in Beloved Baba, Bill Le Page

Mandali who have surrendered everything to serve and do as Baba asked them according to His will. Adi

way or another; and that He has brought us all into this family. We· have not found Baba. Baba has found

P.S. Since writing this, your first-class reproduction of Mani's Family Letters has arrived. It really is excellent, and I am very taken with the painting of Baba by Rano. I have started telling other Baba people here about the book and either I will let you know or they will write direct about copies if they wish to obtain them.
Bill Le Page Beacon Hill, Australia
·····
March 4,1970
Dear Ann, Thank you very much for the books
you left at the Center with Jane, the Eighty- Two Family Letters. I treasure my copy and the one given to the Center is in the library and will be read and reread by the old-comers and newcomers for years ahead. Mani has given us priceless jewels in her letters which are so full of Baba. In fact, so much so, that they seem like letters from Baba and that Mani was just His "pen." It is beautyfully done in its folder. Only one thing, the paper is so heavy (and probably lasting) that it is expensive to mail out. We will try to get orders. Every book on or about Baba has gone slowly in the commencement, then in time the pace quickens. Finally the demand is great, even with "God Speaks" as it is now sought after.
This Saturday Adi and Meherjee come by car from Savannah with Mr. & Mrs. Minchey. Fifteen of Charles' Emory group motor over from Atlanta to be at the talk and stay the night. Wendy too will be with them and stay the night with Jane at a nearby motel on Friday. The Center is full to the brim and brimming over, but everybody will not be" here all the time.

and Meherjee arrived at the Center in Myrtle Beachafter a beautiful Baba birthday celebration in New York and visits to Florida and Georgia. The Center was filled with about seventy lovers who had come from different parts of the United States to be with the Mandali for just one or two days and to share their love and their experiences. The Mandali came to fill our hearts. They eased the bittersweet struggle which we have to go through from day to day by making us all happy and laughing with Baba's humor. Adi and Meherjee also answered the unanswered questions which Baba had aroused in a few of us. After the intellect was fed, we would sing in praise of Beloved Baba.
One night, when we were all in the library, someone asked Adi whether we will still be followers of Baba when we die and take another body and whether we will still try to surrender to His will. Adi answered, "Think of a man who has the burden of impressions from innumerable past lives which prevent him from recognizing and becoming conscious of his Real Self. Imagine this burden of impressions to be a huge skyscraper. Baba wants to destroy this skyscraper of impressions in order to free this man's consciousness from entanglement with illusion. Usually Baba will keep the outward structure of this building as it is and the man will appear outwardly to be as ordinary as anyone else. Meanwhile, however, Baba will be carving out the whole foundation until it is hollow. When it is completely hollow, Baba will not wait a moment longer, but will blow away the whole building of impressions and liberate that man's consciousness. Baba does not disturb or displace anything, but in a unique way, unknown to us, He does His work without our being conscious of it." Kitty then said that we have been

us. Each morning we would all wait for
Adi and Meherjee in the kitchen. Some seemed anxious to ask questions; others just wanted to listen to anything about Baba and gaze at the Mandali for a while. When night came with all the beautiful stars in the sky, we would wait by the library for Meherjee, Adi, Elizabeth, Kitty and Jane to arrive and begin the meeting. On some nights films of Baba were shown when He was at the Center in 1952, 1956 and 1958. I felt that everyone enjoyed the films-especially Adi and Meherjee.
It was very beautiful to see followers of Baba meeting at the Center for the first time. All the people from all over the country felt very much at home, like one big happy family. We were with Baba's messengers who had come again to the West, this time without the GodMan in His beautiful, active human form. Baba is just taking a rest like a man who works during the day and rests at night. Baba's work is finished and it is up to His followers to live the wish of the Beloved Ancient One. The most important message which the Mandali brought is that Baba never dies. He is always with us, loving us and guiding us. Baba is with us so much more because He lives in our hearts as He always has and always will.
JAI BABA!
·····
BOSTON EVENT Dr. Harry Kenmore will speak on his
favorite subject, Avatar Meher Baba in
Boston, Mass. on April 18th at Harvard
University. For further information and
lodgings please contact Joan Ruby
Montandon, 1132 Washington Street,
Dorchester, Mass. 02124, (617) 296-7955

