
Shri Meher Baba on the Formation And the Function of Sanskaras 

There are two aspects of hum an experienceóthe subjective and the ob jective. On the one hand there are m ental processes which constitute essential  ingredients of human  

experience; and  on the other handANALYSIS OF there are th ings and objects to which they refer. The m ental processes are 

partly dependent upon the imm ediately given objective situation; and they are partly dependent upon the functioning of the accum ulated sanskaras or impressions of previous experience. Hum an mind thus finds itself between a s ea of past sanskaras on the one side and the whole extensive objective world on the other. 

    From the psycho-genetic point of view hum an actions are seen to be based upon the operation of the impressions stored in the mind through previous experience. Every thought and emotion and every act is grounded in groups of im pressions which, when considered objectively, are seen to be m od≠ifications of the mind-stuff of man. These impressions are deposits of previous experience, and become the most important factors in determining  the course of present and future experience.   

The mind is constantly creating and ARE gathering such im pressions in the course of its experience. W hen AND occupied with the physical objects BECOME THE of this world, such as, body, nature  and other things around, the mind is, 

so to say, externalised, and creates gross impressions; and when it is busy with its own sub≠jective mental processes (which are the expressions of already existing sanskaras), it creates subtle and mental impressions. The question whether sanskaras come first or experience comes first is like the q uestion whether the hen comes first or the egg com es first. Both are conditions of each other and develop side by side. The problem of understanding the significance of human experience, therefore, turns round the problem of understanding the formation and function of sanskaras. 

The sanskaras are of two type sónatural and non-naturalóaccording to the m anner in which they come into existence. The sanskaras which the soul gathers  during 

 the period of organic evolution are 

natural sanskaras. These sanskaras 

 come into existence and gather round

the soul as it success ively takes up and abandons the various sub-hum an forms, thus gradually passing from the apparently inanimate state of the stone or metal to the human state, where there is full development of consciousness. All the sanskaras which cluster round the soul before attaining the hum an form are the product of natural evolution and therefore best referred to as nat ural sanskaras. They should be carefully distinguished from the sanskaras which are cultivated by the s oul after the attainment of the human form . The sanskaras which get attached to the soul during the hu man stage are cultivated under the moral freedom of co nsciousness with its ac≠companying responsibility of choice between good and bad, virtue and vice. They are, therefore, best referred to as non-natural sanskaras. For, though these post-hum an sanskaras are directly dependent upon the natural sanskaras, they are created under fundamentally different conditions of life, and are, in their orig in, comparatively more recent than the natural sanskaras. This difference in the length of the periods through which they ha ve gathered and in the conditions under which they are formed is responsible for the difference in the degree of fir mness with which the natural and non-natural sanskaras are respectively attached to the soul. The non-natural sanskaras are no t as difficult to eradicate as the natu ral sanskaras which have an ancien t heritage, and are therefore more firmly rooted. The obliteration of the natural sanskaras is practically impossible unless the neophyte is the re cipient of the grace and intervention of a Sadguru. 

    As explained above the non-natural sanskaras are depen≠dent upon the natural sanskaras, and the natural sanskaras are a result of evolution. The next important question is, "Why should the manifested life at the  

different stages of evolution em erge out of the Absolute Reality which is 

infinite?" The need for manifested 


life arises out of the impetus in the 


Absolute to become conscious of
 itself. The progressive manifestation

of life through evolution is ultimately brought about by the will-to-be-conscious which is inherent in the Infinite. In order to understand creation in terms of thought, it is necessary to posit this will-to-be≠conscious in the Absolute in an involved state, prior to the act of manifestation. 

    But, though for the purposes of an intellectual explanation of the creation, the impetus in the Absolute has to be regarded as a will-to-be-conscious;  to describe it as a sort of 

inherent desire is to f alsify its true 



nature. It is bett er described as aWITHIN THE lahar or an im pulse which is so ABSOLUTE MAY inexplicable, spontaneous and sud-BE COMPARED TO 

den that to call it this or that is to


have its reality undone. Since all 


intellectual categories turn out to b e necessarily inadequate in gr asping the m ystery of creation, the nearest approach to understanding its nature is not through an intellectual concept, but through an analogy. Just as a wave going across the surface of a still ocean calls forth into being a wild stir of innum erable bubbles, the lahar creates myriads of individual souls out of the indivisible infinity of one Oversoul. But the all a bounding Absolute rem ains the substratum of all the individua l souls. The individual souls are the creations of a su dden and spontaneous impulse, and have, therefore, hardly any an ticipation about their destined continuity of existence throughout the cyclic period until the final subsiding of the initial tremor. Within the und if≠ferentiated being of the Absolute is born a m ysterious point through which com e forth the variegated m anyness of creation; and the ' vasty' deep which, before a fraction of a second, was icy-still is astir w ith the life of innum erable frothy selves who secure their separateness of a definite size and shape through self-limitation within the foamy surface of the ocean. 

    But all this is merely an analogy. It would be a m istake to imagine that som e real change takes place in the Absolute when the lahar of the involved will-to-be-conscious  makes 

itself effective by bringing into THE ABSOLUTE existence the world of m anifestation. 

 There can be no act of involution orFECTED BY THE evolution within the being of theBHAS OF MANI- Absolute; and nothing real can be born FESTATION 

from the Absolute as any real ch ange is necessarily a negation of the Absolute. The change implied in the crea tion of the manifested world is not an ontological change or a change in the being of the Absolute reality; it is only an apparent ch ange. In one sense, the act of manifestation must be regarded as a sort of an expansion of the illimitable being of the Absolute, since through that act the Infinite which is without consciousness seeks to attain its own consciousness. But, since this expansion of Reality is effected through its self-lim itization into vario us forms of life, the act of m anifestation might, with equal aptness, be called the process of timeless contraction. But, whether the act of manifestation is looked upon as a sort of expansion of reality or as its "timeless contraction", it is pre ceded by an initial urge or m ovement which might, in terms of thought, be regarded as an inherent and involved desire to be conscious. The manifoldness of creation and separateness of the individual souls exist onl y in imagination. The ve ry existence of the creatio n or the w orld of m anifestation is grounded in bhas or illusion, so that, in spite of the m ani≠festation of num berless individual souls, the Oversoul remains the sam e without suffe ring any real expansion or contraction, increment or decrem ent. But, though the Oversoul undergoes no m odification due to the bhas or illusion of individuation, there co mes into existen ce its apparent differentiation into many individual souls. 

   The most original bhas or illusion into which the Oversoul was allured synchronises with the first im pression. It, therefore, marks the beginning of the form ation of sanskaras. The formation of sanskaras starts in the most finite centre which becomes the first focus for the manifestation of the individuality of the soul. In the gross sphere, this first focus of mainfestation is represen- 

ted by the tridimensional and inert stone which has the m ostBHAS APPEARS IN rudimentary and partial con-

sciousness. This vague and undeveloped form of c onsciousness is hardly sufficient to illumine its own shape and form , and is hopeless ly inadequate to f ulfil the purpose of creation which was to enable the Oversoul to know its elf. Whatever little capacity for illumination consciousness has in the s tone phase, is ultimately derived from the Oversoul and not from the body of the stone. But consciousness is unable to enlarge its scope independently of the body of the stone, because the Oversoul first gets identified with consciousness and then through it to the stone form . And since al l further developm ent of consciousness is arrested by th e body of the stone and its langour, evolution of the high er forms or vehicles of manifestation becomes indispensable. The developm ent of consciousness has to proceed side by side with the evolution of the body by which it is conditioned. Therefore, the will-to-be-conscious which is inherent in the vastness of the Oversoul seeks by divine determ ination a progressive evolution of the vehicles of expression. 

    Thus the Oversoul forges for itself a new vehicle of expression in the m ental form in which it becom es slightly more intensified. But it is ev en at this stage ver y rudimentary. And so it has to ge t transferred to still higher forms of vegetation and trees in whom there is an appreciable advance in the development of consciousness through the maintenance  of the vital pro-

cesses of growth, decay and re- production. Emergence of a still more EVOLUTION OF developed form of consciousness becomes possible when the Oversoul AND FORMS 

seeks manifestation through the instinctive life of insects, birds and animals who are fully aware of their bodies and thei r respective surroundings, and who develop a sense of self-protection and aim at establishing mastery over their env ironment. In the highe r animals intellect o r reasoning also appears to a certain extent, but its working is strictly lim ited by the play of their instincts like the ins tinct of self-protection and the instinct for the care and preservation of the little ones . So even in animals consciousness has not had its full developm ent, with the result that it is unable to serve the initial pu rpose of the Oversoul to have self-illumination. 

The Oversoul finally takes the human for m in which consciousness attains to its f ullest development with complete awareness of the self and the environment.  At 

this stage the capacity of reasoning has HUMAN CONS- the widest range of activity and is

unlimited in its scop e. But, as the Oversoul, through its consciousness , gets identified with the gross body, consciousness does not serve the purpose of illuminating the na ture of the Oversoul. However, sin ce consciousness has had its fullest 

development in the hu man form, there is in it a la tent potentiality for self-realization, and the will-to-be-conscious with which evolution started becomes fructified in the Sadgurus or Man-Gods who are the fair flowers of humanity. 

    The Oversoul cannot attain self-knowledge through the ordinary consciousness of humanity, because it is enveloped in a multitude of sanskaras or impressions. As consciousness  

passes from the appare ntly inanimate state of the stone or the metal, then to OF SANSKARAS 

the vegetative life of the trees, then onwards to the instinctive state of insects, birds and animals, and finally to the full consciousne ss of the human state, it is continually creating new sanskaras and getting enveloped in them. And t hese natural sanskaras get added to even after attaining the hum an state by the further creation of non-natural sanskaras through manifold experience and multitudinous activities. Thus the acquisition of sanskaras is unceasingly going on during the process of evolution as well as during the period of later post-human activities. This acquisition of the sanskaras may be likened to the winding up of a piece of string round a stick , the string represen ting the sanskaras and the stick represen ting the m ind of the individual soul. The winding up starts from the beginning of the creation and persists thr ough all the evolutionary stages and human form, and the wound string represents all the positive sanskarasónatural as well as non-natural. 

    The fresh sanskaras which are constantly being created in human life are due to the multifarious objects and ideas with which consciousness finds itself confronted; and  these sans-

karas bring about im portant trans-SOME EXAMPLES formations in the various states of consciousness. The im pressions cre-

ated by beautiful objects have the potency of arousing in conscious ness the innate capacity for appreciating and enjoying b eauty. When one hears a goo d piece of music, or sees a beautiful landscape, th e impression caught from these objects gives him a feeling of exaltation. In the sam e way, when one contacts the personality of a thinker, he m ight get interest ed in new avenues of thought and be inspired with an enthusiasm which was utterly foreign to his consciousness bef ore contacting the thinker. Not only the impressions of objects or persons but also the impressions of ideas and superstitions have great efficacy in determining the conditions of consciousness. 

The power of the impressions of superstitions m ight be illustrated by m eans of a ghost story. Of the different realms of human thought there is perhaps none as abounding  

in superstitions as the r ealm which THE IMPRESSIONS is connected with ghosts who, ac-

cording to popular ideology, are supposed to harass and torture their victim in curious ways. Once upon a time during the Moghul rule in India, a highly educated man who was very sceptical about the stories of ghosts m ade up his m ind to verif y them from personal experience. He had b een warned against vis iting a certain graveyard on the night of amavasya (the darkest night of the month), for it was reported to be the habitation of a very dreadful ghost who unfailing ly made his appearance whenever an iron nail was ha mmered into the ground within the limits of the grav eyard. With the hamm er in one h and and the nail in the other he walked straight into the graveyard on the night of amavasya and chose a spot uncovered by grass in order to drive a na il in. The ground was dark, and equally dark was the cloak he wore hanging loosely. W hen he sat on the ground, trying to hammer the nail, an end of his cloak got between the nail and the ground, and got tied to the nail. He finished hamm ering and felt that he was successful with the experim ent without encountering upon the ghost. But, as he tried to rise in order to depart from the spot, he felt a strong pull towards the ground, and he was panic-stricken. Owing to the operation of previ ous impressions he could not think of anything except the ghost who, he thought, had secured him at last. And the shock of the thought was so great that the poor m an died of heart-failure. This story illustrates the tremendous power which sometimes resides in the impressions created by superstition. 

   The power and the effect of impressions can hardly be overestimated. An i mpression is solidified m ight, and its inertness makes it immobile and durable. It can becom e so engraved upon the m ind of man that despite his  sincere desire and effort to have it eradicated  

it takes its own time and has a way of working itself into action di- rectly or indirectly. The mind con- tains many heterogenous sans-OF HARMONIOUS karas, and while seeking expres-

sions in consciousness, they often clash with each other. T he clash of sanskaras is experienced in consciousness as a mental conflict. Experience is bound to be chaotic and enigm atic, full of oscillations, confusion and complex tangles, until cons ciousness is freed from all sanskaras good and bad. Experience can become truly harmonious and integral only when consciousness is emancipated from the impressions. 

The sanskaras can be classified accord ing to the essential  differences in  the nature of  the spheres to which they refer. As referring to different 

THE THREE TYPES spheres of existence they are found to be of three kinds: (1) Gross sanskaras which enable the soul to  experience the gross world through the gross medium and compel it to

identify itself with the gross body. 

(2) Subtle sanskaras which enable the soul to experience the subtle world through the subtle m edium and compel the soul to identify itself with the subtle body. (3) Mental sanskaras which enable the soul to experience the mental world through the mental medium and compel it to identify itself with the m ental body. The differences between the states of the individual souls are entirely due to the d ifferences existing in the kind of sanskaras with which their consciousness is loaded. Thus the gross-conscious souls experience only the gross world; the subtle-conscious souls experience only the subtle world; and the mental-conscious souls experience only the m ental world. The qualitative diversity in the experience of these three types of souls is due to the dif ference in the nature of their sanskaras. 

    The self-conscious souls are radically different from all the other souls, because they experience the Oversoul through the  medium of the self, whereas  the other  souls ex-

perience only their bodies and the

corresponding worlds. And this
radical difference in the consciousness of the self-conscious souls and other 

souls is due to the fact that whereas the consciousness of other souls is conditioned by some kind of sanskaras, the consciousness of self-conscious souls is completely free from all sanskaras. It is only when consciousness is unobscured and unconditioned by any sanskaras that the initial will-to-be-conscious arrives at its final and real fruition, and th e infinity and the indivisible unity of the absolute is consciously realized. The problem of deconditioning the m ind through the rem oval of sanskaras is, therefore, extremely important. 
