 1 2007-4-1 Four Kinds of Freedom  MLB 

Opening Words
 We are here 

to celebrate our life together
 amidst the wonders of the cosmos: 

stars and moons, oceans and lakes, 

deserts and forests, children and teachers, 

deer and butterflies, flowers and singing,
 wisdom and freedom, sorrow and joy. 

And so we begin our worship by saying: 

As we move through this year of transition and joy,
 we remember with gratitude 
the power of our living heritage, which moves throu
gh time like a clear running 
creek; refreshing us with the sweet draughts of cou
rage, hope, justice-making, 
peaceful living, ever deeper honesty, and more trut
hful loving. And so we kindle 
this light in thanksgiving. 
 Sequence 

The forsythia flames with yellow flowers and is not
 consumed, a true burning bush. 
 
On what mission of liberation might the forsythia b
e sending me? 
 
The daffodil climbs through the loam and, spreading
 its petals wide, trumpets a 
discourse on how liberation can rise up even from l
ast years decay. 
 
What excuses are left to me now? 

 
The rain puddle parts in two very nicely 

when children stamp through it with glee. 

 
Does anyone need larger miracles than that to convi
nce them that freedom really is 
better than enslavement to anything, anyone, any id
ea? 
 
 2 The orange tulip and pink redbud never go to war ag
ainst the daffodil and forsythia 
for being yellow instead of pink or orange. 

 
Might this foreign policy serve as a model? 

 
The first kites and frisbees of spring glide freely
 across the gentle winds, without first 
having to denounce the violence of wind-storms. 

 
Might what I do in the world teach far better than 
my righteous denouncements?  
 
And if that™s true, isn™t it time for some silence?
 Silence. 
 
We who live in the present world, just like the myt
hic people of ancient times, live in 
between the wild and the tame, between our heartbre
ak and our richest joy, and in 
between both peace and unrest. 

 
How can we keep from noting those realities in our 
own circles, in our own lives? 
How can we keep from claiming and naming the folks 
who move us, challenge us, 
astonish us, and grieve us? We acknowledge the real
ity of our lives by silently or 
quietly naming those people, the whole while strivi
ng to extend our compassion 
toward all. 

 
naming 

 
The spring world is a place of such wonders, that o
ur best response can only be equal 
in wonder–the movement of a sonata, the blues of a 
jazz song, the section of a great 
Requiem, the anthem within a cantata, the chant of 
a child, the solemn Amen. 
The First Reading 
comes from Shemoth, called in English, the Book of 
Exodus, a 
scroll in the Hebrew Scriptures. It was put into fi
nal edited form around 500 BCE, 
possibly, we think, by a man named Ezra. Although C
ecil B. DeMille had Moses part 
the Red Sea in his famous movie, the fact is, yam s
uph in Hebrew does not mean Red 
Sea but Reed Sea, or Reed Lake–aka what we call tod
ay a ?wetlands? area. This, all 
by itself, adds a certain proportion to the telling
 of the story. This is mostly from what 
is scholars call the Elohist strand of the tale, on
e of four strands woven together by 
the editor. 

Now when the King of Egypt had sent the people free
, God did not lead them by way 
of the land of the Philistines, which indeed is the
 more direct way, for God reasoned: 
They may experience war there, come to regret their
 freedom and return to Egypt. So 
God had the people leave their slave sites, Pithom 
and Raamses and swing about by 
way of the wilderness by the Lake of Reeds. 

 3 Now when the King of Egypt was told that the people
 had fled, he said: ?What have 
we done, setting these people free from serving us?
? So he had his chariot harnessed, 
over six hundred selected chariots. And he brought 
his warriors with him. The 
Egyptians overtook the Children of Israel as they w
ere camped by the lake. The 
people looked up and saw all of Egypt marching afte
r them. And so the people came 
to Moshe, and cried: 

?Is it because there are no graves in Egypt that yo
u have brought us out to the 
wilderness to die? Didn™t we tell you this would ha
ppen? ‚Leave us alone,™ we told 
you, ‚leave us alone. It™s a greater good to have o
ur freedom curtailed in Egypt, rather 
than to die here in some wild place in the middle o
f nowhere!™? 
Moshe said to the people: ?Be still!? Moshe stretch
ed out his hand over the lake, and 
all night long, a fierce east wind blew, the waters
 peeling back, revealing at last some 
firm ground. And thus the children of Israel came t
hrough the midst of the lake. The 
Egyptians followed, but their chariot wheels clogge
d up. Then Moses stretched out 
his hand over the lake, and the waters returned, by
 early dawn, to a level deep enough 
to cover the warriors of the King™s army. Then Mosh
e sang a song, and Miryam took 
a tamborine and danced.
 The Second Reading
 comes from a well-known lecture by Susan B. Anthony
, who 
was a long time member of the Unitarian Church in R
ochester New York. Giving this 
lecture across the nation was one of the ways she u
sed to alleviate a tremendous debt 
of $10,000 caused by the collapse of a newspaper sh
e was both editing and 
supporting. The title of her lecture, by the way, w
as sarcastic. 
Wherever, on the face of the globe or on the page o
f history, you show me a 
disfranchised class, I will show you a degraded cla
ss of labor.  Disfranchisement 
means inability to make, shape or control one™s own
 circumstances. The 
disfranchised must always do the work, accept the w
ages, occupy the position the 
enfranchised assign to them. The disfranchised are 
in the position of the pauper. You 
remember the old adage, ?Beggars must not be choose
rs;? they must take what they 
can get or nothing! That is exactly the position of
 women in the world of work today; 
they cannot choose. If they could, do you for a mom
ent believe they would take the 
subordinate places and the inferior pay?  Nor is it
 a ?new thing under the sun? for the 
disfranchised, the inferior classes weighed down wi
th wrongs, to declare they ?do not 
want to vote.? The rank and file are not philosophe
rs, they are not educated to think 
for themselves, but simply to accept, unquestioned,
 whatever comes.  
It is said women do not need the ballot for their p
rotection because they are supported 
by men. But statistics show there are three million
 women in this nation supporting 
themselves. There is no escape from the conclusion 
that woman must be clothed with 
equal power to protect herself. That power is the b
allot, the symbol of freedom and 
equality. 

 4 Sermon 

Today is Palm or Passion Sunday for some Christian 
congregations. It is also Wesak 
for some Buddhist movements, Buddha™s birthday. And
 of course, April Fool!  But 
today is also the Sunday that falls before the Pass
over, the high spring holiday of the 
Jewish people. The theme of that holiday is freedom
, and that is my theme this 
morning. But not, perhaps, in the way either you or
 I imagined.  
 
I have not missed a 
seder shel pesakh
, that is, a Jewish Passover supper, since I was a 
teen. I have celebrated it with my Jewish friends a
nd Catholic friends. I have 
celebrated it with my first Unitarian Universalist 
minister, who was Jewish. My 
Jewish friends sometime attend the 
seders
 celebrated at the Unitarian Universalist 
congregations I have served. One rabbi in Massachus
etts got a copy of the Haggadah 
(or service pamphlet) I, a non-Jew, composed, and n
ow uses it at both his home and 
his synagogue. Clearly, most Jews don™t mind cross-
pollination. 
 
Sometimes the 
seders
 I attend take as long as five hours, filled with r
ituals not 
entirely familiar to me. Mostly they take about two
 and a half hours, not very long 
when you consider how long wedding receptions last.
 Sometimes they are mostly 
recited in sloppily pronounced Hebrew. Sometimes th
ere is a very limited amount of 
Hebrew, or no Hebrew, and the ritual is new-fangled
 with modern poetry and secular 
twists.   Sometimes the singing is good. Sometimes 
it hurts the ears. Sometimes I 
forget that Jewish ritual is WAY more relaxed than 
Christian ritual (either Catholic or 
Protestant,) UU ritual or Muslim ritual. But someti
mes I can't imagine preferring 
ritual any other way. 

 
All I know is that spring does not seem like spring
 without it.  Do tulips really bloom 
without my lips being stung by the bitter herb, hor
seradish? Do daffodils really 
blossom if I can™t break a disc of unleavened bread
? If I don™t dip the 
karpas
, the 
greens, in salt water, does spring really thrive? B
ut Passover is not about spring. 
 
For once I was at my friend Richard™s house while m
y best friend, Stefan, who 
happened to be Richard™s partner in life, was cryin
g out in pain in the next room. 
Stefan was dying of comp-lications caused by a viru
lent reaction to a certain 
medication, oppressing him with some-thing called S
teven Johnson Syndrome. It was 
terrible. Richard and I had nursed him all day. 

 
Suddenly, I noticed the full moon shining in the ki
tchen window.  I realized what 
night it was. It was the first night of Passover. M
y church always celebrated Seder on 
the Friday after the official date, since many like
d to attend 
seders
 with friends or 
family on the actual night.  And on the actual nigh
t–that night–Richard usually 
went to a 
seder
 at his cousin™s house.  
 
 5 So I said to him ?Richard, I just noticed the moon,
 and I think it™s Passover tonight. 
And you are not over at your cousin Lucy™s house fo
r 
seder
 because you and I want 
to be here for Stefan. How heartbreaking. It must b
e difficult to have to skip such a 
primary ritual.? 

 
?Oh Mark,? said Richard, as usual speaking with a p
oetic vocabulary that most poets 
could only envy. ?Don™t you see? You and I are cele
brating 
seder
 right now, just the 
two of us, on this kitchen table littered with a pi
le of old news-papers. Can™t you taste 
the bitter herbs in your mouth? Isn™t there plenty 
of salt water flowing from your 
eyes? Don™t you know the bread we are sharing now b
y taking care of a dying man 
we both love will never, ever rise?? 

 
I was stunned by his amazing transformation of a so
rrowful moment by his poetic 
brilliance. I remember looking out at the moon agai
n, blurred through those salty 
tears. And it seemed for a moment as if the moon it
self was a round of unleavened 
bread, and that it broke into pieces as I looked, f
alling to the ground amidst all the 
fresh greens of spring–
karpas
. 
   

That was the day when I understood the deep power o
f ritual in a fresh way, and 
never has any ritual I have celebrated been the sam
e since. I know now they are about 
real experience, real tears, real commitment, real 
suffering, real joy and real lives. 
 
The story of the slaves escaping from Egypt is the 
centerpiece of the ritual. And I tell 
some version of these stories every year at our 
seder.  
Although the stories as we now picture them, thanks
 to Cecil B. DeMille and Disney 
Studios, are pretty fabulous and over-the-top, I st
ill think, as something of a critical 
historian, that there is a very small, but very rea
l kernel of truth to the story. Mosheh, 
after all, is not really a Hebrew name, although th
e Bible goes out of its way to make 
it into one, suggesting the storytellers were embar
rassed by the fact that its a perfectly 
ordinary Egyptian name, the same name found in the 
names of various kings, such as 
Ahmose. And the name of the body of water they cros
sed is only 
yam suph
 in 
Hebrew, which does not mean Red Sea, but rather, Re
ed Lake. Even Luther got it 
right in his German translation. I just don™t know 
what™s up with our perverse English 
translators. And a few hundred poor laborers crossi
ng a wetlands to start a new life 
hardly strains my suspicions as much as water risin
g to the height of a city wall on 
either side of 600,000 escaped slaves.   

 
Still, the story, even in the tame version of the E
lohist, is about real freedom for real 
people, a theme that is hardly confined to the Hebr
ew people that were our most 
ancient religious ancestors. The history of Europe,
 Africa, Asia and the America™s is 
a history of disenfranchised people running away, s
neaking away, fighting to be 
freed, being exiled, becoming nomads, and in a hund
red ways, starting over. With 
nothing. 

 6  
How is a family with a single mom being forced to m
ove because her work doesn™t 
pay her enough to pay the rent and feed the childre
n differ in any way from the story 
of the Hebrew runaways? 

 
How do the children sold into sex-chattel slavery b
y their millions in the modern 
world differ from the oppressions listed in the Boo
k of Shemoth/Exodus? For that 
matter, how are those who, because of the cost of p
roviding health insurance, are kept 
by their employers in part time work at minimum wag
e, any different, really, from 
those forced laborers in Egypt? 

 
How does a young 14 year old who is kicked out of h
is deeply religious family just 
because he says he is gay, differ from the story of
 Moses in 
any
 way, especially 
because he will end up in the wilderness of the str
eet at the mercy of everyone? And 
believe me, no manna will fall from the sky to feed
 him. 
 
All of these people are without vote, without the f
ranchise, without power to come to 
the table. 

Unitarian Susan B. Anthony understood this concept 
very well. She understood the 
basic issue around women and the vote to be enfranc
hisement, that is, the vote, the 
choice. 
Wherever, 
she wrote
, on the face of the globe or on the page of histor
y, you 
show me a disfranchised class, I will show you a de
graded class of labor.  
Disfranchisement means inability to make, shape or 
control one™s own 
circumstances. The disfranchised must always do the
 work, accept the wages, occupy 
the position the enfranchised assign to them.  If t
hey could, do you for a moment 
believe women would take the subordinate places and
 the inferior pay?    
I mean who WOULD vote to take a subordinate place o
r inferior pay? Anthony 
clearly hits the nail on the head as far as I am co
ncerned. 
Ok, sure, women finally got the vote, yes, but we s
till don™t have an Equal Rights 
Amendment in this nation, and large discrepancies i
n wages still exist. The Jews in 
Germany were disenfranchised and were deprived of w
ork opportunities and finally 
murdered. The Natives in this country were disenfra
nchised, and worse, murdered 
outright. Oh the list of the disenfranchised, those
 
who are systematically kept away 
from the table,
 is long indeed. Palestine, Rwanda, the Koreans in 
Japan, the Jews in 
the various Slavic nations, the Natives EVERYWHERE 
in the Americas, not just in 
the United States. The Catholics in Northern Irelan
d, our Socinian ancestors forced 
out of Poland, the Africans 
and 
English lower class who were brought over to these 
lands to be slaves–there have always been plans and
 attempts to find cheap labor, to 
write a whole class or group of people off, to main
tain personal privilege entirely by 
denying ordinary privilege to others. 

 7 I once supervised an intern who was raised in Germa
ny. He was young, only 24 when 
he served my California congregation. I thought him
 a wonderful young man. He and 
I drove to a clergy conference in the desert. It wa
s an eight-hour ride, so we had 
plenty of time to talk. I broached the subject of w
hat German young adults like him 
were doing about what happened there in the 1930™s 
and 40™s. He told me it was all 
repressed and no one talked about it. Until, that i
s, students at the universities in 
Germany began to read a book called ?Our Inability 
to Grieve.?  
This book addressed the issue of not addressing thi
ngs. It addressed the problem of 
secrets, of keeping things under cover, of pretendi
ng that everything is OK when it is 
not. It addressed the cruel reality of 
denial
. And it addressed the real power of grief, 
of admitting sorrow, of wailing and accepting the r
eality of what happened so that it 
might be faced squarely and never again denied. The
re were groups and conferences 
and sessions all about this grief work, my intern s
aid. 
Most Germans have changed because they have done th
is work. Oh, of course, there 
are still broken souls in Germany too, spitting out
 bigotry and wishing for policies in 
the Nazi style. Such folks never go away entirely. 
But they are containable. And there 
has been a great movement of reconciliation in the 
larger populace. Same thing is true 
in South Africa. Please, take the time to read Arch
bishop Tutu™s moving memoir 
about the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission;
 it™s called 
No Future Without 
Forgiveness.
 If you can get past two pages of this book without
 wet eyes, you are 
made of sterner stuff than me. South Africa knew mu
rder and mayhem almost at the 
Nazi level. The stories Tutu tells are very hard to
 imagine. But the work of this 
Commission was to refuse to let denial have the las
t say. Every single brutal reality 
was lifted up–not as some scholarly exercise, but a
s a real community cleansing. I 
do not think it is any accident that the first nati
on in Africa to legalize same-sex 
marriage is South Africa. Because once you start to
 realize the nature of cruelty, and 
how easy it is for human beings to take freedom fro
m their fellow human beings, you 
begin to wash your hands of all of it, even if same
-sex marriage causes a certain 
discomfort in South Africa for some of the more con
servatively religious.  
I think that nothing similar has ever happened in t
he United States of America. I think 
no one yet has really addressed the destruction of 
whole nations on this continent by 
people from another continent. And there has never 
been a Truth and Reconciliation 
Committee about slavery, and a century of class bas
ed poverty following the 
supposed end of slavery. 

A long time ago, one of my colleagues opined that r
eligion had less to do with nouns 
and verbs, and had a lot more to do with prepositio
ns, you know, the little words like 
to, for, from, of,
 etc. You know, love, but for what reason? Truth? W
hat truth? Truth 
to
 power? Or truth 
for
 power? Or the truth 
of
 power? But especially for this sermon 
on freedom, four kinds of freedom come to mind, the
 word freedom as altered by the 

 8 prepositions attached to it. Freedom from; Freedom 
to; Freedom of;  Freedom for. 
For example, the man in our children™s story was fr
eed 
from
 his poverty by chance. 
But he felt no freedom 
to
 deny what he learned from that condition, or from 
the rarity 
of chance, so he was thus free 
to
 grow wiser. And his freedom was not just for 
himself, but to benefit the freedom 
of
 others.   
But in the end I think my colleague was over-reachi
ng, and those pesky prepositions 
prove to be rather limiting. And that™s when the Ex
odus story comes in rather handy. 
When I read the Exodus story, I note four truths th
at touch on freedom. One. You 
can™t apparently go around the obstacle (represente
d by the lake–) you have to go 
through
 it. That is, you can™t deny your problems, you hav
e to face them honestly, 
and move through them no matter how muddy they get.
 Two. The rabbis understood 
that the oppressors are also not free. So that when
 the Egyptians drowned and 
Mosheh and Miryam began to celebrate, the rabbis in
sisted that God sent an angel 
down to silence them by saying ?My creatures are pe
rishing in the water, and you™re 
singing a song and dancing around?? And I™d wager t
he rabbis were talking about the 
horses as well as the warriors when they mentioned 
?my creatures.? Three: The text 
keeps on telling us that freedom is scary, so the p
eople constantly found excuses not 
to claim it, whining about how wonderful the securi
ty of slavery was compared to the 
wildness of the wilderness. Good insight that. Four
: The story does not read like a 
fairy tale, ?once upon a time? but mentions real pl
aces like Pithom and Raamses, and 
real political people like the King of Egypt, so it
 tells me that freedom is for real 
people in real political realities in real geograph
ical places. Namely, everyone who is 
alive. Freedom, as I said, for the oppressors as we
ll as the oppressed.  
And so the four kinds of freedom the story of the E
xodus teaches me combine into 
one kind of freedom expressed in four ways, but wit
hout any of those divisive 
prepositions. And this freedom is a religious deman
d so basic, so foundational, so 
central, that our own Unitarian Universalist tradit
ion holds that all other religious 
concepts are empty without it. So here are the four
 ways of talking about the singular 
freedom I put my trust in: 

1. I put my trust in that freedom which demands tha
t I spend each day of my life 
questioning any privileges I did not earn, but only
 inherited by virtue of class, color, 
gender, or other systems of oppression which separa
te Us into 
us
 and 
them.
 2. I put my trust in that freedom which is real whe
n it is linked to the real political 
and economic freedom of every other human being on 
the earth–freedom to come to 
the table. 

3. I put my trust in that freedom which demands I r
ecognize that slavery binds those 
who enslave almost as much as it binds the enslaved
, so that my own liberation is 
entirely caught up with their liberation as well. 

4. I put my trust in the freedom which does not 

belittle fear but faces it, and never denies it. 

 9  
Richard and I sitting at that table began to catch 
a glimpse of that aspect of freedom. 
Maybe you did too this morning. I hope so. I mean, 
what better thing could I desire? 
Offering 

Knowing that there is only Us and not us and them, 
we gather the offerings of all of 
us for  the benefit of all of us. Thank you for you
r generosity. 
Modern Amidah 

I open my mouth in astonishment. 

Praises fall forth with my every breath. 

I bless that I am not the first, nor shall I be the
 last, to wonder under the stars that 
everything is.  

I bless that everything is, and that I am part of i
t all. 
I bless that no one has any final answers, 

and that no name can be the final name for ultimacy
. 
I bless that it's possible to let fresh insight dis
place convention. 
I bless that it will still be possible on my death 
bed to grow deeper.  
I bless that only the painful work of forgiveness a
llows for any real joy in this life.  
I bless that what is fractured still dares to dream
 of wholeness. 
I bless that there is enough to go around if we giv
e, not grab. 
I bless that distance can usually give way to intim
acy. 
I bless that justice is only just if it transforms 
me as well as the world outside me. 
I bless that the good are not those who strive to d
o good, but those who allow their 
hearts to be vulnerable to the inherent dignity of 
others. 
I bless that peace can never ever be declared to be
 impossible, even in the Middle 
East. 

I bless that ruined cities and ruined lives can oft
en be rebuilt. 
I bless that prayers like this are not magical inca
ntations, but tender invitations to 
bless, question, and praise as often as possible. 

I bless that there is no place in the whole univers
e that is not as sacred as any temple.  
I bless that my breathing can be a kind of thanking
. 
I bless the peace that takes nourishment at the bre
ast of justice. 
I bless that both singing and silence are possible.
  
 
 
 
