 
Anna	Kingsford	and	Symbolism	in the	West*
[Adapted by Will Backett (London)]

 
ANNA KINGSFORD did not demonstrate in the chemical labor- atory the continuity she had established between the seen and the unseen, but her statements are logical and lucid, and carry assurance even to minds not trained in scientific methods, but had she been a practical scientist, the evi- dence would have been complete.
Similarly in the higher planes she could only repeat the symbols as given to her by the Gods; as the Chaldean oracles declare, "The Gods take form for mortals" and as she was told, "Appearances are personal in the heaven worlds".
That this method of enlight- enment is very different from God- realization was not always apprec- iated by her contemporaries, and she was unable herself sometimes to see its limitations, with the result that  the  mass  of  messages, etc.,
 
received could not always be assessed at their relative value. It was this lack of proportion that led her into inevitable difficulties, which otherwise the guidance of a Perfect Master rectifies, as the neophyte proceeds more and more into the unknown.
The following incident em- phasizes this and how even a virtue, to one on the Path, such as love for animals, may prove dangerous,  in the absence of higher guidance. But her life is the record of the journey of a soul and in all such lives slumber germs of error.
Her sympathy for the animal world, which was her main reason for adopting a medical career, in order to become equipped to combat its materialistic outlook, which she saw was at the basis of vivisection, led her to exert her will against certain persons in the Paris
 





















medical world, whom she regarded as mainly responsible for the prac- tice. Edward Maitland describes the scene in her room, which he entered to find her in a state of collapse, physical and emotional, after she had hurled her whole being mentally at a certain absent vivisector, as if with all her might to smite him with destruction then and there.
The terrible reactions on a wielder of Black Magic is shown in the Life of Mileripa, the Adept of Thibet, who suffered for years when he entered the Path through privations and physical difficulties, necessitated through previously evoking hailstorms to ruin his enemies' crops and killing others with the force of his will. Thus the warning in Madame Blavatsky's The Voice of the Silence: ''The more thou dost advance, the more thy  feet pitfalls doth meet."
From Pausanias description of the different functions of the Gods on various planes of consciousness, it appears that they were not regarded by the ancients as entirely distinct from each other. If the Infinite One manifests through the
 

principles and powers which each of the Gods has received in the Celestial world, Phoebus Apollo, Iacchos or Dionyses, Hermes Aphrodite and Saturn are representations of Infinity in the formative world, interchangeable as their activities unfold.
The Vishnu Puranas present as it were the point of view of the Gods: "Krishna struggling with the ser- pent, is reminded by Rama of his real character as, Centre of Creation. . .. The Nave in the Spokes of the Wheal. . . . and That the Gods, to partake of his pastime as man, have all descended under a like disguise."
It is only possible to give a few extracts from Anna Kingsford's Hymns in this article but they should be read in full and in sequence for their inner meaning and depth of beauty and vision, to be appreciated. Expressed in sym- bols, they are not impeded by the personality of the writer. Thomas Carlyle said: "In a symbol there is concealment and yet revelation, silence and speech, acting together, some embodiment and revelation  of the Infinite made to blend
 

 
itself with the finite, to stand visible and as it were attainable there."
The synthesis between the ancient Gods, and the first Chapter of Genesis, Anna Kingsford  extended to the last articles of the Church Creed, in her inspired writings.
"The Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Wisdom, whose angel is Phoebus Apollo, whose seven spirits are as the seven rays of Light.
The Holy Catholic Church, the King- dom of Heaven in Man, the Spirit of Understanding, Hermes or Peter, the guardian as well as the Interpreter of the Mysteries, the rock on which the true Church is founded.
The Communion of Saints, whereby Heaven and Earth are revealed, to each other, and drawn together, through Love. This is the Office  of Venus Aphordite.
The Forgiveness of Sins, or passing through of Souls ..... Iashhos, the Initiator, Lord of transmigration, whereby karma is satisfied through repentance and expiation.
The Resurrection of the Body, Redemption from material limita- tions, achieved through know-
 
ledge and experience, at the cost of suffering and death. Thus Ares or Mars, in its spiritual aspect rep- resents the death of the lower ego.
Life Everlasting. The Perfect Balance. (This is achieved in the midst of duality, and of these forces, Anna Kingsford indicates as Zeus and Hera rulers, in the Celestial world.
And the Amen. The final consum- mation. This is the outer boundary of the Kingdom, where Satan, the Lord of limit rules, for to him is given the dominion of the outer- most sphere, the kingdom of matter."
The Hymn to Satan presents a contrast to that of Aphrodite whose power is depicted in the Vision of Adonai, as he draws back the Universe to the Bosom of the Divine Love. "This the work of the God- man, which the Gnostics of old knew." We may not know at what cost of suffering this is effected, but as the Vision indicates, the direction of the power whereby the soul sinks into generation to obtain experience in the bonds of matter, is reversed. One who has the Divine Conscious- ness
 


and is also One with the human Con- sciousness, released himself from bondage, undertakes this mission.
Meher Baba shows in his discourse on "Love", magnetic, animal, human and divine, that all is love, in degree.
This is depicted in the Hymns to Satan, Aphrodite and Iacchos,  and  the elemental deities Hephaistes, Demeter, Poseiden and  Pallas Athene. Through inner vision the reader's imagination may soar and heart be inspired as they arouse that deep longing no earthly power can satisfy, and thus hasten the day of fulfilment. In the biblical Book of Job, Satan is entrusted by Jehovah, before whom he is called to appear with the Sons of God, with authority to test and tempt Job, but he does not obtain unlimited power. Powerful as may seem  the  forces  of  destruction in the world, it is well that we may know, though it be difficult to realize, that such powers are not beyond the Law of God, but in the last resource, under Divine Control.
HYMN TO SATAN BY ANNA KINGSFORD
ìEternity brought forth Time: the
 

Boundless gave birth to Limit. Being descended into generation.
Among the Gods, there is none like unto him, into whose hands are Committed the kingdoms, the  power
and the glories of the worlds.
Thrones and Empires, the dynasties of kings, the fall of nations, the birth of Churches, the triumphs of time.
They arise and pass, they were and are not: the sea and dust and the immensity of space devour them.
The tramp of armies, the voices of  joy and of pain, the cry of the new-born babe, the shout of the warrior, mortally smitten,
Marriage, divorce, division, violent deaths, martyrdoms, tyrannous ignorances, the impotence of passionate protest, and the mad longing for oblivion. . . . the wail of innocent beasts in pain.
The innumerable incarnations of spirit, the strife towards manhood, the ceaseless pulse and current of desire.
These are his who beareth all the Gods on his shoulders,
 

 
who establisheth the pillars of necessity and fate ....
Blessed are they who withstand his subtlety. They shall be called the Sons of God and shall enter in at the beautiful gate.
For Satan is the door-keeper of the temple of the King: he standeth in Solomon's porch: he holdeth the keys to the Sanctuary;
That no man may enter therein save the Anointed, having the arcanum of Hermes.
For Satan is the spirit of the fear of the Lord, which is the beginning of Wisdom.
He is the devourer of the unwise and the foolish ....
Twain are the armies of God in heaven the hosts of Michael,
In the abyss the legions of Satan.
These are the unmanifest and the manifest, the free and the bound ....
Evil is the result of limitation, and Satan is the Lord of Limit.
To understand the secret of the Kingdom of God, and to read the riddle of Maya, this is to have Satan under foot.
 
He only can put Satan under foot who is realized by thought from the bondage of desire.
Whom the Anointed shall overcome, rising again from the dead on the first day of the week.î

In the Hymn to Iachhos is shown the flight of the soul from the power of the body where the "sojourn in Egypt'' symbolises matter, and the "desert" journey the astral world:

"Serve not the idols of Egypt, nor let the senses be thy task masters
For they will bitterly oppress the Israel of God, and they will bow thy neck to thy yoke.
Thy house shall be smitten with previous plagues .... until the body let soul go free that she may serve the Lord ....
Evois, Father Iachhos, out of Egypt have I called thy Son.
Evois Iachhos, Lord of Initiation, for by means of the body is the soul initiated,
By birth, by marriage, by virginity, by sleep, by waking and by death;
 
 

BY fasting and vigil, by dreams  and penance, by joy and weariness of the flesh.
For the body is the chamber of ordeal, by it is the soul of man tried .... "

The complete Hymn to Iachhos contains 116 stanzas, and more extract will not convey the scope of its imagery and full significance. It is in part a prophecy:
"The interpretation of hidden things is at hand; and men shall eat of the previous things of God.
The Lord maketh all things  new, He taketh away the letter to establish the Spirit."
A parallel between Krishna and Iachhos, whom Anna Kingsford identifies with Jehovah Nissi of the Hebrews, as the planetary God of the Earth, may be detected in Euripedes:
 

ìIachhos,	high	in	glory,	thou whose day,
Of all is merriest, hither, help our play;
Show as we throne Thee at Thy maidens side,
How light to Thee are our long leagues of Way.
Iachhos,	happy	dancer,	be	our guide.
Thyself, that poorest man Thy Joy should share,
Didst rend Thy robe, Thy royal sandal tear,
That feet unshoed might dance, and robes rent wide
Wave in Thy revel with no after care.
Iachhos,	happy	dancer,	be	our guide."
This is the mystic language of the Soul, made available through intuition.*
*   See Gilbert Murrayís translation,
Vol. 3, p. 210 (1911).
 

(To be continued)
