With these words, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights laid foundations that have been indispensable in refuting oppression and tyranny for the past half-century. Like other documents central to contemporary international affairs, such as the Charter of the United Nations and the Millennium Declaration, its precepts were grounded not in choices, achievements, or external circumstances of any kind. Rather, they were justified on the basis of the human condition itself – a common reality shared equally by all. 

The theme of this year’s Parliament of the World’s Religions (link is external) -- “Reclaiming the Heart of our Humanity” – likewise hearkens not to external conditions but to our common human reality.

A growing body of research associates inequality with a wide variety of social detriments, ranging from alienation and balkanization to civil unrest, crime, violence, and outright war. In concrete and tangible ways, equality – of dignity, opportunity, education, voice, participation and many other dimensions – is an essential prerequisite for peace and social harmony.

Yet the daily realities experienced by multitudes around the world all too often fail to reflect the underlying equality between the materially rich and the materially poor, illiterate and educated, women and men, rural and urban, and countless other categories.

Appeals for universality and equality are often grounded in political expediency or the ecological implications of the observation that “we all live on the same planet.” Clearly relationships at all levels, from the local to the global, are impacted by this simple reality.

Yet the agreements shaping human affairs at the widest levels can be seen as ethical and moral documents as much as legal and political ones. In them can be found an evolving understanding of what it means – and what it should mean – to be one part of a vast and interconnected humanity. And in this, they parallel the spiritual principle, expressed in numerous religious traditions, that all human beings are created equal in the sight of God. 

Equality a spiritual condition

Understood in this way, equality is first and foremost a spiritual condition, deriving from the shared reality of the human soul or spirit, which is seen by many as being created in and reflecting the image of the Divine. “Ye are the fruits of one tree, and the leaves of one branch. Deal ye one with another with the utmost love and harmony,” state the holy writings of the Bahá'í Faith, giving utterance to a principle that can be found in a wide variety of sacred scriptures.

Conceiving equality in this way is far more than mere semantics.

When viewed through the lens of religious faith, equality becomes a reality to be recognized and embraced, rather than an aspiration to be envisioned and pursued.

No longer is the goal to establish equality between women and men; it is to organize society in ways that adequately reflect the equality that already exists between them. Rich or poor, minority or majority – whatever the lines of (often arbitrary) distinction, the task is not to create equality. Rather, it is to remove the obstacles and injustices that have hindered the full realization of the equality intrinsic to all members of the human race as common creatures of the same loving Creator. 

Working together for a world of compassion, peace, justice, and sustainability will require a continually deepening acknowledgement of the equality inherent in the human condition.

 More than mere intellectual assent, such recognition will require an ongoing process of introspection and transformation, at both the individual and collective levels. Reforming the spiritual and material foundations of society in this way is a task that religious systems have facilitated for millennia, and they will continue to do so far into the future. 

It must be acknowledged, however, that organized religion, whose very reason for being entails service to the cause of brotherhood and peace, has often stood as one of equality’s most formidable obstacles.

Religious rationale has been used to justify the persecution of those seen to be “other” or “less”.  It continues to be invoked in defense of customs that perpetuate oppression and violence against women. And prejudice of sect, creed, denomination, and faith has fueled hostility throughout history and around the world.

The roots of motivation

Such reflections, however painful, are less an indictment of religion itself than a reminder of the unique power it possesses. Religion reaches to the roots of motivation. When it has been faithful to the spirit and example of its founding figures, it has awakened in whole populations capacities to love, to forgive, to create, to dare greatly, to overcome prejudice, to sacrifice for the common good and to discipline the impulses of the lower nature.

In this way religion transcends the narrowly transactional functions sometimes assigned to it – provider of services, means of organizing a community – and becomes a catalyst for broad-based social betterment.

-- By Daniel Perell, representative of the Baha’i International Community to the United Nations


Read more at https://www.bic.org/perspectives/spiritual-reality-equality-prerequisite-peace#Dy3oGKMr4LJwUgVe.99