UNITED NATIONS—4 Mar 2016—
Despite the hope that they represent for humanity’s future, youth are often seen as a group in crisis. In some settings, youth are portrayed as apathetic and disinterested in the affairs of the world. But more often than not, we see—particularly in the media—a generation deeply discontented with the state of the world and responding in ways that at once provoke awe and fear.

Seeds of legitimate discontent can be found in the seemingly paradoxical landscape confronting the young. On the one hand, rapid scientific and technological advancements have brought to light the capacity of the human race to scale heights undreamt of only a few short decades ago.

On the other hand, these gains have failed to deliver on its promise to usher in an age of peace and prosperity for all.

Among the challenges that young people everywhere face today are new and often unstable family and community structures , inadequate education and the lack of employment opportunities, and a culture of aggressive materialism that promotes excessive consumption, selfishness, and passivity.

These changing social forces can produce feelings of emptiness and discontent. They also narrow and obscure adequate channels for the expression of young people’s innate desire to contribute to social betterment. But this need not be so.

A most precious time in life

Contrary to caricatures of youth as either disengaged consumers or radicalized threats to peace and security, the reality is that young people have an acute sense of justice, they yearn for meaning and purpose, they desire to serve and contribute meaningfully, and they have a thirst for knowledge and an innate attraction to what is good and beautiful.

These characteristics are not acquired but intrinsic to the period of youth.  They may, however, remain latent and dormant when the education and moral empowerment of youth is neglected or left to those whose interests are damaging to the wellbeing of the human race.

For Baha’is, the stage of youth is a most precious time in life. Yet, for Baha’is, it is apparent that the potential of youth cannot find its highest expression without the influence of religion in the world. Is it not the role of religion to awaken and cultivate the high-minded and noble attributes latent in every soul and therefore in youth?

In order for the relationship between youth and society to be recast in a positive, mutually reinforcing manner, then, we must look at the role of religion in a new light.

Communities of practice

Religion has a unique power. It reaches to the roots of motivation. When it has been faithful to the spirit of the transcendent Figures who gave the world its great belief systems, religion has awakened in whole populations capacities to love, to forgive, to create, to dare greatly, to overcome prejudice and to sacrifice for the common good.

But if religion is to be a vital force, it must be re-examined in the light of this current age of transition in humanity’s social evolution. Religious leadership would do well to scrutinize the orientation that has become deeply consolidated in so many communities toward the illusory “other.” They also need challenge the pervasive and harmful claims of privileged access to truth that have fueled some of the bitterest conflicts in the world.

Religious communities can be understood as communities of practice where spiritual teachings are translated into social reality. Across the globe, in the most unassuming settings, Baha’is are striving to establish a pattern of activity and community life to do this. Of course, the Baha’i community readily acknowledges that to uphold high ideals and to become their embodiment are not the same thing. Many challenges lie ahead, and much remains to be learned.

Building a just and unified society and requires long-term vision. No great historical movement has succeeded without such a vision. Meeting pressing challenges like our changing climate, the inequality crisis, or the gender gap will require strenuous effort and real sacrifice, for which a long-term vision is key. This stands as a source of potential inspiration and motivation for every young individual.

A coherent vision of society

Baha’is have the conviction that with a rich and deepening consciousness of the oneness of humankind,  the diverse peoples of the world can and will develop the capacity to forge a coherent vision of society that can guide the advancement of our global civilization.

A civilization befitting our humanity will not emerge through the efforts exerted by a select group of individuals, governments, communities or international agencies. Rather, the challenge must be faced by all of humanity. Every member of the human family – including those who are in their youth -- has not only the right to benefit from a materially and spiritually prosperous civilization, but also an obligation to contribute towards its construction.


Read more at https://www.bic.org/perspectives/youth-and-role-religion-countering-violence-and-extremism#jIJZBhDg3o8dHjUR.99