At the ASEAN People’s Forum, a variety of emotions were on display: passion, fervor, determination, impatience, helplessness, anger, compassion, and solidarity.

Obviously there is something deep within us that moves us to be at such meetings. It draws us together to dedicate our time and energy. It impels us to work for a particular society that we hope to have.

In his opening remarks, His Excellency, Tan Sri Michael Yeoh, chief executive officer of the Asian Strategy and Leadership Institute, challenged participants to have a “bold vision” of ASEAN. So what are we working towards? What is the vision we have of our future?

Is it one where governments and civil society organizations are pitted against each another? Is it one where natural resources are mindlessly consumed at the expense of the environment and our long-term well-being? Is it one where masses are still crying out in suffering, while material wealth remains concentrated in the hands of a minority? Is it one where segments of the population are still denied the opportunity to flourish, unable to fulfill their rightful role to contribute to society?

Our vision could be far more transformational. And I would go further to suggest that we the people of South East Asia are already on our way to something different.

For example, most of us have already come to accept that humanity constitutes a single people. In that context, we reject deeply ingrained prejudices – based on race, class, gender, religious background. We also now share, I believe, a growing sense of world citizenship. And we have come to recognize and accept our interdependence in all facets of life on this planet.

In other words, we have slowly but surely, begun to assume responsibility for our collective destiny.

In her opening remarks, Her Excellency Vicki Treadell, the British High Commissioner to Malaysia, asked whether, in the face of many divisive forces, it might be possible to “future-proof” an ASEAN that is being built today.

In that regard, I feel it may be helpful for us to consider an analogy, one that could hopefully inspire us, and help us to reframe the way we approach the challenges ahead of us.

This analogy compares the world to the human body.

In the human body, cooperation is the principle that governs its functioning. There is a complex association of countless cells, whose organization in tissues and organs allows for the realization of distinctive capacities. As a result of this amazing complex system, something appears that’s more than the sum of the parts – the appearance of our rational soul.

Similarly, civilization can be seen as the outcome of a set of interactions among closely integrated, diverse components – components which have transcended the narrow purpose of tending to their own existence.

And just as the viability of every cell and every organ depends upon the health of the body as a whole, so should the prosperity of every individual, every family, and every people be sought by striving for the well-being of the entire human race.

From this perspective, I feel we can start to envision what ASEAN could strive towards, a bold new future where our interdependence and interconnectedness guides our collective thinking and action.

It should be a community built on trust between the governing and the governed. It should be a community where institutions aim not to control but to nurture and guide the people. And it can be a place where, in turn, the people willingly receive guidance, not in blind obedience, but rather out of respect and trust, won by the humble service and pure deeds of those in positions of authority.

And it should be a community that exercises care and stewardship of the environment which has been placed in our trusteeship.

Finally, it should be a community distinguished by a culture of mutual support and reciprocity, of honesty and dignity, of care and compassion, and of love and unity.

This, then, is how we can “future-proof” ASEAN.


Read more at https://www.bic.org/perspectives/how-future-proof-asean#VbhmTcJuvVejLrGb.99