The Mad Ashram* 
BY DR. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF 
OF all phases of Shri Baba's activities extending over a period of about twenty years, the Ashram for the insane and mad at Meherabad, stands out in bold relief and possesses a significance of its own. Readers already familiar with the personality who has inspired this Journal, can easily understand that Baba, whatever activity he initiates, he does so with a set purpose and that is nothing but the achievement of some spiritual end. Baba aims and plans nothing short of this. The humanitarian aspect of such a work is only secondary and which more or less provides a training ground for his disciples. 
   Like many other sporadic manifest≠tations of Baba's spiritual activities on the material plane, the Mad Ashram, too, has never been advertised. Natural≠ly very few are aware of its existence and the idea behind it. It behoves us, therefore, to give the world a little in≠sight into the working conditions of the above Ashram and its raison-d'-etre.. It may interest a few and amuse a good many to know why the institution has been started and how it is managed. The 'why' is the spiritual object thereof and will be discussed later on in this article. 
   Suffice it to say, the Mad Ashram at Meherabad has very little in common with institutions of its kind in the world. Baba has ordered it to   be run on a plan peculiarly his own. The inmates, about forty of them at the moment, are cared for and served by some of the seasoned disciples of Shri Baba. They are under  strict instructions to treat their charges like normal human beings. Unlike other such institutions, no chastisement of any kind, no chaining, no exaction of man≠ual and physical labour is allowed. The only restriction imposed is that on their liberty of movement, 

cooped in as they have to be kept, within a spacious but defined area. 
   The science of medicine may perhaps suspect in this the application of psycho-therapy for the reclamation of unbalanced minds; but it is nothing of the kind. Psycho-therapy, as a curative instrument, is of doubtful efficacy, and is still in an experimental stage. Even conceding it some appreciable success, it is only applicable individually in not very advanced cases, but never collectively.
   Baba's method in the matter of re≠claiming these mental derelicts is amaz≠ingly unique. Divinely dictated, divinely acted, it (Baba's method) cannot become a pattern for others to copy. It is impossible for ordinary mortals to emulate him, unless they find them≠selves elevated to the same spiritual heights. It is one more testimony of Baba's perfection. Perfection is the ex≠perience of any two or all extreme opposite states of being or conditions at one and the same time. 
   It has been said, "Man is God playing the fool," then a mad person may be said to be "God playing the child." The insane people are veritable babies, alto≠gether irresponsible, having no control over their bodily actions and functions. Baba treats them as such, and children, we know, respond very quickly and easily to love. Baba's panacea for all the ills of life is love, pure and simple, not the spurious imitation thereof which passes for love in the market of the world. Even parental love of a most exclusive and altruistic kind cannot come up to the love emanating from a God-realized Being, as it has its source in Divinity. Divine Love playing the servant through Baba is the modus operandi of the Mad Ashram under discussion. 
   Hence no parallel institution, however idealistically founded, can approach the one at Meherabad under Baba's aegis. Innumerable institutions functioning throughout the world for the mental and physical relief of suffering humanity are at best the outcome of pity. And pity, you must know, is one of the most subtle and clever disguises assumed by the human ego. All the same, it cannot be despised as it supplies a great motive force, 


unhampered by barriers of religion, culture and nationality. Pity is the saving grace of mankind; where religion and morality fail, it steps in to save man from degenerating into a beast. 
   Thus far only ordinary mortals can rise. But when Love appears, it transforms the whole field of action. The most altruistic and selfless motive pales before its glamour, the most beautiful dream of religion and philosophyóthe brotherhood of manó looks up to it hopefully to be interpreted into reality.
 Nothing in universe can resist the force of Divine Love expressed through man. History of the world bears ample testimony to this. Divine Love, with man as the vehicle thereof, has flooded the world from time to time; has subdued continents and elevated man≠kind from depths of moral degradation to heights of spiritual excellence. Meher Baba is the chosen vehicle of Divine Love today. His playful and loving contact with the mad inmates of the Ashram is a practical demonstration on a small scale of what the worried world may  expect of   him when  he manifests himself and delivers the mes≠sage of Love and Peace on earth. The upheaval which Baba speaks of is very near, and the message, according to him, once delivered will be irresistible. 
   Cynics will be convinced and critics silenced, if only they were to witness the astounding and successful results of experimentation with the diseased minds and brains in the laboratory of Love at Meherabad. The personal touch of Baba in the matter of feeding, clothing, bathing and even cleansing the lavatory, has wrought a miraculous change in the inmates of the Mad Ashram. The sub-normal are tending towards normality and the abnormal, that is those stranded or lost on the Path, are given a spiritual push forward or reclaimed. The latter are glaring ins≠tances of the dangers involved in treading the spiritual Path all alone unaided by a Perfect Master. The most expensive medical service or even an ultra sincere Karma Yogi will fail here, in what is only possible of Divinity in flesh. 
   It may amuse people to know that the Mad Ashram enacted a 

 
drama on 25th September based on the life of the King renunciator Gopichand. The chief cast in the play, consisting solely of the mentally deranged, is a feature perhaps the first of its kind ever attempted. For the mad to dance, deliver, sing and play is not only a sign of their returning normality, but it is also a tribute to the potency of Love as a curative factor. 
   The spiritual aspect of the question is difficult to explain and perhaps still more difficult for the worldly-minded to accept. The explanation vouchsafed by Baba in one of his playful moods, as to the spiritual significance of the Mad Ashram, will no doubt impose a severe tax on one's credulity. But it cannot be helped; the explanation on the subject is there; take it or reject it. It all depends on the individual preparedness or susceptibility to matters spiritual. 
   The Mad Ashram has not come into being haphazard. It is deliberately evol≠ved to serve a spiritual purpose. Accor≠ding to Baba, perfection born of reali≠zation owes a certain duty towards creation. This  duty is not a condition precedent to perfection, but it is a mis≠sion self-imposed out of Love, on seeing or realizing one's own self as the Self in all. One freed Soul finds itself bound and limited by time and space in innumerable others. Hence to ad≠vance others individually or collective≠ly towards freedom, Self-knowledge or Realization is the spiritual object of Divine Incarnation on earth. The end justifies the means. Perfect Masters employ material means for the spiritual end, analogous with Universal Con≠sciousness devolving into matter to evolve individual consciousness. Mad Ashram is one of the means in Baba's spiritual programme to restore normality to the war-crazy world. The question 'how he is going to work it' does not lie at all. Miracles of raising the dead to life, restoring of sight to the blind, curing of lepers by a mere touch or glance wrought by Perfect Masters, are accepted facts. Even if explained, it is impossible for the limited mind to under-stand the functioning part or process thereof. You yourself are an answer to such spiritual or metaphysical questions 


beyond the domain of mind, Become That. 
   Baba is prophetic, not merely in his utterances, but lives up to it. His suddenly inspired whirlwind trips round the world, contacts with a select few Westerners, utter disregard for publicity, incognito visits to unexpected places in Europe, affording as it does sufficient food for thought and speculation, still leaves one baffled as to what really he has up his sleeves. For instance, the sudden and unexpected requisitioning of a particular mad inmate of the Ashram to Cannes (Southern France), where Baba was staying sometime last year with a few Western disciples, left even his seasoned disciples a-guessing. A trip to Europe, by a mad inmate of the Ashram, at great expense and inconven≠ience ordered by Baba was surely not for reasons of health. 
   All the above may sound pretty tall, but surely not outside the domain of possibility. A cursory acquaintance with the Master-minds of the world, who have shaped the destiny of mankind, leaving so many religions behind as an aftermath of the spiritual force released by them, will at once rule out the question of possibility. The affairs of the world are governed by cycles of time and tide, which is popularly termed the repetition of history. That which has happened before can and does happen again; what one man has achieved, it is possible for another to repeat the performance or even improve thereon. 
   A negative attitude of mind to such claims and questions leads nowhere. Almost all questions and doubts with regard to the method and means employed by the Master-minds are gen≠erally out of place or premature. The working of the Universal Mind cannot be gauged by measures or standards set up by the individual mind. Only the time factor is there to justify the claimant or the cynic.
   Till then, it would ill become the world to ignore the potentiality of Meher Baba as a Divine Manifestation on earth, which according to all religions is long overdue. I, therefore. invite all lovers of Truth to seek, search and study the Perfect Master Meher Baba. 
