In ancient times people were worshippers of 
God. Centuries passed; then they became 
believers of God. Today we are living in a 
turbulent and violent age. At the height of our difficulties the challenge has been issued by the Avatarñthe God-Manñto a humanity asleep in its illusory world to buck-up, to hurry up, to awaken, because now is the time to become lovers of God. In this era, our Avatar appeals to our maturity in insisting that we become lovers of Meher BabañBaba lovers. 
Now, what is a Baba-Iover? The best way this can be answered, I feel, is by asking another question, what is a baseball player? Suppose someone says, I'd like to play baseball. Strolling down the street, he enters a bookstore and espies a book entitled How to Play Baseball. He is attracted by the title, buys it, tucks it under his arm, and while sauntering down the street encounters a passerby who catches the book title and remarks, "Hmm. How To Play Baseball. Are you a baseball player?" "Oh no," he protests, "I just bought the book. I'd like to read about the game." Then home he goes to read about it. Is he a baseball player? Of course not, he's a baseball reader.He's only interested in reading about baseball. 
Now, he says, I'd like to see how they play the game. He goes out to the ball park and watches a couple of teams go at each other. What is he now? He's become a baseball observer or spectator. If he really gets his feelings aroused after seeing a number of games, what does he become? A baseball enthusiast! It hasn't gotten into his blood yet. And then he sees some more games, and possibly goes through it another season; he then becomes a baseball fan or fanatic. But is he a baseball player? Now to play baseball you've got to play the game, and he hasn't played the game, has he? All right, he gets a uniform. Now he's walking down the street dressed up in his baseball uniform. People say, my, there goes a baseball player. He looks like a baseball player. You can't deny it with that uniform on, and there he goes swaggering down the street with those cleated shoes and peaked cap. Golly, he must be a baseball player. But, mind you, he hasn't yet picked up a bat, ball, or glove in his life. Of course, nobody's going to dare say to him, are you a baseball player? With that regalia they wouldn't dream of asking such a question. But is he a baseball player; Certainly not. 
Well, he gets to the ball park and begins to play. He's practicing now. He's a baseball trainee. He doesn't know how to throw a ball yetñhe gets a sore arm throwing it aroundñbut, by George, he really looks like a baseball player. He looks like it but he isn't, and this is most confusing. Finally, when he practices enough, gets enough coaching, and learns and applies the rules .... he gets to play baseball. He gets into a real game, and learns how to run the bases with his hook and fall-away slides. And when he is in the field he has to field all the balls batted at him. If he drops most of them he's still not a baseball player. You'd say he's a bad baseball player. In fact, you wouldn't even consider him a player! But if he holds on to nearly all of them, and he hit and runs well, then you begin to think ... gee whiz, he not only looks like a baseball player and acts like one; in fact, he, really is one. 
Now how does a guy get to be a football player? A fellow sees a sign up that says, "All those who want to be on Varsity Football come out and see the Coach." The Coach sits him down and sounds him out. Well, since the Coach has to see what our hero is made of, he puts him through the paces. He goes through tackling the dummy, etc. Well, he may make it. He's got the build, he seems to have the guts for it too, and he seems to have the beginnings of some real ability. Then he practices and practices but what is he? He's only a traineeña candidate for the football squad. When is he a football playerñ when he actually gets into the scrimmageñthe give and take of the gameñwhen he's entered into competition against other teams, not the practice team of his own school, but against other varsity school teams. And after he plays consistently game after game, everyone knows he's a real football player, not a guy who just looks like one in those handsome football togs. 
Now, suppose a fellow wants to be a musician. He muses, I'd like to play a musical instrument. What instrument shall it be? .... Let's see .... there's a fine-looking violin. He wanders into the instrument shop where they'll let you have a rental of an instrument for so many dollars a month. He puts the violin under his arm (some have put empty violin cases under their arms, you know, to look like musicians) and meanders down the street. Jumpin' jehosophat, there goes a violin player. He hasn't even drawn a bow across the string yet, but, my goodness, there he is. He's got long hair and disheveled clothingñhe must be ... gosh, he must be a violinist. 
Well, the fellow with the violin goes home and begins sawing away at the strings. Is he a violinist? Has he mastered the instrument? Has he shown even elementary proficiency in exhibiting the possibilities of the instrument? Of course not. He's only shopping aroundñbecause if he doesn't like the high pitched tone or the way it squeaks he might trade it in for a cello or a viola. I think I'll rent a cello or a viola, he thinks, and he takes these home and goes through the same rigamarole. Now, is he a musician? Of course not. 
I once knew a chap who used to astound a whole audience. He'd walk up to the piano, sit down, and he'd put this tremendous transcendent chordñRAMñright down on the piano keys. They exclaimed, I didn't know you could play the piano! He hadn't even begun yet. That's all he knewñone chord! 
Now to enhance his love and knowledge of the instruments he may attend concert recitals by eminent soloists. If his feelings are stirred and enthusiasm grips him, firing him to a greater determination to master the difficult art of violin playing, be becomes an excited concertgoer and fan. This musical student finally becomes a violinist when he can perform smoothly and with aplomb before a listening group, and stir them to rounds of appreciation for a stellar performance. 
Almost every day people greet me with the shibboleth, "I'm a Baba-lover." What does this mean? Now to say you're a lover of Godñto say you're a lover of Meher Babañ is a very serious declaration. But the ones who use the expression really use it ill-advisedly, with vain pretensionñ to attract attention to themselves or half-jestingñfor frankly, I don't know what they mean when they say, "I am a Baba-Iover." There is no way we can tell what a Baba-Iover looks like. In India anyone wearing a kafni, a gown that extends from your neck to your ankles fastened with one button at the neck, is known as Baba. He's a friend, one who is engaged in the pursuit of non-material ends. They are spiritual seekers, sannyasins. Thus, when one says 
he's a Baba-lover, we may well wonder, lover of whom? What Baba? There are over a hundred thousand Babas in Indiañ which Baba do you love? Now, if you're a follower or devotee of Meher Baba, say so, because there's only one Meher Baba in the whole world. And this Meher Baba isn't just a friend. He is the Compassionate Father and Friend of all of us. He's the One and Only Lord of the Universe. That's who this Meher Baba is. He is the Avatar of our age. Now to be a lover of Meher Baba, you must be accepted by Meher Baba as His lover. It's the Father who chooses the sonñnot the son who chooses the Father. It isn't your own estimate of yourself which is acceptable to God; it's God's estimate of you that really counts and really matters. Therefore, when we say we're Baba-lovers we're simply making an estimate of our own irritating egotismñthat's all we're doing. This self-conscious effusiveness has nothing to do with love. 
In His discourse Love and Devotion, Meher Baba, telling of love, says simply, love is not only sublime, but also silent. One who is really in love doesn't tell the whole cockeyed world about it. He looks it. He beams it. He acts it. You feel it. 
When one first picks up a book about Meher Baba and reads about Him, he is a Meher Baba reader, not a Meher Baba lover. If he attends meetings and listens to talks about Meher Baba, he's become a Meher Baba listener. Of course, if one leaves the meetings and attends other kinds of meetingsñ cults and suchñthen he's a Baba-shopper. He's like the butterfly that hasn't selected the kind of flower from which it wants to get its perfume. If one comes to a lot of meetings and begins to get a little feeling about Baba, he becomes a Meher Baba candidate. When this feeling swells he may be deemed a Meher Baba enthusiastñbut he's not a lover yet by any means. After he's disposed of the preliminaries connected with the acceptance of Meher Baba as God in human form and as his only Beloved, he begins his approach towards the spiritual path. As he obediently applies Meher Baba's rules for right living, and feels himself drawing closer and closer to Meher Baba as the Only One who is assuredly his Real Beloved, countenancing none other, Meher Baba becomes the sole Reality of his life. As his closeness to the Beloved is more deeply experienced, his feeling of separation becomes more acute, longing intensifies, and yearning to bridge the gulf of separation becomes sharper and more poignant. Only when we feel a continuous burning in remembrance of our Beloved, a desperate separation, a deep and tortured longingñbecause this Meher Baba is someone we want Union with, because this Meher Baba has really become our One and Only True Belovedñdo we begin to take on the responsibilities and obligations of a real lover. Everything in illusion is lessened and reduced to its irreducible minimum in our consideration and concern. There's only one paramount interest, one transcendent yearningñUnion with this Divine Beloved. To please this Beloved and to do His Will everlastingly, we execute selfless service to our fellow man, to all living creatures in need of understanding and assistance. In every one of these beings we see this Meher Baba, because this Meher Baba lives in every being as Soul. We feel that He is everywhere and in everyone, and forgetting ourselves by remembering Him, we want to serve this One who is in everyone and everything. We feel this love can never be satiated; we can't stop serving, we can't stop giving. When we've stopped askingñwhen we've stopped asking others to shoulder our burdens for us, but instead, we shoulder our own burdensñthat's pleasing our Beloved Meher Baba. When we actively seek to engender happiness in others we are pleasing our Real Beloved. 
Meher Baba emphatically states that true or real love means the complete surrender of one's self to the Beloved. One's self includes one's body, mind, affairs, attachments, and one's very life. In His The Everything and The Nothing, Meher Baba mentions three kinds of lovers. First is the mast 
who knows only God, and is oblivious to himself and the world. Second: the One who lives in the world, carries out his worldly duties and responsibilities one hundred percent, but is all the time conscious that everything is passing and only God exists. He loves God without ever being aware of it. Third: the one who completely surrenders to the God-Man (the Christ or Avatar). He no longer lives for himself, but for the God-Man. This is the highest and rarest type of lover. He becomes a puppet of the Divine Puppeteer. 
Now, only when we've responded joyously to God-Man's 
challenge to become His real lover, and taken on the burdens 
of a true lover of Almighty God, can we be called Meher Baba 
lovers. And one who is selflessly serving never proclaims it, 
never gives it lip service, because what one is doing for others 
is the proclamation. 
We have only one concernñto serve and please this 
Beloved. Always. People who call themselves Baba-lovers 
are looking for the Beloved to make them happy, to be their 
servant. Rather, it's the other way around. Before God can 
become a slave of His lovers we must first, irrevocably, 
become His slave. We must give up everything to this 
Beloved. Remember, when God gives, He gives Everything. 
Centuries ago, when the Perfect Masters cried out "I am 
God," they would have also wished to let out the secret, "You 
all can become God like Me if you take the love Path that I 
have travelled." Even though a Perfect Master was skinned 
alive, he would not reveal the secret of loving the Beloved; 
humanity at that time was too immature to receive this 
revelation. But, today, God Himself, as Avatar, has 
proclaimed the secret to a humanity that now has the maturity 
to accept it. 
Meher Baba has said, do not let what is in your heart come 
to your lipsñstitch your lips and never let it leak out. 
Remember, one who really loves God, God annihilates him. 
God pounds His lover into dust and mixes him with the dust. 
God tests him by being cruel, by giving him false hopes, even 
by cutting him to pieces. To love means to lose your whole 
self with all its paraphernalia. It means torture, pains, longing, 
burning, and, if in spite of all this, one is firm in his love for the 
Beloved, he becomes one with the Beloved. Everyone can 
literally become awake to the realization that each one is 
Almighty God in essence. But this Almighty God in each 
individual is sound asleep. The Divine Spiritual Awakener, 
Meher Baba, has come amongst us to awaken us out of this 
eternal slumber, to release us from our dreaming. He holds 
out to us His Daaman to grasp tightly, and pledges that if we 
keep holding on, He will take us to where we really belong, 
merged in His Infinite Ocean of Divine Love. When the 
interminably separated love-drop becomes this Ocean, the 
lover becomes what he originally was and eternaIly isñGod 
the Beloved. 
This is the Way and the Goal. To achieve this Goal you 
have to become a lover of Meher Baba. Therefore, let us not 
blithely state that we are Baba-lovers. We're Baba-readers, 
we're Baba-trainees, we're Baba-candidates, we're Baba≠
enthusiasts, we're Baba-fans. Lovers? Let's not kid ourselves. It's no joke to love the Beloved; it demands great daring. Meher Baba wants everyone in this age to know and praise Him as the Highest of the High, the Avatar, but only the select few can become His real lovers. I never heard any of the intimate Mandali (whom Baba called real lovers) say, "I love Baba" or "I'm a Baba-lover". A Baba-Iover gives one hundred percent selfless service with absolutely no thought of results or rewards. This stems from a spontaneous dedication to do the Will of the Beloved and to please Him always. Therefore, let's let loving God become the cardinal aspiration of our lives. When this becomes the most serious and supreme resolution of our lives, we will become an uninvolved witness of the machinations of Maya, and know that our Real Beloved, Meher Baba, alone exists. 
The production and mailing costs of "The Way and the Goal" is fifty cents per issue and the subscription rate is twelve issues for five dollars fifty cents. 
If you would like to continue receiving "The Way and the Goal" please fill out the enclosed coupon. If you wish to discontinue receiving the newsletter please check the appro≠priate box on the subscription coupon and return to us. 
