  Sometimes we need to step back and take stock ofthe obvious.  Sometimes the most important things in the worldpass before our eyes, and we don't see them.  And so they don'thave the impact on our thought and our emotions the way they couldif we just stopped and pondered for a moment.  This is especially true of the significance of thebirth of Jesus Christ.  There are undisputed historical effectsof the birth of Jesus Christ that are so huge and so importantthat we miss them -- like we miss the sky or the air or the groundunder our feet.  We never give them a thought.  But when you thinkabout them they're staggering.  Let me mention three.  The reason I begin this wayis to show you that the impact of Jesus Christ on this world hasbeen so immense that even before we turn to the Bible we are confrontedwith a staggering choice this morning in relation to the man JesusChrist.   1.   First, because Jesus Christ was born, one thirdof the world's population today calls itself Christian.  Thatis, 1.6 billion people of the world's 5 billion have come underthe sway of this man Jesus to the extent that they would say Christianityis their religion.  Not only that, Christianity is the most extensiveand universal religion in history.  There are Christians and Christianchurches in every inhabited country in the world.  And in two-thirdsof the worlds 223 countries the population is over 50% Christian.  So the first indisputable significance of the birthof Jesus Christ is that the life of this man has influenced morepeople over the course of human history than any other singleman.  Buddha, Confucius, Mohammed, or even Moses do not comparein the extent of their influence on history and the world.   2.   Second, virtually every person in the modernwestern, and most of the non-western, world call this year 1987. But the reason bankers and butchers, and car dealers and doctors,and teachers and attorneys, and computer programmers and presidentsdate their checks 1987 is because Jesus Christ wasborn 1987 years ago.  No other man in history has been accorded the almostuniversal honor of dividing history in half -- and with such definitiveinfluence that millions who do not call him Lord are forced tobear witness daily to his tremendous on-going importance in theworld by using the date 1987.   3.   Third, all over the western world, and a largepart of the non-western world Sunday is recognized as a holiday,and most of these western cultures recognize a difference evenbetween Saturday and Sunday.  The historical reason for this isthat Jesus Christ was born and that he died and that he rose fromthe dead on Sunday.  In other words the religious, historical, and culturalsignificance of Christmas -- the birth of Jesus Christ -- is sohuge that no one can begin to give it an adequate description.  Now that fact, in and of itself, before we even turnto the Bible confronts you and me with a profound choice: willwe ignore this man and take him lightly in spite of his beingthe most influential man whoever lived, or will we inquire earnestlyinto who this man was and why he has changed the world so deeply?  Why is the birth of this man having this kind ofeffect on the world?  Let's listen first to three witnesses who lived inthe first century and who either knew Jesus personally or spokeoften with those who did.     Witness # 1: Luke (1:30-38)   Luke wrote a two-volume work about the life of Christand the early church (The Gospel according to Luke and The Actsof the Apostles.)  He was probably in Judea for two years whilePaul was in prison, and would have had plenty of opportunity totalk to the mother of Jesus and others who knew him well.  Hetells us that an angel came to Mary before Jesus was born and.. .  . . . said to her, Do not be afraid, Mary,for you have found favor with God.  And behold, you will conceivein your womb and bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus. He will be great, and will be called the Son of the Most High;and the Lord God will give to him the throne of his father David,and he will reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of hiskingdom there will be no end.  And Mary said to the angel,How can this be, since I have no husband?  And theangel said to her, The Holy Spirit will come upon you, andthe power of the Most High will overshadow you; therefore thechild to be born will be called holy, the son of God.  Luke's answer to the question why Jesus has had suchawesome influence in history is that he is that his birth wasa miracle; he was conceived by the Holy Spirit of the Most HighGod; he is therefore the Son of God and not only a man; and heis a king whose kingdom will never end.   Witness # 2: Matthew (1:20-24)   Matthew was one of Jesus disciples who went aboutwith him for three years.  He tells about the struggles Josephhad in marrying Mary because she was pregnant.  The struggleswere resolved again by an angel appearance:  . . . an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream,saying, Joseph, son of David, do not fear to take Mary yourwife, for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Spirit;she will bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus, for hewill save his people from their sins.  All this took placeto fulfill what the Lord had spoken by the prophet:  Behold,a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and his name shall becalled Emmanuel (Which means, God with us).    Matthew's answer to the question why Jesus has hadsuch an impact on world history is that his birth was owing tothe supernatural conception by the Holy Spirit; and that he isa Savior from sin; and that he is God with us.  Jesusis God come in the flesh.  That is Matthew's answer.   Witness # 3 John (1:1-4, 14)   Like Matthew John was one of the 12 apostles.  Hewas the closest of all, who became responsible for Jesus' motherafter his death.  He begins his gospel by identifying Jesus asthe eternal Word of God:  In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was withGod, and the Word was God.  He was in the beginning with God;all things were made through him, and without him was not anythingmade that was made.  In him was life, and the life was the lightof men.  And the Word became flesh and dwelt among us, fullof grace and truth; we have beheld his glory, glory as of theonly Son from the Father.  John's answer to the question why Jesus is havingsuch a profound influence on the world is that Jesus is the eternalWord of God who is himself God and who became flesh and revealedthe glory of God, and who is the source of all spiritual lifeand light.   Now the upshot of all this is that the choice you are confronted with this morning is not only whether the amazing historical influence of Jesuswill move you to search out a satisfying explanation, but also whether you will agree with the explanation given by the Biblical witnesses.  Will you agree     that there is a God who created and sustains andrules the world, and has a purpose for all of history;  that this God is three in one -- three persons:Father, eternally begotten Son, and Holy Spirit;  that the Father sent the Son into the world, conceivedof a virgin by the Holy Spirit so that he was both God and man; that this God-man, Jesus Christ, was a King whosereign will never end;  that by his sinless life and substitutionary deathhe saved his people from all their sin;  that he revealed the glory of God and taught thetruth;  that he fulfilled the Old Testament promises ofa Messiah;   and that he is therefore the key to understandingall of history and all of life, including your own.   That is the meaning of Christmas and the choice itdemands from each of us this morning.  There are many reasons why people don't give wholehearted agreement to the Biblical witness about Jesus Christ --why people hold back from full, red-blooded commitment to whatChristmas really means -- why they watch the drama of redemptionunfolding in history like a spectator instead of a participant.  Sometimes it isn't because they see logical or historicalobstacles.  Instead its often because they don't see that it reallymakes any difference.  The whole thing seems irrelevant to reallife.  It doesn't connect.  It's like some esoteric scientificclaim about the molecule.  It may well be true, but the likelihoodof it making much difference in my life is so remote that I hardlyneed to make any commitment to the truth of the molecular theory. Leave that for the scientists.  Leave Jesus for the religious. I've got my life to live.  And so what I want to do in the minutes left is takeyou to a verse in Malachi the last prophet in the Old Testamentand sketch for you five images of the coming of Jesus Christ. I want to show you that, if you see the coming of Jesus the waythe prophets saw it, you would see its relevance for your life,and you wouldn't be indifferent any more.  Here is a prophet writing 450 years before Jesusbut full of expectation that the Messiah is coming.  In 3:1 hesays, The Lord whom you seek will suddenly come to his temple;the messenger of the covenant in whom you delight; behold he iscoming says the Lord of hosts.  And in verse 3:2, Heis like a refiner's fire.  This same great expectation is described in 4:2 andthis is the verse I want us to unfold in the time that's left. Malachi has just warned that those who proudly resist God willbe consumed with fire on the coming day of judgment.  But thenhe has a different word to say to those who fear the Lord.  Forthem the future holds something vastly more wonderful.  But for you who fear my name the sun of righteousnessshall rise, with healing in its wings.  You shall go forth leapinglike calves from the stall.  When John the Baptist's father prophesied in Luke1:78 he alluded to this verse and said that with the coming ofJesus the day was dawning from on high.  The sun of righteousnesswas rising.  And he has been rising all over this world ever since. And one day his rise will reach its noon day brightness and hewill appear in glory and the final division between the believingand unbelieving will be made.  But for those who fear the Lord -- who wake up fromtheir indifference or rebellion against him and honor him withtrust and allegiance what does the coming of the Lord mean?  What does it mean for you today if you are a BiblicalChristian?   What could it mean for you if you would be?  Five pictures from verse 2:   A rising sun Beams of righteousness Wings of healing Breaking out of a stall Leaping like calves.    1.  Jesus Christ is a rising sun.   That means at least four things.  I'll mention onlytwo (omitting: warmth were there was cold, and growth where therewas atrophy).  (a)  He brings light where there was darkness.  Andwhen you have light you can see.  Jesus helps us see things likethey really are.  He makes sense out of things.  He said to Pilate,For this I was born, and for this I have come into the world,to bear witness to the truth.  Everyone who is of the truth hearsmy voice.  And Pilate mocked him and said, as though helived in the twentieth century, What is truth?  That is the tragic and cynical cry of or age: Whatis truth! Not because there's a passion for truth, but becausethere is so much skepticism that any such thing exists.  And theeffect of this skepticism and relativism is moral and intellectualand personal and family bankruptcy.  Why do many families comeapart?  Because they have no anchor of truth.  The husband andfather has no clear vision of why he or his children exist.  Andso all he can do is pass on a few tips for how not to make moremoney or stay healthy.  And the emptiness gets deeper and deeperwith each unbelieving generation.  But Jesus is the light of the world.  He brings senseand meaning our of absurdity.    (b) The second thing implied by his being a risingsun is that he brings security where there was danger.  When itis dark there is more danger because you can't see the path infront of you.  You might fall off a cliff or trip over a log orbang your head against a branch.  When the sun finally rises you can move with security. That's the way it is with Jesus.  He points the way to go againand again.  He shows up the danger and the foolishness of manychoices before we make them.  He guards us from many evil forcesthat only have power in the dark.  So when Jesus comes into the world, he comes as asun: he is light in the darkness of confusion and ignorance andskepticism.  He gives a fixed point of truth in a world whereevery standard seems to have come unglued.  And in doing thishe guards us from destroying our lives and keeps us safe.    2. The sun is a sun with beams of righteousness.   Which means that Jesus makes things right.  He makesman right with God through reconciliation.  He makes man rightwith man through grace and humility and patience and love.  Andin the end, he will make right all the wrongs that his peoplehave suffered, so that we don't have to carry the burden of indignationand revenge.  If you look at the incredible injustices in the worldtoday, and see people suffering when they seem innocent and prosperingwhen they seem wicked, Jesus gives an answer: where he is trustedhe can reconcile and restore; where he's not, he will have thelast word in the judgment.    3.  This sun of righteousness rises with healingin its wings.   I can remember the sunrise over the Atlantic Oceannineteen years ago this week.  Noel and I were on our honeymoon. We were up early one morning and saw how it happens on the rimof the ocean.  A thin line of orange and red appears along the water. Then it intensifies, brighter and brighter, and you see the brightnessfocusing more and more on the center of the line, until the flamingball surges up out of the water.  And then you watch it rise up,and in a sense it brings that whole red line on the rim of therim of the water up into the air as though the sun had wings.  When Malachi saw that, God told him: the coming ofthe Messiah will be like that and the effect of his beauty willbe healing.  And Jesus was a great healer.  All I have time tosay now is that though Jesus does not heal every disease in thislife, he will heal every disease in the resurrection.  In otherwords Jesus meets the tremendous need we all feel for hope beyondthe grave -- that all sickness and pain and sorrow and cryingwill be gone for ever.   4.  One effect of all this for those who fear theLord (and this is the fourth image from verse 2) will be a goingforth from the stall -- You shall go forth from the stall.   The coming of Jesus means freedom not bondage.  Iremember talking to a thoughtful young woman a few years ago aboutmy sermons on Christian Hedonism and whether I really believedjoy was what all people were really after.  I asked her what madeher tick.  And she said, For me freedom seems more basic.  I wouldn't want to minimize that deep longing inour hearts for freedom.  It is real and it is essential to alljoy.  And Jesus promises to give it.   Until he comes we are allin a real sense trapped and bound in the stall.  We might partyall day long; but we will never know the freedom for which wewere made as long as we are in the stall -- until Jesus sets usfree.   5.  But I stand by my the Christian Hedonism of thosedays because the fifth image from verse 2 is that when the sunof righteousness rises with healing in his wings and we are setfree from the stall of bondage, we will not merely walk, or run;we will leap like calves.   In other words freedom is the necessary conditionof leaping joy.  Jesus said once (Luke 6:22-23), Blessedare you when men hate you. . . Rejoice in that day, and leap forjoy, for behold your reward is great in heaven.  Some of you think that others are disabled in thisregard because of inherited personalities.  You think they couldno more leap like a calf than speak Russian.  But I have suspicionwe do not know each other very well.  I remember once in seminary going out with peoplefrom the adult Sunday School I was teaching.  We came out of thepizza place and I commenced to demonstrate the high step of adrum major in the Greenville S. C. Christmas parade.  Well themouths of those folks fell open.  And they stared in disbelief. They didn't know I have a calf in me.  But I want tell you a secret: There is a calf inevery believer in this room.  And given the right setting it willleap.  And we would do well to give it some room.  Otherwise wewill look very out of character in heaven when Jesus takes usrunning through the fields.  That is the meaning of Christmas:  Jesus comes     to give light and truth where there was darknessand confusion, to set things right where they were wrong, to give healing where there was sickness and brokenness. to give freedom where there was bondage, and to give calf-life joy where there was drearinessand fear.  Shall we pray:  Father I pray that none in this room would be ableto resist the offer of your grace in these words.  Let every familybe united in the faith this year.  May those who have been spectatorsstop holding back, and join the drama of redemption.  And mayeven this morning the sun of righteousness rise with healing inhis wings so that all of us might go forth leaping like calvesfrom the stall.  In Jesus name, Amen. 
