Failing in Good SpiritsSeptember 13, 2015Rabbi Ethan H. WitkovskyRosh Hashanah 5776Thomas Edison is perhaps one of the most famous failures in history. Some accounts say it took him 1,000 attempts to create a commercially viable electric light bulb. That puts him roughly on par with God. You may know that today is the anniversary of the creation of the world, but you may not know that the world we are living in wasn’t God’s first rodeo. The rabbis in the Midrash say that God created and destroyed almost 1,000 worlds before getting it right. That’s a rather steep curve for a deity who is supposed to be perfect. I like to imagine God working at a super-sophisticated 3D projector creating worlds, tweaking them, letting them play out a little, and then swiping left and starting over. I wonder if God got frustrated or angry as plan after plan was scrapped. (Is it possible that the first words God spoke were not “let there be light,” but rather a string of nonsense curse words like those my grandmother used when she lost a game of backgammon?) Perhaps it is easy to imagine God frustrated in this moment because we have all been there. Beginning a project is most trying because that is when the perfection of our plans meet the imperfection of trying to make them work.We all feel the frustration over failed plans, at beginnings and as we carry them out and just try to live our lives. No one likes to fail; no one likes to tell others that they have made mistakes or not followed through on plans. We feel it at the beginning of huge undertakings, yearly renewals, and minor daily setbacks. The fear of potential failure is certainly present today, which is for us the beginning of a new year and for the world the anniversary of its creation. According to tradition, God finally got it right today, Rosh Hashanah: Today is the anniversary of the creation of the world, some 5776 (give or take 14 billion) years ago. Hayom harat olam, today the world was created. We say this phrase three times each day of Rosh Hashanah. The phrase was coined by the prophet Jeremiah, and it has two meanings which point to the depth of our aversion to failure.Hara can mean either “born” or “about to be born,” and olam can mean either “the world” or “eternity.” When we say Hayom harat olam on Rosh Hashanah, we mean “today the world was created.” However, when Jeremiah (20:14-17) cries out in despair and wishes that his mother had been harat olam, he means that he wishes she was eternally pregnant: that is to say, he wishes he had never been born. This single phrase can simultaneously mean that a world is created and also that certain potential never came to fruition, ever.The double meaning of this phrase applies to us here today as well. Hayom, today, is harat olam, the day the world was created, and we are to celebrate. But hayom, today, could also be harat olam, a world forever about to be created, meaning pregnant with possibilities of what might be in the year to come. That is thrilling but it is also terrifying. In this moment of complete potential we can be anything, we have infinite possibilities, and will be infinitely successful. As of right now on this New Year’s Day I am flawless and I can accomplish anything in the coming year. I am going to go to the gym every day, learn how to play the piano, give engaging sermons, cook dinner for my wife every night, figure out what 20-somethings want out of their Judaism, and also respond to every email within the hour. Today I mean that, today I can have flawless plans. Tomorrow is when it all falls apart.Jeremiah expresses this pressure in his lament. After wishing that he was never born, he continues: “Why did I come forth out of the womb to see labor and sorrow, that my days should be consumed in shame?” (20:18) Jeremiah knows that in the womb, at the beginning of the year, we are all perfect in our potential and potentially perfect. It isn’t until we take that first step, when we encounter the labor and toil of trying to realize all of that potential, that we see failure and sorrow. It would be so much easier never to have to try and so never to fail, to always be full of potential and never have to actually struggle with the compromise, adaptation, and failure that are needed to create something in the real world. We could avoid all of Jeremiah’s sorrow and shame if we never tried to do anything at all. But if we never tried to do anything, nothing would get done.That we must risk failure in order to potentially succeed may seem like a simple thing. It has certainly been summed up in countless aphorisms, motivational speeches and posters featuring cute animals. Yet in our day, the act of failure itself is still tremendously difficult. We live in a society that is almost pathologically averse to failure. The desire to present ourselves as better than we are is surely nothing new, but in our world of social media, cutthroat competition for jobs, colleges, and partners the pressure to be perfect is greater than ever. Perfectionism reigns online, where we are all the curators of our lives and who we present ourselves to be to the outside world. We are also constantly comparing our real lives to the curated lives of all of our friends online, ratcheting up the pressure even more. Wanting to be a better person is certainly not a bad thing; it is, in fact, the only thing that matters on this Day of Judgment. Holding ourselves up to a high standard and presenting to the world as the best versions of ourselves can even encourage growth. Danger comes when I want not to be a better person, but a perfect person. The difference between wanting to be better and wanting to be perfect affects the way I will react when I fail to reach the goals I set.It is important to know how to react to imperfection because failure is not a question but a fact: I will fail to be perfect. I will skip days at the gym, forget to answer an email, act out of anger or selfishness, and generally not live up to who I set out to be today. As Jeremiah noted, as soon as we leave the womb we are open to toil, suffering and shame. (We are, and must be, human.) The problems begin when we think we have to hide these failures. I heard a story once about a business that had a culture of perfectionism. Failure was simply not tolerated and anyone speaking about failures was considered a nay-sayer and a bad influence. This company was going to open a new store overseas, and it was incredibly important that the store open on time. About two months before the opening, the CEO called the team leaders into a meeting for a detailed report about the new store. All the reports were positive; everyone said that the store would definitely open on time. Of course the store didn’t open on time, and the company suffered. The problem was that none of the team leaders felt comfortable speaking up and saying, we made a mistake and we won’t be ready on time. It was better for them to hide their small failures in the larger company failure and keep their jobs, better for them, but not better for the group. This is as true in business and in education, science, politics, and personal relationships. The total fear of failure and the perfectionist paralysis that it induces are very real for the group and the individual.We as a culture transmit this fear and its consequences to our children. I remember the first time I got a B on a paper in high school. I asked the teacher, “What did I do wrong?” He replied, “Nothing was wrong. It was a fine paper. It was worth a B, that’s still a good grade.” I was completely bewildered as to me in ninth grade a B seemed like an F. (Luckily, I soon got over that.) You may have heard of college kids being referred to as “teacups.” College counselors use “teacup” to describe students who have never failed. They have, more precisely, never been allowed to fail. They have been cared for and treated so delicately their entire lives that they have never had to deal with a real setback. They have never dealt with the emotional consequences of failure nor learned how to move on after failure. Why are these children called “teacups”? Because the first time they fall, they shatter. There are stories of freshmen in college bursting into tears after a B, flying home when they didn’t make it into a class, and throwing tantrums when the dining hall runs out of their favorite cereal. They have never failed, never learned how to cope with failure, and so they cannot handle it.A similar story is told about events that occurred on this day, years ago on that very first Rosh Hashanah. God is creating the world, but before the creation of human beings God asks the angels, “Should I make humans in Our image?” The angels respond, “What will humans be like?” God explains that humans will be flawed, they will continually rebel, disappoint, and fail. (In general, they will be exactly like us.) The angels reply, “Are you crazy? Absolutely not! Why would you ever create them?” At this, God stretches out God’s finger and consumes the angels with fire. God then creates another group of angels and asks them if human beings should be created. This group also inquires about the nature of humanity and after hearing the truth, they too tell God to not create humans . . . and they too are consumed by fire. (Apparently it also took God a few tries to get angels right.) God then creates a third group of angels, repeats the question and this group says, “God, the whole world belongs to you, do what you want!” And so God creates humanity.This story shows us that failure was intentionally put into creation. Angels are like teacups. They are by definition perfect and in their perfection they cannot fathom why God would create something as imperfect as us. When we close ourselves to the idea of failure, when we hide from our failures, when we treat one failure as if it were the failure of everything, we make ourselves like the angels in the story. We pretend that failure isn’t in our nature, isn’t a built-in feature of creation, but it is. Angels are majestically perfect . . . until they aren’t, and then God destroys them. We are not meant to be angels. We were designed to work hard, suffer and fail. William James called failure “a pivotal human experience.” (The Varieties of Religious Experience, p. 119) It is something that links us all together because there is not a person in this room who has not failed at something. The truest danger to us is not failure but the brittleness of life that comes from needing to be perfect. In striving to be angels we ultimately destroy our ability to be human beings.To be a human being means to allow for imperfection in our world. In this coming year I hope that we can all do a better job of allowing ourselves to admit failure and, perhaps equally important, allow others around us to admit their own failures without fear. Contrary to what one might think, one cannot demand perfection from oneself but accept the failures of others. Dr. Brené Brown points out in her book The Gifts of Imperfection that if we cannot accept our own failures it is actually impossible to truly accept another’s flaws. Perfection is insidious and pervasive; demanding perfection from ourselves means we demand it, even tacitly, from others, and it means we contribute to a culture that shames failure. We should not shame failure for it is not only inevitable, it is necessary, something to learn from. The best thing we can do for our children, for our friends, for our employees, and for ourselves is to create a culture in which we own our failures and learn from them.How can we work to turn the tide of a perfectionist society? We can model failure for others to see: Be open about when we fail, how it makes us feel, and how we deal with it. We can also talk about failure to our friends and family so that it isn’t so secret and scary. Robert Louis Stevenson once wrote a letter to his son and told him: “You will always do wrong: you must try to get used to that, my son . . . Our business in this world is not to succeed, but to continue to fail, in good spirits.” (Reflections and Remarks and Human Life) To prepare his son for inevitable failures and to teach him to try to “fail in good spirits” Stevenson gave his son a long list of his own failures and opened the conversation about failing from a place of experience. He hoped that his son would be better able to handle failures if he had his father as an example. To try and learn and teach from failure is both valiant and difficult.Judaism offers its own antidote to a society that prefers to hide failure and it is here today: Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur, and the ten days of repentance in between. These holidays are centered on all of us admitting our failures. We admit them to ourselves and admit them to others. Painfully, we are required to speak our failures aloud. Purely personal botches we speak of only between ourselves and God in the silent amidah of Yom Kippur. But when the failure affects someone else we must tell them and ask for forgiveness in the next ten days. The requirement to speak our failures aloud serves a psychological as well as a religious need. According to Dr. Brown’s research, the most sure-fire way to eliminate shame is to speak about it. She says that “when something shaming happens to us and we keep it locked up, it festers and grows. It consumes us. We need to share our experience. Shame happens between people, and it heals between people.” (p. 40) The only way to deal with our failures is to speak of them aloud to others. What better way to create a culture that teaches us how to fail without cracking than to make us announce our failures once a year?Speaking our failures out loud can be difficult and may be painful, but it is the most effective way to improve. A friend of mine who writes computer code told me that the worst program malfunctions are the ones when something fails quietly. You want something to fail loudly so that you know where the problem is and can fix it. If you or anyone you know has ever struggled with addiction, then you know that the first step to healing is admitting you have a problem. Ultimately, the best way to deal with failure is to admit it and correct it. This has many names: “failing forward,” or Stevenson’s “failing in good spirits,” but it all amounts to using your failure to push you to do better. This can be difficult, but the first step is separating one’s self-worth from one’s success rate. When I fail, it does not make me – the entirety of who I am – a failure. I have failed at something, not at life. Dr. Brown calls this the difference between shame and guilt. Guilt is “I did something bad”; shame is “I am bad.” Guilt can be motivating, shame can be paralyzing. When we are made to feel shame over our failures, that emotion can bubble to the surface in the form of anger, jealousy, apathy, and other destructive behaviors. Teshuvah and Rosh Hashanah are not about shame; they are about guilt. They are not about wallowing in despair, but about letting our mistakes, our guilt, push us to be better people in the year to come.This is the lesson we take away from Rosh Hashanah: we will fail. Each of us has multiple failures on our tabs from the past year, and just as surely as Rosh Hashanah will come again next year, we will all, God willing, be sitting here with a new list of failures a year from today. Failure is inevitable; if it teaches us, pushes us and inspires us, is a good thing. The fact that we can fail and try again is a blessing because we – unlike angels and teacups – do not shatter. We are able to regroup and try again. In fact we have to try again because for human beings failure is not an excuse for inaction.When I think about the problems that I face in my life or the problems that face our society today, I might echo Jeremiah’s words and wish I had stayed in the womb, eternally searching for a solution but never acting, never having to determine which road to walk down or to endure the labor of making the decision work. There are incredible problems facing us and none of them have a perfect solution. We cannot let imperfection be an excuse for inaction because, like Edison, it is only through failures that will we ever find a viable solution.Our story in the Talmud about the angels doesn’t end with the creation of man; like history, it continues. According to the Rabbis, when the generation of the Flood came and humans were so evil God had to destroy all of them except for Noah, the angels said, “Didn’t the first group tell you this was a bad idea?” and when the next generation was evil and tried to build a tower to supplant God they again said, “See! We told you so.” The angels continue to point out the faults and failures of humans. God could have been angry, vindictive, shamed, or any other emotion that can come from unresolved failure, but instead God replies to the angels with words spoken in the book of Isaiah: “Even as you grow old I will be here, as you go grey I will have patience with you, I created and I will carry, I will have patience and I will deliver.” (Isaiah 46:4) This is the last key to learning from our failures: Patience. We must have patience with others when they fail and most importantly patience with ourselves.Hayom harat olam we say, three times. Today the world was created. But we know that these words harat olam, come from Jeremiah, who used them to mean “eternally pregnant.” Jeremiah was unhappy to have been born, he wanted to live in the perfection of potential, an eternity without failure. But the author of our liturgy took those words harat olam, and applied them to the Creation itself, to the opposite of eternal perfection. Creation is built with failure in the system. It is a feature, not a glitch. I hope that in the year to come we will all strive for the wisdom to move ahead even with imperfect solutions, the patience to endure failures in high spirits, and the confidence to know that despite each failure we will try again and we will do better the next time. Together we can create a community where failures are seen as badges and not bruises. I hope that we allow ourselves and those around us to fail without fear. I hope that failures do not shatter us with shame but rather inspire us to improve. If it took God 1,000 tries to create the world, surely we can endure a few failures in our attempts to live in it and make it better.