  June 8, 1986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchMorningPastor John PiperCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper    EDUCATING FOR HOPE  Psalm 78:1-8 Give ear, O my people, to my teaching; incline your ears to the words ofmy mouth! I will open my mouth in a parable; I will utter dark sayings fromof old, things that we have heard and know, that our fathers have told us.We will not hide them from their children, but tell to the coming generationthe glorious deeds of the Lord, and his might, and the wonders which he haswrought. He established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel,which he commanded our fathers to teach to their children; that the nextgeneration might know them, the children yet unborn, and arise and tell themto their children, so that they should set their hop in God, and not forgetthe works of God, but keep his commandments; and they they should not belike their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation, a generation whoseheart was not steadfast, whose spirit was not faithful to God. My aim in this message is to give a Biblical exposition of the motto of ourchildren's ministries at Bethlehem, and then to apply that exposition toour situation today in training children. When Char Ransom was called as our Minister for Children in August of 1984she chose a motto for children's ministries that comes straight from Scripture.You can see it on most of the pamphlets she puts out: "That the next generationPUT might PUT THEIR hope in God." It comes from Psalm 78:6-7, "...that thenext generation might know them, the children yet unborn, and arise and tellthem to their children, so that they should set their hope in God." The Bible teaches that in God's order it is the parents who have primaryresponsibility for teaching children the truth about God and his will(Deuteronomy 6:4-9; Ephesians 6:4). But the church family has a very importantsecondary responsibility to assist the parents and to confirm these teachings,and to help children whose parents are negligent in their duties (Matthew18:5-6; Hebrews 3:12-13). Therefore it is important for all of us in thechurch -- married and single, old and young, men and women, boys and girls-- to understand the Biblical teaching behind the motto of our children'sministries from Psalm 78: "That the next generation might put their hopein God." Let's think about it together in its context, especially the first eightverses of the Psalm. The Psalm was apparently written by Asaph, who was a Levite and a music leaderin the service of King David (I Chronicles 16:4-5). It is a long Psalm (72verses) and tells the history of Israel's disobedience and God's repeatedmercy on them from the time of the Exodus, when God brought them out of Egypt,until the time of David. In one sense it is a depressing Psalm, because itshows us how mysteriously stubborn and rebellious our own hearts are. Butin another sense the Psalm inspires hope for sinners because of how mysteriouslylongsuffering and gracious God is. The first 8 verses set the stage and let us in on what the Psalm is intendedto accomplish. We will divide these 8 verses into three parts. First, we will deal withverse 5 and we will call it GOD'S WORK. Second, we will deal with verses1-4 and call it ASAPH'S ACT. Third, we will deal with verses 6-8 and callit God's aim. Then finally we will apply our exposition of these three sectionsto our own ministry to children today. GOD'S WORK First, then, lets look at verse 5. He established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel, which he commanded our fathers to teach to their children.  Notice two things. 1. First, God has revealed his will. He has given a testimony and a law."He established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel." Webegin here because this is absolutely basic. If God has not spoken, if hehas not given us instruction about his will or testified about his work,then we are utterly adrift in a sea of confusion about the meaning of life. People who do not orient their lives on the testimony of God in Scripturecannot know what is good for them or for their children. They may have strongopinions about what is right or helpful, but those opinions will be basedon what feels good or on some cultural pressure or on some human traditionor authority less than God. But the Scripture says that God has established a testimony; he has appointeda law. And Jesus Christ has won our confidence and for his sake we believethe revelation of God in the law and the testimony. We have a God-given compassthat keeps us from being lost in the forest of twentieth-century confusion,the compass of God's law and his testimony in Scripture. Very briefly what is the law and the testimony referred to in verse 5? Exodus31:18 gives the answer: And God gave to Moses, when he had made an end of speaking with him uponMount Sinai, the two tables of the testimony, tables of stone, written withthe finger of God. What was written on these "tables of testimony"? Exodus 34:28 tells us: And God wrote upon the tables the words of the covenant the ten commandments. So Psalm 78:5 sends us back to Mount Sinai where God made a covenant withIsrael to be their God. The ten commandments are the central statement ofhow we are to live if we submit to that covenant and trust in God as ourGod. But there is something very crucial to notice about the tables of the testimonyas they are called. The ten commandments do not begin with commandments.They begin like this: "I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of theland of Egypt, out of the house of bondage." In other words, the tables ofthe testimony begin not with a testimony about God's demand but with a testimonyabout God's grace and power for the sake of the people he had chosen. Withan outstretched arm and a mighty hand God saved Israel from bondage, beforehe gave them the ten commandments. So when Asaph says in Psalm 78:5 that God established a testimony in Jacob,and appointed a law in Israel, he doesn't just mean that God told us thingsto do. He means that God has testified about what HE has done and about whatour response should be. This is going to be important to remember when wetry to understand Asaph's act in verses 1-4 and God's aim in verses 6-8. 2. But before we turn to that, notice one other thing in verse 5, namelythat God not only established a testimony, but he also commanded us to teachit to our children. The second half of the verse: ...which he commanded our fathers to teach to their children. This means that God does not intend to speak to every generation the wayhe spoke to the generation that came out of Egypt. Succeeding generationsmust learn about the will of God and the mighty works of God from their fathers.Our children must learn about it from us. So there are two things to remember from verse 5. One is that God has spoken;he has given a law and a testimony to his will and his saving work. The otherthing is that he commands every generation to teach this law and testimonyto their children.  ASAPH'S ACT Now the second section of the Psalm that we look at is verses 1-4, whichwe will call Asaph's act. We call it Asaph's act because these verses describewhat Asaph does in response to God's work in verse 5. In a word, Asaph obeysthe command of verse 5 and makes known God's will and work to the nextgeneration. 1) Give ear, O my people, to my teaching; incline your ears to the words of my mouth! 2) I will open my mouth in a parable; I will utter dark sayings from of old, 3) things that we have heard and known, that our fathers have told us. 4) We will not hide them from their children, but tell to the coming generation the glorious deeds of the Lord, and his might, and the wonders which he has wrought. Two things stand out in these verses. One is that when Asaph teaches thecoming generation he focuses on the deeds and wonders of God, not first thecommandments. Notice verse 4: "...tell to the coming generation the gloriousdeeds of the Lord, and his might, and the wonders which he has wrought."This is why I said it would be important to remember that the testimony referredto in verse 5 is more than commandments. The ten commandments begin, "I am the Lord your God who brought you out ofthe land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage." So Asaph first declaresto the next generation the great stories of rescue and judgement and theglorious deeds of God: like the ten plagues of frogs and gnats and fliesand bloody water and darkness and hail, and like the dividing of the RedSea and the miraculous manna and water from the rock, etc. That's the first thing that stands out in Asaph's act: in obedience to God'scommand in verse 5, he teaches the next generation about the greatness ofGod rather than just about what God demands in his law. The other thing that stands out in Asaph's act is the description of histeaching as a "parable" and as "dark sayings." Verse 2: "I will open my mouthin a parable; I will utter dark sayings (or riddles) from of old." The reasonthis stands out is that when you read the 72 verses of the psalm, they don'tseem like a parable or a dark saying. They seem to be pretty straightforwardhistory of Israel's repeated rebellion and God's amazing grace. There are some word pictures and comparisons that you expect in parables.For example, verse 19, "They spoke against God, saying, 'Can God spread atable in the wilderness'?" And verse 35: "They remembered that God was theirrock." And verse 65: "Then the Lord awoke as from sleep, like a strong manshouting because of wine." These are the kind of word pictures and comparisons that you get in parables.But I have another suggestion why Asaph would say he is speaking in a parableand in dark sayings. Could it be that the psalm poses two of the most fundamentalriddles or puzzles of Israel's history and leaves it for the you and me toanswer? 1. The psalm poses the riddle: How could Israel have been so rebellious andstubborn again and again and again? Why did they not learn to trust and obeyGod? Verses 40-41 describe this strange rebellion: How often they rebelled against him in the wilderness and grieved him inthe desert! They tested him again and again, and provoked the Holy One of Israel. Why?! 2. The other riddle posed is why God should be so amazingly patient, andreturn again and again in mercy to Israel in her misery. Verse 38 describes this strange grace: Yet he, being compassionate, forgave their iniquity, and did not destroythem; he restrained his anger often, and did not stir up all his wrath. The psalm just leaves you stunned at the amazing wickedness of man and theamazing grace of God. It leaves you asking, How can these things be? It doeswhat Jesus' parables so often do: it causes you to ask questions about yourself-- Could my heart be like that toward God? Could God be so gracious to me? So I would suggest that the psalm is a parable and a riddle not because thewhole thing is a made-up story, but mainly because it poses two profoundriddles: why was Israel so incorrigibly rebellious, and why was God willingto return again and again to help them? In summary then Asaph's act in verses 1-4 was to do what God commanded inverse 5, namely, to declare the testimony of God to the next generation,especially God's testimony about his glorious deeds and the wonders he wroughtin saving Israel. And Asaph did this in a way that pushes us to examine ourown hearts. Are we not like Israel? Is there not the same rebellion againstGod's law in our own heart? And might there not be hope for us that God mightbe gracious to us even though we feel like we have thrown away our last chance?  GOD'S AIM That brings us now to the last section of our text, verses 6-8, which wewill call GOD'S AIM. Here we learn why Asaph wrote the psalm the way he didfor the next generation. And here we learn what our goal in educating ourchildren should be. Verse 6 continue verse 5 where God had commanded us toteach his testimony to our children... 6) that the next generation might know them, the children yet unborn, and arise and tell them to their children, 7) so that they should set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God, but keep his commandments; 8) and that they should not be like their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation, a generation whose heart was not steadfast, whose spirit was not faithful to God.  God's aim in the education of our children is threefold. First, that they should have knowledge of God. Verse 6: "That the next generationmight know." I think it is right to prize love for God above knowledge ofGod. The devils have knowledge of God, and tremble! But what a tragedy whenwe see the demonic pride that knowledge can bring, and then draw the wrongconclusion that the best way to inspire love to God is to somehow take adetour around knowledge. It can't be done. We love God because of what we KNOW of him, or our loveis artificial emotionalism. The first task in the education of our childrenis to impart genuine knowledge of the testimony and law of God. It need notlead to pride, especially if we do it the way Asaph did it. So the firstaim of education is knowledge. Second, the aim of education should be that children come to put their hopein God. Verse 6 goes on to say, "that the next generation might know them,the children yet unborn, and arise and tell them to their children, so thatthey should set their hope in God." Knowledge should lead to hope. What goes into the head should make a newheart. If one person errs in education by saying knowledge is not the mainthing, but the heart is the main thing, another person errs on the otherside by saying that imparting knowledge is our only goal, not the changingof the heart. The word of God is very clear on this: the aim of education is to teach thetruth in such a way that young people will come to love it and put theirhope in God. Changed hearts are the goal of education, not just more knowledge.The aim is that they might set their hope in God. Third, the aim of education is obedience. Verse 7 goes on: "so that theyshould set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God, but keep hiscommandments." Education has to do with how our young people act as wellas what they know and what they feel. We have not succeeded in our God-givenresponsibility if our children's heads are full of true thoughts, but theirbehavior is contrary to the law of God. That's why hope is essential, becauseyou always bring your life into sync with whatever you hope in. "Everyonewho thus hopes in Christ purifies himself even as he is pure" (I John 3:3). So the motto of our children's ministries at Bethlehem goes right to theheart of the educational task -- "that the next generation might hope inGod." Summary of the Exposition 1. In summary, we have seen in verse 5 GOD'S ACT, he has established a testimonyand appointed a law, and he has commanded us to teach it to our children. 2. In verses 1-4 we saw ASAPH'S ACT in response to God's command: he declaresthe glorious deeds of God to the next generation, and does it in such a wayas to make the issue of our sin and God's grace very urgent. I would saynow in retrospect that Asaph tells the story of Israel's history in a waythat promotes humility and hope. He shows us the incredible rebellion ofour heart (for by nature we are no different from Israel), and he shows usthe amazing, longsuffering grace of God. So we are humbled because of whatwe are in ourselves, and we can be hopeful because of what God is in himself! 3. And finally in verses 6-8 we have seen GOD'S AIM: knowledge of God, hopein God, and obedience to God. This is the aim of all true Christian education.Asaph was right to tell a long story of Israel's history, because knowledgeis important. And he was right to tell it in a way that raised the questionof sin and grace so that when the next generation read it they would be drawnto hope not in themselves but in God; and then in the strength of that hopeto keep the commandments of God.  Application First I would say that it is the command of God especially to us parents,but also to the whole church, that the knowledge of God be taught to ourchildren, and that they be brought by prayerful reliance on the Holy Spiritto hope in God. Martin Luther put it like this 457 years ago: We are plagued by the miserable fact that no one perceives or heeds thistruth. All live on as though God gave us children for our pleasure or amusement,as though He gave us servants to use, like a cow or an ass, for work only,or as though we were to live with our subordinates only to gratify our whims,ignoring them, as though what they learn or how they live were no concernof ours. No one wants to see that education or training is the command ofthe Supreme Majesty, who will strictly call us to account and punish us forits neglect, or that the need to be seriously concerned about young peopleis so great. (WHAT LUTHER SAYS, I, p. 140) Very specifically I would ask all parents, Do you have some kind of planto impart to your children a knowledge of Scripture and a knowledge of itsdoctrine so that they will be able to stand firm in the hope of the gospelwhen they face grief and pain and pleasure and scoffing secularism? What in your life is more important than teaching your children the veryword of God? It will only take ten minutes to sing a verse or two of a hymn,read a portion of Scripture, draw out a lesson for life, ask a question fromsome good catechism and have one or two pray. If you say you are too busy,I beg you to rethink your priorities. This is a commandment of God. And itwill prove to be the source of much joy. A wise son makes a glad father,says the Lord, and it is the word of God that makes a son wise. I would like to help you as much as I can, and so I commit myself, as theLord gives me strength, to make a regular part of the STAR a new sectioncontaining several catechetical questions with Biblical support that parentscan use with their children. And when the whole range of basic Biblical teachinghas been covered we will put it in a booklet for ongoing use. May the Lord give us the will and the strength in the home and in the churchto teach our children the testimony of the Lord "that the next generationmight put their hope in God."   Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
