

Gita ñ The Philosophy of Duty 
BY M. CHAKRAVARTHY, M. A. (HONS.) 
ACCORDING to Gita Duty is twofold. Duty is ordinary when it concerns the individual in his relation to himself, to his home, to his village or town or city, to his nation and the world. Duty is extraordinary when it concerns God and God's Folk. The Vedas teach about the former and the Upanishads teach about the latter. How to live long, healthy, wealthy and wise and how to enjoy the cup of worldly things to the full are told to us in the Vedas and how to prepare this life for the other world and how to think of God, meditation, concentration and contemplation, soul-Reali≠zation and God-Realization are all given to us in the Upanishads. Sri Krishna has beautifully and harmoniously blended both the ordinary and the extraordinary canons of Duty in his Bhagvad-Gita and introduces us to a Transcen≠dental Realm which is purely "Divine". The Philosophy of action of the Vedas and the Philosophy of Know- 
ledge of the Upanishads are both combined most beautifully in the Philosophy of Duty. 
The Philosophy of Action leads us to the Law of Causation. If a man does good he gets a good result; if he does bad he gets a bad result. In the Philosophy of Knowledge a man strives to know all about God, man and matter. Naturally the real knowledge about Things drives man to renounce the world and seek shelter in seclusion, because all material things and contacts are transient, pains-giving and dis≠appointing. A sort of Renun≠ciation to Things Material comes over and man is tempted to run away. An intellectual appreciation and a yogic realization of the Soul and Soul's potentiality brings to the weary heart good solace and he indulges more and more in the play not of physical moods (serene, dynamic and inert) but in the great and magnificent play of The Cosmos. Sri Krishna, the God-man, 

urges in the Gita that it is not only possible to combine in this world of ours both the Philosophy of Action and the Philosophy of Knowledge but absolutely necessary to lead such a life wherein there is a harmonious combination (cent per cent.) of the essentials of the Philosophy of Action and the Philosophy of Knowledge. In other words, He wants us to live in the midst of the World, do our best and still see that the Law of Causation does not operate on us and bind us to the fruits of our action. This is what He calls the Transcendental Method. In this one can work twenty-four hours like a machine and still see that he is above all Action and on the planes of knowledge. We all work, cannot but work and work is the law of Nature and if we stop there only, work and its result lead us on and on to work and nothing else; but if we work and honestly too and yet transfer the good result that accrues for us to God, i.e., for the good of the World, we become Divine in the midst of Humanity. It means that the man of Action and the man of Knowledge are coalesced into One who is God≠like. God has nothing to gain and He always works. See the Sun, the Stars and the several forces in Nature. They all work, work and work but for the good of the World. Even so man has to work and most efficiently too, but at the same time like a man who has nothing to care for, to expect and to obtain. 
Sri Krishna says again and again that the only Way to become God-like is to do our duty not for Duty's sake alone, not for personal satisfaction that we have discharged our duties but for the sake of God, i.e., the good of the World. Godliness is goodness and goodness is Godliness. In the Philosophy of Action we have to deal with good, bad and indifferent causes and their results. In the Philosophy of Knowledge we have to measure in the scale of Insufficiency worldly wisdom and worldly achievements; but in a Divine Life actuated by the Philosophy of Duty and judged by the acid test of the Transcendental method, there is neither good nor bad, neither insufficiency nor disappointment. All is complete and everything is full in itself. Do little or do more, you are not bound here but you serve God, i.e., the World. The only way to successfully practise this Philosophy of Duty is to annihilate the Idea of Self in us by this Transcendental method and assume that we are only the Instru≠ments in the Hands of God to serve the World. Here all our actions become Divine Actions, all our knowledge becomes Divine Knowledge and all our love becomes Divine Love and all of them individually and aggregately merge together in an absolute surrender to God. This in essence is the Gita of Sri Krishna. The domestic song and the national song become here the Divine Song even like the song of the Cosmos. This is India and this song alone leads man Onward in his orderly march towards Perfection. 

And this is what Shri Meher Baba means, when he says, "I shall bring about a happy blending of the head and heart." 
