  Up until now we have focused our attention on thepleasures that God has in himself and in his work.     He has has pleasure in his Son, the exact representationof his nature and reflection of his glory.   He has pleasure in his work of creation -- the greatsea monsters that he made to sport in the oceans!   He has pleasure in all the works of providence thatshow him to be free and sovereign over all the world.   He has pleasure in the greatness of his name andthe reputation of his glory.   He has pleasure in freely choosing a people for himself,and he rejoices over them to do them good.    And it pleased him to bruise his Son, because inthat great act of judgment the stormy betrothal of God's two greatpassions were married -- his passion for the glory of his name,and the passion of his love toward sinners.   You may recall that our assumption behind all thesemessages has been the conviction expressed by Henry Scougal inhis book, The Life of God in the Soul of Man, namely, that Theworth and excellency of a soul is to be measured by the objectof its love. In other words, if we love cheap and worthlessthings, we reveal how small and cheap our soul is.     The soul is measured by its flights Some low and others high, The heart is known by its delights, And pleasures never lie.    We took as our starting point in this series thepersuasion that this is also true of God, not just of man. Theworth and excellency of God's soul is measured by the objectsof his love. And I think we have seen it born out again and again:the objects of God's love are those things that are of infinitebeauty and worth.     He loves his Son;  He loves his handiwork in creation;  He loves the sovereignty of his providence;  He loves the honor of his name;  He loves the freedom of grace shown in the electionand care and purchase of his people.    So God is a great example for us. He shows us whatan excellent soul should love above all else. We should love    the Son of God,  and the handiwork of God in creation,  and his sovereignty in governing the world,  and the honor of his name,  and the freedom of his grace.   If we loved them more our souls would be the largerand better for it, and we would be more conformed to the imageof our Maker.  Today marks a turning point in the series, becauseup 'til now we haven't focused on what kind of human attitudesand actions God delights in. We have focused first with God'slove for his own glory. And I believe this order is very important.  We need to see (and those we love in this world needto see!) first and foremost that God is God    that he is perfect and complete in himself,   that he is overflowingly happy in the eternalfellowship of the Trinity,   that he does not need us and is not deficientwithout us.    But rather we are deficient without him; the gloryof his fellowship is the stream of living water that we have thirstedfor all our life.   Unless we begin with God in this way, when the gospelcomes to us we will inevitably put ourselves at the center ofit. We will feel that our value rather than God's value is thedriving force in the gospel. We will trace the gospel back toGod's delight in us instead of tracing it back to the grace thatmakes a way for sinners to delight in him.   But the gospel is the good news that God is the all-satisfyingend of all our longings, and that even though he does not needus, and is in fact estranged from us because of our God-belittlingsins, he has, in the great love with which he loved us, made away for sinners to drink at the river of his delights throughJesus Christ. And we will not be enthralled by this good newsunless we feel that he was not obliged to do this. He was notcoerced or constrained by our value. He is the center of the gospel.The exaltation of his glory is the driving force of the gospel.The gospel is a gospel of grace! And grace is the will of Godto magnify the worth of God by giving sinners the right to delightin God without obscuring the glory of God.   And the saints of God love the centrality of Godin the gospel:   They love to say with Paul, From him and throughhim and to him are all things; to him be glory for ever and ever(Rom. 11:36).   They love to make their boast only in the Lord (1Cor. 1:31).   They love to say that God is the beginning and middleand end in this affair of salvation.   They love to say they were chosen for the glory ofhis grace (Eph. 1:6), and called from darkness to light to declarethe wonders of his grace (1 Pet. 2:9), and justified because Christdied to vindicate the holiness of God's grace (Rom. 3:25-26),and will one day be swallowed up in life to the praise of theglory of his grace (2 Cor. 5:4).  And so for seven weeks we have focused on the pleasuresthat God has directly in himself and in the freedom of his workto make it unmistakable that God is the center of the gospel.We have only hinted at the kind of response from man that wouldbring God pleasure. But now we are ready. Now, Lord willing, wewill be able to see why the human responses which God demandsand enjoys come as good news to sinners and yet keep God at the center of his own affections.  If the gospel demands a response from sinners, thenthe demand itself must be good news instead of an added burden,otherwise the gospel would not be gospel. And if the true Biblicalgospel always has God at the center, then the response it demandsmust magnify him and not us.  Now what kind of response can accomplish both ofthese things: good news for sinners and glory to God?  Our text provides the answer. Psalm 147:10-11,   His delight is not in the strength of the horse, nor his pleasure in the legs of a man; but the Lord takes pleasure in those who fear him, in those who hope in his steadfast love.   Let's begin with verse 11 and ask why God takes pleasurein those who fear him and hope in his love. Then we will turnto verse 10 and refine our answer by asking why God does not delightin the strength of the horse and the legs of a man.  First of all let me ask you this: does it strikeyou as strange that we should be encouraged to fear and hope atthe same time and in the same person? The Lord takes pleasurein those who fear him, in those who hope in his steadfast love.Do you hope in the one you fear and fear the one you hope in?  It's usually the other way around: if we fear a personwe hope that someone else will come and help us. But here we aresupposed to fear the one we hope in and hope in the one we fear.What does this mean?  I think it means that we should let the experienceof hope penetrate and transform the experience of fear, and letthe experience of fear penetrate and transform the experienceof hope. In other words, the kind of fear that we should havetoward God is whatever is left of fear when we have a sure hopein the midst of it.   Suppose you were exploring an unknown glacier inthe north of Greenland in the dead of winter. Just as you reacha sheer cliff with a spectacular view of miles and miles of jaggedice and snow mountains a terrible storm breaks in. The wind isso strong that the fear rises that it might blow you and yourparty right over the cliff. But in the midst of it you discovera cleft in the ice where you can hide. Here you feel secure butthe awesome might of the storm rages on and you watch it witha kind of trembling pleasure as it surges out across the distantglaciers.  At first there was the fear that this terrible stormand awesome terrain might claim your life. But then you founda refuge and gained the hope that you would be safe. But not everythingin the feeling called fear vanished. Only the the life-threateningpart. There remained the trembling, the awe, the wonder, the feelingthat you would never want to tangle with such a storm or be theadversary of such a power.  And so it is with God. Verses 16-17 says, Hegives snow like wool; he scatters hoarfrost like ashes. He castsforth his ice like morsels; who can stand before his cold?The cold of God is a fearful thing -- who can stand against it!And verses 4-5 point in the same power of God in nature: Hedetermines the number of the stars, he gives to all of them theirnames. Great is our Lord, and abundant in power; his understandingis beyond measure.   In other words, God's greatness is greater than theuniverse of stars and his power is behind the unendurable coldof arctic storms. Yet he cups his hand around us and says, takerefuge in my love and let the terrors of my power become the awesomefireworks of your happy night sky. The fear of God is what isleft of the storm when you have a safe place to watch it rightin the middle of it.   And in that place of refuge you say to yourself,This is amazing, this is terrible, this is incredible power;O the thrill of being here in the center of the awful power ofGod, yet protected by God himself! O what a terrible thing tofall into the hands of the living God without hope, without aSavior! Better to have a millstone tied around my neck and bethrown into the depths of the sea than to offend against thisGod! What a wonderful privilege to know the favor of this Godin the midst of his power!  And so we get an idea of how we feel both hope andfear at the same time. Hope turns fear into a happy tremblingand peaceful wonder; and fear takes everything trivial out ofhope and makes it serious. The terrors of God make the pleasuresof his people intense. The fireside fellowship is all the sweeterwhen the storm is howling outside the cottage.  Now why does God delight in those who experiencehim in this way -- in people who fear him and hope in his love?  Surely it is because our fear reflects the greatnessof his power and our hope reflects the bounty of his grace. Goddelights in those responses which mirror his magnificence.   This is just what we would have expected from a Godwho is all-sufficient in himself and has no need of us -- a God:    who will never give up the glory of being the fountainof all joy,  who will never surrender the honor of being the sourceof all safety,  who will never abdicate the throne of sovereign grace.   God has pleasure in those who hope in his love becausethat hope highlights the freedom of his grace. When I cry out,God is my only hope, my rock, my refuge!, I am turningfrom myself and calling all attention to the boundless resourcesof God.   Do you remember the question we asked a few momentsago: what kind of response can God demand from us so that thedemand gives good news to us and glory to him? This is the answer:the demand to hope in his love.  As a sinner with no righteousness of your own, standingbefore a self-sufficient and and holy God, what command wouldyou rather hear than this: Hope in my love! If weonly knew it every one of us is stranded on an ice face in Greenland,and the wind is blowing fiercely. Our position is so precariousthat if we even inhale too deeply our weight will shift and wewill plunge to our death. God comes to us and says in that moment,I will save you, and protect you in the storm. But thereis a condition. Your heart sinks. Your face is flat againstthe ice. Your fingernails are dug in. You can feel yourself givingway. You know that if you even move your lips you're going tofall. You know that there is nothing you can do for God!  Then he speaks the gospel command: my requirementis that you hope in me. Is this not good news this morning? Whatcould be easier than to hope in God when all else is giving way?And that is all he requires. That's the gospel.  But it is not only good news for us sinners. It isalso the glory of God to make only this demand upon us. Why? Becausewhen you hope in God you show,     that he is strong and you are weak;  that he is rich and you are poor;  that he is full and you and you are empty.    When you hope in God you show that you are the onewho has needs, not God (Psalm 50:10-15; 71:4-6,14).     You are the patient, he is the doctor.  You are the thirsty deer, he is the overflowing spring. You are the lost sheep, he is the good shepherd.   The beauty of the gospel is that in one simple demand(Put your hope in the love of God!) we hear good newsand God gets the glory. And that is why God takes pleasure inthose who hope in his love -- because in this simple act of hopehis grace is glorified and sinners are saved. This is the commandof the gospel that keeps God at the center -- the center of hisaffections and ours.  Now let us ask why God does not take pleasure inhorses and legs. Verse 10:   His delight is not in the strength of the horse, nor his pleasure in the legs of a man.   The point here is not that strong horses and stronglegs are bad. God made them. He rejoices in the strength and freedomof mighty horses. He asks Job,   Do you give the horse his might? Do you clothe his neck with strength? Do you make him leap like the locust?. . . He paws in the valley, and exults in his strength; He goes out to meet the weapons.  He laughs at fear, and is not dismayed; he does not turn back from the sword. . . he cannot stand still at the sound of the trumpet. When the trumpet sounds, he says, Aha! He smells the battle from afar, the thunder of the captains, and the shouting.  Job 39:19-25   No, the point is not that this glorious animal isbad. The point is that in the day of battle men put their hopein horses instead of putting their hope in God. But Proverbs 21:31says, The horse is made ready for the day of battle, butthe victory belongs to the Lord. Therefore Psalm 20:7 says,Some boast in chariots, and some in horses; but we boastof the name of th Lord our God.   God is not displeased with horses' strength and humanlegs. He is displeased with those who hope in their horses andtheir legs. He is displeased with people who put their hope inmissiles or in make-up, in tanks or tans, in bombs or body-building.God takes no pleasure in corporate efficiency or balanced budgetsor welfare systems or new vaccines or education or eloquence orartistic excellence or legal processes when these things are thetreasure in which we hope or the achievement in which we boast.  Why? Because when we put our hope in horses and legs,horses and legs get the glory, not God. And we are lost not saved.  So I urge you this morning, for the sake of yoursoul and for the glory of God: bank your hope on the power andlove of God, not on yourself or on anything you can achieve.    For the Lord takes pleasure in those who fear him, in those who hope in his steadfast love.   
