Life and Death Beyond These Walls 
April 21, 2013 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 
 
 
Gathering, Welcoming, Centering, Kindling, Opening
: 
We are here, 

after a rough week for the human heart, 

to worship again, to dive past the surface 

and go deeper, to hold ourselves accountable 

to our dreams of the common good, 

and to fearlessly question even ourselves, 

that our lives might powerful and kind, even now. 

  

so
 Grounded in gratitude for the cosmos that is our h
ome, claiming deepening wisdom as 
our
 authority, and daring to engage joy, burden, loss a
nd insight in a deliberate community 
of many ways and ages, the flame summons us to 
awaken
: to listen with our whole lives, to 
open, to serve. 

 
Singing  123 Spirit of Life 

 
Ingathering 

 
One morning, Hedgehog found Mouse covering himself 
with leaves. "What ARE you doing?? 
asked Hedgehog. "I'm hiding from Snake," said Mouse
. "You are hiding from our 
friend
 Green 
Tree Snake?" asked Hedgehog? "Yes," said Mouse. "Fo
x and Skunk both told me that snakes are 
VERY dangerous to mice like me." 

 
"Oh, that's silly! Green Tree Snake has been our fr
iend for a long time. He lives in his tree and 
when he comes down, you and I and Green Tree Snake 
always take walks together. Lets you and 
I take a walk right now. You will be perfectly safe
." 
 
So Mouse joined Hedgehog on a walk. They talked and
 talked, but Mouse wasn't paying 
attention. He was still worrying about Green Tree S
nake. He looked everywhere except where he 
was going. Suddenly he fell into a deep hole. 

 
?HELP!? he cried out.  Hedgehog looked down. "I thi
nk you need to be more afraid of yourself 
than you are of snake."   "That's not funny!" said 
Mouse. "I twisted my foot and I can't climb 
out."  "Are you sure?" said Hedgehog. "Yes I'M SURE
!" said Mouse, a little mad by now. "Just 
stay calm!" said Hedgehog. "I'll find help." 

 
He found Squirrel, but squirrel said he couldn't he
lp. "It™s too dark down there, and I am afraid of 
the dark. And there might be spiders. I'm afraid of
 spiders." 
 
Rabbit, when asked, came to the hole, looked down a
nd said "It™s too deep. I could never jump 
that high and get out. I'd be stuck too." 

 
Hedgehog said, "Don't look at me. I have prickles o
n my back and that would hurt him.? But 
soon, all the animals heard some wooshing in the gr
ass. It was Green Tree Snake. 
 
"What's up?" said Green Tree Snake. "Oh," whispered
 Hedgehog, "Mouse fell into a DEEP hole 
and can't get out cause he hurt his foot. None of u
s know how to get him out." 
 
"I'll go down and get him. No problem," said Green 
Tree Snake. 
 
"NO, NO, NO!? said Hedgehog. "That's not a good ide
a. Skunk and Fox have been telling 
Mouse that all snakes are dangerous to mice. Mouse 
is afraid of you." 
 
"But I have always been Mouse's friend," said Green
 Tree Snake, "so I am going to rescue 
Mouse anyway." 

 
"How can you do that without scaring Mouse?" asked 
Hedgehog, "Watch," said Green Tree 
Snake. "Someone get me a long stick. Good. Now, tie
 my tail---tight---around the stick. Good." 
Then Green Tree Snake lowered the stick down the ho
le, as he himself coiled around a nearby 
tree, going higher and higher. Mouse saw the stick 
but not Green Tree Snake. He grabbed on, 
and as Green Tree Snake spiraled up the tree trunk,
 the stick lifted Mouse out of the hole. When 
he got out of the hole, he saw who it was who helpe
d him. "See. Green Tree Snake helped you!" 
said Hedgehog. "He did!" said Squirrel and Rabbit. 

 
"Because," said Green Tree Snake, "I would never hu
rt you." "I'm sorry for listening to Fox and 
Skunk," said Mouse. "I'm sorry for not being your f
riend."  And the next day, Mouse picked a 
bouquet of spring flowers and brought them to Snake
, as a way of saying thanks. And Snake was 
very happy. 

 
Greeting  
(Announcements and Caring Cards)
  
Affirming A
.  
Ojibway Prayer, 19th Century 
The Ojibwe were a native nation across the north ea
stern part of North America, especially the 
Great Lakes Area. with many names, including Chippe
wa. They were made famous in the long 
poem Hiawatha, by the Unitarian poet, Longfellow.  
Gitchee Manidou is translated as Great 
Mystery, although missionaries often used it as a s
ubstitute for the word God. 
 
music starts  

Gitchee Manidou---Great Mystery, 

Grandparent of our days 

behold our brokenness. 

  ----------------- 

We know very well that in all the earth 

only the human family 

has strayed so far from the sacred way. 

   ----------------- 

We know that we are the ones who are divided, 

and that we are the ones  

who must come back together 

to travel once again along the sacred way. 

   ------------------ 

Great Mystery, Gitchee Manidou 

Grandparent of our days remind us of love 

remind us of compassion and remind us of honor 

  ----------------- 

that we may heal the earth 

and heal each other.            
music ends
  
Affirming B
:  BREAD Alice Rathburn 
   Good morning. Each month a member of our Justice
 Action Ministry speaks to the 
congregation about one of the many projects funded 
by your contributions to First UU™s 
operating budget.  BREAD Œ Building Responsibility,
 Equality, and Dignity Œ is the social 
justice interfaith community organization that our 
church helped found, and pledged to support 
17 years ago.   
Once
 each year, BREAD congregations have the single 
most important
 social justice 
event in Central Ohio, the Nehemiah Action.  BREAD 
gets results from public officials because 
you and thousands of other BREAD supporters show up
, in person, and demand action for real 
and significant change.  
This
 year, BREAD will press for additional progress
 toward keeping kids in school, 
healthcare, juvenile justice, and jobs.  And we™ll 
push public officials to deal with problems of 
discrimination against immigrants.  Now, I apprecia
te that immigration policy can be a 
controversial topic, but discrimination surely is n
ot!  Just hear this story of the daughter and son-
in-law of a member of our 
own
 congregation.  I™ll call the couple Joan and Dan. 
 Dan was 20 when he came to the United States from M
exico in April, 2001, to earn 
enough money to complete his education.  
YES,
 he was undocumented– not much of an issue 
before 9/11–and 
YES,
 he stayed.  By working hard, Dan put his sister th
rough law school, built 
his mother a house, and continued his education. Al
most two years ago, he married Joan, now 
pregnant; and they began saving for a home of their
 own.   
They also hired an immigration attorney to address 
Dan™s immigration status. But 
Immigration is 
so
 backed up that, after two years, Dan still doesn™t
 have a court date. 
So Dan could not, of course, produce acceptable ide
ntification when he was stopped by 
the police for supposedly running a red light and d
riving left of center Œ minor misdemeanor 
charges later dropped because neither was on the cr
uiser™s videotape.  When he followed his 
immigration attorney™s previous instructions and di
dn™t explain why he didn™t have the ID, Dan 
was charged with a 
felony 
and taken to jail.  There his wallet, cell phone, a
nd clothing were 

confiscated and ICE (Immigration Control and Enforc
ement), contacted.  Without his cell phone, 
Dan couldn™t call his attorney or Joan until the fo
llowing day. 
 Although Dan was already on Immigration Control™s b
ooks as an applicant for legal 
status, it was 
five
 days before ICE called Joan at work.  Dan would be
 deported immediately 
unless she brought in a cashier™s check for $7,500 
by 3:00 p.m. that day.  Joan rushed to comply, 
the criminal charges were dropped, and Dan was fina
lly released.  But even though the cruiser™s 
video did not show the alleged traffic violations, 
Dan was charged with a fourth degree 
misdemeanor for so-called reckless driving.  His se
ntence was one day already served, 
not 
five 
days, and $2,000. 

 Immigration is holding Dan™s passport 
and
 the $7500 until after the immigration 
hearings, which could be three, five, even seven ye
ars from now.  So Joan and Dan have spent all 
of their savings Œ almost $20,000 Œ to fight specio
us criminal charges and to follow legal 
procedures to resolve his immigration status.  

 Is this story unusual?  Not at all.  We have heard
 countess stories from members of our 
sister BREAD congregations of discrimination, racia
l profiling, and even documented 
immigrants not reporting crimes, because they fear 
bringing attention to an undocumented family 
member. 
What can we do?  We can live up to our First UU mis
sion statement to practice ?
true 
hospitality? 
and to ?relinquish the safety of our unexamined pri
vilege to engage in 
transforming justice
.?
  Your 
presence at the Nehemiah Action on May 6 gives BREA
D the 
power
 to hold public officials accountable for making Co
lumbus a more welcoming community 
for immigrants, as well as for the other problems b
eing addressed. 
First UU is committed to having 250 to 300 adults a
nd children at the Nehemiah Action 
on May 6.  But we can™t do it without 
you, 
your family and friends.  Mark, Eric, and I will be
 
there.  Will you? 

Communing
 So after this week of explosions killing and hurtin
g people, I find I want to say this: I actually 
want to 
be for
 explosions, explosions that are for life, not deat
h. I am for the original bang, the 
original explosion that gave us all of space and ti
me as we know it, cradling the very earth on 
which we now in humility rest. The great old stars 
which exploded billions of years ago shed the 
very elements that eventually rolled up into us as 
we sit here right now. Ideas that did not so 
much dawn, as explode in human minds in the history
 of this planet, are in the business of slowly 
changing the whole world; no longer are we merely i
nstinctive like a one-celled creature,  but 
decisive, and visionary and social in a way far mor
e elegantly than bees. As our forbears put it: 
Love one another. Support each other shoulder to sh
oulder.  Adore your children. Lift the hurt 
out of ditches. Welcome strangers, for you are just
 as strange to them. Learn to form societies 
around freedom, not force. Learn to heal your broke
n hearts, to deepen your understanding, to 
ask more challenging questions, even of your own mo
tivations, never afraid of the answers, but 
rejoicing in unfolding truth. 

 
I am for explosions...but explosions that enhance l
ife, not make death.  I am for ideas and visions 
and images that are for life, not death. And then I
 am for the silence that falls deeper than deep 
after these explosions have distributed their new l
ife. Indeed, I am for this silence, right now. 
 
silence 

 
I am for joining in this celebration, not as an esc
ape from life, but as an embrace of it, with all of
 
its ups and downs which, after all, cannot be disen
tangled from each other. So we come to this 
moment, when we are free to remember aspects of our
 lives far from this room perhaps, or near, 
but which be bring to this moment...the inner prese
nce in our lives of those we love, those who 
love us, those whom we struggle mightily to love, t
hose whom we mourn and remember, and 
who call forth our deepest gratitude; we name them 
silently inside our hearts, or make the sound 
that is their name softly with our lips: 

 
naming 

 
I am for the explosion of music that rises from the
 silence to heal, to offer us testimony of 
harmony, to thrill, to soothe, to delight, to arous
e us to new life. 
 
The First Reading
 is a poem by Neal Bowers, written 25 years ago. I u
sed it for the homily I 
gave at the communion celebration just before Easte
r, but I wanted to unpack it again...and 
more deeply for this service. The story of the Good
 Samaritan has become a byword in English. 
The original story, found in the gospel of Luke, is
 known to many. Most scholars accept this as a 
genuine utterance of Jesus. It™s about a man who tr
avels down the road from Jerusalem to 
Jericho. He is ambushed by bandits, who beat him up
, take his money and his clothing and leave 
him half dead. A priest from the temple and an assi
stant from the temple both walk past, and 
cross to the side of the road to avoid him. But a S
amaritan comes by on his donkey, gets off, 
disinfects his wounds with some oil and wine, hoist
s him on the donkey, and rents him a room at 
an inn, offering to pay the innkeeper more if neces
sary on his return trip. Neal Bowers wrote this 
in response:  Living the Parable 

 
Wanting to be helpful, we all  

see ourselves as the Samaritan 

rather than the priest or his assistant, 

and never as the bruised man in the ditch, 

stripped and penniless, taken to a room 

smelling of figs and tallow, 

where he turns painfully in bed 

tonguing his chipped tooth, 

touching his swollen eye. 

 
After all, who would imagine himself 

mugged somewhere between Jerusalem and Jericho  

when he could ride in like some minor deity 

on a donkey packed with oil and wine, 

his fat purse tucked away, credit unlimited. 

 
Better to be the one without cracked ribs 

safe on the hard packed road, 

pausing long enough to help 

some creature with no luck.. 

a dog, a sheep, a beaten man... 

not one of us. 

 
The Second Reading
 is a powerful poem by Teresa de Jesus, the pseudony
m of a Chilean 
woman who wrote these words in 1973 during the viol
ent overthrow of the Allende government.  
 
All of a Sudden 

 
What is it with these people-swallowing streets  

all of a sudden? 

They've become cannibal streets, all of a sudden, 

these ordinary familiar streets groomed every hour 
with creamy blue smog. 
All of a sudden the streets are filled with hidden 
swordsmen of death, 
or else are long highways straight to jail cells. 

We no longer know our destinations,  

nor our destinies. 

All of a sudden, only the streets know how many gua
rds are stationed at the corner, 
or how many plainclothes cops  

are waiting for someone to leave his house. 

All of a sudden, there are accomplices to crime eve
rywhere. Spies and assassins all around us. 
They feast on people with shoes, or I.D. cards, or 
with a photo of a sweetheart, 
and it all slips down the large mouth  

of this new-fangled hangman. 

All of a sudden, the same streets,  

strolled by mothers and babies 

and sweet tender pregnant women, 

are posting agents at each intersection. 

All of a sudden, these urbane streets, 

ordinary as every day, start crying out, 

and from behind the cloudy smoke 

you can catch sight of the open mouth of a wolf, 

a sly and effective blow, that swallows our childre
n  
half a month at a time forever. 

 
Preaching 

 
I like to help other people. I dare say most of us 
want to be of help when can. Help a friend 
move, including those heavy books. Help by driving 
a housebound senior to a doctor's 
appointment. Help by offering our jumper cables to 
kick-start a dead battery in a neighbor's car. 
Help by loaning a cup of flour to a neighbor for a 
recipe.   Help by picking up a pal up at the 

airport when he returns from his grandmother's fune
ral. Help by cooking some soup for an ill 
friend.  

 
But certainly, all this week my eyes have been fill
ed with more 
extraordinary 
images of help. 
People helping the hobbling wounded off to safety. 
First aid applied to wound, hugs applied to 
shock. People holding the hands of complete strange
rs in the fading smoke as they sob in Boston, 
weep in Texas. People risking their lives to carry 
people to safety amidst the flames. 
 
Extraordinary images of help, yes, but not atypical
, by any means. So many of us rise to the 
occasion when disaster of any kind strikes. Take th
e Fukushima Nuclear Plant disaster in Japan. 
Afterward, some 200 retired seniors...engineers, te
chnicians in their seventies and eighties even, 
organized themselves to work in the radioactive env
ironment to help secure the situation. "Let 
the young live, and have their families. We have fi
nished our work, watched our families grow 
and thrive. It™s for us to do this work, not the yo
ung." 
 
How moving is that? A 
sacrificial
 help offered by folks who see life from a larger v
antage, what 
our Ojibway neighbors might call the Sacred Way. Th
us, as you may have suspected, the 
children's story this morning was titled 
Help
 for a reason. Remember? It tells how Green Tree 
Snake helps out poor Mouse, who had fallen into a d
eep hole. 
 
No explosions or radiation involved. But trouble no
netheless, since none of his other friends can 
figure out a way to help him. Green Tree Snake slit
hers by, and immediately offers his help. But 
Mouse has heard that all snakes are dangerous to mi
ce, even though he has been friends with his 
green buddy for a long time. He listened to rumors,
 to gossip, to innuendo, to sheer bigotry from 
Skunk and Fox (and yes, I do understand that by usi
ng the word Fox, the innuendo is flowing in 
the other direction as well!). 

 
But Green Tree Snakes do not eat mice. Never have. 
Never will. The gossip was a lie. A 
distortion. And Snake, a real gentle snake if there
 ever was one, heard that Mouse feared him... 
and helped anyway. 

 
Sort of sounds like the animal version of the Good 
Samaritan story from the New Testament, 
doesn't it? Ah, the Good Samaritan...it™s now a phr
ase in common English. We have Good 
Samaritan Hospitals, and Good Samaritan laws... but
 hey! who the heck knows what a Samaritan 
is?
  
The Samaritans, almost a million strong in the days
 of Jesus, were sandwiched between Judea 
and the Galilee in a land they called Shomrom, a pl
ace where they had their own temple on 
Mount Gerizim. The Samaritans called themselves Chi
ldren of Israel, but not Jews, that is, not 
Judeans. They had their own version of the Torah, t
heir own version of ritual life, and their own 
complex ethnicity...and they just didn't get along 
with those Judeans down in Jerusalem. The 
Judeans didn't like the Samaritans either. They wer
en't allowed to marry each other, they played 
nasty tricks on each other too, almost like fratern
ity rivals out of control...e.g., once a Samaritan 
gang threw a bunch of dead men's bones into the Jer
usalem temple to de-purify it just before 
Passover. The Roman Prefect who killed Jesus, Ponti
us Pilate, lost his career by having his 
soldiers murder a bunch of Samaritans. He listened 
to gossip about one of their teachers, 

believed it, and had his soldiers kill many of them
 because of that gossip.  
 
So, as I told you, the Good Samaritan story tells o
f four men, a Judean man about whom we 
know little, a priest, an assistant priest, also bo
th Judeans, and a Samaritan. Now, none of these 
guys seems very aware of how the world works. After
 all, no one with any wisdom travelled that 
road between Jerusalem and Jericho all by themselve
s, since the hills lining the road with filled 
with bandits, and famously so.  So the poor guy get
s beaten up, is left naked and half dead in a 
ditch. Two holy guys pass him by...perhaps, they th
ought he WAS dead, and priests were not 
supposed to get close to dead people before doing t
heir rituals...this may even be a sarcastic 
reference to the bones of a dead man being thrown i
nto the temple that I mentioned earlier. But 
this Samaritan guy comes by, alone, with a donkey, 
oil and wine in his backpack, money in his 
wallet, and a kind heart to take the injured guy to
 a place where he could recover.  Moral? Good 
guy wins, even though he is a hated Samaritan. 

 
Neal Bowers sees something else in the story, howev
er, something that brings me up hard 
against my own self-understanding: 
Wanting to be helpful, we all see ourselves as the 
Samaritan, 
he writes 

rather than the priest or his assistant, 

and never as the bruised man in the ditch... 

 
Ain't that the truth? We must be the good guys, bec
ause we identify with the helper. But Bowers 
does not let up on us: 
After all, who would imagine himself
 mugged somewhere between 
Jerusalem and Jericho when he could ride in 
like some minor deity 
on a donkey packed with oil 
and wine, his fat purse tucked away, credit unlimit
ed. 
 
Ah, that stings a bit, doesn't it? Then he tightens
 his argument even more... 
Better to be the one 
without cracked ribs pausing long enough to help so
me creature with no luck...a dog, a sheep, a 
beaten man...
not one of us
. 
 
Yes, not one of us. We're not like that. We're like
 deities. Good people. We never skipped out on 
school. We always keep our homes well painted, lawn
s cut neat. We never crossed a border 
under a barbed wire fence, never had to go to neigh
borhood healthcare center, or committed 
routine misdemeanors when we were teenagers. Neal B
owers is saying that, in identifying with 
the helper Samaritan, with his means and his own go
od fortune, we have lost any sense of 
identity with the man in the ditch who suffered dee
p misfortune. We can help...yes, we have the 
oil, the wine, and the wallet...but identifying wit
h the man's predicament? Who would want to do 
that? 

 
The poet Teresa de Jesus points out that such dire 
predicaments are not confined to New 
Testament parables, nor to the streets of Boston or
 a Texas town in 2013. She writes of the year 
1973, when the government was overthrown in Chile. 
Speaking of Santiago, she writes 
plaintively: 
What is it with these people-swallowing streets 
 all of a sudden? They've become 
cannibal streets, all of a sudden, these ordinary f
amiliar streets
. 
All of a sudden the streets are 
filled with hidden swordsmen of death, or else are 
long highways straight to jail cells
. All of a 
sudden, only the streets know how many guards are s
tationed at the corner, or how many 
plainclothes cops are waiting for someone to leave 
his house. All of a sudden, there are 

accomplices to crime everywhere
. Spies and assassins all around us. All of a sudden
, these 
urbane streets, ordinary as every day, start crying
 out, and from behind the cloudy smoke... 
I thought I was reading about Boston when I read th
at poem. 
All of a sudden
. 
All of a sudden
. 
Smoke in the streets. Cops waiting in Watertown for
 this young teenaged suspect to leave the 
house...or boat as it turns out...he was hiding in.
 Assassins everywhere, writes the poet. Santiago, 
yes, but also Boston this week, and Detroit during 
the uprising of 67. The riots in suburban Paris 
last year. 9/11. The smoke in the air over Cairo. L
arge events. Horrific events. Events that 
generate fear, uncertainly and make us question eve
rything. All of a sudden, after such events, 
we are not the helpful Samaritan anymore. We get it
 now. We're the guy in the ditch. We™re all in 
that ditch with chipped teeth and blackened eyes, s
cared, angry, waiting for the next explosion. 
We're waiting for the next jack-in-the-box terroris
t to pop up and steal our lives. 
 
I understand that sudden fear, that upsetting disru
ption to everything ordinary, I think. And yet I 
am here to say this morning that for many folks, th
e ditch, and the poem about the streets, ARE 
everyday occurrences. They are not confined to one 
sad week in April, 2013, but spread out over 
the years...slow-motion, something like silent but 
very real explosives going off in their lives. 
Like the folks Alice mentioned in her good words, D
an and Joan, folks associated with this very 
congregation here in Clintonville, not in faraway p
laces like Phoenix or Tucson.  Here. The story 
Alice told, and which I know for myself, is a real 
story about real people...and it™s a story of 
bigotry, bullying, fear and trembling, and yes, ter
rorism. It™s just not, to use the poet™s words, a 
story framed with the explosion "All of a sudden." 
But the intensity of that story echoes the 
horror in Boston, even thought it™s local, more sin
gular and without a trip to Good Samaritan 
hospital. I say threats and death hover about this 
story, just like the smoke on Boston streets.  
 
What BREAD, our gathered interfaith justice organiz
ation affirms is this: in our own schools, in 
our own streets, in our own neighborhoods, injustic
e and cruelty and sadness are happening 
all 
the time,
 not 
all of a sudden
. To focus on these issues, we are called to open o
ur eyes...that is...do 
research on these issues... as many people in this 
congregation have done. We are called to work 
together...not to walk down that road between Jerus
alem and Jericho by ourselves, as 
individuals...we know now that's foolish. The power
 to change things, to name things that have 
been silenced, is simply greater when we are togeth
er. We are called, not so much to help...in the 
ordinary sense of the word, which I certainly salut
e...soup to the sick, rides to the doctor, the 
beaten lifted from a ditch...but rather, to be 
allies
, to work shoulder-to-shoulder, side-by-side, 
with people very different from ourselves in cultur
e and religion... on issues that 
affect us all
. 
Affect us all just because we share this city and t
his state and these streets together. Those among 
us who have more good fortune are not going to the 
Nehemiah meeting to rescue and save, but 
only to be allies to the immigrants who are treated
 with bigotry and terror in our own city. Allies 
to the teenagers in our schools who are kept from t
heir education by foolish practices and a court 
system that punishes and divides rather than restor
es relationship and encourages good 
citizenship, etc. Allies, not saviors. 

 
The explosions affected us all this week, no questi
on. But even before this week began, slow-
motion invisible explosions were going on all aroun
d our city, explosions that also call for our 
response... 

 
That's why Eric and I intend to show up at the Cele
ste Center at the Fairgrounds on Monday, the 

6th
 of May, at 6:15. You see, I don't think we'll ever
 be able to create a society that is completely 
safe from sad people and their weapons...after all,
 as the brilliant social scientist Marshall 
McCluhan once said, "Violence, whether spiritual or
 physical, is a quest for identity and the 
meaningful. The less identity, the more violence." 
Personally, I don't see that quest ending, soon 
or late. But we can join together in thoughtful pow
er as allies to mitigate and correct the results 
of slow-motion and quite explosive violence in our 
local community. 
 
To help is important, certainly, the strong helping
 the weak, the powerful helping the 
disempowered. But to join together in mutual suppor
t adds a religious dimension of insight that 
engages me at a far deeper level. I do like to help
...but I like to support and be an ally even more. 
 
Offering 

As many of you know, our congregation voted last ye
ar to fund our many social service and 
social justice projects from this church™s democrat
ically approved operating budget.  Our 
financial contributions not only fund First Unitari
an Universalist™s facilities, staff, Sunday school 
operation, and numerous activities but also its soc
ial services, such as Faith Mission and YWCA 
Family Center dinners.  Oh, and by the way, our ple
dges and other contributions pay First UU™s 
BREAD dues and help to support many other social ju
stice organizations that are working to 
make a difference. So whether you pay your pledge a
nnually, monthly, or weekly, remember that 
every dollar you contribute helps to make a differe
nce in our world. The ushers will please come 
forward. 

Prayer to lift up Earth Day 

I am part of April. April is a part of me. 

I am part of the Sahara. The Sahara is a part of me
. 
I am part of a lily. The lily is a part of me. 

I am part of the tear on the cheek of one who weeps
. 
One who weeps is a part of me. 

Each leaf, each child, each bell, each gale of 

laughter, each scream, each blade of grass, each br
ook, each crow, dolphin, giraffe, each song is 
a part of me and I am part of them, for I am not on
 the earth, 
I am of the earth, and not one part of earth can be
 cut off from anything else on earth forever and 
ever. Amen. 

