When in you the limited 'I' disappears, the infinite 'I' in you manifests itself automatically.” —Shri Meher Baba 
In "conversion'' the individual begins by recognising that life, as it is, cannot be made worth living except by welcoming within himself a complete change of outlook. He, therefore, entirely recreates his character and goes through a spiritual rebirth. During this process he identifies himself with his higher self, and becomes conscious, as William James has pointed out, that "this higher part    is conterminous and continuous with a more of the same quality which is operative in the universe outside him". On this more he relies in undisturbed confidence for the ultimate success of his spiritual enterprise in all moments of crisis. 
From the psychologica1 point of view it is important to ask whether this more is really external to the individual, 
or whether it is only a part of himself. It is widely accepted by modern psychology that the waking consciousness is only a slice of the total personality. And from the point of view of waking con­sciousness this more is clearly both external and real. Religious consciousness is, therefore, justified in regarding this more as external. Psychology may at the same time be justified in trying to show continuity between the conscious part of the individual and this more. And from the metaphysical point of view the hypothesis of a collective superconsciousness which does not belong to a single individual remains an open question. 
In religious consciousness the more is conceived as an Eternal Ideal or a Divine Person. In the former case the techni- 

que of achieving this more consists of persevering fidelity, and in the latter case it consists of love and self-surrender.* The distinction between these two types of religious consciousness is strictly speaking created by a difference of emphasis on some elernents of religious consciousness rather than other elements. They are, however, not necessarily mutually exclusive. 
In the first type the individual almost always has before his mental eye some historical or imaginary person whom he believes to be the eternal ideal of man. And in the second type the divine person is always taken to embody and symbolise the eternal ideal. In a fully developed form of religious consciousness both of these aspects are found equally developed in the concept of the Higher. 
In the beginning this Higher is supposed to be essentially external and at a considerable distance from the individual. There is, however, no unbridgeable gulf  between  this Higher and the individual. It can be realised by him. And, having attained the Higher, the individual is so much impressed with its reality that he considers himself as having 
either an illusory or a derivative reality; and he is so much impressed by its value that he looks upon himself as having no worth in himself when taken in isolation from this Higher. Whatever real worth he has he owes it to his being an embodiment or a vehicle of this Higher.  
The derivative reality and worth of the finite individual in religious consciousness follows from the recognition that the Highest alone has absolute reality and final value. There is, therefore, an illuminating and striking contrast between the formulæ of moral and religious consciousness. The former speaks of self-realisation, while the latter prefers to speak of the realisation of the "Self which is the Self of selves", or the realisation of God or "the Truth", or, in more mystic moods, of the realisation of "It", or again, in more daring mood, of "nothing” or “nothingness”, or sometimes only of plain “Realisation”.* 

The Highest revealed in religious consciousness is conceived as a reality which is at once trans­cendent of and immanent in all that exists. It is in some such manner that the individual tries to grasp from within the unity of Being which runs in and through the diversity of its manifestations. The “Brotherhood” of the living and the “Fatherhood” of God thus become only two aspects of one single integral experience. 
In the light of this analysis of religious experience, it is now possible to find out its implications 
(1) on the nature of the individuality of the object of religious experience, and also (2) the nature of the indivi­duality of the finite individual. 
It is characteristic of the religious attitude to look upon the object of religious experience not as some abstract law or a concept,  but as an eternal reality which is not less but more real than the finite individual who seeks to be one with it. This eternal reality is further not mere Being. The concept of pure Being is arrived at through a process of abstraction from all the individual existents by omitting every quality which they have in their concreteness. Being in this sense is a feature of everything that exists. The Eternal Reality of religious consciousness is not such mere being, but is a Universal Con­sciousness. 
But the Universal Conscious­ness cannot again, as in some types of idealism, be depleted of all characteristics except the intellect­ual. Any such "bloodless category'' is far from giving us the correct description of the Reality as revealed in religious experience. It is more than universal conscious­ness. It is Universal life. 
Further, in so far as there is in the religious attitude the distinction between the subject 

and the object, the eternal reality is even regarded as the Infinite Person who is from His side as much interested in realising himself in and through the finite individuals as the finite individuals are interested in realising themselves in and through Him. Man loves God, and God loves man. There is thus in relig­ious experience complete recipro­city between the subject and the object.* In the words of Dr. Tagore:-  
"The love that tunes the strings 
of existence 
Breaks out in music when 
my heart is won."† 
In attributing personality to God as revealed in religious conscious­ness, there is some risk of our transferring to him en-bloc that limited concept of personality which we come to form by an analysis of the nature of the finite individual. The analogy of the finite individual cannot be used in this context without some necessary modifications. 
God cannot be adequately conceived as being confined within the limits of any finite form. 
In so far as He is immanent, His life flows in and is shared by every living thing. And in so far as He is transcendent, He is the Formless or the Unmanifest which is the eternal ground and source of the entire world of manifestation. 
But, because God is in one aspect transcendent and unmanifest, and in another aspect lives in and through the entire realm of finite individuals, it does not follow that he is not personal. If it is a mistake to transfer the limitations of finite individuality to God, it is a greater mistake to look upon Him as less than personal. For religious con­sciousness God must be capable of loving and of being loved. 
But as His love is all-compre­hensive and embraces in its fold all the finite individuals, He is not just one person among others. He is "the infinite apprehended as personal, and derives from our immediate experience of the infinite in finite persons”.‡ The term supra-personal, which has been suggested§ in this connection, is perhaps the best to describe the individuality of God, 

1 if sufficient care is taken not to allow its meaning to dwindle down imperceptibly into that which is merely impersonal, and, 
2 if, at the same time, we guard ourselves against the mistake of making the personality of God completely external to life of the finite individual. 
“Communion” of man and God is not a kind of mechanical contact between two mutually exclusive entities. It is an instance of a unique and intimate relationship in which the "sharing" of life is so complete as to invalidate all theories which find a fundamental dualism between God and man and try to set one against the other. In religious consciousness we have the experience of God in the finite individual and of the finite individual in God. 
Coming now to the implication of religious experience for the nature of the finite individual, we find that his consciousness points out to a completeness which does not belong to him qua finite. Indeed in the 
light of the analysis of the religious experience, it becomes impossible to look upon him as merely finite. 
"Merely finite” is an abstraction from his concrete reality. He is an integral part of a greater reality in which "he lives and moves and has his being" and is not an absolutely self-sufficient and self-contained entity. He is, therefore, essentially "Janus-faced, human-divine, finite infinite". Just as the infinite exists in and through the finite, the finite also exists in and through the infinite. 
In religious experience the “nisus” for self-knowledge and self­realisation leads the finite individual to turn away from the finite to the infinite. The process does not consist in the bare negation of the finite but in an increasing awareness of the self-affirmation of the infinite in and through the finite. It is, therefore, a process of a gradual release from the thraldom of abstractions and partial views. It is an entering into a fuller understanding and app­reciatian of the One in the many, which is not merely a one of the many, or in William James’ striking phrase, "one of the eaches”. 

In the conscious realisation of the and experience the individual grad-infinity of which he is an heir, the ually enters into the possession of individual finds at once the complete his own highest value. The culmin­satisfaction of his total personality ation of this process is his destina­and the only absolute basis for tion. In that culmination he realises integrating all his activities in the ultimate meaning of his life and relation to other finite individuals. the final purpose of his individual Thus through religious aspiration existence. "The task is done." 
(To be continued) 
. 
