Sunday, May 30, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Then said one unto him, Lord, are there few that be saved? And he said unto  them, Strive to enter in at the strait gate; for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. When once the master of the house is risen up, and hath shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying,  Lord, Lord, open unto us; and he shall answer and say unto you, I know ye not whence ye are. Then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets. But he shall say, I tell you, I know ye  not whence ye are; depart from me, all ye WORKERS OF INIQUITY. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, and you yourselves thrust out. And  they shall come from the east, and from the west, and from the north, and from the south, and shall sit down in the kingdom of God. And, behold, there are last which shall be first, and there are first which shall be last. The same day there were  certain of the Pharisees, saying unto him, Get thee out, and depart hence; for Herod will kill thee." Lk. 13:23-31.  "Then Jesus sent the multitude away, and went into the house; and his disciples came unto him, saying, Declare unto us the PARABLE OF THE TARES of the field. He answered and said unto them, He that soweth the good seed is the Son of man; The field is the world; the good seed are the children of the kingdom; but the TARES are the children of the wicked one; The enemy that soweth them is the devil; the harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels. The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity; And shall cast them into a furnace of fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. Then shall the righteous SHINE FORTH AS THE SUN" ­ (i.e., shining brilliantly, resplendently, effulgently, in heavenly glory) ­ "in the kingdom of their Father. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear." Mat. 13:36-43.  "Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast into the sea, and gathered of every kind; Which, when it was full, they drew to shore, and sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad away. So shall it be at the end of the world; the angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the just, And shall cast them into THE FURNACE OF FIRE; there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. Jesus saith unto them, Have ye understood all these things? They say unto him, Yea, Lord." (Mat. 13:47-51)  Concerning these holy, righteous ones that will shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father, they are, of course, all the ELECT, whose names are written in the Lamb's book of life in Heaven; and of whom Bro. Gill says; to wit: "But who are made righteous by the righteousness of Christ imputed to them; these, though they have been in this world loaded with reproaches, and attended with many afflictions and persecutions; and have been despised for their poverty and meanness, and want of outward glory, honor, riches and prosperity; shall now shine forth in the robe of Christ's righteousness, in perfect holiness of nature, in all felicity and prosperity of soul; and in the shining, dazzling robes of glory, incorruption, and immortality, on their bodies; even as the sun, having no spot in them, or upon them, and without any clouds of darkness; they will be as Christ Himself, the sun of righteousness, with whom, and in whose glory they shall appear, both in soul and body, in the kingdom of their Father. Much the same images, here made use of, to set forth the glory of the saints, both in soul and body, in the world to come, are expressed by the Jews in their ancient writings. The faces of the righteous, they say, in time to come, shall be like to the sun, and moon, to the stars and planets, and lightnings, and lilies, and to the lamp of the sanctuary. They say that God, in time to come, will beautify the body of the righteous, as the beauty of the first man, when he entered into paradise, (Adam), and that the soul, whilst in its dignity, shall be sustained with the superior light, and be clothed with it; and when it shall  Sunday, May 30, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  enter into the body hereafter, it shall enter with that light; and then shall the body shine, as the  brightness of the firmament, as is said in Dan. 12:3; to wit: "And many (i.e., the multitudes) of them  that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and  everlasting contempt. And they that be wise (i.e., all God's Elect) SHALL SHINE AS THE  BRIGHTNESS OF THE FIRMAMENT; and they that turn many to righteousness (i.e., all God's  Elect) AS THE STARS FOR EVER AND EVER. But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal  the book, even to the time of the end; many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased."  Dan. 12:2-4. And a little after `tis said, that when the soul goes out, the body is left, which shall be there  built again, as the light of the sun, and as the brightness of the firmament. Little wonder that this  glorious passage of Scripture (i.e., Mat. 13:43) concludes with the solemn warning from the Savior  Himself; to wit: "Who hath ears to hear, let him hear;" meaning, let him seriously consider of the  several things covered in this parable, concerning the wheat and tares, the righteous and the wicked, as  being `matters of the greatest moment and importance.' The TARES are the children of the wicked one,  (Ye are of your father the Devil, saith Christ), described by Benjamin Keach as follows, `The sower of  the evil seed (our Lord saith,) is the devil,' from whence the TARES sprung up, i.e., the children of the  wicked one; that is, they are the PRODUCT either of EVIL DOCTRINE, or else of the FILTHY LUSTS  that Satan by his temptations infuseth into the hearts of all unrenewed persons; for all sin and false  doctrine is of the devil. "Ye are of your father the devil," Jn. 8:44, i.e., the PRODUCE of his EVIL  SEED."  In further detailed description and identification of the TARES, Bro. Keach adds as follows; to wit: "I.e., men of abominable principles, holding dangerous heresies, and guilty of vile practices, and these would spring up among the wheat." In other words, in this world, the Elect of God amongst men, and the Non-Elect, are commingled the one with the other ­ which is a constant source of grievous vexation to the Elect, as with just Lot among the filthy Sodomites. 2 Pet. 2:8; to wit: "For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment; ... And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes condemned them with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto those that after should live ungodly; And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked; (For that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteousness soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds;) The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished." (2 Pet. 2:4-9)  An informational aside: But who, one might ask, is/was Benjamin Keach? He was a famous English Baptist Preacher, who lived from 1640 to 1704, dying at the age of 64, and who suffered much because of his Baptist faith. Among those struggles was a very infamous trial for views Keach expressed regarding Baptist principles, and the Second Coming of Christ in power and glory, in a little book, which was ultimately burned before his eyes, by the public hangman, on the public square, while he was bound hand and foot in the stocks. He was given two weeks imprisonment by a cruel and unjust judge, Chief Justice Hyde, and his sentence was rigorously executed; and fined twenty pounds ­ an enormous sum at that time.  Bro. Keach gained fame as a powerful Baptist preacher and defender of Baptist doctrine, being one of the original signers of, and a principal contributor to, The Westminster Confession of 1689, a Confession of Faith that WBC, for the most part, subscribes to. He began to preach at 18 years of age, and during a long, fruitful ministry, over forty books came from his pen; including the work for which he is perhaps best known, entitled "Exposition of the Parables."  Sunday, May 30, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  Also, Benjamin Keach was the first man to introduce hymn-singing into church worship services, in  1673; and later published a book of 300 hymns, entitled "Spiritual Melody." So much for the Benjamin  Keach informational aside, showing that Bro. Keach qualifies as an authority on the subject of the  Parables of our Lord Jesus Christ.  "But while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way." (Mt 13:25)  Now, Beloved, see how boldly Bro. Keach expounds God's holy Word; to wit: "By men sleeping here, NO DOUBT is meant the ministers of the Gospel, or pastors of churches, being remiss and careless in not staying awake and watching against Satan's sowing of TARES or evil seed; either the seed of lusts and earthly mindedness, (by which means some professors might be utterly spoiled, and come to nothing), or else the seed of errors and heresies; both are from Satan," says Keach. Point blank. No halting between two opinions, as Elijah hurled in the teeth of pussy-footers on Mt Carmel. It's the mealy-mouthed pastors, sleeping on the job, responsible for the damnable TARES. NO DOUBT ABOUT IT! says Keach. Sleeping watchmen, pastors, shepherds ­ an open invitation to the bloody carnivorous beasts of the fields and forests to slaughter and devour God's sheep; to wit: "All ye beasts of the field, come to devour, yea, all ye beasts in the forest. His watchmen are blind; they are all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber. Yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot understand; they all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from his quarter. Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; and tomorrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant." (Isa. 56:9-12)  These plain, strong words, straight from the Holy Ghost, speaking to us from the Bible and the front pages of the daily newspapers, should have every preacher and all other religious leaders trembling in their boots. The blood of the sheep (God's Elect) they were paid to warn and protect is dripping from their hands, and slaughtered and bleeding little dead lambs lie all over the landscape with deep gashing wounds laying their necks wide open. All these preachers stand in pari dilecto (i.e., equal blame and guilt) with the murderous wild beasts of the fields and forests.  Even Bro. Take-Your-Pick Gill appears to be strongly single-minded on just who these guilty sleepers are, but insists that they are "good men," nonetheless; to wit: "But while men slept. Good men, ministers and churches; whose case this sometimes is to be asleep in a spiritual sense; and which sleepiness lies in a non-exercise of grace; in a sluggishness in and to duty; in a contentment in external exercises of religion; in lukewarmness about the cause of Christ; in an unconcernedness about sins of omission and commission; and in a willingness to continue in such a state; and which arises from a body of sin and death; from worldly cares; weariness in spiritual duties; a cessation from spiritual exercises; an absenting from spiritual company; oftentimes from outward ease, peace, and plenty sometimes from a long expectation of the bridegroom's coming, and the delay of it; and from its being a night season, a time of darkness and security; such a case with the church, and good men, is very dangerous, as it exposes to every sin and snare; renders them liable to lose the presence of Christ, their liveliness and comfort; and tends to poverty and leanness of soul; such are in danger of being surprised with the midnight cry; and the churches are likely to be filled with hypocrites and heretics."  Such is, indeed, a good description of the TARES in the Savior's parable. But why in the world would anyone call them GOOD MEN, and GOOD MINISTERS, and GOOD CHURCHES? Gill has just described the great and overwhelming majority of those who call themselves Christians the world over. Beloved. These people are Hell-bound perverts ­ anything but GOOD MEN, and GOOD MINISTERS, and GOOD CHURCHES (!)(!)(!). The language of the dear Lord Jesus in referring to these hypocrites and heretics simply does not warrant calling them anything other than "WORKERS OF INIQUITY" ­  Sunday, May 30, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  a term of art in the Scripture, reserved there for Hell-bound reprobates. Take our text above, for an  example; to wit:  "When once the master of the house is risen up, and hath shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; and he shall answer and say unto you, I KNOW YE NOT whence ye are. Then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets. But he shall say, I tell you, I KNOW YE NOT whence ye are; depart from me, all ye WORKERS OF INIQUITY. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." (Lk. 13:25-28) A frequent pattern of language and word combinations in Scripture; to wit: I never knew (i.e., I never knew you with any approbation and favor; or, I never loved you; or, I never [no, not from all eternal ages past] have I loved you as one of my sheep). Ergo, You are all WORKERS OF INIQUITY; i.e., your full time job, occupation and profession is to rebel against your Creator and to malign and persecute God's faithful servants who are warning you to flee from the wrath to come. See, also, the word pattern as it appears at Mat. 7:21; to wit: "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I NEVER KNEW YOU; depart from me, YE THAT WORK INIQUITY." Mat. 7:21-23.  Beloved, seek to be able to fully expound this short passage or God's holy Word. The operative phrases are; to wit: I NEVER KNEW YOU, and, WORKERS OF INIQUITY. Notice, that our dear Lord Jesus does not take issue with their self-serving claims, that (1) they have ­ under certain safe and comfortable circumstances ­ referred to Christ Jesus as "Lord, Lord;" (2) they have ­ under favorable conditions ­ prophesied in Jesus' name; (3) they have ­ when it was the popular thing to do ­ cast out devils in the name of Jesus; and, (4) they have done many subjectively so-called "wonderful works." Beloved, the response of our Lord Jesus was amazing, and all our hopes for salvation for time and eternity hang on that glorious response.  Therefore let us closely examine and analyze that response; to wit: "And then will I profess unto them, I NEVER KNEW YOU; depart from me," ­ (i.e., you are bound irreversibly for Hell) ­ "YE THAT WORK INIQUITY." Mat. 7:23. It is as though the Savior should say to that whole worksrighteousness multitude, SO WHAT? It's all irrelevant. I don't know you. I never knew you. No. Not in eternal ages past, when my Father, and the Holy Ghost, and I, as it were; we three, the Trinity, the Godhead; sat down in the Great Council Hall of Eternity and hammered out the terms and conditions of the Covenant of Grace; a vital provision of which is the Lamb's Book of Life, wherein are listed the names of all the saved from among mankind ­ a tiny Remnant, compared to the damned, the Workers of Iniquity, none of whose names are written in the Book. The Savior loves and is thoroughly familiar with the saved. They, alone, will go to Heaven; to wit:  "And there shall in no wise enter into it (Heaven) any thing that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie; but they which are written in the Lamb's book of life." (Rev. 21:27) Bro. Thomas Brooks, concludes his great book, The Covenant of Grace, with the following paragraph; to wit: "I further plead, O blessed Lord, that there is an immutable connexion betwixt being written in this book of life and the obtaining of eternal life; and if the connexion betwixt being written in this book of life and the obtaining of eternal life were not peremptory, what reason could there be of opening this book in the day of judgment? The book of life is a book of sovereign grace, upon which lies the weight of my salvation, my happiness, my all; and therefore by that book I desire to stand of fall. Well, saith the Lord, ... `Come, ye blessed of my Father; inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.'" Mat. 25:34. I love you. Amen.  
