IMPRESSIONS 

BY PRINCESS NORINA MATCHEBELLI 

It is the 'New Life ' in external perpetual opposition that in Being in 'I' cons≠cious, indivisible in Him who is our own very Being, has come to the pure point of new awareness. This new form in conscious order in man He, as the Pure Power, is stirring, awakening. He creates the opposing order when men in themselves become indifferent and satiated with life inert within. We become under His guidance the alive Being in constant adjustment. The indispensable strife in life He can accentuate if need be. He can arouse the 'Divine Theme ' in any individual. Our mind, that busy factory of habit thoughts, misery, illusionary schemes of material happiness, making us feel separate creatures with separate lives, with separate goals, with expectation of reward for our good or bad deeds, these He will transmute in new conscious order in idea and make  man see  and know and feel. In the self-ordering state in new awareness of Truth within, men will feel equal; men will have confi≠dence in each other. He will bring to fulfillment the human being who will create better living conditions in the world. 

A joyful pilgrimage towards God is life in action for Him. No one but He, the Perfect One can assure in us the old Faith which is infallible Wisdom. God in His abstract state of OM, will remain mental illusion until one like Him gives us the experience of God as the 'Living Reality'. When the personal impersonal God appears it is the tangible sign for man to make good. That time is on. It is now. We need to be in readiness to react for the 'pure exchange '. 

When Shri Meher Baba took upon Himself the superhuman self-imposed sacrifice of silence that until now has lasted over thirteen years, He did it 





to serve the divine plan, to benefit mankind. Operating within He fulfills the 'One Way ' towards Union, which we, by the use of mind, by finite dual thinking order, too easily counteract. Being in us Life, Truth in Being order, He can within readjust the purls aim and that is the straight 'One Way ' to God. 

His instrument to operate with is life itself. Life positive and negative, a s t he opposites that we call unconditional form in strife, to evolve into the one all state that is pure. He designing into our 'intuition ' does the new stir. The Truth in its 'one all fulfilling plan ', achieves the exchange in consciousness. 

Traveling in foreign lands and walk≠ing through cities which have no other importance than to be the accumulation of the masses driven in self-experience by the illusion making mind, He, the unfathomable All Fate causes the in≠evitable evolution. 

Moving about like any ordinary human being, He uses motor cars, trains, airways. He lives in small huts, in luxurious abodes. He communes with the rich and with the poor. 

He uses the crude energy of the masses, and He searches out of the individual the more subtle contribution. The ex≠pansion of human qualities, jealousy, hate, anger, lust, are the impure work in our spiritual soil. Vice and deprivation are the manure He uses to fertilize the spiritual show in advancement. He removes fear through the awakening life in Being that in itself is the state of fearless pure existence wherein one experiences security, safety, hope. He awakens in us the optimism that results from this knowing experience. We realize that we are part in Him in Being which is divine. He forms in us a life of Hope that in us is divine humour. We can in this state of divine Being in 'I' conscious see, feel and know the Truth in full order in Being, and that is to see life pure, good, unconditional in its onward hope to readjust in all the Truth. We react in Him alive, sure, simple and natural. He, the pure 'Love Being,' in love with life, in love with all and any show in the human creature, designs into life the Truth as the form in which we know to want to become the 



form in which we result free, liberated human. We then have the winning will to overcome the show of the old pessi≠mist who, as He humorously says, makes the worst of the best; we shall become true optimists and true idealists. the optimist that makes the best of the worst, and the idealist that makes the best of the best. In the new state in consciousness we make good, feel good and see good in all in life, as it is. The New Awakening in man will bring the fruit of hard labour, hard struggle, long-lived longing, long-lived immune making work in the dual human. Love divine will make the miracle. 

Shri Baba is poor. He is impersonal in the use of gold and silver. We are supposed to give love while we perform the charitable gesture, and the material gift has to serve merely as a symbol. The fact of giving becomes impersonal when we begin to be unattached to the object that we have cherished as possession; we then realize the difference between giving for sharing and giving for self-satisfaction. It is the same in the work  within. We learn to detach ourselves from the act in Being when in our own selves we awaken to profess love as life, and in the external act are unsel≠fish. We learn to exchange the personal use of our individual experience with the divine order in Being that is unconditional in selfless use of its reactions and expresses external life unattached to any result, to any self-satisfaction. "Do no more than you can feel," says Shri Meher Baba. "By pre≠meditated giving you give parts of yourself, and by feeling in giving you give of your divine Self." He awakens in us the divine wisdom of the heart. No one can do the ultimate good until he has realized the good within. We exchange free and light life impersonal with life personal; the lower mental intuition with our Being intuition. We are determined not to resist to the changing work that He in us stirs, ad≠justs and forms to new life. 

    He may reveal Himself to the most humble form in consciousness and hide before the most creative erudite intel≠lects. Blessed are the pure in mind, to them God will reveal in Being. The meaning of this 



thought is pure, wise use in us. Pure thinking is that state of stillness of the mind, it is non-reaction in 'I' individual. Stilled in mind, freed from experience, we become conscious of the expansion of, pure love, of the pure living exode that is fusion in light winning rhythm of pure indivisible joy. We live life as a child, we then have the blessed state to be pure in mind, rich in heart ; it is like playing in Being, playing in life with illusion, as a child whose life is an unbroken dream state, whose life is pure exode in breathing, fulfilling unconsciously the unconditional expan≠sion in consciousness without resis≠tance. 

    Baba makes us become humble. He does the act of joining in us life as the individual form in external existence with the inner life in Being, that in its fulfilling order in awakening, works out in usóGod. He joins God and human life, life individual with life immutable. He liberates us from the ordeal of life in ourselves that in us is dual experi≠ence. He merges the opposites into the one all form and that is Love that gives and never demands. 

We can in no way see above the line of our finite mind. He will lift the veil of ignorance and help us to see the face of God. The veil is the ego. His love does the pure clearing work of the elimination of the ego. We in our own Being in exchange in consciousness react in pure winning will to our own qualities. These to us in life in finite existence seem crude, harsh, and give pain, and are the cause of our individual misery; they constitute in our own life the problem of individual reaction in experience. We know that life can in no way be seen as Truth-order as long as man has to react in finite mind in experience. Man is bound to react to the low order in ex≠prience of lust, jealousy, anger, greed, avarice. Resigned in Him, the Redeeming Pure Form, these low experiences of life finite transmute into pure energy and become the impetus of divine life indivisible. It becomes Truth action in pure winning will. Love in Being. Joy in Being. It becomes the divine action as the unfathomable longing for Union with the Beloved. He in His work indivisible realizes in us life  



indivisible. He transforms, redeems, resurrects. Awakening in 'I' conscious we become fearless and doubtless; we are freed from prejudices, free from divisionary ideas. When man resigns in Him, man will realize Liberation. His alive breath is our own life in ex≠change in life and death. As human Being He reflects our life in joy and pain. His pure order in suffering is our own life in Him suffering expiation. His Grace performs the work of Re≠demption. 

Within the realm of pure expansion in Divine Existence He is painless, calm, pure Bliss. He is like Jesus. He never sleeps, His sleep is indivisible Intuition work, indivisible love expan≠sion, un-interrupted conscious action. He loves within, without, above, be≠yond all and everythingóAll Knowing, Immutable. With His head he feels. With his heart He devises. He says: "I do not think, I feel." Shri Meher Baba works, still, silent, knowing, from working field to working field, from type to type, from nation to nation. His head includes God, universe, and every individual in Being. He will awaken in us the pure need to want to be like Him.  

( T o be continued) 