
THE Swami—Precisely on the 1st of February as instructed, the young Swami arrives in Bangalore at the Ashram after his pilgrimage to Rameshwaram, in the South. 
Giving an account of his trip, he narrated some interesting exper­iences during the sojourn. Through some places, he passed quietly and undisturbed, but at others, he was taken to be a real Swami and Guru and people wanted to come under his guidance and asked for advice in spiritual matters. Some wanted spiritual Upadesh (discourses), and he tried to give explanations as best as he could from all he had learnt and experienced during his years of wanderings in India and Tibet for spiritual yearnings. A man who was married, having a family, wanted to give up all his ties in order to follow the Path, but the Swami advised him to live with his wife and family, yet mentally to feel detached. At some places, he was asked to go on a lecture tour, preaching Vedanta. And last but not the least, at some other place, he was cleverly induced by a member of the fair sex, under the pretence of devotion, to live with her as she was all alone. But he waded his way through all these tests with a firm determination to fulfil the Master's injunctions and orders. He visited Rameshwaram, had darshana of a hundred sadhus (ascetics) and saints there, and returned immediately to Bangalore. The Master’s inner guidance and help, as he himself admitted, enabled him to go through all the trials, however hard, and having thus fulfilled his first mission, he returned to Bangalore to face the Master for further orders. 
His determination and longing were remarkable. Baba knew this and was very happy. He was however now preparing him for another ordeal, which he revealed to him the next day. 
The second stage of his spiritual pilgrimage was to go through the Deccan, to visit and have darshana of four of the greatest Masters of the Spiritual hierarchy—two living and two of them who had shuffled off their mortal coils. 

They need no introduction with our readers since these are too well-known for their connection with Meher Baba. 
By way of test, Baba first told him to go all this distance on foot, although it was not possible to return within the period of the month stipulated. But the Swami without a word of protest or complaint accepted the Master's injunction smilingly. When purposely asked by the Master if he could do it, he calmly replied "I don't know. Master knows all". Then Baba in his usual jovial mood, asked him to go by train, but without ticket as he wouldn't pay anything this time. 
"That would be cheating", he asserted. Baba replied: "I am glad you said it; yes, it would be cheating but it would be alright if you would take each slap that you get cheerfully and enjoy it, without feeling least hurt, mentally." 
The Swami did not answer, but stood silent yet smiling. 
Baba then offered him only Rs. 15 and asked him to manage the balance for himself. (The return fare to all these places would be nearly Rs. 25.) 
Gratefully accepting the Master's prasad (gift) and blessings, he left on his second mission. 
He first went to Sakori, in Ahmednagar District in the Deccan, where he took the darshana of Shri Upasani Maharaj (Baba's second Spiritual Master), and left immediately after the darshana, as instructed. From there, he went to Sherdi, a few miles away, where he paid his respects to the resting place of the Great Master Sai Baba (the Spiritual Master of Upasani Maharaj). Then he proceeded to Kedgaon, near Poona, where he had to meet another living Master Sri Narayan Maharaj, and after having his darshana he left immediately for Poona to visit the resting place of Hazrat Baba Jan, the first Spiritual Master of Meher Baba. 
From Poona, he came over to Pandharpur, one of the greatest places of pilgrimage in the Deccan, where hundreds of thousands gather twice a year to pay their respects to the great saint Vithoba. Here, he came across another Swami, Babadas—who had known Meher Baba for years and had now been on that side to acquaint people with Meher Baba's mission lecturing and distributing the books about the Master. It was not accidentally, but coincidentally they both met; the common cause for the Master which they intended to serve brought them closer in contact. How pleased they were to meet each other thus, could only be judged by those who know what a Master' s Love is, and what joy it brings. 

One of the Master's old dis­ciples, Mr. R. K. Gadekar, B.A., B.T., 
T.D. (Edin.), a deputy Educational Inspector in the Sholapur District, also happened to meet them there, and they were happy to converse about Baba. Exchange of experience from different angles brought new revelations. Taking advantage of the Swami's presence on that side, Babadas and Mr. Gadekar arranged for a public lecture in Sholapur to acquaint the people in that district, with the life and teaching of Meher Baba, through personal experiences as given by the Swami. 
Under the auspices of the Sahitya Seva Mandal (Literary Service Society) of Sholapur, and before a large and distinguished gathering, our Swami Bhabanand delivered a lecture on "Manav Dharma" (Duty of Man). 
Mr. M. S. Sardar, Bar-at-Law, presiding. 
Here is a brief report of the lecture: 
In the beginning, Mr. R. K. Gadekar, B.A., B.T., T.D. (Edin.) spoke about the ‘Life of Meher Baba and his noble Mission’ from his own personal experiences. 
While introducing Bhabananda and Babadas to the audience, Mr. P. 
N. Limkar, B.A., B.T., gave his own experiences derived from their company. He stated that true love for a Sadguru could easily be seen when one has the good fortune to move in the company of such loving devotees. 
Swami Bhabanada then gave an illuminating talk about about Universal Love and spoke at length about his contact with Meher Baba. The speech threw a flood of spiritual light on the audience and they were deeply impressed. 
One Hindi teacher Mr. Guru, after that, gave his experiences of the sacred darshana of Shri Baba and other saints. He expressed his joy to have come in touch with such devoted souls who had contacted and had received illum­inating experiences from Shri Baba. 

Rev. Mackenzie also explained what Masters mean and how rarely they are seen. He gave his own experiences of some real saints he had come in contact with. 
Mr. Limkar then read out a message of Shri Baba at the request of Swami Babadas—that Baba will break his silence at the proper time, which is now approaching. Let all be prepared to receive this blessed message from Shri Baba. 
The Chairman, Mr. Sardar, remarked how happy he was that day to be in company of the Swamis who had actually come in contact with a Master Shri Baba, and further stated that all should act up to Baba’s advice with faith and be blessed. 
* * * 
One of the most important changes that are recently effected with regard to the Master's work in connection with the new Centre was the cessation of the contract with the Mysore Engineering Company and taking over of the construction work by the Master's own group. For reasons best known to Baba, he wished to have this construction work of the new Universal Spiritual Centre done in accordance with his own ideas and plans under the direct supervision of his own group. The contract had therefore to be discontinued. The contractors were explained everything and the contract was terminated, on complete mutual agreement. 
This change in the plans would naturally take longer to complete the first two blocks. As complete acquiesecnce with the Master's plans was of greater consideration than that of time, Baba didn't mind the delay in construction by a few months. He in the meanwhile intends to go on a tour for over a month and then stay a few months in Meherabad, Ahmednagar, before returning to Bangalore, when the first two blocks are completed. He therefore starts on a tour on the 1st of April with obout 40 of his group. He expects to arrive at Meherabad, by the middle of May to stay there during the monsoon. 
The remaining members of the Master's group stay in Bangalore carrying out duties as assigned to each during the Master's absence. The three different Committees will continue their activities in their own spheres—the Centre (Build­

ing) Committee, will look after and supervise the construction work of the Centre, in strict accordance with the Master's plans; the Meher Editorial Committee conducting the work of publishing the group's monthly The Meher Baba Journal. and the Publication Committee carrying on its own activities in connection with the group's publi­cations and replying to inquiries and correspondence all over. 
After completion of the first two blocks, the entire group of the Eastern and Western disciples of the Master now staying here in Bangalore, as also those who accompanied the Master in his tour and staying in Meherabad, will all later be shifted to the new Centre blocks at Byramangala. 
* * * 
The Master's arrival and stay at Meherabad again after an absence of about ten months will gladden the hearts of his innumerable devotees and disciples on that side, many of whom will have the longed-for opportunities of meet­ing him at Meherabad, which they all missed due to the great distance during the Master's stay in Bangalore. 
The Master's coming over to Bangalore and the postponement of his plans at Mandla near Jubbulpore in the Central Prov­inces, had caused no small disappointment to many loving and devoted souls who had longed for the Master's stay in their midst and establish a Centre there. The Master, therefore, has planned to have one of his centres there, where according to him, he had a spiritual link with the past. One of his principal men in the Central Provinces, with two other assis­tants, has been sent over to Mandla to have a small structure errected in accordance with Baba’s plans, on the spot indicated in the plan (on the site gifted to him by one of the Malguzars of C.P.) The unexpected arrival of the Master's emmissaries from such a distance with the glad tidings rejoiced all hearts who have always been eager to have the Master in their midst. They have all offered spontaneous co-operation and the construction of a block in accordance with the Master's plans proceeds well ahead according to the reports received. 
MANDLA IN C.P. 


