


Why Birth Control is Wrong
Video
December 28. 2014

 What I want to preach about tonight is a subject that pretty much most people just considerate it a case closed and why are we still talking about this and does anybody actually still believe in this type of an issue. Honestly, we, as Christians need to not just follow blindly what our society tells us is right and our society tell us normal because there are a lot of things that our society accepts that are just frankly wrong.	Keep your finger on Isaiah 7 and go over to Romans chapter number 12. Because what I want to preach about tonight is the subject of birth control. Again this is something that everybody pretty much agrees that it's acceptable, 99% of people are doing it. Honestly, if we look at the bible tonight and examine this, we'll that this is actually not something that God wants us to do.	Now look if you would at Romans chapter 12 verse number two, it says and be not conformed to this world but be transformed by the renewing of your mind that you may prove what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God. That's what I want to point out to you that we need to prove what the will of God is. Not just say well, if everybody is doing it, if society says it's okay, if 99% of pastors and churches are fine with it, let's just go with the flow. 	No he said we need to not just be conformed to the world and just follow their pattern but we need to be transformed, we need to renew our mind and we need to prove for ourselves what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God. The bible says prove all things, hold fast that which is good. If you think about when David was going to face Goliath and Saul offered that David might wear his armor. 	He tried it on and it just didn't seem to fit right. He said I cannot use this for I have not proved them. Okay. He hadn't tested them, that's what it means to prove something. We should be careful what we just blindly do and what we used without testing it first and proving it to see whether it is God's will, to see whether it's biblical. Now when it comes to birth control, the statistic show that 99% of women ages 15 through 44 who have ever had intercourse, had used at least one contraceptive method. 	According to the statistics by the Guttmacher Institute, 99% of women have used birth control, okay. Well, someone's going to offend somebody. You know what? That's not the point though, the question is is it right? Is it biblical? Now out of the birth control that women used, the most popular method of birth control, the number one method is the birth control pill and specifically it is the combination pill of estrogen and progestin. 	The number one most commonly used method of birth control today and these are statistics from 2010 and 2013 from the Guttmacher Institute is the pill, and in fact four out of five women had used the pill as contraceptive, and I'm going to demonstrate for you and explain to you right now, first of all before I get into the rest of the sermon that birth control pills cause silent abortions. If you are taking birth control pills, you are inadvertently literally killing your children. Remember this is the most commonly used birth control method. 	Before we get into the subject from the bible of whether birth control is right or wrong, let me just start out by saying that the most commonly used, the most popular method of birth control, the one that four out of five women have used. The one that is 28% of women who use birth control are using it right now is a pill that will literally cause your unborn children to die. Now let me explain to you why that is and then we'll move on. 	Before I do let me start out by proving it from the bible that life begins at conception. Okay, who here agrees that life begins at conception, say amen. Yeah. It begins at conception. Well, let's show it from the bible. Look down at your bible at Isaiah chapter seven verse 14. Therefore, the Lord himself shall give you a sign. Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son and shall call his name Emmanuel. 	Now flip over if you would to Matthew chapter one. Because in Matthew chapter one, this exact scripture is quoted in the new testament. In the old testament it said a virgin shall conceive and bear a son. Well, in Matthew chapter one, verse 23, the bible reads, behold a virgin shall be with child and shall bring forth a son. They shall call his name Emmanuel which being interpreted is God with us. Isn't it interesting that in the old testament it says conceive and in the new testament says shall be with child. You know what that tells me that conception produces a child, not a blastosis or an embryo or a fetus but God considers that a child. 	Flip over to Hebrews chapter 11. While you're turning to Hebrews chapter 11, we're not going turn to all of this for sake of time. There are so many scriptures that we could use that life begins at conception. For example, we could go to the fact that John the Baptist leaped in his mother's womb when John the Baptist was brought in close proximity with Mary who was pregnant with Jesus and the two children were in their mother's wombs, and when John the Baptist got near Jesus, he leaped in his mother's womb. 	That shows there was a spiritual connection there. The bible says that John the Baptist was filled with the holy ghost from his mother's womb. The bible talks about the fact in Psalm 139 that God knows us in the womb and forms and [Inaudible 00:06:00]. In fact, anyone who says that a baby in its mother's womb is not alive is just a complete fool. It's really only just the most atheistic evil fool that would say such a thing. Other than politicians who say it routinely because of the fact that they want to be elected in liberal areas. 	They lie and say I believe that life begins at birth. I watched a debate one time between two politicians. One was a republican and one was a democrat and they were running on the East Coast, in a very liberal area, and the debate moderator asked them, when do you believe that life begins. One of them said birth. They said to the other one, when do you believe life begins? Birth. Now that is so scientifically stupid and it's amazing to me today how the atheist will claim to be so into science and we believe in the science. 	It's funny when you confront them with science that flies in the face of their wicked ideology that all of the sudden they don't believe in science anymore. Science will tell you it's a life. Science will tell you that a tree is alive. Science will tell you that an earthworm is alive but a human being living in its mother's womb, nine months gestation, one day away from being born, they'll say it's not alive because they're liars and they worship Satan, that's why. They love death. 	The bible says, they hate God, love death. That's what these people are. They love death. They're pro-death, it's not pro-choice, it's pro-death. Pro-life versus pro-death. The bible says choose life in the book of Deuteronomy. When we, excuse me. When we talk about life beginning at conception, the devil loves to change the meaning of words. Because if he can't get you to believe in the stupidity of some politician that tells you it's not alive until it's born. 	Well, what he'll do then is try to change the definition of words. He'll get Christians to agree, oh yeah, life begins at conception so then he'll change the definition of conception. Now conception has historically always meant fertilization. When the seed from the man and the egg from the woman come together and that egg has fertilized, that has been known as conception. Now they're starting to change the definition.	Even in some dictionaries, they'll put a definition that says, well, it's fertilization or implantation. I've even heard a baptist preacher buy into this and say well, life doesn't begin until it's implanted. Let's see what the bible defines as conception. Let's make the bible our final authority. The bible says in Hebrews 11 verse 11. Through faith also Sarah herself received strength to conceive seed and was delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judge him faithful who had promised. 	Let me ask you this. Could conceived seed refer to implantation? Let me explain to you the terms here. This is how the birds and the bees work children. I'm not going to go into any detail, don't worry. Don't plug your kids' ears or anything. Basically, the seed from the man travels into the woman's body and finds the egg and the egg is fertilized up toward the top of the Fallopian tubes. That fertilized egg, that developing child that's multiplying and growing and so forth begins to travel down that tube until it gets to the uterus. 	When it arrives at the uterus, it implants itself into the wall of the uterus and then eventually that's where the placenta is going to be attached and then there's going to be a cord and the baby and so on and so forth. That developing life comes down that tube and implants in the wall of the uterus. Now when the bible says that she's received strength to conceive seed. Notice that conception is tied in with the seed. Isn't it? What's conception? What's conceived? She conceived seed. Okay. 	Now does the seed come from the man or the woman? Biblically? The man of course. The man provides the seed, the woman has the egg. What happens is that developing child travels down that tube and that trip takes 7 to 14 days. Okay. Conception or fertilization takes place up here then it travels down the tube and 7 to 14 days later it implants in the wall of the uterus. Okay. Now this new definition of saying, wow, conception is implantation.	Is the seed involved with implantation? No, because the seed is long gone. The seed from the man fertilizes that egg and then all the seed is gone, okay. Then a week goes by and then it implants. How could you call implantation conceiving seed, you can't. There's no seed there anymore, the seed has been gone for over a week. We see that the world's definition, that's a new definition that they're twisting and changing things to me and that planned parenthood has pushed this new definition of conception is not in tune with the bible, it's just a lie of the devil to try to get you to say yeah, life begins at conception. 	That's 7 to 14 days after fertilization. You say well, what 7 to 14 days, that 7 to 14 days is important, it's critical. You ever heard of the day after pill? Women today take what's called a day after pill or emergency contraception so that in case they got pregnant they can take a pill that will then kill the developing child in the womb. He say well it's just such a small simple organism at that point but it's still a child, it's still growing, it's still alive. 	You can't pick a time and say well, I think it's okay up to three months. I think it's okay to kill it up to six months. No it's either the stupidity of the politicians who say birth or it's conception like the bible says, which one is it. You can't just have some, I think it's three months, I think it's four months. I think it's when the heart starts beating. On what authority do you think that? The bible says that we don't know how the bones grow in the womb of her that is with child. 	We should not think that we can decide when it's alive when God says conception equals a child when we compare Isaiah 7:14 to Matthew 1:23. Here's how these birth control pills work. The combination pill works according to two mechanisms. There's a primary mechanism and then there's a backup mechanism. Okay. The primary mechanism is to stop a woman from ovulation. She does not release an egg, therefore no pregnancy can occur. 	Now if a woman just doesn't release an egg and no pregnancy occurs, is any human life being snuffed out? Is anyone being killed, no. It's just no egg is produced and so there's not a pregnancy. There's the backup mechanism. Because if that was the only way birth control pills work where they just did, made you not release an egg. They would not be 99.9% effective, and let me tell you something. Birth control pills are 99.9% effective.	When you see women getting pregnant while they're using birth control pills it's usually because they didn't take it consistently or something or they're lying and saying that they're taking it when they're really not. According to the studies and research, birth control pills are 99.9% effective. Why are they so effective? Because of the fact that they have a backup mechanism to make sure that if the primary mechanism doesn't work, the backup is there. 	Here's the backup mechanism. They actually harden the lining of the uterus itself. Making it impossible for the developing blastosis to implant in the wall of the uterus. That developing child that's 7 to 14 days old gets to the uterus and it cannot implant and so it dies and is flushed out and the woman doesn't even know it. That there was a life there that was alive for 7 to 14 days and is snuffed out. 	You say well, how often is this happening? Well, it depends on what type of pill is being taken. The most common pill, the popular pill is the combination pill which is estrogen and progestin combination. Breakthrough ovulation which is when an egg is released even though you're taking the birth control pill occurs five to 60% of the time. Okay. Let me get out my figures to make sure that I've got this all right here. 	Five to 60% of the time breakthrough ovulation can occur. Now it's different with different types of pills but for the basic combination pill, five to 60% of the time. Just to put it in perspective, even if we were to use the most conservative number there. That 5% of the time, an egg is being released, a woman can get pregnant and basically that child is going to die. It would be happening every two years.	The average woman is on these birth control pills for three decades. That's what the statistic show that they use them for decades. Okay. If you go with the 60% figure. This could be happening every other month if you think about it. You could be having a silent abortion literally every other month, maybe it's happening once every three months. Maybe it's happening every six months. Maybe it's happening once a year or once every two years. 	The bottom line is it's happening and it's wicked to do that to your body, to turn it into this killing machine where it'll still produce the egg that's going to be fertilized but then it's going to die. That's why these birth control pills are so effective because they do that to the uterus, not only that but women who take these birth control pills. Then when they decide, okay, I want to get pregnant now their uterus lining is still not the same. 	Then they'll have miscarriages because of the fact that the lining is still not right. That's why even a doctor will tell you that if you've been on these pills, you need to take a few months and wait before you try to get pregnant again because your uterus has to go back to normal and you have to metabolize all these junk, these hormones that you've been putting into your body. Now there's another pill called the mini-pill or the progesterone only pill, the pop as it's called. 	These type of pills are hardly suppressing ovulation at all and they are mainly relying on the backup mechanism and they're mainly just destroying the environment, creating a hostile, if you actually look at the package insert as I've done. I've taken the birth control pills and literally read the package insert, all that fine print. Says it creates a hostile environment in the uterus for the developing blastosis as they would call it. 	These mini pills are progestin only pills are actually doing this even more often. Constantly, could be every other month that this is happening when you're on this type of pills. Same thing with the Depo Provera patch, the Depo Provera shots. Any hormonal birth control method is an abortifacient that is causing you to have a silent abortion some percentage of the time and we as Christians should just reject it outright as being manslaughter or murderer to take these type of pills knowing what they're doing to your body and knowing what they're doing to your children. 	We need to just reject it outright and say it's immoral, it's sin, it's wrong, we shouldn't do it. That should be case closed for the most popular birth control method in America today. Not only that but a lot of women will use what's called an IUD, an inter-uterine device, this is where they put an actual object up into their bodies and in order to again stop the child from being able to implant. It's not going to stop you from ovulating necessarily but it'll stop the child from implanting. Now we're starting to understand why it's called birth control. Not conception control.	It's not necessarily stopping you from conceiving, it's stopping you from giving birth. Doesn't mean that a life is not going to be created. It's just going to die. It's not going to be born. We as Christians need to wake up and realize that everything that the devil and the world dishes out down at Walgreens is not something that we need to be purchasing and participating in and we need to prove all things and we have to figure out what we're putting into our body before we just put it into our bodies. We need to be careful with this stuff.	You say well you're condemning me because I've used it. Look 99% of women have used it. If you didn't know any better, well, you can't change the past, shame on you for not knowing but hey everybody makes mistakes, we've all made mistakes. You need to now that you know the truth repent. Now that you know that it's wrong. You need to decide well, I'm never going to use those. I'm never taking birth control pills, now that I know what they're doing. Not only that I'm doing you a great favor by warning you about these things. 	Because honestly birth control pills are very harmful to your health in the first place because of the fact that they also increase your chances of getting blood clots and having a stroke and having a heart attack. You can go to the cancer dot, what is it, cancer.gov or whatever, even their main website and they'll talk about the fact that estrogen that's in these birth control pills is a known carcinogen or something that causes cancer. Who has heard research and things about estrogen being related with cancer? Estrogen, maybe, yeah, it's pretty common. 	Taking this synthetic estrogen in these birth control pills is increasing your cancer risk, risk of blood clots and a lot of other bad things, it's bad for your health and it's increases your risk for breast cancer. It increases your risk for a lot of other illnesses. These things are bad for your body, you say why are they so popular why are so many women taking them. Well obviously somebody is making money selling them, number one and advertising them and telling you how great they are. 	Number two are just hell bent on not having children apparently. They just want, a lot of people when you start criticizing the birth control pills. Well, what are we going to use? Provide me with an alternative. I'll get to that in a little bit. As you say well which method of birth control is acceptable. What should we be using? Well, the short answer is nothing, but I'll explain that more as we go through the sermon here. 	First of all before I get into the bible really heavily because I've got a lot of bible, but I want to just say this, if you look at the history of birth control in this country. First of all historically it's been considered ungodly and immoral to use birth control by Christian people throughout history, in fact it was illegal in the United States until the 20th century, totally illegal, people were in prison. 	See things were, devices were ceased and you're not allowed to sell birth control in this country until the early 20th century. The woman who is responsible for bringing birth control into the mainstream and making it legal in the United States was a woman named Margaret Sanger. Now this Margaret Sanger was a eugenicists. She believe that white people were superior to other races and she like the Nazis believed that certain races were inferior to others and that we need to encourage those people not to reproduce so that we can just have the good people reproduce, and the fittest and the strongest people reproduce. 	She was the big part of the eugenics movement in the United States, which by the way there was a really big eugenics movement in United States. Everybody always wants to pin that on the Nazis which is true that they were involved with it but a lot of it they got from the United States. It's where a lot of the eugenicist has pioneered, okay. She started an organization called the birth control federation of America. 	Do you know what the birth control federation of America later changed its name to? Planned parenthood which I called planned barrenhood. Okay. Planned parenthood, that wicked organization that conservatives rail against for being pro-abortion and pro-death was actually originally known as the birth control federation of America. You can see the type of evil people that are behind this agenda, she's the one who pushed this through and got it legal in the United States. 	She's the one that promoted it and made it mainstream. This wicked evil person named Margaret Sanger who is an evolutionist and who was not a believer in the Lord Jesus Christ by any stretch of the imagination. Preachers used to be against birth control. One of the most famous baptist preachers of all time, his name is John R. Rice. Whether you love John R. Rice or you're not a fan of John R. Rice isn't really the point. 	He was a mainstream very popular independent baptist preacher that even a lot of people today look to as he were the hymnal that we have is put out by the Sword to the Lord publishers which was founded by John R. Rice. Okay. John R. Rice said this in 1946. He wrote a book in 1946 called the home where he dealt with all types of issues with the family and children and discipline and so on and so forth. 	Here's what he said. He said that use of artificial means, drugs and appliances to prevent conception has for centuries been regarded as immoral, wrong for the individual and dangerous to society as a whole. Here's what else he said birth control measures if generally practiced would be disastrous to public morals and public welfare. He had three chapters in the book dedicated to this subject. 	One of the chapter is called birth control but he really deals with it for three straight chapters in his book, yet people today were like what are you preaching, you're an independent baptist and you're preaching this birth control. You're wild, you're crazy, you fanatic. This is what everyone used to believe, even John O. Rice, a mainstream popular preacher that was accepted all over the nation and preaching everywhere was one who strongly stood against birth control and wrote a whole book dedicated to exposing the agenda behind it and so forth. 	A lot of people when you say something against birth control, you're catholic, that's catholic stuff. You know what, guess what, even a broken clock is right twice per day, okay. The Catholics also believed in the trinity and that's true too. The Catholics also say that Jesus died on the cross. Okay. Now obviously Catholicism is a wicked false religion, I'm not defending it. Everybody has something right. That's like saying well you're just like Billy Graham because you both wear pants. 	You're like Billy Graham because you wear pants and so does he. Wouldn't that be just stupid and ridiculous. What about this? You used the King James bible, you must be Mormon. That's what the Mormons use, the King James version. Isn't that a dumb way to think about, that's just a dumb logic. People accuse you of being catholic because you believe in replacement theology or because you believe in the fact that birth control is wrong. 	In reality, Catholics are completely hypocrites on this subject anyway because in fact data shows that 98% of experienced women of child birth age who identify themselves as catholic have used contraception other than natural family planning at some point in their lives. 98% for catholics are using birth control. They're just being hypocrites about it anyway. 	The bottom line is that biblically speaking, God wants us to have children and he wants us to be fruitful and multiply. Let's look at some scriptures on this. Start out with me if you would. In Genesis chapter nine. While you're in Genesis nine I'll read for you from Genesis chapter one verse 28. The bible says and God bless them and God said onto them be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth and subdue it and that dominion over the fish of the sea and over the foul of the air and over every little thing that move upon the earth. 	He said well, Pastor Anderson, God is telling them to be fruitful and multiple because there's only two of them. Obviously when there are only two people you're going to have to be fruitful and multiple but what you have to understand is that he used the word replenish for a reason. Now if he were just talking to Adam and Eve only, the word replenish would make absolutely no sense because replenish means to refill. Well, guess what, it never been filled before so how can he tell them refill or replenish. 	The reason he tells them to replenish is because the fact that it's not a command, just to Adam and Eve but rather command to all of mankind to continually replenish the earth. Children are going to be born and people are going to die and it's our job to be fruitful, to multiply and to replenish the earth on an ongoing basis. The word replenish proves that he was not speaking to just Adam only in that scripture. 	Even so we have tons of other scripture. Look at Genesis chapter nine, well God said to Noah, and God bless Noah and his sons verse one and said unto them be fruitful and multiple and replenish the earth. You say Pastor Anderson there's only eight of them. Of course they need to replenish. He says in verse seven, and you be fruitful and multiple, bring forth abundantly in the earth and multiple therein. Jump forward to Genesis 17:20. I'm going to show you that this is a theme that comes up over and over and this wasn't just Adam, this wasn't just Noah. 	Over and over again God's people are told to be fruitful and multiply. It says in chapter 17 verse 20, as per Ishmael I have heard thee, behold I have blessed him and I will make him fruitful and will multiple him exceedingly. Twelve princes shall he beget and I will make him a great nation. Go to chapter 28 verse 3. By the way, notice that being fruitful and multiplying is always associated with blessing, being blessed. 	When you're fruitful, when you multiply that's a blessing in the bible. Genesis 28 verse 3, and God almighty blessed thee and make the fruitful and multiple three that thou may as be a multitude of people. Flip over to chapter 48 and while you're going to chapter 48 I'll read for you chapter 35 verse 11. God said unto him, I am God almighty, be fruitful and multiply a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee and kings shall come out of thy loins. 	Genesis 48:4. Said unto me, behold I will make thee fruitful and multiple thee and I will make of thee a multitude of people and will give this land to thy see that to thee for an everlasting possession. Go to Leviticus chapter 26 and then we're going to go to Exodus 1. Go to Leviticus 26 and then we're going to go to Exodus 1. Leviticus 26 verse 9, for I will have respect unto you and make you fruitful and multiply you and establish my covenant with you. 	This is many years later, this is when the children of Israel are already numbering in the millions. There are millions of millions of children of Israel and they're out of Egypt and they're going to the promised land and God says if you obey my voice and if you keep my commandments I will make you fruitful and I will multiply you. 	Deuteronomy chapter 1, you don't have to turn though, you go to Exodus 1. In Deuteronomy chapter verse 11. Moses said this, the Lord God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many more as you are and bless you as he have promised you. How many Israelites were there that came with Moses out of the land of Egypt? Millions. There were 600,000, just the man of war that were of the fighting aage. That means that there were probably 3 or 4 million people all together. 	Moses said God make you a thousand times as many. That would be what? 3 or 4 billion. Just for that one nation of the children of Israel. God wants his people to be fruitful and multiply and it's a blessing when they do. Now in Exodus chapter 1. We have a story about the children of Israel. They've gone down into Egypt and when they went down into Egypt the bible tells us in verse five, and all the souls, they came out of the loins of Jacob where 70 souls for Joseph was in Egypt already. 	The children of Israel that go down into Egypt are 70 souls, 70 people and they're going down the Egypt which is one of the most powerful nations in the world. A great big giant powerful nation. They are 70 people. Let's fast forward a few hundred years and look what the bible says in verse seven. The children of Israel were fruitful and increased abundantly and multiplied and was exceeding mighty and the land was filled with them. 	Let me ask you this, are Gods people multiply. Look what the bible says in verse 8. There rose up a new king over Egypt which knew not Joseph and he said into his people behold the people of the children of Israel and more and mightier than we. Are the Egyptians multiplying at the same rate as the Israelites? No. The Egyptians are obviously not multiplying. By the way if you go to planned parenthood's website, they'll tell you birth control was invented in ancient Egypt. 	That's what planned parenthood says on their website. The oldest known birth control we found was found in ancient Egypt and the bible here shows us a contrast of God's people being fruitful, multiplying and increasing abundantly while the population of the worldly Egyptians is not keeping pace at all to the point where 70 people outpace them and fill the land and multiply exceedingly and abundantly and the land is just filled with them. 	They say the people of the children of Israel are more and mightier than we. Now look pharaoh here, this evil king that wants to kill children later in the chapter represents the devil. You say prove it, well, there's another king who did something similar to this for he wanted to kill babies. What was his name? King Herod, right? Okay. King Herod wanted to kill all the children from two years old and under, what about in revelation 12 when that story is covered and it says that the dragon wanted to devour the child as soon as it was born.	Who was behind Herod wanted to kill the babies, the dragon, Satan, okay. Satan is represented by this king of Egypt that would want to murder young children. What we see in the stories is that number one, god's people multiplied greatly. Number two, we see the devil didn't like it. The devil is upset about it. What's the devil going to do about it, to stop it, let's read it. Says in verse 10, come on let us deal wisely with them less they multiple. 	It come to pass that when they're fault out any war, they join also unto our enemies and fight against us and so get them up out of the land. He said look we need to do something about this. We need to stop these people from multiplying. It says in verse 11 therefore they did said over them taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens and they built for them for pharaoh treasure cities, Pithom and Rameses, but the more they afflicted them, the more they multiply and growing, they were grieved because of the children of Israel. 	The Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigor. They made their lives bitter with hard bondage in mortar and in brick and in all manner of service in the field. All their service wherein they made them serve was with rigor. What do we see here in all these verses over and over again they're making them do what? Work and serve with rigor and have burdens and have to do all these hard work and be in bondage. 	Even in spite of all that, they keep multiplying and growing don't they. Look what the next step is, it says in verse number 15, and the king of Egypt spake to the Hebrew midwives, which the name of the one was Shiphrah, and the name of the other Puah, and he said when ye do the office of the midwife of the Hebrew women and see them upon the stools, if it be a son, then ye shall kill him but if it be a daughter then she shall live but the midwives feared God and did not as the king of Egypt commanded them but saved the men children alive. 	What are we seeing here in this story? Number one, god's people are multiplying greatly. Number two, the devil doesn't like it. Number three, he afflicts them with burden, hard work, servitude and makes their lives rigorous and difficult. Then number four, he instructs the Hebrews to murder their children because he doesn't go kill them. He doesn't send his troops to do it, he has the Hebrew midwives slay the children and of course they feared God, they refused to do it. 	Now do you expect me to believe that in 2014 the devil today doesn't mind when god's people multiply, he's okay with it. The devil hated it back in Exodus chapter 1. He was grieved when god's people multiplied but today the devil wants us all to have children and raise godly children. No, the devil today is grieved when he sees god's people multiple and he says come on, let's deal wisely with them. You know what he has done to make god's people have to not multiply or they don't have to because in this story we have people who continue to do right. 	You know what the devil has done to try to stop god's people from multiplying is he said you know what let's put them to work and notably he wants to put the women to work. Put the women to work. That'll stop them from multiplying because what was the devil's answer in Exodus 1. He said put them to work and then kill the ones that are conceived. That's exactly what the devil's agenda is today. He says number one send the women to work and then they won't be able to reproduce because they're not going to be able to miss work. 	They're not going to be able to take care of the kids, so they're going to be so busy with their job, they're going to be forced to use birth control and then not only that, but the ones that they would conceive we will slay them through what? Birth control pills that do cause silent early abortions and also through abortion itself. Surgical abortion itself. That's what the devil has promoted today. He's promoted women working and he's promoted abortion.	Now the United States department of labor has these statistics for 2013 that women participating in the labor force in 2013 that are of a working age is 57.2% and men working is 69.7%. It's not even that different. Think about it. Today men are working at a rate of about 70%, 69.7% and women are working at a rate of about 57%. It's only about a 12% difference between the men working versus the women. 	It didn't used to be that way, folks. It used to be that men went out to work and the women stay at home. That was the norm, that was the accepted societal norm that men would go to work and provide and that the women would stay home, marry, bear children and guide the house. I think I read that in the bible. First Timothy chapter five verse 14, that women would use the new testament. I'm so sick of people rejecting the teachings of the old testament. Heathen is of God, hear it god's words. 	Ye therefore hear they're not because you're not of God, and the old testament is just as much god's word as the new testament. I'm sick of this what about the new testament. The new testament teaches the same thing as the old testament. What do you think it's like the book of Mormon where it's just some other testament that just teaches totally different things. 	No, the new testament confirms and strengthens the teachings of the old testament and the same things are taught in both old and new testament. The reason we turn to the old testament a lot is because it's longer. The old testament is four times as long as the new testament so there's more scripture to preach from. You're always in the old testament, no we're just in the old testament three or four times as much because there's more of it. Not even trying to do that. It's just the way that it works out, because the new testament is short.	This stuff is confirmed in the new testament. The new testament says that women should marry, I will, god's will, I will therefore that women marry, bear children, guide the house, give non occasion to the adversary to speak or fruitful for some already turn aside after Satan, that's what the bible says. Are there women today who turn aside after Satan, I'm sure that there are. 	One way to stop that would be if they would marry, bear children and guide the house. Now look I understand that there are exceptions because there are women who are in situations and maybe they've made mistakes in the past or maybe they're suffering from mistakes that someone else made in their life or whatever. That's not the point. Okay, obviously people are in different situations for a variety of reasons. 	The question is what's god's will. The question what does God want us to do? Yeah. We can get in positions where we're in a situation that's not ideal through our sin or someone's else's sin. According to the bible, there's a plan and it's called a family. It's where we group up as children where we have a mother and a father raising us, this is the ideal situation folks. A mother and a father raise us, then we grow up and we get married and we leave our father and mother and go directly to our spouse and we cleave onto our wife or cleave onto the husband and we become one flesh and then we produce children together and have our own family, that is god's plan. 	The man go to work and the women stay home and bear children and guide the house, that's what the bible teaches in both old and new testament. You say what about me, I'm in this situation I'm divorced. My husband left me or my husband doesn't provide, he doesn't have a job or he wants me to work and so he's telling me to go to work. Look I understand there are all these other situations but that's not what the sermon is about today. 	The sermon is about the right way of doing things. We could talk about all the problems and all the wrong things and all the bad situations in the world but that would take all night, wouldn't it. There are plenty of people in this room that are not in a bad situation. There are plenty of men in this room that can go out and work and provide for their family and that's what they need to be doing. 	They need to be saying to their wives, honey, you stay home and you have children and raise those children and I'll go out and bring home the bacon. That's what we need, a generation of god's people to be fruitful and multiply. I'm sure that not every single person in the nation of Israel was being fruitful and multiplying at this time but in general as a whole the majority were. That's the way it should be amongst god's people. Are there going to be exceptions to the rule? Of course. 	Are there some women who are bearing and cannot have children? Well, eventually they always got a child in the bible, eventually. If they prayed and sought the Lord, eventually they get. Either way some had one child, some had two children. God's not always going to choose to bless you with a lot of children. Isaac and Rebekah were godly people, they waited 20 years and had a set of twins and that's all they had. 	You know what though, that's all God gave them. They weren't purposely going out and using birth control to prevent. God might give you like he's given me eight children so far and he's given some people one child, two children. Other people he's given even more than he's given me. There's a guy in the bible named Heman, that had 14 sons and three daughters but whatever God gives me, I'm going to accept it as a blessing from God. 	This story that we see playing out in Exodus chapter 1 is the devil's modus operandi in 2014 as well. Same thing. Put the women to work and then slay the unborn. That's the plan. You say okay Pastor Anderson, you've at least convinced me that the birth control pills are wrong because they are taking a life. How can you be against the morning after pill and not against normal birth control pills when the morning after pill is just a high dosed birth control pill, that's all it is.	The morning after pill contains the same hormones and a higher dose that will just quickly change the lining of the uterus to make it a hostile environment for the child, that's why it works. You say well Pastor Anderson okay I'm convinced that birth control pills are the wrong way to go. They're abortifacients. What about other birth control methods. 	Come on are you telling me the birth control is wrong and that there's no acceptable birth control method? In a word, yes. Let's just go through the methods quickly and I don't want to. I'm not going to get in any detail or be graphic or anything. There are a few different types of methods. Go to Genesis chapter 38, if you would, Genesis chapter 38. 	Because Genesis 38 is the only mention of birth control in the entire bible. If someone else has another mention of birth control, see me after the service because I'd like to see it. To my notes, and I'm not perfect, I don't know everything and maybe somebody is going to show me after the service where I'm wrong, to my knowledge. Genesis 38 is the only instance of birth control in the entire bible from Genesis revelation. 	Again I'm open to being corrected on that. In Genesis 38, we see a man using birth control and guess what, his wife was not on the pill. They didn't have the pill back then. He did not give his wife a pill and say hey, you need to take this at the same time every day and you need to go see the doctor to get your prescription filled. No, Onan used the more primitive type of birth control method. 	It says in verse 8, and Judah said onto Onan, go in unto thy brother's wife and marry her and raise up seed to thy brother. Onan knew that the seed should not be his and it came to past when he went in onto his brother's wife that he spilled it on the ground, lest that he should give seed to his brother. The thing which he did was considered to be responsible. Is that what it says? No, it says the thing which he did displeased the Lord, wherefore he slew him also. 	Now God did not just frequently in the bible just kill people. Where he personally kills somebody, but this is a guy that God actually personally killed and why did he kill him? For spilling it on the ground. He went in onto his wife to raise up seed onto his brother, he knew that the seed should not be his and so he decide to spill it on the ground, God got angry and killed him. Not a very good advertisement for birth control right here in Genesis 38. It's not looking good. 	Especially when you realized this is the only mention of ... You say Pastor Anderson, you poor ignorant fool. Don't you realize that the reason why God was mad at Onan was the reason why he spilled it on the ground. Why, what was wrong with his reason? Because you know what, there was nothing wrong in those days with not raising up seed onto your brother because you were allowed to do it, you just, the girl would slap you in the face and so forth. 	Remember that whole ritual. She'll slap you in the face and loose the shoe and do all that. Spit on you or whatever. You don't have to do it. God did provide allowance that hey, if you don't want to take your brother's wife and raise up seed in your brother. You don't have to. Why is god's so mad at this guy? Because he goes in onto her and then spills it on the ground, okay. Now you say well, it's because he did it for a selfish reason. Yeah, but everybody who uses birth control is doing it for a selfish reason. 	Name for me a birth control motivation that's not selfish. More money, less work, easier life. These are the type ... Well, it's my carbon footprint. Okay, whatever. You're so unselfish. You can sit there and say that all you want but this is the only example God gave and it's a negative example of birth control when Onan spilled it on the ground, go to Psalm 105. Psalm 105. 	I wrote Psalm 105, but I'm pretty sure it's actually Psalm 106. Go to Psalm 106. I could be wrong, let me turn there and find out. My notes are telling me 105, but my mind is telling me 106. Yeah. It's 106. Psalm 106 and look down at verse number 35. This is about the children of Israel that says they were mingled among the heathen and learn their works and they serve their idols which were a snare onto them. 	By the way, covetousness is a idolatry the bible says. When you're going to sit there and live a life that's about amassing money and wealth and toys and cars and trucks and boat. That could be idolatry. The bible says that they were mingled among the heathen and learn their works and they serve their idols which were a snare to them. By the way the new testament talks about serving mammon says the love of money is the root of all evil and you cannot serve God and mammon. 	These people are serving idols and it says in verse 37, yea they sacrifice their sons and their daughters onto devils and shed innocent blood even the blood of their sons and of their daughters whom they sacrificed onto the idols of Canaan and the land was polluted with blood and they were defiled with their own works and when a whoring with their own inventions. 	Here we see people that are killing their own children, that's the birth control pills that we talked about, with inventions even it says but then you say well what about the Onan method. Well, we saw how that ended up for Onan and it didn't look good. You say okay, well, what other methods are there, there's got to be an acceptable method out there, of birth control. 	Well, these are the basic classifications of birth control methods. First of all, you have hormonal birth control and that's going to include your IUDs that release hormones, these mirena ring thing and the patch and the shot and the mini pill and the combination. All hormonal birth control methods will put those in the same category and those should be immediately ruled out of being manslaughter.	If you do it intentionally on purpose, it would be murder. If you do it by accident, it's manslaughter. Okay. Those are ruled out, well, then another method that people would use is the Onan method, we'll call it. Spilling it on the ground. The bible isn't really saying anything positive about that method. Then another method the people would use is a barrier method is what they'll call it. 	To me, a barrier method is pretty much the same thing as Onan's method. I'll put it in the same category, personally. Okay. Another method that's pretty popular amongst Catholics and this is what the Catholics teach that you should be doing is called natural family planning or NFP. Now natural family planning you're not really using birth control per se because you're not using barriers, you're not using the pills or anything like that. 	I forgot, another birth control method what I call mutilation. Either the man or the woman mutilates themselves or has a surgery that mutilates their body so that they become infertile. Natural family planning, now I'm just going to say it right now. I'm against natural family planning, I don't believe in it. I do not think that it is a good way to, well, I don't believe there's anyway. I'm going to get to how my children. 	Think about this, I have eight children. Are my children all nine months apart? My children are approximately two years apart. We do not use any birth control. We use none. Zero, zilch. Okay. The only birth control method is getting on our knees and praying for God to give us more children. That's our only birth control that we use. Okay. 	We never use any. I'll explain to you a little later how our children are two years apart and we do not use natural family planning. NFP, this is also sometimes known as the rhythm method. We do not use it. I'm repeating this because people often mistakenly think. Pastor Anderson, believes in natural family planning. Pastor Anderson is believes in the rhythm. No I don't, I've never taught that. Never believed that. We don't use it. None of our children are spaced through natural family planning. 	Okay, I'll explain to you a little later how our children are naturally spaced without using any birth control method whatsoever. Natural family planning and if you would flip over to first Corinthian seven, natural family planning is where you chart out a woman's cycle. They chart out her monthly cycle and sometimes they'll use computer software, smartphone app, different charts, maybe even take your temperature and chart all of this data, and enter it into a computer, and this software will tell you when you are the most fertile each month. 	What you'll do is you'll have a blackout period where for maybe three, help me out with this [Inaudible 00:53:18] how long is the blackout window in natural family planning?Speaker 2:	Five to seven days. Steven :	Five to seven days. There's about five to seven days a month that are blackout as okay, this is the time when she's most likely to get pregnant so if you abstained during these five to seven months, she's probably not going to get pregnant. That's called natural family planning or the rhythm method. Now a lot of catholics will use this and this what the catholic church promote and they'll say this. 	They'll say well, God could still make you get pregnant if you wanted to. It's not really birth control. It could still be. Here's why I'm against natural family planning because of the fact that first of all there's another big blackout period each month, if you know what I mean. Now we have two major blackouts each month, number one. 	Number two, the fact is that during the blackout period is actually the best time for a husband and his wife to hit the sack because that's actually when a woman is going to enjoy it the most. I'm keeping this G-rated but it's just a scientific fact that women actually desire intimacy the most during that period. Why? Because when their body is ovulating and when they are releasing that egg and able to become pregnant, they naturally desire that union with their husband. 	Isn't it foolish to blackout the best part of the month for intimacy between husband and wife and say, well, okay the best time for doing it, the best week, we're not going to do it that week, that's not very good for your marriage, okay. Especially because now you have these two big blackout periods each month. Half the month is X-ed off the calendar. Okay. Not only that, look what the bible says in first Corinthians chapter seven.	Let me turn there myself. It says in verse number one, now concerning the things where of you wrote onto me is good. By the way not only that, also it's been scientifically proven that a man finds his wife the most attractive during those seven days as well by the way. That's just the best time all the way around. Look what it says in verse number one. 	It says now concerning the things where of you wrote onto me, it is good for a man not to touch a woman nevertheless to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife and let every woman have her own husband. Let the husband render onto the wife due benevolence and likewise also the wife onto the husband. That wife hath not power for her own body but the husband and likewise also the husband hath not power of his own body but the wife. [Inaudible 00:55:58] with consent for a time that she may use natural family planning. Is that what it says?	It says except to be with consent for a time that you may give yourselves to fasting and prayer. Come together again that same tempt you not for your [Inaudible 00:56:17]. What is the purpose of God saying hey do not abstain from a physical relationship with your spouse, do not defraud one or the other. He said because you don't want Satan to tempt you for your incontinence. 	The blackout period of natural family planning is the time when the husband and wife would be the most open to temptation. God's not even making any allowance for it here. He's not teaching us the hey, abstain every month in order not to have children. No children are blessing. We're supposed to be fruitful and multiply. We're supposed to be having lots of children according to bible. 	Psalm 127 says this, if you would turn to Hosea 1. Hosea chapter one. Psalm 127:3. Lo, children are inherited to the Lord and the fruit of the womb is his reward as arrows are in the hand of a mighty man, so our children of the youth. Happy is the man that have this quiver full of them, they shall not be ashamed but they shall speak with the enemies in the game. God says children are a blessing, we should want to have our quiver full of them. 	It's a joy and a blessing and a good thing to have children. When you teach this and you say hey be fruitful, multiply. Increase abundantly, exceedingly, have children. Don't use birth control. You don't need to be Onan. You don't need to murder your own children. You don't need to sit there and abstain from a physical relationship from your spouse during the best parts of the month. No the bible is telling us to have children. 	People will say this, well, if you do that, you're just going to get pregnant every nine months and that's not healthy. That's what they'll say. If you heard this opposition. What are you going to do, have a bunch of Irish twins? Irish twins is when you have two children within the same year and they're not twins. They're Irish twins. Meaning that you're just having kids every nine, 10 months. 	Now personally, I don't think that that's healthy for women to have every nine or 10 months. Frankly that's why God didn't design it that way. That's why even though my wife and I used no birth control, we do not have children every nine or 10 months. You say Pastor Anderson, how do you do it? How are you not having children every 11, 12 months Pastor Anderson? What's the deal? What's your secret?	Well, here's the thing, this used to be information that was passed down from mothers to their daughters but this information is falling off the face of the earth unfortunately, so now your pastor has to teach you in church or all places. Actually the answer is in the bible because look down at your bible there at Hosea chapter 1 verse 8. By the way the answer is always in the bible, sometimes it's hard to find, sometimes it's not obvious but the answer is always in the bible. 	Hosea chapter 1 verse 8 says this. Now when she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, she conceived, and bare a son. When did this woman conceived? When she weaned. Why? Because breastfeeding will stop you from getting pregnant, period. Now you say I don't believe it. [Inaudible 00:59:31] old wives fable. Okay. Look at my family back there and tell me it's an old wives fable. If it's an old wives fable then why is it that my wife and I have been having a physical relationship for all these many months since [Bohas 00:59:50] has been born and yet she's not pregnant. 	How are we doing it? What's the secret? Are we using natural family planning? No. Onan style? No. Walgreens? No. CVS? No. How are we doing it? Because she's breastfeeding the baby. You say well that doesn't work for everybody. Here's the thing, it doesn't work for everybody because of the fact that people don't do it right. Now again I'm not saying that there's never going to be an exception to this where a fluke could happen and a woman could get pregnant. 	Look there's always a chance for a fluke to happen and the exception proves the rule but it is 99% effective if you do it properly. If you breastfeed on demand your child, that will prevent you from getting pregnant again until it is naturally safe to do so. Look God designed it in his wisdom. Think about how smart God is, God designs it where a woman gives birth to a child and then breastfeeding that child keeps her from getting pregnant again until her body has a chance to recover. 	Then by the time the child is older and grown and able to eat a lot of solids and breastfeeding less and less then the woman's fertility will come back and then she'll be able to have the next child. If you look at how children are spaced in the bible, they're not just back to back. You look at a lot of children where it actually gives us the spacing, because the bible doesn't usually give us the spacing, but some examples where we get the spacing is like with [Inaudible 01:01:29] we can calculate the spacing. 	We can also calculate the spacing with Miriam, Aaron and Moses. They were like two or three years apart when we look at the spacing in those situations. How do they do it? Through breastfeeding. Now these are the rules though. In order for this to be effective and the fancy name for this is lactation amenorrhea. This is not a birth control method because we were going to breastfeed the kid anyway, it's just called doing it normal. 	It's called just having your kid and feeding it the way God planned. This isn't natural family planning. That's why I want to make sure there's no confusion here. This is not a birth control method. This is not using birth control and yet having children that are spaced normally and naturally and healthy. This is why it doesn't work for most people because if you put your kid on a four hour feeding schedule, not going to work. 	It's popular to say feed your kid every four hours on the news. Four hour feeding schedule. Not going to work. You must feed the child on demand. Meaning when it's hungry, feed it. With a newborn, that's pretty much every hour. When my wife has a little baby, she's feeding the baby constantly. She's nursing it constantly. That's one of the rules. 	Number two, the baby has to sleep in bed with you. Because if you don't have the baby in bed with you, then you can't feed it on demand throughout the night every hour. You're not going to get up every hour and sit there. People make it so much harder than they have to, they get up, they feed the baby, or especially if they're doing formula feeding. 	They get up, they heat it up, they're get it going. People always ask my wife and I. They'll ask us hey are you guys getting any sleep? Honestly, we usually sleep pretty well after a baby is born. We're like, yeah, we slept all night just fine. Now we've had some sleepless night usually when they get older and they fuzz and we have issues. 	Honestly when my wife just had a baby, often we will sleep like babies. We'll sleep perfectly. Why? Because this is how my wife feeds the baby in the middle of the night. She rolls over, sticks the breast in its mouth and falls back to sleep. Without even getting up. Without doing anything. She just lay there sleeping. The baby starts squirming and she grabs it. Puts it on there and done. 	Feed in your sleep. What's the point at staying up and torturing yourself? That's how she does it. Now a lot of people will say, baby in bed with you. That's a bassinet next to the bed. No. See, this is why it doesn't always work for people because they don't follow the protocol that's going to work. They try to do a four hour feeding schedule. They're supplementing with bottles. They're having the baby in a bassinet or a crib or something like that. 	No, the baby has to be in bed with you. Okay. You say, well, no, you're going to roll over it, it's going to die. Well, that's a myth. The woman who overlaid it in the bible is probably drunk or on drugs. She was a prostitute for crying out loud. Okay. To show bible on this in Luke chapter 11 in the parable where the father is given the holy spirit. He said my children are now in bed with me. Throughout history, a lot of times people have had the baby in bed with them. 	We've always had the baby in bed with us. You say well, how can you have a relationship with your wife? Well you know what my wife and I seemed to be having a physical relationship. [Inaudible 01:05:03]. I don't think we have a problem in that area. There are other places in the house. Okay. The bottom line is there are other times, the bottom line is that at night during sleep time, the baby should be fed throughout the night and that will prevent you from becoming pregnant to soon in an unhealthy way. 	Like I said we've got the proof right there. Seven spaces there, that are naturally spaced. If you tell that to a doctor, they'll laugh in your face, but doctors believe a lot of foolish things. It is a fact, it is true. There are all kinds of scientific reasons why it works and it's what we do, it's what we see in the bible and unfortunately most woman have never even heard of this. 	Never even taught these things. In reality it's the way to go. Let me just wrap up the sermon by saying this. Society has a certain agenda. It's of the devil. That societal agenda is to promote birth control. Society wants you using birth control. I think Exodus one shows us why. Because the devil doesn't like it when god's people multiple. While the Mormons are multiplying and while the muslims are multiplying, god's people are having 2.5 children and it's a shame. 	We as god's people need to multiple abundantly and churches will be filled with a new generation that's growing up and learning the word preset upon preset, line upon line and they're going to grow up and be by the army for the Lord but instead people are refusing to have kids because they're serving the idols of this world and chasing after materialism or they're buying into the ideology of the Satan Worshiper Margaret Sanger. 	Because they're being brainwashed by TV and school and everything else or they're believing in this environmental junk that the earth is overpopulated and we need to reduce the population down to 500 million and all these garbage. You know what? That is of Satan, that agenda. This world is not going to be here forever. But in the year 2335, the population is going to be too high. This world is not going to be here forever. 	Jesus is going to come back at some point. Let the heathen puncture themselves with IUDs and pump themselves full of drugs that make their wife grow a beard and everything else. Let them pump all the birth control. Let the Egyptian population stabilized but let god's people become more and mightier by following god's advice to be fruitful and multiply and by viewing children as a blessing. 	Listen to me, birth control has been a very big factor in the moral decline of this country. That's what John R Rice said what happened in 1946. He said if this stuff ever were generally used, it'll destroy morality. That's what it's done, you know why? Even today, I've been hearing from more and more Christians that they think fornication is okay. Because the bibles, these new versions now, the NIB and so forth. 	They take out the word fornication and they replace it with sexual immorality. Now you know what immorality means? Pretty much whatever you want it to mean. There are more and more Christians today that are saying well as long as you're not a whore-monger, as long. As long as you're not sleeping around, as long as you're not just a complete loose promiscuous woman it's okay before marriage. I'm starting to hear it. 	When I was a teenager, kids in my youth group believed it in a baptist church and more and more with these new versions and with these wicked ideology. You're hearing this teaching that says hey it's okay to go to bed with somebody that you're not married to just don't commit adultery and just don't be a whore-monger. Let me tell you something, that kind of stupidity would not even be possible without birth control because you'd be producing all these bastard children. 	Think about it. If you didn't have birth control and you taught young people hey it's okay to in a committed boyfriend, girlfriend relationship to have this relationship. You'll be producing bastard children all over the place. It doesn't even make any sense. Birth control has allowed people to start thinking that way. Yeah. I could fool around. I can experiment. I can be with a few people. No, it's wicked. We need to stay pure until we're married. 	We need to abstain from that relationship until we're married and then when we're married, we can enjoy that relationship and we can enjoy the product of that relationship, children. You say well, I don't want to have that many children. Well, you know what, it doesn't matter what you want because you're not your [Inaudible 01:09:57]. Therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit with God, and the world will say my body, my choice. 	No, your body is a temple of the holy ghost which is in you and you're not your own [Inaudible 01:10:10]. Therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit. Look you say why can't afford it? Look God knows what you can and can't afford. If God gives you a child, he'll provide. He'll provide all your need according to his riches and glory by Christ Jesus. If he thinks you're not ready for a child, he won't give you one. 	Because he opens and closes the world. If he decides that you can't afford another one, he won't give you another one. If he decides that it's his will that you have two children, you'll have two, just like Isaac and Rebekah. If it's god's will that you'll have one child, you'll have one child. Just like Sera had. If it's god's will that you have 10 children, you'll have 10 unless you kill them or unless you used barrier methods and the natural family planning. 	By the way, this stuff destroys marriages. The divorce rate increasingly also has to do with the use of birth control. Because having a normal relationship with your spouse actually improves your marriage. Having a normal natural physical relationship with your spouse is good for marriage. Today we've corrupted that relationship with all these weird methods. 	Because these pills they affect women psychologically, they affect women physiologically, it's true. Look you don't think that taking hormones is going to change their personality? Hello. Even men who takes hormones. Men who take steroids. Have you ever heard of roid rage, not road rage, roid rage. Because men who take steroids get angry and aggressive and it's a mind altering thing and so are these birth control pills. 	They create all kinds of changes in a woman's body that are not conducive to that marital relationship. I'm here to tell you today that God's way is the best way, the natural way, the Christian way and if you would get on god's program by faith, and just step out of [Inaudible 01:12:09] say I'm going to do it in god's way. You'll find that God will provide and that God will give you a lot of joy and happiness in your life. 	God's going to bless you because the path to god's blessing is through the door of obedience. We need to stop leaning on our own understanding. Trust in the Lord with all thy heart and lean not onto thy own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him and he shall direct thy path, do you believe that? Okay. God never told you to use birth control. Every example of it is bad, so why don't you just do it in god's way. 	Well, I'm still waiting for my first child. Just be patient. Keep praying. God waited 20 years to give Isaac and Rebekah a child. Be patient. Wait upon the Lord. Let him direct your paths. You say well I'm afraid God is going to give me too many children. I'm going to have my own reality show or something. Here's the thing, you know what, god's going to give you the right amount. Just trust him. Just trust him and let the chips fall where they may. 	Now so far I have eight children. I'm 33 years old. Say what in the world? Here's the great thing, you say well how many are you going to have, it's going to be crazy. Here's the great thing, eventually they're going to start becoming adults and leaving. You're going to get to a certain point where you reach critical mass because they start leaving and then the new ones keep coming in and it's going to max out as some point. 	I'm hoping that this vehicle is the last vehicle I have to buy, because we have a 12 passenger van and I'm hoping that we can make that thing work until the bitter end. Because we fit nine people into an eight passenger for a long time, we can squeeze 13 into that beast out there. I'm planning on that being the final vehicle, God willing. You know what though, whatever God has in store, he's going to provide. I'm just going to trust him and just keep doing it the old fashion way. 	Enjoying every minute of it. Let's bow our heads and have a word of prayer. Father we thank you so much for your word, Lord. We thank you for your wisdom because frankly without your word and your wisdom, we'd be falling the way of this world, just like the 99% is doing, Lord. God you've opened our eyes, help us to not stick our head in the sand and ignore the truth but Lord help us to harken onto these scriptures, harken onto these principles and bless us with many children. 	I pray that you would bless me personally with more children if you would see fit Lord, and also bless the people of our church. Lord, I know that there are those who would like to have children or like to have more children Lord. I pray that you would just bless them and open the womb and make them fruitful, multiply them Lord. We love you and in Jesus name, we pray, amen.


