


Tyler Baker - "Looking Forward to the Cross"
Video
September 23, 2015

The part of the passages there the part of the chapters I want to focus on is Hebrews 11:13 where the Bible reads: These all died in faith not having received the promises but having seen him afar off and were persuaded of them and embraced them and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth. And a couple of things I want to point out is number one when it says these all, it's referring back to the preceding verses before verses 1-12 talking about Old Testament saints, people that died it names off a few different people there. And then notice it says the promises. The promises it's referring to is basically the promises mentioned in the chapters that were preceding. The promises that are of Jesus Christ through the shedding of his blood and the eternal spirit. And notice it says that they've seen them a far off. It talks about them seeing the promises a far off that they didn't receive them that they saw them a far off. And a far off meaning far away.	And it would be like if you are liken it under when you're driving on the highway, and you and you could see an exit sign far away we know the colors of [inaudible 00:01:05] oftentimes they're green and you could see that exit sign but you can't necessarily read what it says on the sign. You can't see the specifics or the details of the sign and that's what it's referring to. And we today as being New Testament believers we don't see things a far off because we've already received the promises. The promises of the Holy Spirit and the things that were fulfilled through Jesus Christ dying on the cross for us, and things that were that were given to us and were made manifest through the scriptures. The Bible tells us that now things are made manifest unto us.	So if you were to roughly look at a timeline of just for simplicity??s sake, just these 6,000 years of history, and you would say that Jesus Christ died at 33AD. The people in the Old Testament a good way to refer to it would be the people of the Old Testament, the Old Testament saints would be looking forward and they would be looking toward the cross. But we as New Testament believers after Jesus Christ had died on the cross for us, and we've already received all of those promises they're already fulfilled. We would be looking back, we would be looking back at the cross. 	And the title of my sermon tonight is looking toward the cross or looking forward toward the cross. And I'm going to preach about Old Testament salvation, about salvation of Old Testament saints. And I'm going to prove from the Bible that there's one plan of salvation and there's one Gospel and that the same way that we are saved today is the same way that people in the Old Testament was saved, and there's one savior and it's the same method. There's one gospel it's the same method it's by believing or trusting on Jesus Christ, by calling upon the name the Lord. 	Turn your Bibles to Isaiah 43:10. And this verse clearly teaches that all these people it says they died, it says they died in faith. Not having received the promises but having seen them a far off.  And a lot of people say see they didn't receive the promises, see these promises weren't accounted to them or they weren't even given the promises, I've even heard that wording. But the ridiculousness in that is how ... If you were to just to claim that they knew nothing of the promises then they would be incapable of being persuaded by the promises. Obviously they knew of the promises. The same promises that the Bible discusses here. And I've heard people that believe in like a hyper Dispensationalism of different salvations, throughout different time periods and different ages. I've heard them actually mock that phrase of the title in my sermon, I looking toward the cross. 	I think it's a perfect way to describe what the Bible teaches. And in their ignorance they're actually mocking a Bible doctrine because that is what this passage is teaching here. And you're in Isaiah 43:10 I'll read to you just a couple of verses in the New Testament. The Bible says in Philippians 3:20, ??For our conversation is in heaven from whence also we look for the savior the Lord Jesus Christ.?? So two things in that verse that tells us that Jesus Christ is Lord, and it says that Jesus Christ is savior. And then Ephesians 5:23 another verse about Jesus being the savior says, ??For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the church and as the savior of the body. 	You look at Isaiah 43:10. The Bible says, ??Hear my witnesses sayeth the Lord, and my servant whom I have chosen that you may know and believe me and understand that I am He before me there was no God formed neither shall there be after me. I even I am the Lord and beside me there is no savior.?? Another verse very clear there is one God And there's one savior the God of the Old Testament is the same God the New Testament. The God of the Old Testament said, ??I am the Lord and beside me there is no savior.?? 	Turn to John 1:40. So how could there be different plans of salvation when there is only one savior? It doesn't make sense look at John 1:40. And what we're going here for a minute we're going to start at the time of Christ at Christ Ministry and we're going to look at some stories that were recorded, and we're going to see that there were many people numerous people looking for the Messiah to come. And that's the claim of a lot of people when you talk to them about that they believe that there's a different salvation of those in the Old Testament. They'll claim that those people didn't have enough information revealed and they??ll say that they were incapable of trusting in Jesus Christ because they didn't know enough about Jesus Christ. That the promises ?¦ and they'll completely defy and contradict what we looked at their Hebrews 11:13 what that teaches that those that were in the Old Testament that they were persuaded of the promises. And they'll completely contradict that and say that they were incapable they didn't know nothing about the promises. 	And I'll read to you real quickly from John 4:24 The Bible says: God is a Spirit and they that worship Him must worship Him in spirit and in truth. This is Jesus witnessing onto the Samaritan woman. And then it says the woman say upon him, ??I know that Messiah's cometh which is called Christ when he is come he will tell us all things.?? And immediately after that Jesus reveals on this woman that he's the Messiah. So before that there is no record in the Bible of anyone else telling this woman about the Messiah coming. And we see here that she says, "I know." So she was aware that there was a Messiah coming.	In that same chapter verse 41 says, ??And many more believe because of his own word and said unto the woman now we believe not because of thy saying, for we have heard him ourselves and know that this indeed that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world.?? So there's two examples in one chapter of people that were waiting that were looking and they were waiting for the Messiah to come. And they knew the signs of it they knew what he would be like they knew what he would be like, they knew who he was and who he was going to be. And when they heard him and when they saw him they knew that this was the Messiah, they knew that this was the Christ. 	And you I had you turn to John 1:40. One more thing real quick, I'll read a quick Old Testament promises of the Messiah to come in Isaiah 9:6, the Bible says, ??For under us a child is born, under us a son is given. And the government shall be upon his shoulder and his name shall be called Wonderful Counselor, The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end upon the throne of David and upon his kingdom to order it and to establish it with judgment and with justice, from henceforth even forever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this.?? And then Isaiah 11:1 just a couple of pages past that again another promise of the Messiah says, ??And there shall come forth they rode out of the Stem of Jesse and a branch shall grow out of his roots and the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him. The Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord.??	And then Jeremiah talks about the branch speaking of the Messiah again says Jeremiah 33:15, ??In those days and at that time will I cause the branch of righteousness to grow up on to David and he shall execute judgement and righteousness in the land. And those days shall Judah be saved and Jerusalem shall dwell safely and this is the name wherewith she shall be called referring to Jerusalem the Lord Our Righteousness.?? Zacharia 6:12, again speaking on the branch of the Messiah says, And speak unto him saying, thus speaketh the Lord of hosts saying, behold the man whose name is the branch and he shall grow up out of his place, And he shall build the temple of the Lord, even he shall build the temple of Lord and he shall bear the glory and shall sit and roll upon his throne. And he shall be a priest upon his throne in the council of peace shall be between them both.?? 	Now look down at John 1: ... McKayla give me a cup of water. John 1:40 says, "One of the two which heard John speak and followed him was Andrew, Simon Peter's brother. So they heard Jesus preaching, he first find his own brother Simon and sayeth unto him, we have found the Messiah which is being interpreted the Christ. And he brought him to Jesus, and when Jesus beheld him he said, thou art Simon the son of Jonah thou shall be called Cephas which is by interpretation a stone. The day following Jesus would go forth into Galilee and findeth Philip and sayeth unto him Follow me. Now Philip was of Bethsaida the city of Andrew and Peter. Philip findeth Nathaniel and sayeth unto him, "We have found him," Watch this, "Of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets did right, Jesus of Nazareth the son of Joseph.?? 	So here in a matter of five verses we see four men who were looking for the Messiah to come. They were waiting and they were watching for the Christ, the Messiah which is being interpreted the Christ. And then if you look at Luke 3:15, I'll read it to you quickly ... Well okay, you can turn there. Luke 3:15. And just to prove that it wasn't just a small group of people just use this as the disciples that we're waiting for the Messiah. 	We'll look at Luke 3:15 says, "And as the people were in expectation the listening to John the Baptist preach, "And as the people were in expectation and all men mused in their hearts of John whether he were the Christ or not. John answered saying unto them all, "I indeed baptize you with water but one mightier than I cometh the latch of whose shoes I am not worthy to unlose. He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire, whose fan is in his hand he will thoroughly purge his floor and will gather the weed into his but the chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable and many other things in his exhortation preach tea under the people."	So two things about this passage number one, Matthew 3:5 says, "Then went out to him Jerusalem and all Judea and all the region roundabout Jordan." That's a parallel passage to this here preaching about who was going and listening to John the Baptist. And if you look back into Luke 3:15 there it says, "And all men mused in their hearts of John whether he were the Christ or not.?? So there wasn't a few people waiting for the Christ. There was many people and when they heard John the Baptist preaching they were waiting for the Messiah, and they were looking there was ... there was expectation as it uses there, and they were waiting and they aint even hearing John the Baptist preach they're thinking, "Is this the Christ??? Just proving that people are just waiting for Jesus to come, they're just waiting for the Messiah. This isn't something that was hidden completely from the people of the Old Testament, something that they just had no clue about, that they were unaware, or unable to know.	Turn over one page to Luke 2:25. This is thousands of people, this is thousands of people that were waiting. It says, ??All men mused in their hearts.?? And then we know John goes on after that also just to de-emphasize himself. And he himself starts pointing toward Jesus, starts pointing people towards the cross. And I'll read to you real quick from Acts 19:4 that clarifies what John's ministry was about. A lot of people that teach dispensationalism they'll even try to twist what John's ministry was about. The people at that time were being saved by the gospel and they also had to be baptized. John 19:4 says, ??Then said Paul John barely baptized with the baptism of repentance saying unto the people?? so this is what he was preaching this was his message: That they should believe on Him which should come after him. That is on Christ Jesus he's pointing toward the messiah. He's pointing forward and toward the cross. 	So you're in Luke 2:25. So we'll pick up reading in verse 25 again. So we're moving our way back right now. What we're started at Jesus' ministry with the woman at the well, and then we're moving all way back. We got back to John the Baptist now we're gonna get back even before John the Baptist was preaching just to prove that it wasn't just John the Baptist that was telling people about the Messiah. 	So Luke 2:25 says, "And behold there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon, and the same man was just and devout waiting for the consolation of Israel and the Holy Ghost was upon him, and it was revealed on to him by the Holy Ghost that he should not see death before he had seen the Lord's Christ. And he came by the Spirit into the temple, and when the parents brought in the child Jesus to do for him after the custom of the law ...  Excuse me. Then took yea up in his arms and blessed God and said, Lord now let us thou thy servant departed in peace according to thy word. For mine eyes have seen thy salvation which thou has prepared before the face of all people. A light to lighten the Gentiles and the glory of thy people Israel, and Joseph and his mother marveled at those things which was spoken of him. And Simeon blessed them and said unto Mary his mother, behold this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign which shall be spoken against.??	So first we see is the Bible and it tells us that he was waiting for the consolation of Israel. Then it says that it was revealed unto him that he should see the Lord's Christ. That uses those words exactly, that he should see the Lord's Christ. If you look again at verse 36, in this chapter like I said is taking place, it's before the New Testament was written before John was preaching. John the Baptist was even preaching. Jesus is a baby at this point. And verse 36 let's look at that too. It says, and there was one Anna a prophetess, the daughter of FanueL of the tribe of Asa. She was of a great age and had lived with a husband seven years from her virginity. And she was a widow of about four score in four years which departed not from the temple but served God with fastings and prayers night and day. And she coming in that instant gave thanks likewise on to the Lord and spake of him to all that looked for redemption in Jerusalem.?? 	Notice it says Him and Him is referencing Jesus that's who it's speaking about. And notice she's looking, she's looking toward the cross and she's looking for the Messiah. Turn to 2 Timothy 3:15 because a lot of people will say, "How did these people know these things?" Even though you show them scriptures, and that's obviously ?¦ Our faith today is based upon the scriptures, we??re looking back at the cross. How do you know when somebody came down to us and gave us the Gospel a Bible says, ??Faith cometh by hearing and hearing by the Word of God.?? So how do the people in the Old Testament know? Faith cometh by hearing and hearing by the Word of God. They knew by the Scriptures that was prophesied in the Old Testament. So how did they believe on Jesus Christ? They believed on the promises to come of the Messiah they were promised that Jesus one day would come, that Christ would come and he would be the savior of the world just like everyone we saw numerous examples, thousands of people going to John the Baptist.	We saw Anna of the Prophetess, we saw we saw the disciples four of the disciples, we saw numerous people in John 4: after with the woman at the well, then we saw Simeon. All these people how do they know? How did John the Baptist know? How did all these people know? Because the scriptures. Because they were looking toward the Scriptures. 2 Timothy 3:15 says, ??And that from a child thou has known the holy scriptures which are able to make the wise under salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.?? This is ... he is not referring to New Testament passages. He's painting the New Testament as he's writing. This is a part of the New Testament. He's referring to Old Testament passages, and he's talking to Timothy number one. 	He didn't meet Timothy until I think Acts 16: is when Paul and Timothy actually met. So Timothy definitely was and he was not referring to New Testament Scriptures that Timothy got his hands on. It says, ??And that from a child thou it's known the Holy Scriptures.?? and watch what it says, ??Which are able to make the wise on to salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.?? There is no way to weasel your way out of that. The Bible says that the Old Testament Scriptures are able to make the wise than a salvation how? Salvation through what? Under salvation which is through Christ Jesus. 	Turn in to your Bible to 2 Timothy 1:9. There's one faith, there's one Lord, there's one baptism. Nothing's different today than it was in the past. There's one savior. John 14:6 very, very famous passage, Jesus sayeth to Nehemiah, ??I am the way, the truth and the life. No man cometh unto the Father but by me.?? A very simple verse, a very simple verse and it's very clear. Bible says there's no way to get to the father that doesn't matter if it's an Old Testament passage, that doesn't matter if it's people living in the Old Testament, people living a hundred years from now. There is one way to the Father. So you're in 2 Timothy 1:9. I??ll read to you quickly from Romans 16: I believe Chapter 16:25-26. The Bible says, ??Now to him that is of power to establish you according to my gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery which was kept secret since the world began, but now is made manifest and by the scriptures of the profits according to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all nations for the obedience of faith.??	And that's another one people will abuse, they'll look at that and say, ??See according to the revelation of the mystery was a mystery unto them which was kept secret since the world began.?? But a mystery ?¦ see, you have to at least know a part about it in order for it to be a mystery. Look at 2 Timothy 1:9. The Bible says, "who has saved us and called us with a holy calling, not according to our works but according to his own purpose and grace which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began, but is now made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ.?? Now watch this, who has abolished death and has brought life and immortality to life through the Gospel.?? 	The mystery is it wasn't that they were going to be saved, it wasn't that you know that God was going to be their Savior, the mystery was of how it all was going to be brought to the details, the specifics. They were looking toward the cross and things were vague to them. They weren't able to see every single detail they were seeing these things from a far off. It was a mystery of how God was going to sacrifice himself for how God was going to bring salvation. But Jesus Christ when he came and he died on the cross for the sins of the whole world He brought light onto the Gospel. Like the Bible says right here, "But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ who has abolished death and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel."	Turn to Romans 4:1 we're going to look at a couple of passages of Old Testament sayings in Romans 4:1. New Testament passages speaking about Old Testament sayings. Look at Passages proving that they were saved by grace through faith in the Old Testament. Romans 4:1 says, ??What shall we say then that Abraham our father ?¦ here's the context as pertaining to the flesh have found for if Abraham were justified by works he half were of to glory but not before God." in verse three. "For what sayeth the scripture, Abraham believed in God and it was accounted on to him for righteousness. Now to him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of grace but of debt, but to him that worketh not but believeth on him that justifies the un-Godly his faith is counted for righteousness.?? And that's what we should base our believe upon for what sayeth the scripture, like it says in verse 3: "For what it sayeth in the scripture, Abraham believed God and it was accounted unto him for righteousness.??  	Keep looking so we have an example of Abraham, crystal clear how was Abraham saved? He believed God and it was accounted on him for righteousness. And Abraham is supposedly in a completely different dispensation than us today and he's also according to hyper dispensational as that believe in this all these different multiple plans of salvation. He's also supposed to be in a different dispensation than David because the law had been given yet. Now here's an example ?¦ This one whole chapter God just destroys man's dispensationalism right here. Just in Romans 4: just two dispensations are just out the window. Romans 4:6 picks up here, speaking of David. Even as David also describeth the blessedness of the man under whom God imputed righteousness without works. Saying I was going to tell you what this righteousness is of this blessedness. 	Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. In that context it's telling you that the same salvation the same blessing that Abraham received, the same way even as it says, even as the same salvation the same blessedness that Abraham received is the same blessedness and the same salvation that David received. Keep reading we??ll pick up in verse 10. How was it then reckon when he was in circumcision or in un-circumcision. Not in circumcision but in un-circumcision and you receive the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had yet being on circumcised. That's eternal security. That was a sign that wasn??t the Holy Spirit like ours today. But that was his eternal security at that moment. That was a sign, a seal of the sign that he had eternal security, that he could never lose his salvation. He had believed on God, and God imputed that unto him for righteousness.	So we'll keep reading that verse we??ll pick up in verse 12 and the father of circumcision to them who are not of the circumcision only but who also walk in the steps of that fate of our father Abraham which he had being yet un-circumcised. For the promise that sounds familiar, kind of like the promise in Hebrews chapter 11: For the promise that he should be the heir of the world was not to Abraham or to his seed through the law, but through the righteousness of faith. For if they which are of the law be heirs, faith is made void and the promise made of non-effect, and that applies to any dispensation. If at any time after that promise was given anyone was able to become an heir along with Abraham and became a child of Abraham or a son of Abraham through the law by receiving righteousness through the law, then the promise would have been made void.	But the Bible says very clearly, ??For it they which are of the law be heirs faith is made void and the promise made of non-effect look at verse 15. Because the law worketh wrath for where no law is there is no transgression. Watch this. Therefore it is of faith that it might be by grace to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed not to that only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham who is the father of us all. 	And I want to point something out people that may be familiar with  dispensations. Because while I was growing up I heard dispensations a lot taught by going to different Baptist churches. And one of the dispensations that they believe is that one of them is that salvation by means of salvation is faith plus works. And that was actually that is during the time of David, and they also said that at the time of Abraham. Look at what verse 16 actually says, ??Therefore, because he just got done saying it's not of the law, or the promise will be made of non-affect. Therefore because of that it is of faith that it might be by grace to the end. The promise might be sure to all the seed. What he's saying is that the only way that salvation could be by grace is the reason that it's by faith. 	So it makes no sense that if you believed in a dispensation that was faith plus works, that would completely contradict the idea of what God says here therefore is of faith he??s saying that he went ?¦ that he called salvation that salvation is by faith and through the promise because it's either one or the other. The Bible says in Romans 11:6 and if by grace then is it no more of works. Otherwise grace is no more grace. Those two things are completely contradictory. And like in nature grace and works just cannot they??re characteristics they just cannot co-exist.	Turn to Galatians 3: and we??ll look more about what the promise was that was given to Abraham here. And then I'm going to read to you from Romans 4:23 the Bible says, ??Now is not written for his sake alone, speaking to Abraham, that was imputed to him but for us also to whom it shall be imputed if we believe on Him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead. And that's us today at this present time. And that also applies to those that lived after Abraham that had the Scriptures which were recorded and written for Abraham. And I'll turn it over to Galatians three where you're at. Galatians 3: and let??s pick up in verse eight. The Bible says, And the scripture for seeing that God would justify the heathen through faith preach before the gospel on to Abraham saying, and this shall all nations be blessed. So it tells me preach the gospel unto Abraham and this shall all nations be blessed.	So then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham. For as many as are of the works of the law are under the curse for it is written cursed is everyone that continue with not in all things which are written in the book of the law to do them. But then no man but that no man is justified by the law in the side of God, it is evident for the just shall live by faith. And that's actually a quotation from the Old Testament by the way. 	And then verse 12 ??And the law is not of faith but the man that doeth them shall live in them. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law being made a curse for us. For it is written, cursed is everyone that hangs up on the tree. And verse 14 the same blessing that we??re talking about him in Romans four, and it is just mentioned and verse eight it says that that blessing was the gospel. So if you look at verse 14 that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith. Brethren I speak after the manner of men though it be but a man's covenant yet if it be confirmed no man dissonant it or add it there too.	And then the famous verse and verse 16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He sayeth not unto seeds as of many but as of one and to thy seed which is Christ. So he goes over here if we are to keep reading he goes over the same idea. And he contrasts the law and he contrasts grace and that these two things cannot co-exist. And then he explains that the law was only meant to be a schoolmaster, that was the only point of why it was given. So pick up reading look in verse 22 but the Scripture has concluded all understand that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. But before faith came we were kept under the law shut up onto the faith which should afterwards be revealed. Verse 24 wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us on to Christ that we might be justified by faith.	And what it means by the law being our schoolmasters it means it's our teacher. It's teaching us that we on our own cannot be righteous. God shows we can see God's righteousness through the law, and then when we try to keep God's law, we just are proven and over and again we fall short. Over and over again we're seeing that we're sinners. So the whole purpose of the law is to teach us that we cannot attain on to what's required in order to get us to heaven. 	Now I want you to think about this for a second if God says the purpose of the law given in the Old Testament was to be a schoolmaster and then you have a group of people over here that are saying that in the Old Testament people were saved by the law.  How's the schoolmaster? You actually proving the opposite. You're proving that it is possible by the wall to get to heaven it's not a schoolmaster that wouldn??t bring anyone to Christ. I would say I don't need Jesus then. If I can get to heaven by the law I would not need Jesus Christ to die for me on the cross.	The Bible says I do not frustrate the grace of God for if righteousness come by the law, then Christ is dead and vain. That's in any dispensation. That doesn't matter if that's today, that's in the past that??s in the future, it doesn't matter. Jesus Christ would have never had to come. God would have just given the law and said, ??All right boys here you go get your get yourself heaven.?? That's all he??d had to do. That's it. If man was ever in any way able to get . . . and let's just put the last aside anyway just hypothetically. If man could get to heaven by any other way than Jesus Christ then we didn't need him, we wouldn't needed him to come.  	Turn real quick if you will to 2 Corinthians 11:3. And the Gospel that's mentioned over and over in here is the same gospel that??s preached all throughout the Bible. There's one gospel. And Old Testament Romans 10:16 quotes an Old Testament passage of Isaiah says, ??But they have not all obeyed the Gospel. And then he quotes Isaiah phrase. I say Lord, who have believed our report. That proves Isaiah was preaching what? He was preaching the gospel. 	Hebrews 4:2 says for unto us,?? Talking about the Hebrews at that time or the Jews at that time and Paul. For unto us was the gospel preached as well as unto them. And if you look at the context of speaking of Israel in the Old Testament and the children of Israel in the wilderness. For unto us was the gospel preached as well as on to them but the Word preached did not profit them not being mixed with faith in them that heard it. Notice for unto us was the gospel preached as well as unto them. If there was a different gospel that makes sense?  For unto us was the gospel preached as well as unto them. That would make sense if there was two different gospels. There??s one gospel. And notice it says not being mixed with faith, it doesn??t say not being mixed with works, it's says not being mixed with faith. There is only one way of salvation is by believing on the Lord Jesus Christ no other way of salvation.  	2 Corinthians 11:3 the Bible reads, ??But I fear less by any means as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtlety so your mind should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ's.?? Verse four, ??For if he that cometh preaches another Jesus whom we have not preached, of if you receive another spirit which you have not received or another Gospel which you have not accepted, you might well bear with him he's worried that they may go along with it. And he's warning about another gospel, and he's warning about another Jesus and another spirit.	Turn to Galatians 1:6 now. Galatians 1:6 says, ??I marvel that you are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel which is not another, but there be some that trouble you and what pervert the gospel of Christ.?? And then he says there??s a warning. ??But though we or an angel from heaven preach any other gospel unto you, then that which we have preached unto you let him be a cursed as we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any other gospel unto you than that you have received, let him be a curse.	And you know the craziest thing about this is the people that believe in these different dispensations. I've actually heard from the Pulpit taught in Revelation when the angel is preaching the gospel after the rapture, or right before the Rapture when the angels going around preaching the gospel that that is a different gospel. And the Bible gives a specific warning not only about another gospel but about an angel preaching it. God is not the author of confusion, do you know how confusing that would be to people? They're like look at Galatians 1: and they??re like looking this angel, they??re look at Galatians 1: and like, ??What did I do??? That would be the most confusing thing in the world. I mean it's crazy what people will believe it's crazy. 	Turn to Acts 10:43. Acts 10:43, 43 I'm sorry look at verse 43 I think I said 40. The Bible says, ??To him give all the prophets witness.?? Him is referring back to Jesus to him give all the prophets?? witness that through his name whosoever believeth in Him shall receive remission of sins. And I'm going to read to you from Luke Chapter 24:27 And it says Jesus speaking to His disciples after he rose again from the dead he says, then he said unto them, oh fools and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken ought not Christ to have suffered these things and to enter into his glory?? And then it says, and beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them and all the scriptures the things concerning himself. Notice it says, ??In beginning at Moses and all the profits he expounded to them and all the scriptures the things concerning himself. Just as Paul said to Timothy and that from a child thou has known the holy scriptures which are able to make the wise and the salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus. 	That's the most powerful verse to somebody trying to tell you the Old Testament can't get somebody saved. Because there is no way to get around that. Those two words looks like which are able. How can you get around that? And that from a child thou has known the Holy Scriptures which all are able to make the wise and the salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus. 	Turn to Hebrews 9: will look at verse 17. Actually the last sermon I preached I actually alluded to this point when I was an Abraham??s bosom sermon. But we didn't physically turn to this passage but if you speak to somebody who is like a hyper dispensation or somebody believes in all these different methods of salvation, and different ages and stuff like that. This is a passage they'll often turn you to. And you know what's funny about things that are heredical teachings is it??s so often that I've found this over the time which I've done my own personal studying the Bible and I figured out the meanings of verses. It??s so often that versus that hard to understand at the beginning, and people take those verses and they have used those verses for a certain outcome. It actually oftentimes is teaching the exact opposite of what that person is trying to use a verse for. I've seen that happen so many times. 	And look down at Hebrews 9: I said verse 17 The Bible says, ??For a testament is a force after men are dead, for a testament is a force after men are dead. Otherwise it is of no strength at all while the test data liveth. And that's what people look at. They??re like see, see before Jesus Christ death on the cross there's no way that his blood could have been accounted to the people in the Old Testament. It's impossible. I've had people take me to this verse numerous times. And this verse is actually teaching when you get the whole verse in context is actually teaching the exact opposite of what they think is teaching. Go up to chapter 11 we??ll start reading in Chapter 11 and first you have to understand the Book of Hebrews what the book of Hebrews is about. It??s about contrasting things. It's about in the very beginning he contrast the sons of God. He talks about us being the sons of God and Jesus Christ says the Son of God with the angels. And how Jesus Christ is so much greater than the angels.	It's supposed to ?¦ he contrast things repeatedly to show the superiority of Jesus Christ as the High Priest and then the priests of the Old Testament. And then he goes over the Lamb sacrificed. And then he talks about how Jesus Christ sacrifice is much greater than that. So we'll pick up reading in verse ?¦ we??ll pick up reading in verse 11. And this one right here is actually getting to where he's more or less concluding on the subject. And verse 11 says, ??But Christ being calm and high priest of good things to come via greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands.?? That is to say not of this building. So again he??s contrasting that something superior to something inferior. Verse 12, ??Neither by the blood of goats and calves but by his own blood he entered at once into the holy place having obtained. I want to point out a couple things while we read through here. First, I want to point this out. Having obtain eternal redemption for us.	Verse 13: For if the blood of bulls and of goats, and in the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctify us to the purifying of the flesh. Watch he says, verse 14 is comparing something again and he??s contrasting it again. How much more shall the blood of Christ who threw the,?? watch this, ??Eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God.?? Now verse 15, ?? And for this cause.?? So from what he just explain what? That Jesus Christ offered himself through the eternal spirit. So he says, ??And for this cause.  So for the reason that Jesus offered himself to the eternal spirit. ??And for this cause he Jesus is the mediator of the New Testament.?? That means he's the only one that could do it. That Jesus was the only person that could do this because is there any other person that could offer themselves to the Eternal Spirit? Of course not.  	So for that cause Jesus is the one that had to be the person that offered himself or the mediator of the New Testament. And for this cause he is the mediator of the New Testament. And Now watch what he explains. That by means of death, so talk about it when he died on the cross, that he had to be the one to die because he offered himself to the eternal spirit, that by means of death for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first Testament. Only Jesus dying and offering himself through the Eternal Spirit is the only person that could have paid for the sins of the past for, the sins of eternity. And that's what this passage is teaching. And then when you get into verse 14 he's talking about the testament of a man. He's contrasting how he was contracting things before. He's contrasting the testament of a man and then God being the mediator of the testament. 	Look at verse 17 now what we read before. For a testament is a force after men are dead. Otherwise it is of no strength at all while the test hater liveth. And he says in verse 18, ??Whereupon neither the first Testament was dedicated without blood.?? and he goes through and he reads,  I'm going to look at one more verse in this chapter. And I'll go ahead and then we'll flip over to Hebrews 11 and we??ll wrap up there. And we'll look at the flip over to verse 24. We??ll read out 24 to 28. He talks about this topic again. Actually I??ll start in verse 23. It was therefore necessary that the patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with these. But the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands which are the figures of the true, but into heaven itself. Now to appear in the presence of God for us. 	Nor yet that he should offer himself often as the High Priest entereth into the holy place every year with blot of others. For then now watch this, this verse right here, ??For then must he often has suffered since the foundation of the world.?? That's referring to the past. That's again saying that Jesus Christ didn't have to come in the beginning of the world and offer himself as a sacrifice for the sins of the world because he offered himself through the eternal spirit. And therefore was able to cover all the transgressions and all the sins of the past because he's God. Because He is outside of time. 	The Bible says in Revelation 13:8 it talks about the lamb being slain from the foundation of the world. That??s  because God Jesus Christ is eternal. Jesus Christ was all managing Jesus Christ was all God. So when he died that blood was not normal blood. That blood was not the blood of just any regular man who would die for something. He offered himself to the eternal spirit. And therefore could pay for the sins of eternity whether it was Abraham in the Old Testament, whether it was David, whether it was Simeon who saw Jesus as a baby, it didn??t matter at what point or what time it was. Jesus Christ the promise was given to them it says they were persuaded, it says they embraced the promises. How could you say that they didn't have the promises? They obviously received the promises, they obviously did. They are promises weren't fulfilled, but those promises were given unto them.	Turn over to Hebrews 11: we??ll end right there. I'll finish reading this out though. So it says, verse 25 knowing yet that he should offer himself often as the high priest entereth into the holy place every year with blood of others. For then must be often have suffered since the foundation of the world, and he says but now wants in the end of the world has the appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. And that is a disappointed on the men wants to die, but after this the judgment. So Christ once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation. 	And we??ll pick up reading in Hebrews chapter 11 we??ll pick up reading in ?¦ We??ll start reading in verse 32. But you know Hebrews 11: 1 starts out like we heard brother Jesse read. ??Now faith  is the substance of things hoped for the evidence of things not seen.?? So we today we didn't see any of the promises either. Just like those of the Old Testament they didn't see the promises. We have the scriptures just like they had, but we just have a little bit more than they have. More things have been made manifest, more life is then brought to it. To them in the Old Testament was a mystery things they could see it but it was a far off. It was something that they couldn??t see the specifics about they couldn't see the details about, but they knew that the Christ would come just like the woman at the well said, I know that Messiah is coming which is called Christ when he is coming you'll tell us all things.	 They knew that Jesus Christ was going to come, they may have not known his name, they may have not a known exactly how everything will play out but they were trusting God for their salvation. And that's how they were saved. They were saved by looking forward and they were looking toward the cross. So what verse that I say verse 32? So Bible says, ??And what shall I more say? For the time would fail me to tell of Gideon and of Barack, and of Samson, Jephthah, of David also and Samuel one of the prophets who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, lacks valiant in fight, turn to flight the armies of the aliens. Women received their dead raised to life again, others were tortured not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection. 	And others had trial of cruel mocking scourging GA, moreover of bonds and imprisonment. They were stoned, they were sworn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword. They wondered about and sheepskins and goatskins being destitute, afflicted, tormented of whom the world was not worthy.They wandered in deserts and mountains and in dens, and caves of all the earth. Now watch this, and these all having obtained a good report through faith received not the promise. So he goes and names all these just amazing things that all these people have done. All these great and amazing things and then he said he concludes with this. And these all having obtained a good report, through faith received not the promise. And then look at verse 40. God having provided some better thank for us that they without us should not be made perfect. 	And we look at the Old Testament, we look at the New Testament, we looked at things that are revealed and we compare us looking back at the cross, and we compare the Christians of the Old Testament, looking toward the cross and just trusting in the promises of the Messiah at that time.	We have so many more things than what they have and that's the truth. We have the Holy Spirit indwelling us, we have the Old Testament we have the New Testament, we have all the scriptures, The New Testament oftentimes is a commentary to the Old Testament. It actually explains things in the Old Testament. Many times you see people can??t understand things in the Old Testament. Daniel and then more is revealed in Revelation. There's numerous bangs that we have today that they didn't have in the Old Testament, numerous things. And he explains to you that these all died in faith not having received the promise. So if we think about this, how much more should we be doing for God today than what they did then? How much more motivated should we be? How much more compelled should we be to go out and save the lost and to give the full gospel in clarity to somebody and as simple as it can be given? And with the freedom that we have for now to walk around with a Bible, and everybody can own a Bible, half the things are happening people aren??t happening us anyway.	They??re being run out of cities, They??re being ?¦ A lot of prophets in the Old Testament were stoned to death. The whole country's worshiping Baal they sodomized everywhere ?¦ that is calling America. But a lot of things are happening are a lot of things in our lives today makes it a lot, lot easier to do a lot, lot more for God and we need to take that advantage. We need to take that advantage see we when we uses that word received is often is like the fulfilled. That's the way I want to says that they didn't receive the promises. That the promises weren't completely fulfilled yet. They were given to them but Jesus Christ had died on the cross yet. So us knowing all that we know and having all that we have today we should be doing that much more for God today. That much more soul winning, that much more teaching of and just everything. Let's go ahead we??ll bow our heads and then we'll have a word of prayer. 	Dear heavenly Father God we thank you dear Lord God for the promises, we thank you for all that you've done for us dear Lord, we thank you for just for giving us the scriptures and for revealing so many things for it to us dear Lord. We thank you for your word so much, just to help us to retain it dear Lord God and we're just thankful that we have a great savior that is the same savior of all man kind. And we love you just be with us in Jesus Christ??s name Amen.
 
 
