


"Wolves in Sheep's Clothing"
Video
June 4, 2014

Now the part of the chapter that I would like to focus on is there beginning in verse number 15. Where the bible reads, ??Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep??s clothing but inwardly they are ravening wolves. You shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit. Neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire. Wherefore by their fruits you shall know them.?? That??s what I want to preach about today is false prophets that will come to you in sheep??s clothing.	Now if you study the bible, there??s a consistent thread throughout the New Testament. Of comparing false prophets unto evil trees and tress that produce bad fruit. Now keep your finger here in Mathew seven. We are going to come right back to it but go to the book of Jude. Jude and I want to show you, this is right before Revelation, is that small book of Jude. Let me show you a similar passage in Jude, beginning in verse number four. The bible reads, ??For there are certain men crept in unawares.?? Again wolves that come in sheep??s clothing creeping in unawares. Who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, undy men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness and deny the the only Lord God and our Lord Jesus Christ.??	??I will therefore put you in remembrance though you once knew this how that the Lord having saved people out of the land of Egypt. Afterward destroyed them that believed not.?? Notice this scripture about God destroying those that believe not is directed toward these false prophets that creep in unawares with damnable heresies. Now are these people believers?Congregation:	No.Pastor:	Are they saved? No. Because the bible is clear here that they are people who believed not. Then if you jump down to verse 12 it says, ??These are spots in your feasts of charity when they feast with you.?? Again emphasizing the fact that they will be among you, they will creep in. They will be a wolf in sheep??s clothing. ??Feeding themselves without fear, clouds there without water. Carried about of wind,?? watch this, ??Trees whose fruit withereth. Without fruit twice dead plucked up by the roots raging waves of the sea, filming out their own shame. Wondering stars to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness forever. These are unsaved unbelieving people who are on their way to hell and they creep in with the intent and the goal of bringing in lies, bringing in false doctrine or teaching things which they ought not.??	Now go back to Mathew chapter seven because this is a very misunderstood passage in Mathew seven. A lot of people will try to apply the passage in Mathew seven, just to all men and just to all believers. Say, ??Hey if you are not bringing forth fruit you are not really saved.?? Who??s ever had that before? Where somebody said, ??Hey if you don??t bring forth fruit you are not saved. The problem is there are missing the context here because verse 15 says, beware of what?Congregation:	False prophets.Pastor:	He says, ??Beware of false prophets.?? What is another word for prophet? Preacher, so he??s saying, ??Beware of false teachers, beware of false prophets which come to you in sheep??s clothing but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits.?? Who are you going to know by their fruits?Congregation:	Prophets.Pastor:	Okay is he saying you are going to know who is saved by their fruits?Congregation:	No.Pastor:	No. That??s how a lot of people will quote this, I have had it quoted that way my whole life but yet that??s not what it says. It says, ??Ye shall know the false prophets by their fruits because preacher??s false prophets are compared in the bible to evil trees. Then a good preacher or a good soul winner or someone who preaches the gospel to the unsaved is a good tree.?? Think about this now, Proverbs 11:30. The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life and he that winneth souls is wise.?? The bible talks about us as believers that if we will be rooted and grounded in what we believe if we will add to our faith charity and to charity temperedness  and all these different things. He says, ??Then we will be fruitful.?? He talks about that some will bring forth fruit.?? He said, ??Some 30, some 60 and some a 100.??	Now what do you think that is if he talks about a believer bringing forth fruit and then he puts a number on it. Some 30, some 60, some a 100. Okay now what does it mean to be fruitful? If we look at the very first time in the bible that fruitful is ever mentioned in Genesis one, what??s it talking about? It says, ??be fruitful and ?¶ ??Congregation:	Multiply.Pastor:	??Multiply and replenish the earth.?? The first time the word fruitful is used is talking about animals and human beings reproducing. When they are fruitful when they produce fruit there??s a multiplication taking place. Now that??s?? perfectly consistent with 30, 60 and a 100 fold fruit berry. Stop and think about it. If we had a lemon today that lemon is a piece of fruit. That lemon if it were to be fruitful, if it were produce fruit, what is it producing more lemons. Right if the lemon is fruitful it produces more lemons. If the apple is fruitful it produces more apples. That is what it means to bring forth fruit to bring forth after your own kind. As Christians if we are going to be fruitful that means we bring forth another believer.	Okay so if I go out and win someone to Christ that??s me bringing forth fruit. Because I have now multiplied, I have now begotten a spiritual child. When my wife and I multiply, if my wife and I are fruitful like the bible promises to bless people and to make their wife fruitful what is he saying? That they are going have children that??s what he??s saying. When he told Abraham that he??s going to be fruitful he??s telling them that he??s going to have children. When my wife and I have children we are reproducing after our own kind. We are human she will produce human children. Okay the lemon will produce lemons. The apple will produce apples but let me ask you this, what about a human who does not reproduce? Does that mean that they are not human?Congregation:	No.Pastor:	You don??t reproduce you are not human. That doesn??t make any sense does it? What about this, what about an apple that doesn??t reproduce? Is it still an apple? In fact what percentage of apples do you think will produce an apple tree? Or become an apple tree and produce more apples? A very small percentage. In fact most apples will just fall on the ground and be eaten by animals or be eaten by people. Most apples are going to be purchased at the store and consumed. It??s only a minority of apples that will fall to the ground and die and that seed will go into the earth and produce another apple tree. That apple tree will be fruitful and that apple tree will produce nothing but apples. What the bible is teaching here, when it says a good tree brings forth good fruit and an evil tree brings forth corrupt fruit.	What it??s teaching is that things produce after their own kind. If that apple is planted in the earth, it will produce apples and nothing else. It will not produce oranges, it will not produce bananas. Does that just guarantee that every apple is going to reproduce? Is every human being going to reproduce? No, but if they do you now what you are going to get. That??s what people are mistaking about this passage. They think this passage is teaching that every safe person is going to bring forth fruit. When in reality it??s just teaching that if a saved person brings forth fruit it??s going to be good fruit. If an unsaved false prophet wolf in sheep??s clothing brings forth fruit it??s going to be evil fruit. They will reproduce themselves, they will reproduce by producing more evil people.	Those who are saved and that are a good tree when they reproduce if they reproduce they are going to produce more Christians, more saved people. You see it is impossible according to this passage for an unsaved person to get someone saved. That??s what this passage teaches. Because the bible says it??s not possible for a corrupt tree to bring forth good fruit. Therefore if an unsaved person would go out preaching the gospel even if they have a King James. Even if they are going through the motions they are given the plan of salvation, they will not get anyone saved. Because getting someone saved is a spiritual job that takes the spirit of God dwelling inside the person who??s doing the preaching of the gospel. That??s what it says folks.	If you don??t agree with that then you are basically what you are saying is that an evil tree can produce good fruit. See Judas Iscariot went soul winning, did he not? Judas Iscariot was one of the 12 that was sent two by two. The bible is clear that he did not believe on Christ from the beginning he did not believe. He never believed on Christ. From the beginning he said he, told, Jesus told him he was a devil. He said, ??If not I chosen you 12 one of you is a devil,?? early in his ministry. He said that, ??He believe not from the beginning.?? A lot of people say, ??Judas lost his salvation.?? You can??t lose your salvation. Judas, it says he didn??t believe ever from the beginning. Yet he went out soul winning. Yet he went out and knocked doors with the other disciples.	Did he get anyone saved? He couldn??t have because he??s an evil tree. Now a lot of people will mistakenly say, ??Well when the bible talks about a Christian bringing forth fruit,?? it??s not talking about winning another person to Christ. It??s talking about just, you??ll see changes in their lives. Who??s heard that before? You just see changes, or sometimes people will say, ??Well the fruit of the spirit.?? That??s not the fruit of the Christian that??s the fruit of the spirit. See the fruit of the spirit is what the spirit produces. The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, long, peace, long suffering, generous, goodness, meekness, faith, temperance. Okay that??s what the spirit produces, why? Because he??s reproducing after his own kind. He embodies and epitomize all those thing. The bible says, ??God is love, the fruit of spirit is love.??	The bible calls the holly spirit the oil of gladness that??s why the fruit of spirit is joy. Jesus Christ is the prince of peace that??s why he brings forth peace. Okay those are spiritual qualities brought forth by the Holy Spirit. This is not talking about the fruit of the spirit. You don??t get 30 love, 60 joy and a 100 piece. The fruit of the believer is believers. The fruit of the lemon is lemons. The fruit of apple is apples. The fruit of humans is humans and the fruit of the saved child of God is another saved child of God. You know why people don??t like that doctrine? Because they don??t do any soul winning. They do not want to be a zero. In reality when it comes to fruit bearing if you are not winning anybody to Christ, if you??ve never won someone to Lord in your life you are at zero right now. You are not to the 30 level yet.	It doesn??t mean you are not saved, you are saved. You are a child of God but have you become a tree of life. Have you become fruitful? Have you begun to reproduce and bring forth fruit in your life? Jesus said, ??If you follow me you might become a fisher of men.?? Is that what he said? No he said, ??If you follow me I will make you fishers of men.?? When you win somebody to the Lord that??s you bringing forth fruit. Now it??s obvious that every saved person doesn??t bring forth fruit or the whole world will be saved by now. If every saved person was bringing forth some 30, some 60, some a 100 pretty soon the whole world will be saved. The vast majority of Christians bring forth no fruit. Then others bring forth some 30, some 60, some a 100 some even more than that.	As the seasons of life go by they bring forth even more fruit than that. That??s what this passage is teaching. Now here??s more proof you say, ??Pastor Anderson you are not interpreting this right.?? Let me give you more proof. The bible says that, ??The evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit.?? Okay so according to most people they??ll say, ??The fruit he??s talking about is changes in your life.?? ??He quit drinking that??s fruit in his life.?? ??He got baptized,?? there fruit in his life. ??Look he joined the church,?? there??s fruit. Okay can an unsaved person quit drinking? Can an unsaved person get baptized? Can an unsaved person start dressing and looking differently. Can an unsaved person go volunteer and help someone and give money to the poor? An unsaved person can do all of those things but you know what an unsaved cant do?	Win someone to Christ. They can??t because only a good tree can bring forth good fruit. Look you can teach a chimpanzee to ride a bicycle, right. You can train a chimp to ride a bicycle. You can send a chimp into orbit okay like the Soviets did and the United States did. Remember when they used to send chimpanzees up into orbit around the earth. Well you can train a chimpanzee to speak sign language and to do a lot of things. You know what a chimpanzee is never going to be able to do, bring forth human fruit. Okay a chimpanzee is never going to be able to produce a human because it??s not human. A none-Christian is never going to be able to produce a Christian because they are not a Christian. Paul talked about when he won people to the Lord, he called it begetting them. He said, ??Onesimus is one that I??ve begotten in my bonds.?? He said, ??Timothy is my son in the faith.??	He said, ??The Galatians are people that he brought forth as children.?? Why because he won them to Christ, he begot them spiritually. Soul winning is a spiritually process that takes a spiritual Christian that has the holy spirit living inside of them it is not possible for the unsaved to accomplish that task. The bible is clear here that only a good tree can bring forth good fruit. The corrupt tree will always bring forth evil fruit and he says a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit. Neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Now this isn??t saying that every person you talk to and give the gospel to is going to be saved and going to be a righteous Christian. Because a lot of times you??ll talk to people with the gospel and they??ll just pretend to get saved.	I guarantee you that if you have been soul winning for any length of time I hate to burst your bubble. If you say, ??Well I have won a 100 people Lord in my life.?? I guarantee you at least one of them was probably just lying to you and just going through the motions just repeating what they are hearing you say. Just deceiving you to get you off the back or just deceiving you for whatever other reason. Don??t let that discourage you because it??s not the majority of people that you are talking to. If you are doing your soul winning properly, if you are being through you are doing a good job. The vast majority of the people that you are talking to I believe are really getting saved. They are going to be people that save the right things and they are not legit. Here??s the thing, you didn??t beget them, you didn??t bring them forth that??s not you producing evil fruit.	Just because you went on and talked to somebody and they won??t along with. Because Jesus he reached Judas Iscariot and Judas Iscariot was a fraud. Was he a son of Jesus? No it wasn??t his son in the faith. Jesus did not make him into a wicked person, he was already a wicked person before Jesus came along. See we are not going to go out and produce wicked false teachers. Either they are that way before we got there or whatever but that didn??t come from our spiritual genetics of true salvation. This passage is important to understand, you say, ??Why are we even talking about this, what??s the point of even learning this doctrine??? Because the bible tells us that these people will be among us and creep in among us. Therefore we need to be warned of their existence.	We also need to make sure we don??t misunderstand this passage and start teaching false doctrine about salvation. That people will have to get baptized and go to church and quit drinking to be saved because otherwise they didn??t bring forth any fruit. You don??t have to bring forth fruit to be saved. If you saved and you bring forth fruit it??s going to be good fruit. If you are not saved you are bringing forth no good fruit. Let me prove to you further, go back to Mathew three. Because there??s a statement that??s really similar to what Jesus said in Mathew seven. Where he said, ??Every tree,?? he said this, ??Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire.?? A lot of people will look at that and say, ??See if you don??t bring forth fruit you are going to the fire.??	Hold on a second that??s not what you are saying. Because it says, ??Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast in fire.?? It doesn??t say every person who doesn??t bring forth fruit is going to the fire. No every tree and what the bible define a tree as from Mathew to Revelation he uses the trees to represent good what and bad ?¶ Is every single person a prophet, a preacher being used by either God or Satan to deliver either the true gospel or false gospel. No, so we are not talking about just every person here. We are talking about trees. Now the good tree is the good tree that brings forth good fruit and those trees are referred to as planted by the Father in heaven. Those are the trees that are planted by the Father.	Then there are the corrupt trees,; the evil trees which are not planted by God and the bible calls those trees twice dead. He says they are trees whose fruit withereth. Without fruit twice dead plucked up by the roots, raging waves of the sea. Filming out their own shame wondering stars for whom is reserved the blackness of darkness forever. Now what does he mean when he said, ??Twice dead.?? Now all of us before we are saved we are dead in trespasses and sins but we were not twice dead. The one who was twice dead is the one who becomes two fold more a child of hell. It is the one who becomes reprobate or what the bible calls rejected, reprobate and so forth. Now let me show you in Mathew chapter three, the exact same statement that John the Baptist preached same as what Jesus said.	Because it says in verse 10, ??And now also the axe is laid onto the root of the trees therefore every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire.?? Same thing Jesus said but let??s show you that this isn??t just talking about all people but it??s talking about these false prophets. Back up to verse seven. Who is that statement directed at. It says, ??But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come to his baptism. He said unto them, ??Oh generation of vipers who would want you to flee from the wrath to come bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance and think not to say within yourselves we have Abraham to our father. For I say unto you that God is able of these stones to raise up children and unto Abraham.??	??Now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees therefore every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast in the fire.?? This is not even what he??s preaching to the general population. John the Baptist is preaching that they should repent and believe the gospel. No question about that. He is preaching that they need to believe on him that should come after that is on Jesus Christ. He is preaching the baptism of repentance unto all men. This statement about the trees being cut down is very specifically stated as, when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come to his baptism he said unto them, ??Oh generation of vipers.?? He said to them that every tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast to fire. Go to Mathew 15. Just in the book of Mathew alone this is very consistent.	Because we saw it in chapter three, we saw it in chapter seven, now lets look at chapter 15 and see the same thing. Throughout the scripture. It says in verse 13 actually let??s start at verse 12. Mathew 15:12. ??Then came his disciples and said unto him, ??Notice how that the Pharisees were offended after they had this saying.?? That??s one of my favorite verses it??s so funny. Jesus finishes preaching and His disciples come to him and say, ??Don??t you realize you have offended the Pharisees??? He doesn??t care, he??s preaching the truth. They say, ??Don??t you know that the Pharisees were offended of what you said.?? He answered and said, ??Every plant which my heavenly father had not planted shall be rooted up let them alone they will be blind what?Congregation:	Leaders.Pastor:	Leaders, they will be blind leaders of the blind and if the blind lead the blind both shall fall into the ditch. Again who is he referring to as these plants that are going to be plucked and what does it say in Jude? Plucked up by the roots. Trees whose fruit withereth, without fruit twice dead, plucked up by the roots. Jesus said every plant that my father has not plant is going to be plucked up by the roots. He??s talking about leaders, he??s talking about Pharisee preachers, the Sadducee preacher. This leaders of the blind that were reprobate. That had a hardened heart and a darkened mind according to the bible. It??s very consistent, now go back to Jude if you would. This is the passage right before Revelation book of Jude short little book there.	Jude talks about these evil trees. Now let me say this I don??t want you to misunderstand what I??m saying this morning. Because there are some people who teach false doctrine ignorantly. They are not purposely going out to deceive and to lie and to preach a false doctrine. They are actually just sincerely wrong. For example the apostle Paul was like that. Remember the apostle Paul he persecuted the church of God and he said, ??But I obtained mercy because I did it ignorantly and unbelief.?? Did you hear that? ??How be it, for this course I obtained mercy that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all along suffering for a pattern to them that hereafter should believe on him to life everlasting.?? He said, ??I obtained mercy because I did it ignorantly and unbelief. You know what that is implying and you can prove it with other passages you don??t have to see the implication.	It??s implying that if he had not been doing it ignorantly but if you were purposely preaching false doctrine that he would not have obtained mercy. Because he says I obtained mercy because I did it ignorantly. Now that tells me that there are some people out there that are like in Apostle Paul who preach false doctrine and teach false doctrine not on purpose. Not because they are creeping in, like a wolf in sheep??s clothing but actually they are just mixed up. They are just deceived, they are sincere but they are sincerely wrong. Don??t forget the fact that the bible talks a lot more about the other kind of false prophet. There??s more scripture much more warning, much more teaching about the other kind of false prophet.	I??m not saying that some false prophets are not sincere. Because some false prophets are sincere like in Apostle Paul. If you look at the Apostle Paul he eventually got saved. Because if you think about it if a guy is wrong and he??s sincere and he??s trying to do what??s right but he??s sincere. God is probably going to try to bring things into his life to give the gospel to this guy. Brother Garret was like that and so Brother Garret was trained in a lot of false religion as a Lutheran and as a Pentecostal. He never was like, ??Yeah I??m going to teach lies.?? He basically was just sincere and a lot of people might have grown up catholic. You might have even grown up Mormon or Catholic. Maybe even taught a Sunday class because they make everybody a Sunday school teacher in a lot of these churches.	He might have taught stuff but it??s not like you were doing it on purpose. Okay you were just ignorantly and unbelief you haven??t heard the truth, you hadn??t heard the gospel. Case in point, he??s saved. Okay case in point Apostle Paul got saved. See there are a lot of false prophets that are never going to get saved. There are a lot of false prophets who are not doing it ignorantly and unbelief. This is where you are wrong if you sit there and say, ??Well every teacher of these other religions are all sincere people they are just wrong.?? No they are not sincere. The bible teaches that they are evil people out there who are corrupt to the core, rotten to the core, they don??t believe on Jesus Christ at all. They are just an evil false prophet. You say, ??Why would anyone do that??? There are a lot of reasons why they would do that.	Number one because there are under the power of Satan. Satan can influence the unsaved and the reprobate to do a lot of evil things. Satan entered into Judas Iscariot when he went and betrayed Jesus. Judas was under the power of Satan and being manipulated by Satan. Even after Judas Iscariot realized what he had done he felt bad about it. The bible says he repented and brought back the money and gave it back the money that he had sold Jesus. The 30 pieces of silver and they wouldn??t accept the money back. He just threw it on the ground and ran away and killed himself. Okay he was under the power of Satan that??s one reason why these false prophets could be doing what they do. Another reason is that a lot of them in the bible says, ??Teach things which they are not ought for filthy look or sake.??	Basically for the money that your TV evangelist your TV preacher, you see these guys who are just multimillionaires and they drive fancy cars and they just ?¶ Or maybe even not to that extreme but they just have a pretty good salary. Maybe they just like everybody looking up to them and thinking that they are popular and thinking that they are wonderful. They are doing it for the fame, they are doing it for the glory, they are doing it for the money. They are doing it because they are under the control of Satan. Or they are doing it because they just enjoy being a deceiver and enjoy being evil. Why is Satan evil? He??s just evil and to sit there and try to understand the mind of an evil person is not really going to be possible for you because you are not evil. I??m not evil, you are not evil therefore we might sometimes feel a little perplexed.	Why do people do that? You know what? A person who judges everyone by their own heart and thinks, ??Well I??m a nice person, I??m a good person. That means everybody else is good, everybody else is nice.?? That person is called na√Øve. Many Christians today are way too na√Øve. They think, ??Well I would never do things like that, I could never imagine doing it.?? There are evil wicked people that will stop at nothing to destroy and to hurt and pervert and to corrupt. That??s what the bible is warning us about and if you don??t know that these people are out there. If you don??t know these people exist you will be their victim. Now you can be their in multiple ways. Number one you can be their victim by falling for their false doctrine, by listening to them.	A lot of people will sit there and listen to a bible teacher who is not even saved. You will point out to me, ??He??s wrong on the gospel, he??s serious wrong on the gospel.?? Then they will just basically say, ??Well but you can still learn good stuff from this guy.?? No you need to make sure that anybody you are listening to, I??m not saying everybody is perfect, I??m not saying everybody??s doctrine is perfect. Nobody is perfect but they better be saved. They better believe the bible and when they are teaching work salvation, when they are teaching baptismal regeneration or they are teaching that you are going to lose your salvation that??s a deal breaker. You shouldn??t listen to anything that they have to say. Now let??s look at a little more in this passage in Jude and then we are going to look at the parallel passage in second Peter chapter two and I??m going to give you some practical applications for this.	In Jude it of course said in verse four, ??There are certain men crept in unawares.?? He talks about how these are the evil trees, the trees who??s for wither, they are twice dead all of these. Okay but let??s back up to verse five. It says, ??I will therefore put you in remembrance though you once knew this how that the lord having saved people out of the land of Egypt. Afterward destroyed them that believe not. Angels which kept not up their first to stay but left their own habitation. He hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, under the judgment of the great day. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah and the cities about them like manner, giving themselves over to fornication and going after a strange,?? Or queer is another word for strange.	Strange flesh are set forth for an example suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. Now he brings up the story of Sodom and Gomorrah and he says, ??They went over after strange flesh, they gave themselves over to fornication.?? Okay but it was not the normal type of fornication between a man and a woman.?? They actually went out to strange flesh meaning men with men, women and women. Of course we read that in the story and elsewhere in the bible that??s crystal clear. He says here in verse eight likewise, now what does likewise mean? Likewise means in the same manner, in the same way. ??Likewise also these filthy dreamers defiled the flesh.?? Now what is that saying? He??s saying they defiled the flesh in the same way as who? Now that??s a pretty interesting verse there when he says, ??Hey Sodom and Gomorrah, fornication strange flesh.??	??By the way likewise these also defiled the flesh, same way.?? What does that mean? They are perverted. Now if you keep reading it it says, ??Likewise also these filthy dreamers,?? notice the word filthy not alternative lifestyle. Likewise also these filthy dreamers defiled the flesh, despised dominion and speak evil of dignities. Let??s go to second Peter two the parallel passage. Second Peter Two if you??ve ever compared it with Jude is a parallel passage. A lot of the same things are brought up in the exact same order in second Peter chapter two as we see in Jude. Look at verse one, ??But there were false prophets,?? isn??t that what we talked about in Jude.?? Isn??t that what we saw in Mathew seven, isn??t that what we seeing now in Second Peter two.	??There were false prophets also among the people, even is there shall be false teachers among you.?? Notice false prophets and false teacher are being used interchangeably to help us know what he is talking about. There will be false ?¶ Does he say there might be? ??There will be false teachers among you who prively shall bring damnable heresies. Even denying the Lord that bought them and bring upon themselves self destruction.?? By the way denying the Lord that bought them tell that to these Calvinist who believe in limit of atonement. He even bought, he even paid for the sins of the unsaved false prophets. It says in verse two, ??Many shall follow their pernicious ways by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken off.?? What??s he saying at the end of verse two? These people are going top give Christianity a bad name.	These people will creep in teach false doctrine, pervert and defile the flesh and give Christianity a bad name. Okay, ??And through covetousness,?? verse three, ??Shall they with fainted words,?? meaning fake works they are going to say stuff they don??t believe. They are going to preach things but they don??t believe.?? Judas preached a lot of right things as he went door to door because all of his companions thought that he was legit. He was preaching fainted words, he was saying stuff he didn??t really believe. It says, ??Whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not and their damnation slumbereth not. For God??s spared not the angels that sin but cast them down to hell.?? Isn??t that the same thing we saw on Jude? Then if we jump down to verse six and turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes,?? isn??t that same thing.	It says, ??Condemn them with an overthrow making them an sample unto those that after should live ungodly.?? Let me stop and say this. Is the the story of Sodom and Gomorrah an outdated story? It??s outdated, in the Old Testament that??s how God was. He was hell fire and damnation and now the God of the New Testament is just all just accepting and loving. Look the God of the Old Testament is the God of New Testament. Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today and forever, I??m the Lord I change not. Therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. He says here that, ??It is in sample unto those that after should live ungodly.?? The bible is saying the New Testament example of what God thinks of sodomy of homosexuality is the story of Sodom and Gomorrah. That??s the New Testament example according to the New Testament book of second Peter Chapter two.	It says in verse seven, ??Deliver just Lot vexed with the filthy conversation of wicked,?? does that word sound familiar? Remember the filthy dreamers, the false teachers, the wolves in sheep??s clothing the one who creep in. He said they are filthy dreamers and he talks about the sodomites that they were filthy. Verse eight, ??For that righteous man dwelling among them and seeing and sharing vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds.?? Okay let??s jump down to verse 13, ??And shall receive the reward of unrighteousness as they are the kind of pleasure to riot in the daytime. Spots they are and blemishes spotting themselves with their own deceiving??s,?? while they what? Feast with you. They are with you, they are amongst you, they will creep in. Jesus had it in his church.	Every church will have people who creep in. Unless it??s just an unsaved church then its like, ??Creep in it??s already of the devil.?? I mean if it??s a real bible believing church he said in verse one, ??There shall be false teachers among you.?? He didn??t say they might, He didn??t say maybe ?¶ The Apostle Paul in Acts 20 said, ??I know that after my departing grievous wolves will come in not sparing the flock. Also among your own selves,?? he said, ??Shall man rise up speaking perverse things to draw away disciples at them.?? He said, ??I know for a fact that some of you are a fraud and will rise up and preach heriness after I??m gone. That other people will come in after I??m going.?? He said, ??I know it.?? Second Peter two says, ??It??s a fact.?? Jude, ??It happened.??	It??s not something that is a questionable thing it??s just something that is guaranteed to tale place. He says in verse 14, ??Having eyes full of adultery and cannot cease from sin. Beguiling or deceiving unstable souls and heart of exercise with covetous practices. Curse the children which have forsaken the right away and are gone astray falling the way of Balaam the son of Bosor who love the wages of unrighteousness.?? Notice all the common denominators that keep coming up or they doing it for the money or they are doing it for the lust of the flesh. Or they are committing adultery, or they are beguiling the unstable or they are defiling the flesh like a sodomite. All these different perverted acts, false teaching wickedness of all sorts are all together in the same person. This false prophet, this person who creeps in, what we could call the evil tree that brings forth corrupt fruit.	Okay now this doesn??t have to be a pastor or even a Sunday school teacher or preacher. This could even be a soul winner. This could be maybe somebody who??s leading a bible study. There are people like this who creep in that are evil people. Now look you need to get this in your head right now that not everyone that goes to church is automatically saved. Not everyone that goes to Faith for Word Baptist Church is automatically saved. Not everyone who goes to Faith for Word Baptist Church and talks the right talk and looks like they walked the right walk and goes soul winning is even saved. They are people who creep in that are evil people. I??m not saying that we should go on a witch hunt and try to unmask the traitor this morning and figure out ?¶	Lock the doors, we are going figure out, no one is living until we figure out who the Judas is. Jesus knew that someone in his church as a Judas Iscariot. I believe that part of the reason why he allowed him to be with him for those three and half years. Obviously the main reason was so that the scriptures could be fulfilled and he would be betrayed by his friend Judas. Not only that I think that he??s just trying to give us a really strong message that these people are going to be among you. Even for the three and half years that he was the pastor, they were among them. Okay go to First John Chapter Two. A few pages to the right in your bible, First John Chapter two. He??s just sending a strong message that says, ??I even had a wicked infiltrator in my church. Why do you think that your church is never going to have people like this???	Okay so what??s the practical application to this? Number one watch your kids? Watch your kids and here??s the thing. Most people today in Independent Fundamental Baptist churches will literally drop their kids off at the home of anyone who??s just from church.?? From church, no problem.?? Literally I remember being in churches where they wanted my wife and I to go on an overnight retreat and they said, ??Drop your kids off with this family from they church.?? I??d never even met them. I??d never even seen them, it was a big church never even met them. They said, ??No, no these people are from church.?? They expected us to say, ??They are from church? Sure no problem, I??ll be glad to drop my kids off with them.?? The problem is that just because somebody is from church even if they have been at church for a long time.	Here??s what a lot of churches will say, ??We do background checks.?? Let me explain to you. Every criminal, every pedophile, every pervert at one point had a clean record. Because there??s always a first offence and by the way they usually don??t get caught on the first offence. Many of these creeps will get away with this for 20 years before they are ever busted. To sit there and say, ??We do background checks,?? that is the stupidest thing in the world. Background checks are the stupidest things in the world, they make absolutely no sense to sit there and say, ??Don??t worry we did a background check.?? That doesn??t tell, ??Did you look into the future? Did you do a foreground check.?? Now I don??t even think background checks should exist because people who do that kind of stuff should be killed anyway.	Anybody if our justice system were truly just somebody who molests children would basically just be executed for that. That will be the biblical punishment for that. In fact the Supreme Court ruled about six, seven years ago that no pedophile can be executed in the United States did you know that? They ruled about six or seven years ago they said that, ??No pedophile can ever be executed even if they molest a 100 children no pedophile will ever be executed again in our country, until the Supreme Court changes that ruling.?? They said, ??We will only execute murderers but will never execute a pedophile. I??d rather, in some ways you??d rather someone were murdered than molested in some ways.	It??s almost as bad to that person. Depending on how they react to it. Think about it, if someone were going to sit there and point a gun at me and say, ??You are going to be molested or killed I just say pull the trigger.?? I would rather if I had the choice right now to be murdered or molested by some sodomite I would rather be killed who agrees with me? You??d rather be killed ?¶ Of course and that??s why I teach my children never get in the car, if somebody points a gun at you and says, ??Get in the car.?? I say look and by the way all children should listen incase you are not in my family just learn this children. If anybody ever points a gun at you and says, ??Get in the car,?? don??t get in the car. You run away because number one, number one if you run away they are not necessarily going to fire that gun.	Because they might not want to draw that attention that a gunshot was fired. Number two even if they fire the gun they are not necessarily going to hit you if you are running away. Number three even if they hit you when you are running away you have a better than 50% chance of not dying from that gunshot wound. You have a less than half chance of being dead after one shot okay. When somebody say ?¶ Number four you might suffer a fate worse than death if you get in the car. You never get in the car, you never go with the kidnapper, you never cooperate, you always run screaming in the other direction kids. Everybody listening very important and you should teach your children this safety and stuff like that too.	What I??m saying is that you can??t just sit there and assume, ??Well when we go to church we are in a safe place.?? Just let your kids, run wild, go everywhere don??t worry ?¶ Even after church when we are fellowshipping I??m constantly watching. I don??t have to watch the older ones as much mainly because ?¶ Not just because they are 12, 11 and nine because you know what? The older boys it??s not just at that age, because a lot of kids at that age will still be victimized. I have taught my children very clearly and very strictly how to be street smart in this way. They expect it, they know it??s coming, they are ready for it and they are also older. I still watch them, I still supervise them but the ones I supervise the most are the younger kids too. Especially the girls and I watch them and I don??t let them out of my sight or my wife??s sight.	You can??t just sit there and say, ??I??m at church just let them be behind closed doors. Let them go hither and yawn and we don??t know where they at.?? Look you??ve got to watch your kid and don??t you ever drop your kids off with people from church to baby sit your little kids. You cannot trust and look I??m not saying, ??I??m just suspicious of everyone.?? Here is my motto, suspect no one trust no one. Did you hear me? Suspect no one, trust no one. I don??t care who it is in this church. I??m not going to sit there and drop my kids off and especially I don??t sit down and, ??Drop them off for an overnight or drop them off for this retreat, drop them off.?? No you??ve got to watch your kid, we are living in parallels times. God said, ??In the last day??s parallels times shall come.?? We are living in those day, parallels means dangerous. We are living in those dangerous times where you cannot be too careful with your children. That??s part of the reason why we don??t have Sunday school here.	Why because in a lot of churches you will get there and they are like, ??Your kids go here, this age go here, this age go here, your baby goes here,?? and it??s going with strangers. ??It??s a different church, we did a background check.?? It means nothing, it means nothing and we got to protect our children. By the way this is why we don??t have a bus ministry. I??m not against, I??m not mad at people who have a bus ministry. There??s a lot of good things about the bus ministry. I used to work in the bus ministry and you know what? A lot of people get saved. I??m not saying, ??Hey anybody who has a bus ministry is a wicked person.?? Because you know what a lot of good is done through the bus ministry but you know what else happens though in the bus ministry? What happens? Kids are being brought unattended from their parents and you have workers working with them.	You don??t know what those workers are going to do or what they are going to be like. All of the big churches that have bus ministries have had this happen, under their watch. I will not be responsible for it, it will not happen in my ministry it??s not worth it. You say, ??You are going to let all these kids go to hell.?? No we are going to knock the doors, we??ll preach the gospel, I just won an eight year old boy to the Lord about 10 days ago on soul winning. Okay with his mother right there and I presented the gospel to an eight old boy and gotten saved. By the way the bus ministry is so expensive and takes so much work and effort. If you put that same money, time and effort into soul winning you will get more people saved. We are not just saying, ??Just let them go to hell.?? No you will get more people saved just by doing bonafide soul winning.	If you put the same amount of time energy, money and effort into it. Again I??m not saying that if a church has a bus ministry it??s a wicked church. I will say this a church that has a bus ministry is probably opening themselves for wickedness to take place in that church. Because anytime you setup a ministry where you are giving unfettered access to children. Look a lot of those children workers are great Godly righteous people that love those kids and want to get in the gospel. Want to give as many wonderful children workers but what about the one person that??s not a wonderful children??s worker. You??ve got the 99 righteous, Godly bible teachers and then you??ve got the one Judas. The one evil corrupt tree, filthy dreamer defiling the flesh. Beguiling unstable soul it??s not worth it. It isn??t worth it.	I remember when I used to work in the bus ministry years and years ago, a decade ago. I remember I??d knock on the door and we be advertising the bus ministry and the people would say, ??I??d never send my kids on a church bus because I don??t let my kids out of my sight.?? I??d always say, ??Good you are right I wouldn??t neither.?? I say, ??I wouldn??t either, I would never put my kids on this bus. People put four year olds on the bus, the bus would pick up four and up. Put a four year old on the bus and if you think that there are no molesters out there. Look every church that I??ve ever been are you listening to me. I have been saved since I was six years old. I have gone to a Baptist church every week of my life since I was born. Okay I was born and raised a Baptist. I went through a period in my teenage years where we went to a more liberal Baptist church but I??ve always gone to a Baptist church. 90% of the time we are going to independent fundamental Baptist churches. I??ve been in a bunch of different Independent Fundamental Baptist churches.	I was born in it, raised in it, saved at the age six, I know what I??m talking about. I have experienced every church that I have ever been in people in that church later turned out to be perverts. Every single church I??ve ever gone to. It??s funny, because I will get up and preach a sermon like this and it goes over peoples head. Then what will happen is someone will be exposed like six months from now and you are going to be like, ??Pastor Anderson, I remember you saying that but it wasn??t until I actually saw it happen that it really hit home with me.?? It??s like you have to see it to believe it. A lot of people are listening to me right now and they are skeptical of what I??m saying.	I??m sure a lot of people believe me but there are some people that are skeptical. Here??s the thing, six months from now, 12 months from now, 18 months from now I will come to you with an example from our church and then you will be like, ??Wow.?? We have an example, for example. There was a guy who was going to our church less than a year ago. Okay six or nine months ago okay and this guy went soul winning and his own wife brought us evidence that he was a homosexual. That he was into, that he desired to molest children. Okay this was brought unto us by his own wife. Okay this happened less than a year ago and I cast him out of the church and he??s trying to keep coming to the church. Say, ??She??s lying and everything else.??	Dude it??s your wife telling us. Number one this isn??t just some railing accusation. Number two she brought us a big stack of evidence that we verified. Okay and it was true and look, what else do you have to be told to know that this happens? This guys was ?¶ Look there was a Baptist pastor in Phoenix okay that had come over to my house and knocked on my door when I started a church. He came over knocked on the door, ??Hey welcome to the area,?? Independent Fundamental Baptist Pastor. ??Hey welcome to the area,?? and all these stuff and he was trying to be our buddy and everything like that. This guy he needed some electrical work done on his church building okay. I??m an electrician so I said, ??Sure I will do that electrical work for you.?? ??I will pay you.?? I said, ??No let me just do it for free. You are a pastor, lets do it it??s for the church.??	I went over there, I lay the electrical wires for him and everything. This guy and my wife will tell you, he was always trying to say, ??Hey my daughters can babysit your kids.?? Did he not say that repeatedly? He??d always be like, ??I??ve got these teenage daughters they love to babysit they are so good at it. Man you need to get out without your kids.?? This is what this pastor was telling. ??You need to get out without your kids. You need to go on a date. You need to leave your kids and my daughters will watch your kids.?? Okay I will give you his name, Pastor nick Manova, two miles from here. Okay and this guy literally was caught by the police because he was online trying to hook ?¶ This guy is in his fifties, he??s online trying to hook up with like 14 year olds. Okay over the course of 10 months.	This guy is trying to hookup with young teenagers. Okay I mean good night that??s not normal. Look committing adultery is a wicked sin, it??s a horrible sin. The bible says this should be stoned with stones. Let me tell you something. That??s not how a normal person commits adultery. When you are going after this children and unstable souls. Adultery is wicked but that??s not wicked, that??s just reprobate, when you are sinning. He was caught the police came and surrounded the church building and they were going to do a search warrant on the church building. This guy always carried a gun with him and he pulled out his gun and he blew his own brains out just like Judas did committed suicide. Because he was busted, he was caught having ?¶	Look the news article stated that it was over these particular months that this guy was doing these activities on the internet. I looked at his church website during that month he preached his series on purity. Now how evil is that when you are getting up on the pulpit and preaching a message, a series on purity while you are out trying to commit fornication in a strange way. Okay what I??m trying to say is that I could have very easily okay had I not read these scriptures, had I not been a little more street smart I could have easily said, ??Sure,?? and look I??m not even saying his daughters are bad. His daughters seem like very nice girls and I??m not going to say just because they are his kids are bad of course not.	Because maybe his wife was ?¶ I don??t know if the kids are good bad, I??m not saying anything negative about them. Okay because what I think could have easily happened though is that what if I were had said, ??Honey lets go on a date maybe drop the kids off at the home with those girls.?? How do you know that if you drop it off with those girls, how do you know what he is going to do? See what I mean? Like, ??Girls let me just take them and show them. I??m just going to run them up to get some ice-cream.: Who knows even if the girls weren??t the problem. Do you think I would have wanted to read that news article and have ?¶ ??That??s the guy who my kids are babysat at his house all the time.?? You know what, every church I??ve ever been in the culture was that yeah you drop them off. ??They are from church, drop your kid off at that nursery. Drop off you kid off at that Sunday school.??	??Let them go over to that house, let them spend the night, they are from church.?? Look that??s not, the example that I??ve given you it??s not all the examples I could give. I could give way more examples. Now thankfully our church does not attract perverts. Here??s why our church doesn??t attract perverts. Because we don??t give anybody access to children. We don??t have these closed door children??s ministries. We don??t have these opportunities to just have all these access to children. Thank God our church doesn??t attract people where that??s their goal. That??s one blessing about our church that it doesn??t attract perverts. Okay another reason is because sometimes they can??t handle the preaching against homos. In our church preaches so hard again and a lot of people are offended by it. Even some normal straight people are like, ??Whoa you preach way too hard against the homos. You are just mean spirited, you are just hateful.??	They will quit the church over it. I have had a lot of people say, ??Man I started listening your preaching but I quit listening to your preaching because you are so hard on the perverts and so hateful towards this homos ?¶ Then I went back and listened to it more anymore.?? Anyway but then it??s like, ??Man a lot of people are offended by it.?? Let me tell you something I??m glad, I like the fact that the preaching is like that because it helps get rid of some of the perverts. We had a guy show up and I could tell stories all morning. How much time you got? You got time? No I??m just kidding but anywhere you are hungry for lunch. Anyway we had a guy show up one time and this guy just, ??Man praise the Lord, hallelujah,?? Just talking all the spiritual talk. ??Man we are independent fundamental Baptist. The King James brother, praise God from whom all blessings flow.?? This guy has just given all the right talk he??s there with his wife and kids, normal guy right.	Well the guy sits down with his family and I just start whipping some face on the homos. Imagine that Pastor Anderson. I??m just whipping face on they homo and the guy just got uncomfortable. He??s uncomfortable and he gets up and walks of the service. During that part of the sermon. Then when I got on to something else he comes back in and he??s hanging toward the back. Okay a lady in our church went up to go use the bathroom. Okay and in those days we were in smaller building and the bathroom was outside. You had to go outside the church walk about 75 feet or 50 feet and then there was the outdoor restrooms. A lady stepped out to use the bathroom, he followed her out there and basically propositioned her with indecency. Tried to talk to her about committing adultery with him and fornicating with them.	Okay how many examples do you need? The guy was only there for one service and as soon as we found out about it, we basically railed on the guy and told him never to come back and blah, blah this and that. What I??m saying is that even though out church is not going to be a magnet for those types because we don??t have all these children??s ministries. That??s what children??s ministries end up doing is becoming a magnet for pedophiles. I??m not saying that the people who run the children ministries are bad. I??m just saying that bad people do come in. It??s the same thing with even like if you just look up sports coaches, school bus drivers, janitors at schools. Why because they just want that access unto children. By the way let me just say something. Just everybody get ready to quote me on this.	Every homosexual is a pedophile. There I said it. They are, get over it, it??s a fact. Now the mainstream media will try to hide that from you but it??s the truth they are all pedophiles. Okay and so they love to get into schools and sports league and churches. These are, look why do you think that the Catholic priest who is preaching good doctrine or false doctrine? Is he a good tree or an evil tree? Okay why are so many pedophiles? Because that??s what the bible said would happen. He says it??s the same guy who perverts doctrine, perverts the flesh. Okay and that??s why guys like Dr. Jack Scapp famous Independent Fundamental Baptist preacher. He was preaching false doctrine, he was preaching perverted doctrine. I said, I called it eight years in advance.	I said that guy is a pervert. I went and I publically declared him I said, ??He is a pervert, he is a predator, he is exactly what the bible warns about.?? I said that eight years before he was arrested for statutory rape. Eight years before I already called it. You said, ??You must have magical clairvoyant powers.?? No I read the bible and the bible said, ??That if they pervert doctrine, they??ll pervert the flesh. It??s that simple. Perverted doctrine, perverted person. Again I??m not talking about little nit picky doctrines, I??m talking about perverting major doctrines of the bible okay. Now look what the bible says in verse 18 of First John chapter two. This is the last place we are going to turn. Please listen to this sermon, you say, ??I don??t like this sermon. Why do you preach on this sermon.?? Look it doesn??t matter whether you like the sermon. It doesn??t matter whether you say, ??Pastor Anderson this is my least favorite sermon you??ve ever preached. Pastor Anderson your sermon is boring. Pastor Anderson I don??t agree with you.?? Look I just want you take one thing from this school. One thing do not blindly trust people from church and don??t let your kids out of your sight because you don??t know who the Judas is.	I??m not saying be suspicious of people and just paranoid of everybody. Because here??s the thing just live your life in such a way where you don??t have t be paranoid because you just always watch your kids. You are just always on the look out, you are just always prepared for it just assume that it??s here. If there??s been one in the past why wouldn??t there be one now? Somebody enter the sound of my voice is a Judas. If not then there will be here next week, they will show up next week or the week after. I??m not saying every service but chances are there??s always ?¶ Well look we know for a fact that they will be here. There have been here in the past, there will be here in the future. Be careful. Look at First John 2:18 it says, ??Little children is it the last time and as you have heard that antichrist,?? singular the antichrist right.	??You??ve heard that antichrist shall come even now they are many antichrist plural. Whereby we now that it is the last time.?? Now look doesn??t this say that as we get toward the last days there are going to be more antichrists? What is an antichrist, the bible says who is a liar but he that denyeth that Jesus is the Christ he??s antichrist who denyeth the Father and the Son. Basically this is an unsaved person who doesn??t believe Jesus is the Christ but yet they creep in and they are amongst us. You say, ??How do you know they are amongst us??? Look what it says in verse 19, ??They went out from us.?? Now were these people amongst them? They went from us but they were not of us. ??For if they had been of us they would no doubt have continued with us but they went out that they might be manifest that they were not all of us.??	Now again some people will miss apply this scripture again and just apply it to all believers. If they don??t continue with us they are not saved. If they went out from us they are not saved. Okay no, but when it comes to a preacher, when it comes to these antichrist, these false teachers, false prophets. He says, they went out from us but they were not all of us. For if they had been of us they would no doubt have continued with us but they went out that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us. Here??s the thing, we haven??t really sent out a lot of people to start churches yet because we are a newer church ourselves. We??ve only been around for eight and half years. Here??s the thing, we are going to send more and more people out as pastors. So far we didn??t send out Brother Jim√©nez but I did train him and teach him so he??s virtually sent out by us although not officially sent out by us, in Sacramento.	Then of course Brother Dave Bozins was sent out from us to start a church in Prescott. Brother Dave is someone who I know very well, very closely. Brother Romero is another one that we are going to be sending out in just a few months search. We??ve only send out a handful of guys and they are all Godly righteous man or we wouldn??t have send them out. Here??s the thing can you imagine a day when Faith for Word Baptist Church sends out a 100 people to start churches across the ?¶ I believe that it will happen if God allows if the Lord will and we continue here as well as we are doing and our church keeps growing and we keep training young man to preach the gospel to sent them out. Can you see a day and I??m not saying 101 day but I??m saying can you see a day where we are sending out the 98th guy to start a church and the 99th guy to start a church and the 100th guy to start a church. Can you see the day when we maybe we don??t know them quite as well as the guys that we are sending out now.	Can you even fathom or imagine the idea that we could send out a guy someday to start a church to pastor a church and that guy turns out to be a Judas Iscariot is that possible according to scripture? It happened to the apostle John because ?¶ I was talking about this with somebody because we had about an Independent Fundamental Baptist that we knew that turned out to be a total fraud. Okay and I was thinking to myself I wonder if that would ever happen where we would send somebody out who later turned out to be a fraud. I remember thinking, would we be responsible, would that be our fault? Actually John is saying, ??Look they went out from us but they were not of us. They went out that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us.	Look if even somebody that John, that the Apostle John is sending out and ordaining for the gospel ministry turns out to be a Judas, do you think that maybe we could be fooled by people around us? If John was fooled? By the way all the disciples were fooled by Judas. When he said Judas is the one they all ?¶ He said, ??One of you is going to betray me,?? they all said, ??Is it I??? They didn??t say, ??Judas, its Judas.?? They said, ??Is it I.?? They were suspecting more of themselves than of Judas. Jesus says, ??If the guy who I hand the soap to after I??ve dipped it,?? he gives the soap hands it Judas and he says to Judas, ??Thou that doest do it quickly,?? and no one understand.?? Everyone at the table thought, ??He??s just sending Judas to go buy something.?? He just said, ??Okay Judas is going to betray me, here you go, go do it.??	They are just like, ??No it??s not Judas.?? In fact I took a gun safety class and they taught that one of the reasons why people get killed sometimes in a gun fight is because they don??t realize that their enemy is someone that they know. Basically someone will come in to attack them with the ?¶ They look at that person and they are like, ??So and so what are you doing here.?? They think because they know that person that person cannot be the enemy and people are killed that way. They said, you got to be prepared that the enemy could be someone that you don??t expect to be your name. This is like a gun safety class nothing to do with the bible or spiritual thing. They are just explaining that sometimes your cousin or your uncle or your church member or your friend. Can sometimes be an evil person without you know it.	Even the world is teaching that. Okay but what??s the bible say, ??They went out from us, they were not of us.?? Don??t let this message go in one ear and out the other. I know it??s not a fan message, I know it??s not positive and uplifting. It??s the truth and this could save your life or save your children??s lives or someone that you love. Let??s bow our heads and have a word of prayer. Father please help us not to be deceived Lord. There??s so much naivety today amongst Christians. Lord I believe that the reason why Christians are so na√Øve is just that they are good people. Good people tend to think that everyone around them is good also Lord. Lord we as good people we cant understand the sinful perverted wicked mind. Lord help us to just take your word for it. Thank you for warning us in the bible because if the bible hadn??t warned us of these things we would just assume everybody was basically good. The world tells us that everybody is basically good. Lord help us to realize that these warnings in the bible are real and that no everyone is not good. Some people are just rotten and evil people Lord please protect us. Lord as we all do our best to watch our children and not to let them out of our sight and to be very careful of these things Lord.	Even as we do our best Lord we are not perfect we are human Lord and so please just protect our children Lord. Help none of our children to fall victim to this type of wicked people and in Jesus name we pray, amen.
†
†
