

The Jews and Their Lies - Part 2 
By Pastor Steven L Anderson 
Download PDF
Download mp3
Watch Video
July 27, 2014

Tonight I'm going to be continuing my sermon from this morning called "the jews and their lies". Where I get that title is 1st John chapter two which we read this morning. 1st John 2:22 says "who is a liar, but he that denieth that  Jesus is the Christ? He is antichrist, that denieth the father and the son." So when the Bible says "who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ?". What he is saying is that that is the biggest liar that there is, is one who would tell you that Jesus is not the Messiah, because Christ means Messiah. And someone who will tell you such a lie and be such a brazen liar as Judaism teaches... this myth that there is some other Messiah coming and that Jesus Christ was not the Messiah, you know I preached about it last sunday night, how ridiculous that is in light of OT scripture. Whould it surprise you that they tell us many other lies as well? And so that's why I am preaching on the Jews and their lies. Now, just to give you the review from this morning, I'm not going to re-go over the points, but lie number one was that they believed the Torah, or the OT. Not true. Number 2, they say that the Talmud is the Word of God. That's a lie. Number 3, they teach that God is both male and female. That's a lie. That's new age mysticism of the Kabbala. Number 4, they teach that the Jews did not kill Jesus, which is a lie. And then number 5, they teach that christianity is responsible for the nazi holocaust. And they try to use that to silence people from just telling the truth about their religion, by declaring that you are hateful, you are of the nazi's, and all these ridiculous things. Obviously we would never approve of the Nazis or the communists for that matter. Obviously there have been all kinds of genocides throughout the 20th century and we approve of none of them. And we don't believe in violence. 

But tonight I want to get into the sixth lie, which is that the land of Palestine belongs to them. This is the lie of the Jews today. Go if you would to Hebrews chapter 3, and let's examine their claim from scripture. They say that the land of Palestine belongs to them and it's a lie. Now, christians will also repeat this, and in fact, you almost hear this more from christians than jews. Christians will tell you "hey, God promised them that land, that land belongs to them. They have a right to that land according to scripture!". Well, that is a lie. Because the Bible is very clear, that that promise of that land unto the jews was always conditional upon their faith and obedience to God. Always. Now look at Hebrews chapter 3, this is talking about that original generation that left Egypt with Moses, after they had been in bondage for 400 years. Look down at verse 17, it says "but with whom was he grieved 40 years? WWas it not with them that had sinned, whose carcasses fell in the wilderness, and to whom sware He that they should not enter into His rest, but to them that believed not". So we see that they could not enter in because of unbelief. So that first generation of Israelites that came out of Egypt with Moses, was not allowed to enter the promised land. "That's their land!". No they weren't allowed to enter into it, because of the fact that they didn't believe, that's what the Bible says. Now after 40 years, and after all of their carcasses fell in the wilderness, every person who was above 20 years of age died and did not go into the promised land, all the men of war that is. Even Moses himself died before going into the promised land. Then there arose the next generation of their children, who DID believe the Lord, and they went with Joshua into the promised land. And they inherited that promised land. But what happened over the years? They turned away from the Lord, they sought after other gods. And as a punishment, they were removed from that promised land. Just as God promised would happen. Go back to Deuteronomy chapter 30. God told them that if they turned after other gods and did not obey His commandments, that they would be removed from the promised land. And that happened to the children of Judah, when Nebuchednezzar came and took them captive. Well after 70 years of captivity in Babylon, after they had turned back to the Lord in their hearts, God brought them back into the promised land, because they had had a change of heart. And we read about that in Ezra and Nehemiah, the people coming back and rebuilding the temple that was destroyed by Nebuchednezzar. Rebuilding the wall around Jerusalem, and being in that promised land once again. Then when Jesus Christ came, he came unto his own and his own recieved him not. And because the Jews rejected Jesus Christ, he prophesied that as a result of them rejecting him, that their temple and their city would be destroyed. He gave a parable about it. And he talked about how their city would be burned, and how the temple would be destroyed, and it all was fulfilled in AD 70. In the year AD 70 the Romans came in, destroyed the temple, and as Jesus Christ prophesied, there was not one stone left upon another. And as Jesus said, their house was left unto them desolate. And their city was destroyed. And the temple was destroyed, and they were dcattered into all nations. And that is going to become important later in the sermon. 

But look down at your Bible in Dueteronomy verse 1 it says "and it shall come to pass, when all these things are come upon thee, the blessing and the curse which I have set before thee, and thou shalt call them to mind among all the nations whither thy God hath driven thee, and shalt return unto the Lord they God, and shalt obey His voice according to all that I command thee this day, thou and thy children with all thy heart and with all thy soul, that the Lord thy God will turn thy captivity and have compassion on thee, and will return and gather thee from all the nations whither the Lord thy God hath scattered thee. If any of thine be driven out unto the uttermost parts of heaven, from thence will the Lord thy God gather thee, and from thence will He fetch thee. And the Lord thy God will bring thee into the land which thy fathers possessed, and thou shalt possess it. And He will do thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers." So here, God is telling them inthe mosaic law, that if they turn back to God after they're scattered, after they're in captivity, He will bring them back. That's what He did, in the days of Ezra and Nehemiah. So let's just go back, and go through the history quickly. First of all, children of Israel don't believe the Lord, they can't go into the promised land. Then they believe the Lord, they're allowed to go into the promised land. They turn away from the Lord, they're removed from the promised land into Babylon. They turn back to the Lord, they're put back into the promised land. They turn away from the Lord Jesus Christ, and they're removed from the promised land... And then in 1948 they all believed on Jesus Christ, and that's why they're back in the promised land today, because they have turned unto the Lord with all their heart. YOU KNOW THAT ISN'T TRUE!! So how can people say "oh, God brought them back to the promised land?". The christians will teach today that they are int he promised land as "a fulfillment of Bible prophecy, when God said He would bring them from all nations". Now, here is what boggles my mind. People fail to rightly divide the Word. The Bible says "study to shew thyself approved to God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of truth". Here is a good way to divide the word- OT and NT. That's a great way. 

But not only that, you will have people today that will quote things from Jeremiah and ezekiel about them coming back from all the nations where they'd been scattered, and they will say that's what happened in 1948. Otherwise, where is the fulfillment of this prophecy? Here's what people don't understand. They don't realise that when Jeremiah is speaking in the Book of Jeremiah, they were just about to go into captivity with Nebuchednezzar, they hadn't even done that yet. And when Ezekiel is speaking, they had just gone into that captivity. So both Jeremiah and Ezekiel are speaking at the beginning of that Babylonian captivity, or shortly BEFORE that Babylonian captivity. And so, OF COURSE, there are all kinds of prophecy saying "I'm going to bring you back from the nations where you have been scattered." That's what He did 70 years later. Those prophecies have already been fulfilled over 2500 years ago. Those prophecies were fulfilled long before the time of Christ. But people say "oh yeah, this is of today. This is being fulfilled right now in the 20th century with the rebirth of the nation of Israel. It's a fulfillment of God's prophecy to bring them back from all nations". No, that was a prophecy of Nebuchednezzars captivity, and them coming back from that, okay? So, again, failure to rightly divide things that happened thousands of years ago, and things that are happening today, big difference. Why can't they show us NT scriptures of the children of Israel coming back from all nations? because it's not of the NT, that's why. Now they will say "oh what about the 144 000?". Oh, we'll go there, okay? (LAUGHS) that whiteboard out there... you're wondering what's on that whiteboard, we are going to go there, and you will see about that. Go to 2nd Chronicles 6- and honestly we could go all over the OT to see this, we are just going to hit a few key points for the sake of time. We could go all over the OT to show you that promises of children of Idrael to be brought back to the land are all conditional on their faith and obedience to God. But look at 2nd Chronicles 6:36. It says "if they sin against thee"- talking about the children of Israel- "if they sin against thee (for there is no man which sinneth not) and thou be andgry with them and deliver them over before their enemies and they carry them away captives unto a land far off or near, yet if they bethink themselves whither they are carried captiove, and turn and pray unto thee in the land of their captivity saying, we have sinned, we have done amiss and have dealt wickedly. If they return to thee with all their heart and with all their soul in the land of their captivity, whither they have carried them captives, and pray toward their land, which thou gavest unto their fathers, and toward the city which thou hast chosen, and toward the house which I have built for thy name, then hear thou from the heavens, even from thy dwelling place their prayer and their supplications and maintain their cause, and forgive thy people which have sinned against thee." 

Go back to Genesis 13. We see right there again, that when they are scattered into all nations, there has to be some repentence. They have to realise that they have done wrong, okay? They can't just say "wel, we're just going to continue in the same thing that got us kicked out of the land- but God is just going to bring us back anyway." Why would God- it would be like if I kicked out one of my children out of my house. Let's say I have an adult child, and my adult child is living in fornication, God forbid. And by the way, if I ever had an adult child that was committing fornication they would be thrown out of my house, you know God forbid that that would ever take place. But let's say that I threw them out, and they just continue living in fornication, and I bring them back. Would that make any sense? "I threw you out because you were living in fornication, but I'm just going to bring you back, even though you're still living in fornication." Now, what you would say is "Oh, he must have realised he made a mistake when he kicked that child out, he has changed his mind". Here is the thing- God doesn't make mistakes like that. When God kicks you out, He means it. And God kicked them out, if you study the book of Mathew, it's because they rejected Jesus Christ that their city was burned, and that their temple was destroyed, and that they were scattered into all nations. If that hasn't changed, then why would God have brought them back? And if God is not the one that brought them back, then someone else brought them back. Because it's amazing... I mean, people say "wait a minute, it's a miracle!". Now, I wouldn't say it's a miracle, but you know what I would say? It's a phenomenon. I would say it is unparalleled in human history. It is definately VERY remarkable. But it's not a miracle, because when you have multibillions of dollars, you can make alot of miracles happen. When you have the money of the Rothschilds, when you have the money of the Jewish bankers of the world, you can make things happen! You can make something happen that looks like a miracle. But it's not a miracle, it's just you having th emoney to buy the politicians, and to buy the tickets and to bring all the jews back to Palestine because you have got the money to do it, because you are a fractional reserve lender. That's how you can do that, okay? Because you can make money appear out of thin air, which some people would consider a miracle, it's more like a magic trick. I mean, if I brought a hat up and started pulling money out of a hat, like pulling rabbits out of a hat, no-one would say I'm a miracle worker. They would say that I'm a magician. 

So, if you would look at Genesis 13, these are some of the promises to Abraham that christians today really focus on when they want to say "that land belongs to the Jews today". They will focus on scriptures like Genesis 13:15, where it says "For all the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it and to thy seed forever". Verse 17, "arise, walk through the land and the length of it and the breadth of it, for I will give it unto thee". Look at chapter 15:7. Chapter 15, verse 7, "and He said unto him, I am the Lord that brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give thee this land to inherit it". Chapter 17, verse 8. Flip over to chapter 17 verse 8 it says "and I will give unto thee and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of canaan, for an everlasting posession, and I will be their God". Now, I don't know about you, but when I see the word "everlasting" and "forever", I actually believe that. I believe that means everlasting. Forever. Now, this can't be talking unto the jews, because frankly they didn't have the land forever. They got kicked out of the land and they were gone from it for, what? 1800 and something years? so for 1800 and something years they didn't have the land, that doesn't sound like an everlasting posession when you are kicked out of it for 1800 something years. "Well, but God just knew they were coming back". No, see the promise is being made unto Abraham. And He is using the word "thee" singular, and He says "I am giving this land unto thee and thy seed". Well, all we have to do is go to Galatians chapter 3, you don't have to turn there. But in Galatians chapter 3, it says "now to Abraham and to his seed were the promises made. He saith not to SEEDS as of MANY", but He said "as of one, to THY SEED" and He said that "SEED which is Christ". The seed of Abraham is Christ. So when you read this where it says "for all the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it and to thy SEED forever". He is saying, "I am going to give it unto you Abraham, and to your SEED, which is Christ, and all those that are in Christ". Because all they that are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham. If you're of FAITH, you are a child of Abraham. Remember when they told Jesus, the jews told Jesus in John chapter 8, they said "we be Abraham's seed". And he said "if ye WERE Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham". He said "you do the deeds of YOUR father, you do the deeds of your father the DEVIL". He said "Abraham is NOT your father, God is NOT your father, you are of your father the devil". So these promises were made unto Abraham and to his seed. There is no promise that is just an unconditional promise that says all of the physical descendents of Abraham, all of the jews, or all of the Israelites have this land, it's for them, no matter WHAT they do, no matter how blasphemous they are, no matter what sins they commit. That's not true! And if that were true, if God really made a promise like that, then He has broken it many times. By kicking them out of that land. 

So to sit there and say "well that land belongs to them" by virtue of the fact that they are the physical descendents of Abraham, that is meaningless. Now, go to Genesis 15, you are right there in chapter 17. Because a popular teaching that I have heard alot is that they say "well, you know God never really fulfilled that promise to Abraham", because they will say... I don't know if you have seen the maps of the "greater Israel borders". Where they will show you that the, I'm sorry, that it is the land from the river of Egypt all the way to the river Euphrates, and they will say "hey, that still hasn't been fulfilled. That needs to be fulfilled for the physical seed of Abraham!". They say "God has not yet fulfilled promises to Israel!". And these dispensationalists always say "you know there are alot of OT promises to Israel that God still has to fulfill". It's all been fulfilled unto that physical nation! And they have been rejected at this time. But look if you would, let me just show you how this is a false doctrine. Look at Genesis 15:18. It says "In the same day, the Lord made a covenant with Abraham saying, unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt, unto the great river, the river Euphrates". "Well see right there, God promised the jews everything from the river of Egypt, all the way to the river Euphrates!". And I've seen all kinds of maps online, where they draw this out... "THIS is what Israel should have!! ALL THIS LAND!". Big chunk of this, big chunk of that. Okay, go to Deuteronomy 2. See this is just a failure to study the word of God. It's just being tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine. To think "oh man, we need to make sure the jews get this huge portion of land, from the river of Egypt to the river Euphrates". Let's see if that's really what the Bible is teaching in that scripture. Look at Deuteronomy chapter 2 verse 9. Remember, this is when the children of Israel are first coming out of Egypt, they haven't even inherited the land yet, they are about to inherit it for the first time. God gave Abraham, Isaac and Jacob no inheritance in the land. They were strangers and pilgrims in that land. They dwelt in tents in that land. But he is bringing them out of Egypt to conquer and inherit that land. And they're going to the promised land. Look what God specifically sayds to them in Deuteronomy 2:9. "And the Lord said unto me, distress not the Moabites, neither contend with them in battle, for I will not give thee of their land for a posession, because I have given Ar unto the children of Lot for a posession." Look at verse 19. "And when thou comest nigh over against the children of Ammon, distress them not nor meddle with them, for I will not give thee of the land of the children of Ammon ANY posession because I have given it unto the children of Lot for a posession". THIS land is within that space of the river of Egypt to the river Euphrates! And God is saying "I am not giving it to you! It's for Ammon. It's not yours!". SO to sit there and say that God intends us to just physically, politically give them all that land, "it all belongs to them, that's a promise that needs to be physically fulfilled", God said no about part of it even back then. And even when they first went in with Joshua, when they disobeyed God, even with Joshua, even though they had the faith to go into the promised land, they were not perfect. And they made some serious mistakes and they disobeyed God. And God told them "I'm not going to give you all the land, I'm going to leave the Philistines here over in the gaza strip. I'm going to leave them there. You are not going to be able to drive out the Hivites. You are not going to be able to drive out the Jebusites. I'm going to leave these...". He NEVER gave them all the land  because they did not keep their end of the bargain. They never did. So you say "well how is this going to be fulfilled?". Well, if it's a promise that's made unto Abraham and his seed which is Christ, to have the land forever, well you know what? SOmeday in the millenial reign of Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ is going to be ruling and reigning, and these people, the children of Abraham will inherit all that land. Basically all of the believers. That are the spiritual seed of Abraham. Even many of the physical seed of Abraham that are believers are going to inherit this land. In the millenial reign of Christ. And also in the new heaven and new earth, we will inherit all things. That's why it says it is an EVERLASTING posession, and it is a land that he will inherit fprever. But to try to apply these "forever", "everlasting", "Abraham and his seed" promises unto the jews of today is false doctrine. It is to totally misunderstand the whole history of the nation of Israel. Which is a history of being removed from the land when they don't believe, and being brought back when they do believe. DO THE JEWS TODAY BELIEVE ON THE LORD JESUS CHRIST? No. Why did He kick them out? Because they rejected Christ. So why would He bring them back when they STILL REJECT CHRIST? It makes absolutely zero sense. 

So this is one of the lies of the Jews today, is "hey, we own this land, this land belongs to us". No, God did not say that you could just have that land, and use it as a den of iniquity. He didn't give you that land to turn it into some den of iniquity, a den of sodomy. A den of perversion, a den of false religion. No. A den of Abortion. He gave you that land to be a light unto the gentiles, He agve you that land for when you were obeying Him and worshipping Him and serving Him, and when you stopped doing that, you forfeit your right to that land. That's why He never let you into it in the first place when you didn't believe. And that's why He kicked you out of it other times when you turned away from Him. So that's one of the lies of the jews today. Now here is the next lie. GO to Acts chapter 7. The seventh lie of the Jews today is that the star on their flag is the star of David. They will lie to you, if you point to that star and say "what is that star?", they will say "that's the star of David". And you know what's funny? We asked a bunch of Rabbis. We asked all these rabbis. "what is that star?" and they said "we have no idea". Every rabbi we talked to had no idea where that star comes from. And I asked all four of them, I said "is that in the Bible anywhere?". No. Now the Bible talks alot about David. So if there were a star associated with David, we would hear about it somewhere. We talked to all the Jewish experts. They said that that star is found nowhere in the Bible. "we have no idea where that star comes from". Now, I can tell you where that symbol comes from. That's the star of remphan. Look at Acts 7:43. It says "yea, ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your god remphan, figures hich ye made to worship them, and I will carry you away beyond Babylon." So the only star that we see associated with the children of Israel is the star of remphan. When they worshipped a FALSE god, they had the star of remphan as an icon, and as a symbol. We never see a star of David in scripture, but the star of the false god remphan. And so we know today that they are not worshipping the true God. Because the Bible says "he that denieth the son, the same hath not the father. But he that acknowledgeth the son, hath the father also". If the jews do not believe on the son, the Bible says that they don't have the Father. So who do they have? Somebody else. A false god. Call it what you want... "Shekinah", the female goddess that they worship. We showed that in the scripture this morning. Other things that prove that. Now go if you would to 1st Timothy 1 where we started the sermon. 1st Timothy 1. 

And this is what I want to spend alot of time on tonight. Because one of the biggest lies that they will use, is they will say "we're jews. And you're gentiles". Okay? This is what they'll say. "We're jews, and you're gentiles". And when they spoke to us, they say "you gentiles..." (mocking the haughty, condescending tone)... They said "what you gentiles call the old Testament... We call the ONLY testament". (makes drum sound to punctuate a bad joke) So, you know, they basically call us gentiles and they basically, and they say "we are jews, you are gentiles". That's actually a lie. Now the Bible talks about them in revelation 2:9. And it's funny because sometimes people today will tell you "oh the book of Revelation covers the tribulation, and the tribulation is all about the jews, you know". But here is the funny thing. The word "jews" is used twice in revelation. And both times, it's calling them the synagogue of satan, both times. The only two times you will find the word Jews in revelation, is in chapters 2 and 3. You say "well it says Israel over here". Israel and jews are 2 different things. Don't have time to go into it. But anyway, Revelation 2:9 says "I know the blasphemy of them which say they are jews, and are not, but are the synagogue of satan". Now we know that only one religion uses synagogues. And He said "they SAY they are jews, and are not, but do lie". Now, who uses a synagigue, and says "we're jews". Obviously the jews, okay? But you say "wait a minute Pastor Anderson, they say they're jews and they are". But the reason that it says "they say they are jews and are not but do lie", is because in Romans 2:28 it says "but he is not a jew which is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh, but he is a jew which is one inwardly". And the Bible says in Philippians 3:3 "WE ARE THE CIRCUMCISION, who worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh". So in God's eyes, they're not jews! Because they're not inwardly. So He says they say they are jews and are not but do lie, but are the synagogue of satan. And it's interesting what He says in Revelation 3:9, because he says "behold I will make them of the synagogue of satan which say they are jews and are nto but do lie. Behold I will make them to come and worship before they feet and to know that I have loved thee". Now why would He have to make them know that God loved the Philadelphians, because you know what they think? "well, God loves us, but he doesn't love you. We're the chosen people. You're not. We're the jews, you're the gentiles. We're the chosen, you're the Goyim". Is the word they use for those that are of the heathen, that's what they consider us. I am going to prove this to be false. I have already proved it spiritually false. Because the Bible says we are of the jews which are jews inwardly, we are the circumcision because we rejoice in Christ Jesus. You are in 1st Timothy, but I do need to just quickly read from Ephesians before I get into this wonderful chart over here on the whiteboard. 

But Ephesians chapter 2 reads in verse number 11- listen to this carefully. Ephesians 2:11. "Wherefore remember, that ye being IN TIME PAST gentiles in the flesh, who are called uncircumcision by that which is called the circumcision in the flesh made by hands, that at that time ye were without Christ, being ALIENS from the commonwealth of Israel, and STRANGERS from the covenants of promise, having no hope and without God in the world. But NOW in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes WERE far off, are made NIGH by the blood of Christ". Look at verse 19. "Now therefore ye are NO MORE strangers and foreigners but FELLOWCITIZENS with the saints, and of the household of God". So what He says there in verse 12, is that in time past, you were aliens from the commonwealth of Israel. You were foreigners! But in verse 19 He says "you're not strangers and foreigners anymore, you are fellowcitizens now". So he says in verse 12 "you were an alien of Israel, you were a foreigner to Israel" and in verse 19 he says "you're a citizen of Israel". So this idea of "we're jews, you're gentiles". No. He says in verse number 11, don't miss this. He says in verse 11 "wherefore remember that ye being IN TIME PAST gentiles in the flesh"- are we still gentiles? (No). You were in time past gentiles, you are called uncircumcision, but actually through the blood of Christ, you have been brought nigh unto Israel. You are a citizen of Israel. You are a part of Israel. How can anyone read Ephesians 2 and not realise that we are citizens of Israel? That's what it says. When you were without Christ, you were a foreigner to Israel. Now you have been made nigh to Israel through the blood of Christ. Now you are a citizen of Israel. Now there is a bunch of people over in Israel today that call themselves citizens of Israel. I say they are a bunch of foreigners over there. Bunch of strangers and aliens. Why? Because they are not made nigh by the blood of Christ. In God's eyes, they're not of Israel, because they don't believe in Jesus Christ! Those natural branches have been broken off. And we've been grafted in, as the gentiles. But think about this now. In order to immigrate into Israel, now this is really important, in order to immigrate to Israel, you can't just be anybody and just immigrate into Israel. You can't just, you know, for example be a mexican and say "I want to just go to Israel". Right? You can't just be chinese and say "I want to immigrate to israel". You can't be just, an american and say "I want to immigrate to Israel". No. In order to immigrate to Israel, you have to be able to prove that you are Jewish. In order to immigrate to Israel today. Now you can be someone of a different ethnicity, and immigrate into Israel, but you would have to convert to Judaism, which involves renouncing Christ. In order to convert to Judaism, we spoke to several rabbis, and you have to renounce Jesus Christ. You cannot believe that Jesus is the Messiah, you cannot believe that he is the son of God. SO in order to become a citizen of Israel today, you either have to prove that you are Jewish. Of Jewish blood. Or, you have to renounce the Lord Jesus Christ. So there are two ways to immigrate to Israel. Have Jewish ethnicity, or deny Jesus, and join the religion of Judaism. It's a very rigorous conversion process that takes about a year and a half. Of just, you know, bowing down unto the rabbis and doing whatever they say or whatever. I'm not really interested in it. So I don't have all the details. But anyway, let me just explain to you how ridiculous this is. To say "oh, you have to prove that you are jewish, you have to prove that you are of Israel, then we will let you immigrate". And it's called "the right of return". 

Now, they won't accept DNA. And I'm going to explain to you why in a moment. They will not accept DNA. You could go to a DNA lab, and prove that you're related to them, and prove that you are descended from the same jews that they are descended from. They will not accept that. You have to be certified by them, by the rabbis, by THEIR jewish community. They will certify whether you are jewish or not. DNA, which has been scientifically proven to be accurate, which has been used to convict all kinds of criminals of the DEATH penalty, and to exhonerate and let other people go free, because it is so accurate- they won't accept it. And I am going to show you why in a moment. Because if they accepted it, it would prove everything they believe to be a fraud. Now let me explain this chart to you that I have drawn over here, I want to go over this with you. But first let me read to you from 1st Timothy. Now I have already proven that we are of spiritual Israel. That we are spiritually jews, according to Romans 2, Philppians 3, and Ephesians 2. That's pretty easy to prove from the Bible, we could turn to many other scriptures. But listen to me. I am about to really blow you away tonight. And I don't say that very often. And I am about to make a really big promise. And I am going to deliver on that promise. And when I first make this promise, many of you are not going to believe that I am able to do what I say I am going to do tonight. I am going to promise to do something. And many of you are going to not believe that I am able to fulfil what I am going to guarantee you, but let me tell you something. I will deliver, okay? And I don't say that lightly. Just hear me out, okay? Have I proven that we are spiritually the sons of abraham? I mean I have done that in many other sermons. Have I proven that we are of Israel, we have been brought nigh unto Israel, we're citizens of Israel, spiritually? Listen to me tonight. You are not going to believe me. But when I am done, you will see it. I am going to prove to you tonight, that YOU ARE A PHYSICAL DESCENDENT OF ABRAHAM. I am going to prove it to you tonight. I will go a step further. I AM GOING TO PROVE TO YOU TONIGHT THAT YOU ARE PHYSICALLY DESCENDED FROM ISRAEL HIMSELF! Not even just of Ishmael or Midian. I AM GOING TO PROVE TO YOU TONIGHT, THAT YOU ARE PHYSICALLY DESCENDED FROM ISRAEL. You say "I'm black!". I will prove it to you. You say "I'm Chinese". I will prove it to you. "I'm Korean". I will prove it to you. "I'm white!". I will prove it to you. Now, I know what you are thinking. "Pastor Anderson is out of his mind, there is no way he can prove that". Look, when I am done tonight, the only people who will disagree with me, are just people who don't understand science and math. No scientist will disagree when I am done tonight. No mathematician will disagree when I am done. That YOU... "well surely you don't mean me?". I mean YOU. Are descended PHYSICALLY from Israel. Not spiritually, physically. Let me step over to the board here. I know it's a tall order. It's a big promise, okay? But let me explain this to you. Now this is something that I actually learnt when I traced my family tree and when I figured out how this worked, this blew my mind. This blew me away. And I learnt this about 5, 6, 7 years ago when I was tracing my own ancestry and my family tree. And I want you to pay very close attention because this is going to involve math. And so I want you to pay very careful attention. I;m going to explain this to you and make it as simple as I can. Okay, this is what a family tree looks like. Who has ever made a family tree before? Lots of people, great. 

Now, at the bottom of this family tree, we just have one person, these circles represent people. So at the bottom of the family tree, we just have one person which is you. Now, you descend from 2 people don't you? Your mother and your father. So if we go back one generation you come from 2 people as a direct descendent, right? But if we go back another generation, you don't just have 2 grandparents, you have 4 grandparents. And it keeps doubling, doesn't it? Because you have 2 parents, 4 grandparents, 8 great-grandparents, 16 great-great grandparents, and you have 32 great-great-great grandparents. Everybody follow so far? And it keeps doubling because everybody has 2 parents, okay? So, we're going to use exponents tonight, okay? Exponents will help us understand this. Because we started with one person, right? That's 2 to the zeroth power equals one, alright? Then in the first generation, we go back one generation, going back to mum and dad. We have two parents, which is 2 to the first power. When we go back 2 generations to our grandparents, we have 2 squared, or two to the second power, which is four. Four grandparents, right? If we go back 3 generations, we have 8 great grandparents, that's 2 to the third power. Four generations, it's going to be 2 to the fourth power. 16. Two to the fifth power, 32. Two to the sixth power, 64. So the number keeps doubling, doesn't it. Now, that means that if I were going to do a family tree that went back five generations, I would have to have a piece of paper wide enough to where at the top of that paper I would be able to have 32 people's names, wouldn't I? Because that is how ancestors I am going to have directly in that fifth generation. Now if I went to the sixth generation, my paper is going to have to be twice as wide, because now I am going to have 64 slots to put in the names right? Now, our parents are 2 different people. Our grandparents are 4 different people. Our great grandparents are 8 different people. Now, how could we have 3 grandparents? It would be like a guy with 2 wives, and people are marrying their half sister, it would be a mess, okay? So these people are all unique people. If I made a family tree like this, these would all be unique names, all unique people, all different people. Not like that song "I'm my own grandpa", about living in the south and so forth. So... have you heard that song? (LAUGHS) So anyway, a normal family tree going back five generations, all the names are pretty likely to be unique. I've done my family tree to this level, and the names are all unique. It's all unique people, because theres alot of fish in the sea. Alot of unique people in the world right? Well what happens though, is that as we go back further, this number get reallllly big. Now in order to understand how this chart works, we have to understand how long a generation is. Now a generation has nothing to do with the lifespan, okay? For example, my mother gave birth to me when she was thirty years old, okay? most women give birth to children around that age, you know. The child bearing time would be between 20 and 40 these days. That would be the primary time when women are giving birth. So let's just take 30 as an average. My mum was thirty when she had me. If you go online and type in "how long is a generation?", the number that keeps coming up over and over again, the number that keeps coming up over and over again is 25, 25, 25. Sometimes you will see 30, sometimes you will see 20 something. But 30 is a nice round number, and 30 is a very conservative number for this calculation. So a generation is 30 years. Meaning somebody has a child when they're thirty, and then they have a child when they're thirty, they have a child when they're thirty. Nothing to do with lifespan. 

So that means, that if we go back 10 generations, and a generation is thirty years, then that's 300 years right? So let's just round off and say that if we went back in our family tree about 10 generations, we're going to be at about the year 1700. Does that make sense everybody? About 300 years ago. Now because our family tree is getting wider, if we wanted to do a complete family tree showing all of our ancestors back to the tenth generation, we would have to have a piece of paper that was wide enough to have a thousand and twenty four slots. Because 10 generations ago, there would be 1024 people that we would directly descend from, right? Because it's going 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024 when we get to the tenth generation. Now, here is what I noticed when I did my family tree though. When I went back 10 generations, you know what I started noticing? These are no longer unique people. Why? because people marry their.... Don't you hate it when you accidentally marry your 7th cousin, and you didn't even know that she was such a close relative. I mean obviously you don't know. I mean, who here can name their third cousins? Who even knows what a third cousin is, you know? But anyway, this is what a cousin is, a cousin is the people that you share your grandparents with. You share the same grandparents, right? A second cousin is somebody that you share great-grandparents with. For example, the children of cousins, are second cousins. The children of second cousins, are third cousins. The children of third cousins are fourth cousins. You don't have to understand all that. But what I want you to understand, is that by the time I got to the tenth generation here, these 1024 people were not all unique because there had been some intermarraige in that 300 years that had unknowingly taken place. Let's go back 20 generations. So now we are back around the year 1400. Well, if I wanted to have a complete family tree, I would have to have a piece of paper that could fit 1 048 576 names. That's a pretty big piece of paper. It's an unbelievably sized piece of paper. Now do you think all of these people are going to be unique? Maybe not, right? okay. Now, let me just show you the scripture, I am going to come back to that chart, just digest that for a minute. Look at 1st Timothy chapter 1. In 1st Timothy chapter one, it says in verse 4 "neither give heed to fables and ENDLESS geneaologies". I want you to keep that phrase in your mind. "ENDLESS geneaologies which minister questions rather than godly edifying which is in faith, so do". Now in Titus, he just said avoid geneaologies. But here he says to avoid ENDLESS geneaologies. And I'm going to show you why geneaologies are endless, they truly are endless. 

So in the year 1400, if I am going to trace ALL of my ancestors. I mean, I am going to tell you who ALL of my ancestors from the 1400's are. I would have to show you a family tree that just at the top, would have a million something people. Just in the top row, let alone eveything else coming downward, right? If I were to go back 30 generations, now I am only in the year 1100, I'm not even close to the time of Christ yet am I? No. If I went back to the year 1100, 30 generations, I would have 1 BILLION, SEVENTY THREE MILLION, SEVEN HUNDRED AND FORTY ONE THOUSAND, EIGHT HUNDRED AND TWENTY FOUR ancestors in that generation. Now, listen, they're not all unique. And let me tell you why, there were not a billion people living in the world at that time. So there is alot of repeating going on right? You know what that shows, is that alot of people are descending from the same people. Cannot help but intermarry, it's impossible not to, because of these numbers. Now look, the real number that we want to go back to, is not 1100 AD, let's go back to 70 AD, because 70 AD is when all the Jews were scattered into all nations. And they were scattered into all nations, okay? IF we were to go back to 70 AD, and we were to have a family tree that shows all of our ancestors in 70 AD, and how they're connected, that top line would have 18 quintillion, 446 quadrillion, 744 Trillion names. From 70 AD. Now, who thinks that there were 18 quintillion, 446 quadrillion, 744 Trillion people living at the time of Christ, or shortly thereafter. No. In fact, the approximate population at that time was 200 million, on this earth, okay? Of that 200 million, let's just call 7 or 8 million, Jews. You say "I don't like that number". Well that number is not going to matter in a minute, okay? So let's just call it 7, 8 million, okay. SO if there are 200 million people on the earth at the time of the temple being destroyed, in 70 AD there are 200 million people on the earth, and about 7 or 8 million are Jews, that means if I have an ancestor from that era, there is a 1 in 27 chance that they were of Israel. That's not even counting all the mixing that could have taken place up to that point. But let's just use this number. Let's just say 1 in 27 people living at that time are descendents of Israel. And, let's say that 200 million is the population of the earth, so basically, each of my ancestors has a 1 in 27 chance of being of Israel. Does everybody understand? How many slots am I filling in on that family tree? 18 quintillion slots right? So think about this. What if I were buying a lottery ticket, and the odds of that lottery ticket coming up a winner are 1 in 27, does everybody understand? Because that's the winning ticket that says "you're jewish! You're of the chosen people! You're of Israel! You are an Israelite indeed!". I've got a 1 in 27 chance of pulling that number. Okay, you say "well, Pastor Anderson, if you have a 1 in 27 chance, you are probably not going to win that lottery, because you have 26 chances of losing". Okay. But what if I buy 18 quintillion lottery tickets? You think I'm going to win? So what if I buy 18 quintillion lottery tickets, and I have got a 1 in 27 chance of striking Jewish? You think I am going to hit it? Let me ask you this. How many times do I have to hit it to be descended from Abraham? How many times do I have to hit it to be descended from Israel? So, how can anyone in here say "I'm not descended from Israel. I don't have a drop of jewish blood in my body"? You're saying, that out of all these chances... And I realise that these are not all unique people. There are not 18 quintillion ancestors. But you are filling out your family tree, there are 18 quint... qui.. ah... I can't even say these numbers. 18 quintillion spots for you to write a name, of someone in that generation that you directly descend from, and only ONE of them... only one of them has to be an Israelite. "Well, there weren't 7 or 8 million!". Okay, let's just say one million. Right? Let me grab my pen here. "Well there weren't 7 or 8 million!". Okay. How about one? How about a 1 in 200 chance? You have got a 1 in 200 chance of your ancestor from that generation being an Israelite and you are buying this many tickets. Think you are going to hit it? 

You say "well, Pastor Anderson, you are not taking geography into account. I mean, if you are in the middle east, you are much more likely to hit it, than if you are in Korea, or China, or Africa, or... I mean, what are the chances that you are going to hit it then?". But wait a minute, you only have to hit it once. You only have to have ONE ancestor out of ALLLL these ancestors. Only one has to be of Israel. And you say "well, I'm hispanic!". Okay, well, first of all, people that are hispanic... notice spanic... Spain. Did you know that spain was one of the places that the Jews lived the most. There was a huge jewish population in spain until 1492 because in 1492, all of the Jews were forced to either... In 1492 all the jews had to eith leave spain or convert to Catholicism or die. Those were their choices. Well, guess what alot of them did? Alot of them left spain. But you know what alot of them did? Converted to catholocism. That's why today a HUGE portion of the spanish population is directly descended from those jews. Because alot of them were the "conversos", you know, converted unto catholicism. And then you know what those people on Spain and Portugal, who were jews who converted to catholicism, you know what their descendents did? They came to mexico, they came to south america, they came to brazil. So people all over mexico, brazil, south america, they are FOR CERTAIN going to have ancestors from spain and Portugal somewhere in their big gian family tree of millions of ancestors. And for sure there is going to be at least one them that is a jew. At least one, out of millions of ancestors. Out of a quintillion chances, 18 quintillion, mind you. That's going to be... You say "well, I'm black, I'm of Africa. How can I be connected with Abraham?". Well, stop and think about it. Israel- we're not even talking about Abraham, I'm saying you're of Israel, okay? Think about Israel's children, you know what one of Israels children Joseph, guess where his wife was from. Egypt. Joseph's wife was of Egypt. Where is Egypt? Africa. Moses' wife, was Ethiopian! So we already see, even in Bible days, intermingling with Africa, intermingling with the sons of Ham. I mean, if you think about it, the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, were half of Ham, and half of Israel. Because Israel's son Joseph married an egyptian woman who was of Ham. So ALL of the Ephraimites and Manassites are descended of Ham. They all have connections with Africa. And not only that, but all throughout history you have all kinds of merchants and missionaries and conquerors. Even, you think of the mongolian empire, that went all over the world, and that conquered China, that conquered korea. All the ships that sailed and went here and there and everywhere. You ONLY HAVE TO HAVE ONE! Ancestor. Out of your MILLIONS AND MILLIONS of ancestors. You only have to have one that descends from Israel, and you are a direct descendent of Israel today. Only one is what's necessary. 

Now, anybody who understands what I explained just now, anybody who knows math, you know we've got a certified accountant, do you approve of this message? We have a certified accountant in the front row here, that's just told me that he approves of what I am saying. Because any mathematician knows this is true. And you know what any scientist will tell you that this is true. We talked to the guy at the DNA lab, he said if you go back several hundred years, we're all the same. You know what? The Bible was right when it said we are all of one blood. That God has made the nations of the earth of one blood. You sit there and say "oh, I am just purely a  white person. I'm just purely asian, I'm just purely african". No you're not. No-one is. No-one is. That's why it's so ridiculous to take pride in that. (SARCASTICALLY) "ohhh, I'm Jewish, you're gentile". Those Palestinians over there all descend from Abraham. Every single one of them. "well no, you mean most". ALL of them. Every single Palestinian is a descendant of Jacob. Anybody who disputes that statement after seeing this information just doesn't understand math and doesn't understand science. And the guy from the DNA lab will tell you, there has been so much mingling. And look, you can sit there and have your endless geneaology, because you know what you can't tell from a geneaology? Someone who committed adultery and lied to their husband and said "oh yeah, this is your son". And he's not. People that are adopted, and not told that their adopted. Or even they're told they're adopted, and then that information gets lost. I mean who here can tell all the people that were in your lineage that were adopted? "Oh yeah, my ancestors 300 years ago were adopted." You're not going to remeber that. So there are adoptions, there is infidelity, there is travelling, there is conquest, there are merchants, there are missionaries... It doesn't matter where you're from folks. You know why God said to avoid this? Because it hurts your mind to even think about this stuff. (LAUGHS) I mean, these numbers bend the mind. He is just like "just avoid it". Avoid endless geneaologies. You know what, they minister questions. I mean does this make you feel really sure about your nationality now? No. It raises alot of questions. Because now you are thinking "goodnight, who do I descend from? Iroquoi? Gypsy? African? Chinese? Korean? Caucasians?". We're all mixed. There is no pure. you know, the nazis, "the pure aryan"... Baloney. There is no such thing. Because one little drop of Jewish blood... And I asked the guy, the leader of the Jewish congregation. I said to him, "how jewish is jewish?". I said "how many jewish ancestors do I...". I said "I did my family tree and I said 10 generations back, so at this level...", because I really did, "I found someone with a jewish name". And he said "well as long as it's the matrilineal line", because they do it on the mother's side, for some bizarre reason. "As long as it's matrilineal, then you're jewish". Then we're all jewish. But do you see now why Israel doesn't let you use DNA to return to the land? (sarcastically) I want to return! I want to return to my homeland of my ancestors! LET ME RETURN TO ISRAEL, I'M AN ISRAELITE! "PROVE IT!"... (motions toward whiteboard where he made the argument regarding geneaologies)... Let's all, I mean John Hagee ought to buy me a ticket! Help this jew return to the homeland. I don't want to go, but anyway... (LAUGHS) Now look, this just goes to show you what a fraud this whole thing is, of "well THEY'RE the jews, YOU'RE the gentile. DON'T say you're a jew, DON'T say you're of Abraham, YOU'RE NOT A SON OF... YOU'RE A GENTILE, THEY'RE THE JEWS... THESE PALESTINIANS, they're all of Ishmael! The PALESTINIANS ARE OF ISHMAEL! And the JEWS are of ISRAEL!". No. Every Jew is also of Ishmael, because of mixing! And every Palestinian is also of Israel. 

Now some people who just don't comprehend this, here is what they say. "Well how can we all be descended from Abraham when there were other people living at that time to descend from?". Because you don't descend from one person. You descend from millions of people. And only one of them has to be a descendent of Israel, for you to be a descendent of Israel. And the chances, I mean, I was going to put on the board the chances of you not being an Israelite. It had so many zeroes, it couldn't fit on the board. This is your chance, it's like, you have a point zero zero zero zero zero zero zero... it would be all over the wall, like just... "these are the chances of you not being of Israel". (Motions toward entire wall). So you know it becomes just statistically insignificant at that point. Any mathematician will tell you. Just zero zero zero zero zero zero... you know. So I could tell you tonight, you have a 99.9999999999999999999999999999999999999... etc percent chance of being of Israel. But it just makes more chance to say 100... Let's just round it up to the nearest significant digit. And just call it 100 per cent. And anyone who says "well, you know there is still a chance...". You need to go back to math class, and you need to go back to science class. Let me just wrap my sermon with one last thing. Ezra chapter 10, because I am running out of time, but I really wanted to drive that point in. Ezra chapter 10. Because this is what people will say, people are just stubborn my friend. People are really stubborn, you show them the truth, and they just don't want to accept it, no matter what you show them. So there are going to be some people, who, you know how they are going to argue with this right here? Here is how they are going to argue with this. They are going to say "well no Pastor Anderson, because the jews were REALLY CAREFUL never to intermarry with other nations throughout history. THEY were just...". Well, look, only a few slip ups, and you are bringing in all kinds of DNA, number one. But they say "no, no Pastor Anderson, you don't understand. The Jews were just REALLY careful not to intermarry throughout history. I mean I know they were scattered throughout all nations. I know they were throughout Europe, but they only married each other". I have heard this so many times. "they only married each other, they were really careful to marry only within the jewish community, and that's how hey preserved their identity". No they preserved their identity through their religion, that's of antichrist okay? But you say "Oh no, they really were careful to preserve that identity Pastor Anderson". They did not mix. Well first of all, what about the ones that converted and assimilated into the societies where they lived? They're mixing all over the place. And what about all the people that were none jews who converted to Judaism? In in Esther chapter 8:17, it says many of the people of the land became jews. For the fear of the jews fell upon them. And when they became jews, they are going to intermarry now. So that logic falls apart, but let's see if that's really true.  Let's go back to the days of Ezra. One example. I could show you tonnes of examples of intermarraige. I could show you Joseph marrying an Egyptian, Moses marrying an Ethiopian, I mean I could show you TONNES of intermarraige. But let's just look at one example. Because remember "the jews were really good. They were in Europe, they only married each other pastor Anderson, that's why your logic falls apart". Okay, Ezra chapter 10:19. "And they gave their hands that they would put away their wives; and being guilty, they offered a ram of the flock for their trespass. And of the sons of Immer; Hanani, and Zebadiah. And of the sons of Harim; Maaseiah, and Elijah, and Shemaiah, and Jehiel, and Uzziah. And of the sons of Pashur; Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethaneel, Jozabad, and Elasah. Also of the Levites; Jozabad, and Shimei, and Kelaiah, (the same is Kelita,) Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer. Of the singers also; Eliashib: and of the porters; Shallum, and Telem, and Uri. Moreover of Israel: of the sons of Parosh; Ramiah, and Jeziah, and Malchiah, and Miamin, and Eleazar, and Malchijah, and Benaiah. And of the sons of Elam; Mattaniah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, and Abdi, and Jeremoth, and Eliah. And of the sons of Zattu; Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, and Jeremoth, and Zabad, and Aziza. Of the sons also of Bebai; Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, and Athlai. And of the sons of Bani; Meshullam, Malluch, and Adaiah, Jashub, and Sheal, and Ramoth. And of the sons of Pahathmoab; Adna, and Chelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezaleel, and Binnui, and Manasseh. And of the sons of Harim; Eliezer, Ishijah, Malchiah, Shemaiah, Shimeon, Benjamin, Malluch, and Shemariah. Of the sons of Hashum; Mattenai, Mattathah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manasseh, and Shimei. Of the sons of Bani; Maadai, Amram, and Uel, Benaiah, Bedeiah, Chelluh, Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib, Mattaniah, Mattenai, and Jaasau, And Bani, and Binnui, Shimei, And Shelemiah, and Nathan, and Adaiah, Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai, Azareel, and Shelemiah, Shemariah, Shallum, Amariah, and Joseph. Of the sons of Nebo; Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jadau, and Joel, Benaiah. ALL THESE HAD TAKEN STRANGE WIVES: and some of them had wives by whom they had children". I rest my case. (Laughter). They had all taken strange wives. I mean, did you hear that list? That's one event. That's one generation. (LAUGHS) "No, no, Pastor Anderson, they were really good about not intermarrying." They just kept it within the jewish community". Right, sure. But you know what? People are just stubborn. This is their sacred cow. "Israel, the jews...". They love that star of David- it's of remphan. They love this nation of people and think they're just so wonderful. Look, I don't love them or not love them any more than anybody else. They're just human! Just people. You say "you hate jews!". Then I'd be hating myself, because I'm a jew. "Well, you just hate the ethnicity of Jews". I'm of the ethnicity of the jews! "Well you hate obama because he is jewish!". (LAUGHS) You say "He's a muslim!", he's a jewish muslim, I guess, I don't know. I mean look... just name anybody you want. I'll declare them a jew right now. Just name who you want. You know, Sammy Davis Junior converted to judaism. But he was already ethnically a jew. Be not decieved. You know what? This is stupidity to sit there and say "oh yeah, the jews are God's chosen people". No, if you believe in CHRIST, you're God's chosen people, because we're ALL of one blood, we're ALL the same. We're all human beings, we're all related, and you know what? WE ARE THE CHOSEN PEOPLE if we believe in JESUS CHRIST! And those who DON'T believe in Jesus Christ are NOT THE ELECT. And you say, "oh, the 144,000, they're going to be of those 12 tribes". Look, somebody said "well, they don't know who they are, but God does". God could just pick 12 thousand people, randomly. and they would be of Rueben. With all this mixing. He could just pick 12 thousand people RANDOMLY and they would be of Gad! They would be of Asher. RANDOMLY, ANYBODY! But you know what, that's not true, those 12 tribes in revelation are OT saints from back when those tribes actually existed and meant something. It don't mean anything anymore. No jew can even tell you what tribe they are of today. Because they haven't done their family tree all the way bcak to 70 AD, okay? 

But, thank God we're the chosen ones, doesn't it feel good to be chosen? doesn't it feel good to be the elect? You know, God's people, the Holy Nation? Let's bow our heads and have a word of prayer. Father we thank you so much for these spiritual truths Lord, and thankyou for giving us minds that can comprehend math, and that can learn why everything in the Bible was right. You were right when you said "endless geneaologies". You were right when you said that Abraham was a father of many nations. You were right Lord, when you said to just avoid geneaologies and to just figure out whether you are of Abraham, by whether you have the faith of Abraham. Lord, please help us all to not feel that we are second class citizens of the kingdom of God, but to know that we are of the chosen people. And Lord, help us to love the lost whether they are so called "jewish", whether they be red, yellow, black, white, Lord. How ridiculous for someone to hate those of another race when they must have an ancestor of those nationalities somewhere if we go back far enough. Lord, help us to go our seperate ways Lord, with just a renewed appreciation for our position in Christ. And for our position as the elect. In Jesus' name we pray, Amen. Alright, let's go ahead and sing a song before we go... 


