


The New Morality vs. God's Word
Video
August 16, 2015

 Luke Chapter 16 the verse that I wanted to preach on is beginning in verse 15 where the bible reads, "And he said unto them, ye are they which justify yourselves before men, but God knoweth your hearts for that which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God." What I want to preach about this morning is the new morality versus God's word. The new morality versus God's word. You see today in 2015 America, there is a certain morality, a certain accepted practice of what is right and what is wrong. It's contrary to God's word. You see in the past, our nation had God's word at least as a standard for right and wrong. Even people who didn't really believe the Gospel of Jesus Christ still looked to basic Christian morality. They looked to the bible for principles on what is right and what is wrong. 	Today, there is a new morality that's not based on the bible. You see pretty much every single person that you talk to whether they be a Christian, atheist, agnostic, or some other religion has some type of morality. They have some concept of what they consider to be right and what they consider to be wrong. Very rarely would you run into someone who just said, "Well, everything's okay." Most of the time people have rules that they go by whether it's biblical rules or something else, and because our nation has turned away from the bible in so many ways, now that void has been filled with the new morality. 	This morning I want to point out some of the differences between the new morality in America and God's word, and God's laws. First of all in this verse it says, "That that which is highly esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of God. That's pretty big of a difference when the world is highly esteeming something. It's saying "This is great!" God saying "That's an abomination." If you would go to Isaiah chapter 5 verse 20. While you're turning there, I'll read for you Proverbs 14:12. The bible reads, "There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death."	See this new morality, it doesn't claim to be based on the bible. It just claims to be based on common sense. We all kind of just know what's right, don't we? Do we really need the bible to tell us what's right? The problem is that there's a way that seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death. Plus a lot of people who say things like, "Oh, just follow your heart or just use common sense." What they don't realize is that their minds have been programmed by TV and the media. It's not that that all came from their own heart. It said it's been put there over the years by very bad people. 	We'll look at Isaiah chapter 5 verse 20, "Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil. That put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight." Flip over to chapter 55 of Isaiah. See right there, it talks about how what one person considers good, someone else could call evil. What one person considers evil, one else would call good. The bible has to be the standard for what is right and wrong. Not the so-called morality. I'll get to the meaning of that word in a few moments.	Look at Isaiah 55 verse 7. "Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord. He will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts." Go to Ezekiel chapter 18. In that verse, he stated that the way that we think of things is not the same way that God thinks about things. That your thoughts are not my thoughts. Your ways are not my ways. My ways are better. My ways are higher. My thoughts are higher. You have a much lower, baser morality than I have. That's what God is saying.	Look at Ezekiel chapter 18 verse 29. "Yet saith the house of Israel, the way of the Lord is not equal. Oh house of Israel, are not my ways equal? Are not your ways unequal? Therefore I will judge you, oh house of Israel. Every one according to his ways, saith the Lord God. Repent and turn yourselves from all your transgressions so iniquity shall not be your ruin. Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby you transgressed and make you a new heart and a new spirit; for why will ye die, Oh house of Israel? For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord God. Wherefore turn yourselves, and live ye." He's saying here, they are saying that his ways are not equal. That basically that is not fair. He's saying, "No. I'm right and you're wrong." When man has a certain way of doing things, when man has a certain standard of right and wrong, and God has a different standard of right and wrong; we need to go with God's standard and God's standard is found written in the bible. Now without the bible, and without God telling us what is right and what is wrong, we really have no concrete way to determine what is right and wrong.	For example, I was speaking at the community college in a philosophy class. I put forth the statement that without the bible and without invoking God as our creator, it's impossible to really say that murder is wrong. You can't really prove that murder is wrong. Basically, I asked the class, "Well, who here believes that murder is wrong?" Every single person believes it is wrong. "Well, who here believes that the bible is the word of God?" Very few. "Who here even believes in God at all?" Only like half the class. Most of them had been indoctrinated in this thing of the big bang, and evolution, and everything just came from nothing magically appearing out of thin air. I said to them, "Okay, well prove to me that murder is wrong. Why is it wrong for me to murder because I said according to what I believe, murder is wrong because the bible says thou shall do no murder. Why is murder wrong? Because God said so. It's in the 10 Commandments. Thou shall not kill. Okay, now you prove to me that murder's wrong." They're, "It's just wrong."	Everybody knows it's wrong. What? How? Prove that it's wrong. What if somebody says, "Well, I think it's okay to kill people in certain situations. I think it's okay to murder someone." If you need to basically gain some advantage on that however. They said, "No. No. It's wrong because it hurts other people. It harms other people." I said, "Okay. Why is it wrong to hurt other people?" I said, "According to your doctrine of the big bang and evolution, we're all just animals anyway. We all just are chanced beings that are just an evolved animal." I said, "Look at the animal kingdom. They kill each other all the time. Are they wrong?" I asked, "Is a dog who kills another do committing murder? Is it committing sin? Is it wrong?" They're confounded. No one could answer that. No one could prove that because there is no way to prove it. Because without God, without the bible, then everything would be permissible. Think about it. 	If we're just animals, if we're just a chemical concoction from the big bang, then we could pretty much do whatever we want. Our lives are meaningless. Eat, drink, and be merry because tomorrow we die. Without God's word, without the bible, there is no foundation for morality at all except just every man doing what's right in his own eyes. If you talk to an honest atheist, they'll admit this. I talked to a guy that I knew. He's what I call an evangelical atheist. One of these ones who, he's not just an atheist. He's serious about being an atheist. He preaches atheism. I confronted this guy with the idea that "Well if there's no God, then basically you have no authority to say what is right and wrong because it's just in every man's own eyes." I said, "How can you prove that murder is wrong? How can you prove that adultery is wrong? How can prove that anything's wrong? Do animals abide by thou shall not commit adultery? Do animals abide by thou shall not kill?" He was honest. Here's what he said, "Well, you're right. As an atheist, all I'm left with is just a subjective morality." He said, "There is no absolute right and wrong." At least that atheist admitted it.	Ninety, some percent of atheist that you talk to are too foolish to even understand what you're saying. They think that "No. Murder's wrong period." Based on what? Based on you? Are you God? God's word must be the final authority for us as Christians on what is right or wrong. We're not like this atheistic world that just goes through life making our own rules up as we go. We have a standard here. We have God's word that never changes. We have God's commandments. Now when you think about the 10 commandments, a lot of people even unsaved, even non-Christian people are pretty familiar with the 10 Commandments. If you asked someone, "Hey, have you ever heard of the 10 Commandments? Ninety-nine percent of people have heard of it. It's been looked at as just a basic teaching of morality. It's just kind of a foundational doctrine of what is right and what is wrong.	Obviously there are many more commandments in the bible than the 10 Commandments. If we just look at the 10 Commandments and we compare the 10 Commandments with the new morality in America, you will find that 6 of these 10 Commandments have absolutely no place in the new morality. The new morality in America only retains 4 of the 10 Commandments. If you think about it, the first of the 10 Commandments is thou shall have no other Gods before me. That's not even on the radar of this new morality in America. They don't believe in God. Number 2, thou shall not make unto thee any graven image. Carvings, statues of people or animals out of metal or wood. That's not on the radar in the new morality. Third commandment, thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. That's something that this new morality cares anything about? No. Fourth, remember the Sabbath to keep it holy. Again, is that even on the radar? Anything that has to do with God, they're not interested. Obviously the Old Testament, Sabbath, resting upon the seventh day, in the New Testament Jesus observes Sabbath etc., whole another sermon of itself.	Number 5, honor thy father and mother. If you look at the way the bible interprets that honor there, you look at what Jesus taught about that? Honor there is talking about also caring for your parents in old age, paying for them basically when they're old; taking care of them financially. That's part of that, not only obedience is also part of that. Also, honoring them with your substance, taking care of them when they're old. No, the government does that. People are told, "Hey, you got to save up for that so you don't burden your children etc., etc." The first 5 are not really on the radar in the new morality. 	Then we get to the next one, thou shall not kill. Again, our ungodly world would agree with us on that. The American culture in 2015 would agree that killing is wrong. Murder is wrong. Obviously they make exceptions to that with abortion and everything. Of course in general, they'd say, "Yeah. Don't murder." In general they'd say, "Yeah. Don't commit adultery." At least most people would say that. "Hey, thou shall not steal." Most people in America would agree with that even if they're not Christians. When we get to thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor, again most people would agree. "Hey, don't lie under oath." Don't testify against someone and falsely accuse them. 	Then we get to the tenth commandment thou shall not covet. Most people don't even know what the word covet means, let alone. When you explain to people what covet means, they're like, "That's a sin? Really?" Coveting is when you desire something that belongs to someone else. Not that you would take it away from them and make it your own. Oh, no. It's when you look at someone who has more than you and you envied them and say, "I wish I had a house like that. I wish I had a car like that." Again, most people are incredulous that that's even a sin. It is a sin to covet that what you do not have. Out of the 10 Commandments, 6 of them are not even on the radar in this new morality. The only 4 that are retained are thou shall not kill, thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not steal, and thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. 	If we would go to France today, did you know that 60% of people on France think that it's okay to commit adultery? Sixty percent of them think that "Hey you know as long as ..." Most of them would just say, "Just be discreet about it. Just don't rub their noses. At least keep it a secret, hide it." Sixty percent are saying it's not even wrong. We're not talking about how many have done it. We're saying how many would say it's fine. Germany is close to that level in the 50s would say it's fine. More than half of people in these countries think that adultery is okay. Basically, they're down to like 3 of the 10 Commandments over in these places. Then if you factor in abortion, now they're down to like 2. The reason I'm reading all these scripture and showing you all this, is just to show you by way of introduction that there's a big difference between God's word and the new morality. Isn't there? Are they the same? Is it pretty much common sense? No. There's a big difference between this new morality and God's word. It's not the same thing. It's different.	Now just the word morality itself. What does it mean? If you look at the word morality, first of all if you speak Spanish, it helps you see where some of our English words come from because a lot of our English words are Latin based. In Spanish there is a verb morar, which means to dwell somewhere. It's the place where you live. Where you dwell is where you would morar. All right? That's where morality comes from. Okay? It has to do with what is right and wrong where you live. That's what morality means; in your culture that you're a part of. Also another word that's similar to morality is the word ethics. The word ethic come from the same root word as the word ethnic. When we talk about ethnic, we're talking about what country someone's from. Where ethics is again what is right and wrong based on what society says is right and wrong around you.	Even the word morality itself, it has to do with the fact that it's what the people around you accept as right and wrong. That's what morality is. Which is why the bible doesn't use the world morality ever because God doesn't care about morality and ethics. God cares about his law. His word. Righteousness, unrighteousness based on what he says. The modern versions have brought in this word morality. Okay. Let me give you an example. The first example I want to give, the difference between the new morality and God's word is on the subject of fornication. 	Now fornication is people who have intimate physical relationship before they're married. This is known in the bible as fornication. God's law says that we should keep that within marriage. The bible says marriage is honorable and all, and the bed undefiled. Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. That's God's standard. Here's the world standard. "Hey, as long as it's consensual, as long as everybody's 18, as long as you're consensual, and as long as you love each other." Right? Then it's okay. That's what the world thinks. Your average person today in America does not think it is wrong to do that before you're married, do they? Your average person in America today thinks it's totally fine. In fact they think you're crazy if you say, "Hey, you have to wait till you're married to have that physical relationship." "Oh, are you serious?" That's the way the world looks at it. That's a pretty big difference between God's standard. 	First of all if you would flip over to first Thessalonians 4. The bible says in second John verse 6 it says, "This is love that we walk after his commandments. This is the commandment. That as ye have heard from the beginning, ye should walk in it." The bible says that love is when we walk after his commandments. The bible says love is the fulfilling of the law. Yet they'll say, "Well if you love each other, it's fine." Here's the thing. Fornicating with someone is not an act of love. It's an act of disrespect. It's an act of defilement and is not love according to bible. Look at first Thessalonians 4:3. "For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should abstain from fornication." Verse 7, "For God hath not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness." Go to first Corinthians chapter number 6. First Corinthians 6, God's word says abstain from fornication. It needs to be kept within marriage. The new morality says, "Well, as long as you love each other." As long as it's consensual. Here's what they'll say "Just do it safely. You use protection. Do it safely." That's what they're teaching the kids today. That's what TV is teaching them. That's what our society is teaching them in the new morality. 	Whereas the bible says no to fornication. Look at first Corinthians 6:18. "Flee fornication. Every sin that a man doeth is without the body; but he that committeth fornication sinneth against his own body." Look at chapter 7 verse 1. "Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me. It is good for a man not to touch a woman. Nevertheless to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband." Why? To avoid fornication. Keep that physical relationship where it belongs within the bounds of marriage. That's what the bible's teaching here. This is God's word on the subject. It trumps man's morality.	What the new modern versions will do is like for example the NIV, the most popular version in America today. They'll take out the word fornication. You know what they'll replaced it with? Sexual immorality. What's immorality mean? Basically what society says it's wrong. What the culture says is wrong. You could interpret that if you have an NIV. You can interpret that with sexual immorality, that's it if you don't love other. That's it if you are not doing it safely. That's it if it's a one night stand. That's it if it's not consensual. They can make it mean whatever they want. I've literally sat in a Baptist Youth Service. Of a Baptist church, a youth group and literally had a student argue with the teacher and say, "I don't think it's wrong to go to bed with somebody before you're married. Prove it to me from the bible." The teacher couldn't do it. The teacher couldn't prove it because these new versions have made so many changes. It makes it hard to even prove that from the bible. Of course if you're reading a King James Bible, there is plenty of teachings against fornication and how we need to be married and etc., etc.	That just shows you how dangerous these new versions are. This is why where King James Bible only here. We don't want this idea of morality in the bible. No. We want God's law. God's word. Concrete, this is right. This is wrong. Black, white; not this gray area. Not only that, go to first Timothy chapter 6. First Timothy chapter number 6, another thing that the new morality has this thing of cussing versus what God's word says about blasphemy. Now here's what's funny. If you watch a show on TV, they'll bleep things out. If they take a movie from Hollywood and bring it to the TV, they have to clean it up for TV. They'll censor it, right? They say we got to remove the profanity; remove the cussing. You know what? Here's what they never remove. God's name in vain. Basically according to the new morality, blaspheming Christ is fine. On TV, they'll have a children's show and it could say Jesus, and Christ, and oh, my God! Just throw out all these blasphemies toward the names of God. That's all fine and dandy. Then, they'll turn around and label words that the bible uses as cuss words.	They'll take biblical terms and say, "That's a bad word. That's a cuss word." Honestly, I think the devil's behind it because people will then feel that the bible is just this profane book, or the bible is just so uncouth, or rough because we're taught in our whole lives that hell is a bad word. Right? We're taught in our whole lives that damn is a bad word. That bastard is a bad word. These are biblical terms that God uses. Look what the bible says in first Timothy 6:3. "If any man teach otherwise and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness. He is proud knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof cometh envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings." What does the bible say? God's words are wholesome words. The bible says every word of God is pure. He's a shield unto them that put their trust in him.	They sit there and take biblical words and say those are bad words. Those are cuss words. Those are inappropriate words. Words like piss, bastard, hell, damn. Everybody's like, "Pastor Anderson's got Tourette syndrome. No I'm talking about biblical terms that we should use. I'm not going to stop using these words because Tipper Gore said no, because these words are biblical words. Look, I'm glad that the bible uses some strong language sometimes to make some strong points. It's not like this weak, watered down versions of the bible that soften everything up. No, God speaks with some strong language. There's nothing wrong with that. I'll tell you what's wrong; blaspheming Jesus, blaspheming God. They'll bleep out all the biblical cuss words and then they'll include a bunch of blasphemies against Jesus and everything else. It's hypocrisy my friend. What are you going to believe? The world's morality? The new morality or go with God's standard and God's law? Let that be the determination. Not only that, go to Ephesians chapter 4.	Here's another difference between God's law and the new morality. See according to the new morality in America, all negative emotions are pretty much wrong. Basically here's what they'll tell you. Hatred, always wrong. Fear, always wrong. They'll say anger, always wrong. Anytime you see anybody getting angry, they'll say, "Oh, that's bad. That's wrong. Don't ever get angry. Anger is wrong." Oh man, you're not supposed to ever hate anyone for any reason. Oh man, you know fear that's bad. You're preaching on hell? You're teaching fear. That's wrong. That's bad." According to the world, fear, anger, hatred are always wrong. That's part of their new morality. Everything's just got to be positive all the times. Isn't that part of the new morality in America today? It's that what God's word teaches.	Look what the bible says in Ephesians chapter 4 verse 26. The bible says, "Be ye angry, and sin not." Now if anger is a sin, how is that even possible? If anger is a sin, then how can I be angry and sin not? That would be like saying, "Go outside without leaving this building." It wouldn't make any sense, would it? No. It says, "Be angry and sin not." How do I do that? It says, "Let not the sun go down on your wrath." There is a time to be angry for a righteous cause. Like the bible says in Matthew 5:22. "It's a sin to be angry with your brother without a cause" the bible says. Of course, all the new versions take out without cause and just say, "Oh, it's just a sin to be angry with your brother. No, no, no. It's a sin to be angry with them without a cause. When we look at the life of Jesus, there were times when he was angry.	In Mark chapter 3 he was going to heal a man on a Sabbath day. He had a withered hand in the synagogue. His hand was withered up. When he asked them whether it was lawful to heal on the Sabbath day, it says that Jesus looked upon them all with anger. He had anger that they would be so heartless. That they didn't want this guy's hand to be healed. That made Jesus mad. What about when Jesus made a whip of cords and went in to the temple and drove out the money changers. Jesus flipped over the tables and dumped out the money. What about the fact that God is angry with the wicked every day. Today we're taught, no anger is wrong. Don't ever get angry. Then a lot of people bottled up so much anger, they have worse problems, all right? You have to let out your anger a little bit. Some anger is healthy. Now, I will say this. Most of the time, our anger is misplaced. Probably the vast majority of times that Christians are angry, they're usually sinning because there are so many times that we're not supposed to be angry. 	We're not supposed to be quick to anger. We're not supposed to be angry over dumb things that don't matter. There is a time and a place when anger is righteous. That's why the bible says, "Be ye angry and sin not. Let not the sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to the devil." You jump down to verse 31 it says, "Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put away from you with all malice; and be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you." This is not a contradiction. Here's what he's saying. Get angry when there is a righteous cause to be angry. Then he says to put off anger when you're done. Don't let the sun go down on your wrath. Put off anger and he says, "Be kind and tenderhearted forgiving one another. Sometimes there's an appropriate time to get angry. When you're done being angry, then you forgive and you move on. You don't just harbor that anger and become bitter. You see the difference?	Is anger just in general wrong? No. It becomes a sin when you hang on to it and become bitter and dwell on it, and go from day to day being angry. That's a sin. They say, "Oh hatred, it's all wrong." The bible says in Ecclesiastes 3:8. "There's a time to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a time of peace." They say, "All fear is bad. Don't scare people." Ecclesiastes 12:13 says, "Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter. Fear God, and keep his commandments for this is the whole duty of man." All throughout the bible, it says over, and over, again. Fear the Lord, fear God, fear the Lord. People will sometimes try to say, "Well, fear doesn't really mean fear. They'll say fear there just means respect." Okay. Why did it say fear and trembling? Serve the Lord with fear and rejoice with trembling. With fear and trembling as the servants of Christ, the bible says. Over and over again, it couples fear with trembling. You don't just tremble out of respect. You tremble because you're scared.	Now the bible teaches that we should not fear anyone except God. God has not given us the spirit of fear but the power, and of love, and of a sound mind. Hundreds of times he says that fearing God is a good thing. Fearing man is not good. Fearing Satan is not good. We're told over and over again to fear God. If we preach on hell to put the fear of God into people, we're doing right. The bible says, "Some save with fear, pulling them out of the fire; hating even the garments spotted by the flesh. We just destroyed the new morality in that verse. We got fear. We got hating, anger. It's all there. No. Obi-Wan taught us that this is the path to the dark side. Fear is the path to the dark side. "Hey, Luke use the force. Don't use anger." See this is how the devil has brainwashed us, right? If we have any fear, anger, hatred we're going to become Darth Vader or something and go to the dark side. This is what the world is telling us today. It comes from the teachings of Buddhism. That's all Star Wars is basically, a repackaged Buddhism. People take it real seriously. They watch Star Wars and they think it's real. 	I got a book in them. A big thick book. Not a booklet, a book. It was written by some guy and he send me this book. He's like, "You need to read this book Pastor Anderson." It was a book about how God has spoken to us through the bible, the Koran, and Star Wars. They weren't kidding. He has shown us how they're all 3 books, the bible, the Koran, and Star Wars; they're all teaching the same morality. When you George Lucas made Star Wars, he thought he was just making fiction. In reality, he was inspired by God. That's what this book said. It said that Jedi is short for Jesus disciple. That's what it said. He said, "He was explaining the force and all that." Actually what it is, is just borrowed from Eastern mysticism. How many things of our new morality in America are not based on the bible, they're based on Star Wars. You can laugh at that. Honestly, you know it's true that this is what people think today. You know that most people out there will say, "Oh yeah, hatred is the dark side. Hatred, fear, anger, these are all bad things. We need to breathe in all the positivity. Then breathe out all the anger and fear. This is our culture today because people are quoting Gandhi more than they're quoting Jesus. 	Love the sinner hate the sin, quote from Gandhi. Right? That's their new morality. They quote Gandhi. They're quoting Star Wars. They're quoting Buddha. They think that this is somehow righteous when the bible has a completely different morality. The God of the bible, he has anger. He has hatred. He says you better be afraid of me. I'm God. I'm the Lord. Fear me. They don't believe that. You see, there's a big difference between the new morality and God's word. We are influenced by eastern mysticism which is nothing more than Satanism. Okay? The God's that the Hindus worshiped are devils. All these serpents, and flames, and half-male, half-female gods that they worships; it's of the devil. Buddhism, this thing of emptying out your mind. Empty yourself Luke and let the force flow through you. You sit there and meditate and basically they're dealing with unclean spirits because they go into these meditative trance-like states whether it's Zen Buddhism, or yoga, or whatever. They're basically inviting in the unclean spirits. That's why they have these enlightening experiences, out of body and all that stuff. 	We need to watch out and not let this stuff tell us what's right and wrong. Not let the world tell us what's right and wrong. We need to dig into the scriptures and forgot what's right. Here's another difference between the new morality and God's word. We're living in a day where killing your own dog is a felony. I mean remember Old Yeller? That's a felony now. Here's the thing. Killing your unborn child is fine. That's the new morality in America. You can't kill your dog but you can kill your unborn child. That's the new morality. Lifting up animals to the level of people, calling them children, and babies and all these different things.	Then what about this new morality? The bible say be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth. Here's the new morality. If you have children you're being irresponsible. You just used up my carbon credits buddy. Seriously, this isn't as much in America today. It's coming. In Europe, this is the mentality. If you travel to Europe with a family like mine, you get dirty looks everywhere you go. People are just, "How dare you overpopulating? You're single-handedly overpopulating the earth Pastor Anderson." Are you nuts? Because they've been brainwashed with this depopulation agenda, mother Earth, and we need to reduce the population to 500 million and all this stuff. God's morality says, "Be fruitful, multiply. Children are inherited to the Lord. The fruit of the womb is his reward. Happy is the man that has his quiver full of them." The world says, "Shame on you for being so irresponsible by having all these children." You're supposed to adopt those children once we take them away from a crackhead. What are you doing? You're not supposed to produce children yourselves. You're supposed to buy them from us and then we can make sure that you never spank them or teach them the bible.	Anyway, the new morality lifts animals above humans. The new morality wants to control the population and depopulate and be irresponsible about having children. God's morality says, "Hey, enjoy your wife. Be fruitful and multiply. Children are a blessing. My God shall supply all your need according to his riches and glory by Christ Jesus." The new morality says drinking alcohol is fine. Drinking alcohol is fine but drugs are evil. That's the new morality. No. The bible condemns both when it says be sober. Be sober. You're not sober when you're drunk. You're not sober when you're smoking pot. The bible says be sober. The world says, "Well, drugs are wrong because we said so but alcohol is fine." It's hypocritical and inconsistent. 	The bible teaches that we should spank our children. The bibles says, "He that spareth his rod hateth his son; but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes." The bible says, "Withhold not correction from the child for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not die. Thou shall beat him with a rod it shall deliver his soul from hell. The world says, "Positive reinforcement and that if you spank, you're a bad parent." Look how God's law and the new morality are diametrically opposed. New morality says if you spank your children, you're abusive. You spank your children, you're a bad parent. God's law says you hate your child if you don't spank them. He says you're a terrible parent if you don't spank. These 2 things are very different. Who do we listen to? The new morality or God's law?	Not only that but today, many people with child-rearing have even taken it a step further to not just saying don't spank your children. Now to the point where they'll say don't even tell them no. Don't even rebuke them. Basically it's just a positive only child rearing. This thing of attachment parenting, have you heard of this? Isn't that the one [inaudible 00:35:29]. Attachment parenting where it's just it's all positive and cuddling. You never tell them that it was bad what they did. You just tell them like, "Let's find a better way to do that?" "I think there's a better way." You just distract them. "Well here, why don't we just put the chainsaw down because over here are some fun toys." It's just all about just distracting them, and positive reinforcement, and praising them. That's garbage. You know what? It only works for people who have 1 kid, maybe 2, because if you had 8 kids and try to go by this new morality, this attachment parenting, they'd kill you. Your children would literally, there's more of them. They'd team up on you and tie you up and kill you because these kids are so evil. That are raised where they're never taught right and wrong. Everything's fine. They're always the brattiest, most unhappy, disrespectful children. 	It's funny if our parenting is still bad, if spanking your children is so bad, how come I take my 8 children out in public and get compliments every single time on how well behaved the children are? I'm thinking to myself, [inaudible 00:36:39] good today. This is a bad day for them. The worldly people are like, "Oh wow! You're kids are really obedient." I'm like, "What are you talking about? Are you nuts? That's because they're used to their little brat at home. That's swinging from the chandelier. You know what I mean and won't listen to anything and is basically telling their parents to go jump in the lake. "Now, you're making mommy sad when you do that. Remember, sadness is going to lead me to the dark side. All right?" This is the world that we're living in today. Not only that, go to Genesis chapter 4 because here's another teaching of the new morality. 	The new morality says, "Hey, respect all religions. Respect all views. Don't judge or condemn anyone for any reason. Just respect everyone for all reasons." Let's see what the bible says about that because Cain is one who is symbolic in the bible of a false prophet. In second Peter chapter 2, when false prophets are being described he says, "Woe unto them because they've gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and are perished in the gainsaying of Korah." According to the bible, Cain, Balaam, and Korah are basically prototypes for the false prophets of the New Testament. He said these guys symbolized what false prophets are about. When we look at Cain, we see in verse number 3 it says, "In process of time it came to pass that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the LORD. Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof. And the LORD had respect unto Abel and to his offering; but unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect." It says "Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell." 	The bible is not saying let's respect everyone. Let's respect all views. Let's respect all religions. No. It says, "Look when you disobey God, and you bring the wrong offering, when you make a false religion and your false prophet, God doesn't have respect for you." There's no respect for you or for your religion. I don't respect Islam. I don't respect Muhammad. I don't respect Buddhism. I don't respect any of these things. Why? They're false. They're lies. Why would I respect lies? The new morality says, "Well, we need to respect all views. Respect all religion." [inaudible 00:39:09] The bible doesn't say that. The bible says, "Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness but rather reprove them." The bible says that the preacher should reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine. Not to just be tolerant of any and all faiths, and teachings, and religions. No. In the new morality, no one can ever judge, rebuke, or condemn anyone or anything. You know in America today that judge not is the mantra that is repeated over, and over, and over again. Judge not, judge not, judge not.	Then the world, they have all their judges. It's okay for the government to judge but a religious leader can't judge. Dad can't judge. Mom can't judge. The pastor can't judge. "Oh, but the government can judge." Like they're the only authority anymore. That's the new morality friend. In the new morality, the government is god. Whatever is legal, is right. Whatever is illegal is wrong. That's the new morality in America today. Not only that but in the new morality, there are no gender roles. Men and women are all the same in the new morality. See in the bible, wives are supposed to obey their husbands. In the new morality that's an abomination. That's called abuse in the new morality. If you have a biblical marriage where the wife is in her proper role and the husband is in his proper role, that an abusive marriage. 	Literally I remember even 13, 14 years ago, being at the hospital when my wife was pregnant with Solomon and they had signs out. This is how to know you're in an abusive relationship. It was like, "Wait a minute. This is describing my marriage." It's like your husband, he thinks he's the boss. He tells you not to be friends with other men. I'm like, "What? That's marriage. What do you mean? Hello." See what I'm saying about how that which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of the Lord. You see how there are those who call good, evil; and evil, good. They put sweet for bitter, bitter for sweet. Light for darkness, darkness for light. Here's what I'm trying to get across with this sermon because I could just go on, and on, and have all the different examples. We talked about fornication. We talked about cussing. We talked about fear, hatred, and anger. We talked about animal rights, population control, alcohol, drugs, child-rearing, respecting all views. Don't ever condemn anyone, gender. We could go on and on because there are just an infinite number of differences. Right?	Here's the point that I'm trying to get across in this sermon. The point is that when we take a stand for what is right and what is wrong, it better come from the bible. Fear God and keep his commandments. This is the whole duty of man. That's it. Don't let the new morality come in and tell you what's right and wrong. We need to base what we believe on the bible. It's great to have strong views about what's right and what's wrong. If you're going to lead your family, if you're going to lead you children, if you're going to lead a church, you better know what's right and what's wrong so that you can teach people how God wants us to live. You have to make sure that you're not just regurgitating stuff that you saw on the movie. Something that you saw on TV. Something that you heard in school. We need to make sure that this new morality does not become our morality. This needs to be our morality "the bible, God's work" because the new morality is very different on all of these subjects. It's very different than what God's word.	That's why if we follow God's word, the bible says it will be a peculiar people because we're living differently than the people around us. The people around us they think, "Well, if I protect the environment and have no kids, affirm every sodomite that I can get near, then basically I'm a wonderful person." Especially, I didn't have this in my sermon. According to new morality just making a lot of money, that's success. God says he's chosen the poor of this world. Rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom which he had promised to them that love him. According to the bible gain is not godliness. According to the world, that's success. We need to make sure to live our lives according to the bible and not according to the course of this world. In America today there's a big difference.	Let's bow our heads and have a word of prayer. Father, we thank you so much for your word Lord. We just pray that you would just help us to study Lord our bibles and read, and read, and read, and figure out what is right and what is wrong in every situation by studying the scriptures daily Lord; and not just going along with what society has told us. In Jesus name we pray, amen.
 
 
