


Physicians of No Value
Video
April 7, 2009

?¦here tonight, Father, and I thank you forthose that have been with us for some time and have been faithful to this church and love this church as much as I love this church.  And, Father, I just pray that you would please bless the sermon tonight and use it in the lives of those that are here. Give us wisdom, dear God. The Bible says wisdom is the principal thing. And so I just pray that you would help us to get wisdom and to understand the deep things of the Bible.  And in Jesus?? name I pray, Amen.
Now a little bit of an unusual sermon tonight, but in Job chapter 13 verse four I want to focus on that as our text verse.  The Bible says, ??But ye are forgers of lies, ye are all physicians of no value.??[1]  That is the title of my sermon tonight, ??Physicians of no value.??
Now look, if you would, at Matthew chapter nine and I am going to philosophize with you a little bit. We are going to come back to Job chapter 12.  But look at Matthew chapter nine and verse number 12.
Now in the book of Job he uses a metaphor about the men that are speaking to him, the three men that have come to comfort him, so to speak, that are actually railing on him and blaming him for all of his problems. He refers to them as liars and he says, ??You are a liar.?? And he says, ??You are liars kind of like physicians of no value.  That is what good you are.??
Well, look, if you would, at Matthew chapter nine. I am going to preach to you tonight about physicians of no value. 
Now, understand, first of all, before I get into the sermon what the word ??physician?? means. In the Bible the word ??doctor?? is not used in the sense of a medical professional. The word ??doctor?? in the Bible is used three times and it is referring to a scholar, much like someone goes to a university. They can earn a bachelor??s, a master??s or a doctorate.  That is the use of the Bible word ??doctor.?? It is used three times in that way.  ??Doctors of the law,?? referring to lawyers, ??doctors of the Bible,?? Bible scholars who have attained the title of being a doctor. 
But when the Bible wants to talk about what we know of as a doctor, like a medical professional, the Bible uses the word ??physician.?? 
Now look at Matthew chapter nine verse 12.  And let??s see what Jesus Christ has to say about physicians, about doctors.  The Bible says in Matthew 9:12, ??But when Jesus heard that, he said unto them, They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick.??[2]
Now that statement is repeated three times by Jesus in the gospels. It is stated in the Bible three times that Jesus said, ??They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick.??[3]
Now before I get into the sermon I don??t want you to think that I am one of these people that says, ??Don??t ever go to the doctor.??  You know, it is...  You know there are actually some religions that teach it is a sin to ever go to the doctor.  Now, I don??t agree with that at all. That??s not true. 
Now according to this verse is that true?  No, because Jesus clearly said they that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick. So there is a person who is sick who does need to go to a doctor.  So I am not saying that all doctors and all medicines are wrong and it is a sin and just leave it in God??s hands and just call 1-888-Benny Hinn and put your hand on the screen and he is going to heal you.  That is not what I am talking about at all. 
He will slap you in the forehead and you will fall out and you might feel a little tingle for a minute. But he is a physician of no value if anything. 
But the point is that Jesus is saying here...don??t miss what he is saying.
You say, ??Oh, well, he is just talking about repentance and sinners...??
No, don??t miss what he is saying.  Don??t ever miss the primary application of what Jesus is saying. Yes, he is using it as a metaphor, but he is also making a very plain statement that says, ??They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick.??[4] 
So here is what we learn.  If you are healthy, if you are whole, if you are not sick do you need the doctor according to the Bible?  No.  If you are sick and have a serious problem do you need the doctor?  Yes, you may need the doctor.
Now that is what I want you to understand, first of all, before I get into the sermon. 
Now, number one, point number one, don??t go to the doctor unless you have to.  And this is all I am...I am going to show you all this in the Bible. Don??t go to the doctor unless you have to go to the doctor.
I have not been to the doctor in years.  I think I am going on about three years now since I have been to the doctor.  Praise the Lord. You know, I went to the doctor three years ago because I got a really bad bronchial infection, you know, bronchitis.  I think you had that recently. I had bronchitis and I had to...and I struggled with it for like a month just trying to get over it.  It was not going anywhere, you know, so I had to go and get the antibiotics and get over that. 


There is a time when you are forced to go to the doctor. But let me tell you something, going to the doctor is not a positive thing.  Going to the doctor is not the end all, be all.  Going to the doctor can actually be a negative thing.  Did you know that? I am going to show you that in the Bible a little bit further. But going to the doctor is a negative thing. You should only use the doctor as a last resort. This is just wisdom from the Bible.
He says, ??If you are whole, if you can handle it, don??t go to the doctor.??  Don??t got to the doctor [?].
You say, ??I have health insurance.  It??s free.??
Hey, it is not even good for you to go to the doctor when you are whole, when you are not sick.
Now, look, if you would, at Job 12:3 back where we started the sermon.  Job chapter 12 is where we started the sermon and I am going to show you something.
While you are turning there let me tell you this. There are positive mentions of doctors in the Bible like, for example, in Colossians 4:14 the Bible talks about, ??Luke, the beloved physician.??[5]  Did you know that he man who wrote the book of Luke was actually a physician by trade. The man who wrote Luke, I am talking about the man who wrote the gospel of Luke, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, actually was a physician by trade and the Bible calls him ??the beloved physician.??[6]  There is nothing wrong with being a physician. There is nothing wrong with doctors. But you just have to understand what the Bible teaches about this. 
Now look at Job chapter 12 where we started reading and I will show you a little why I was reading here.  Look at verse number three.  The Bible says here...I like this. He makes kind of a smart aleck remark in verse number two. Did you notice that?  ??No doubt but ye are the people.??[7]   I mean, ??you are just the [?],?? is what he is saying.  ??[You] are the people, and wisdom shall die with you.??[8]  I mean, you just know it all, don??t you? 
But he says, ??But I have understanding as well as you; I am not inferior to you: yea, who knoweth not such things as these???[9]
Now, first of all, I want to tell you this that most of the things that the doctor knows you already know, just so you know, ok.  I have been to the doctor so many times...I remember going to the doctor growing up. My mom used to take me to the doctor just at the drop of a hat. I mean if something was...it was just like, ??Let??s go to the doctor. Let??s check it out.??
And I would go there and I remember telling my mom I said, ??I tired of going to the doctor. You know, I don??t even want to the doctor anymore because,?? I said, ??every time I go there they just tell me what I already knew. They just tell me something that I already knew about. They don??t do anything. They have never done anything.??
I mean at this point I had never had antibiotics until I was like 18, but I had been to the doctor like 15 times and they just didn??t do anything. 
??Oh, let it run its course. Eat some chicken soup.??
You know, I??m thinking...
And so nine times out of 10 do you think that the doctor some special knowledge beam that comes down from him from heaven that tells him something that you don??t know?  He has the same books that you can read yourself.  He has the same internet that you can look at yourself. He has the same resources you can look at.
Look, anybody knows half the things that you are going to hear from the doctor. Anybody can dream it up themselves.  But look, if you would, at verse number six.  The Bible says, ??The tabernacles of robbers prosper.??[10]  We are going to get to that in a minute, the robbers. And it says in verse number six, ??And they that provoke God are secure; into whose hand God bringeth abundantly.??[11]
Verse seven:
But ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the fowls of the air, and they shall tell thee:  Or speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee: and the fishes of the sea shall declare unto thee.  Who knoweth not in all these that the hand of the LORD hath wrought this?[12]
Now think about this for a moment as we get into the sermon.  Does the medical world in 2007, does the modern science??falsely so called??believe that God created this world perfect and that on the sixth day God looked at everything that he had made and behold, it was very good?  Is that what the doctor believes when you go to the doctor?  No. The medical world is based on the assumption that there is no God.  It is based on a science book that teaches evolution, that the nature and that God??s creation is not perfect, but that it needs our help constantly.  We have to constantly be improving on God??s creation. We have to constantly be stepping in to make sure it doesn??t mess up because there is no creator, there is no God.  It is just happening around us.
Now, God says here, ??Listen, physician of no value. Listen, doctor who doesn??t believe in God.  Listen, doctor who thinks that you know everything, you think you are the people and you think wisdom is going to die with you??? He says, ??You are going to have something to learn by asking even the beasts of the field could teach you a thing or two about medicine.?? 
He says, ??Even the fishes could declare to you that the hand of God has created all these things, that God knows more than you do, that God??s creation is superior to your creation and to your methods.??
Now look, if you would, at verse number nine again. We saw...
Who knoweth not in all these that the hand of the LORD hath wrought this?  In whose hand is the soul of every living thing, and the breath of all mankind.  Doth not the ear try words? and the mouth taste his meat? 
With the ancient...[13]
This is referring to God.
With the ancient is wisdom; and in length of days understanding.  With him is wisdom and strength, he hath counsel and understanding.[14]
Now here we see another problem with the philosophy of the medical world.  And we are going to get into all the specific examples, don??t worry. You are in Faithful Word Baptist Church. So you are going to hear it all. But the first point I want to make is just to show you that, number one, don??t go to the doctor unless you have to go to the doctor as a last resort.  Number two, the medical world is based on an assumption that there is no God and that God??s creation is not perfect and that there is nothing that we can learn from the animal world and the natural world.  But, number three, we see here that God??s philosophy is that things that are older, people that are older, you know, information that is older, he says, there is wisdom there. There is wisdom in the Bible. There is wisdom in speaking to an old man. The young person does not know it all.  Ask the old man.  Get to the old man and ask him a thing for two and you could learn something.
Now, what does the medical world believe? The exact opposite.  Go to school and they will teach you that, ??Oh, back then people were just nuts. I mean they didn??t know any thing about medicines. Boy, back then people were just idiots.?? And they will use an example of maybe, you know, using leeches, you know, like they did. And they did do stupid things like that. But I could show you 500 stupid things that they do right now that is just as weird as putting leeches on somebody. And so they always point to it and say, ??We know everything right now. The past, they knew nothing. The people in Bible days, totally ignorant.??
Well, then why were people in the Bible days living to be 120 years old?  Tell me that. Why was Moses 123 years old as he died if he was so medically stupid. 
Well, he happened to have written the book of Leviticus. Obviously it was God that was using him to write it which talks all about sanitation, which talks all about health, which talks about disease control, which talks about proper diet, which talks about all the things that could help you lead a healthy life. But what did he know anyway?  He didn??t have the modern science marvels that we just can??t live without today, the modern medicine that, good night, what we even do without the doctor today? What would we do? He is our Lord and Savior. 


But that is later in the message.  We will get to that.  But look at what it says here in verse number two of chapter 13.  So we saw some of the fundamental errors with modern thinking about medicine.  Number one, the doctor is not for prevention. The doctor is for cure according to the Bible. The doctor is not for preventative maintenance.  Number two, the doctor doesn??t believe in God. That is his biggest problem.  And, number three, the doctor doesn??t understand that he could learn something from people of the past. He thinks that the cutting edge new thing that just came out last year is the end all, be all. This is it. We have arrived.
But look at verse number two of chapter 13.  ??What ye know, the same do I know also.??[15]  Well, that is what I would like to say to a lot of doctors that I have been to.
I am not inferior unto you.  Surely I would speak to the Almighty, and I desire to reason with God.  But ye are forgers of lies, ye are all physicians of no value.[16]
You see, did you know that you can open your Bible and get medical advice from the Bible?  Did you know that?  Did you know that you can get dietary health advice from the Bible?  I preached a whole sermon on proper diet. I left out half my sermon for sake of time and I preached many things that the Bible teaches about eating what is good food to eat, what is not good food to eat.  And a lot of people think so many misconceptions about what good food.  You know, people say meat is bad for you.  Show me that in the Bible God had the priests eating meat every day. And I proved that to you. They ate beef every day. Hallelujah. Beef is what is for dinner. And in the book of Leviticus it is very clear.
And I don??t have time to re preach that sermon, but go through.
And a lot of people??s misconceptions about what is healthy, what is not. Hey, butter is healthy.  Praise God. It is in the Bible.  Read the Bible.
And I went through the whole sermon and I showed the Bible??s clear teaching about healthy foods, what is healthy, what is not.  And the main premise of the sermon was that everything that God made is good. What is really making people obese and what is really hurting people is the artificial, you know, the chemical, what God has not made, what has been made in the laboratory. And, well, get that sermon if you haven??t heard that one. That is an important sermon just not really a sin or a right or wrong issue, but it is just going to help you. That is the purpose of the sermon. That is the purpose of the sermon tonight, by the way, is to help you.
But the last thing to realize here in this introductory statements is that God almighty knows more about medicine and about health than the doctor does. 


You say, ??Well, the Bible doesn??t really talk about things like that.?? 
This book talks about everything, everything.
You say, ??Well, what about this???
Yes. Yes, it does.  Yes, it does talk about it because the Bible talks about everything.  And I get so tired of people saying, ??Well, the Bible doesn??t really talk about that.??
Have you memorized the whole Bible?  You are going to tell me...oh, you know everything that the Bible talks about. You know like through the whole Bible because you are telling me the Bible never mentions so and so.  Really? Wow. You must have it memorized.
The Bible mentions everything.  I have never found a subject where if I didn??t just study a little further, you know, I have thought about a subject, well, what does God say about that?  And at first I couldn??t find it.  I kept looking. I kept looking.  Always you are going to find it. Always.  You have to work. You have to search the Scriptures.  Every single subject is covered in the Bible.
Now why wouldn??t this subject be covered in the Bible?  It has got to be. Everything is covered in the Bible.
You say, ??Oh, they didn??t have the modern technology then.??
Hey, God has more technology, God knows more science, God knows more mathematics than any doctor in this world can shake a stick at and so I would put God??s knowledge in the holy Bible next to what the world says any day of the week on any subject, any matter, anything.


And I wish that you would understand that because that will help you understand the Bible in a lot of different areas, if you realize this statement, I have made this statement many times.  The Bible has everything I need to know about every subject in the world.  I??ll stand by that statement. I love that statement because it is the truth.  And it revolutionizes my understanding of the Bible when I realize that. 
If I wanted to know about a subject I just look at it through the Bible.  If I want to know about booze, want to know about alcohol, I just look through the Bible. If I want to know about fill in the blank. I look to it in the Bible. 
But let me show you one example of what I am talking about.  I have got this big stack of stuff. I have got like 30 pages of stuff. I am not going to go through all of it for sake of time. But listen to this. This is the breaking news from yesterday.
The governor in Texas...Now remember our first premise. And so, you know, we are comparing Scripture with what we see here. Remember our first premise?  ??They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick.??[17]  Ok, that is what we believe about doctors because that is what the Bible says.


Well, listen to this. ??Texas governor orders anti cancer vaccine.?? Now that sounds pretty good, you know, at first, if you are just the average Joe reading that.  But the news is always slanted. This is from the Associated Press.  The news is always going to be slanted.  So when you read the headline, always deceptive because this is what it is. It is not an anti cancer vaccine. Let me read on. 
??Some conservatives,?? this is the first line of the Associated Press article. And, by the way, the Associated Press is a major...in case you don??t know, this is a major news organization. That??s what...I think it is the biggest one in the whole nation. 
??Some conservatives and parents?? rights groups worry that requiring girls to get vaccinated against the you know what transmitted virus that causes cervical cancer...?? 
So what is it really about?  It is not about the cancer at all, is it?  It is about an STD, ok. 
??Some conservatives and parents?? rights groups worry that requiring girls to get vaccinated against the you know how transmitted virus that causes cervical cancer would condone premarital you know what and interfere with the way that they raise their children.  By using an executive order that bypassed the legislature?¦??
Are you listen to this?  The governor of Texas just bypasses all the lawmaking organization. He bypasses the legislature.
??Republican governor Rick Perry, himself a conservative,?? yeah, right. He doesn??t even know what conservative is.  ??...on Friday avoided such making Texas the first state to mandate that school girls get vaccinated against the virus.  Beginning in September 2008 girls entering the sixth grade...?? Did you hear that?  ??...the sixth grade will have to receive Gardasil, Merck and company...?? That is the manufacturer of this vaccine, ??Gardasil, Merch and Company??s new vaccine against strains of the human papillomavirus, or HPV.??


Now think about this. We are going to see the correlation in a little bit.  What does HPV remind you of? Doesn??t that sound kind of like HIV, ok?  But listen. We are going to get to that correlation in a little bit. 
??Perry also directed state health authorities to make the vaccine available free to girls ages nine to 18 who are uninsured or whose insurance does not cover vaccines.??
So here is what he is saying.  He just, like Adolf Hitler, like Chancellor Adolf Hitler back in the 1930s he is just making executive orders. He doesn??t care what the congress of Texas says.  He doesn??t care...I mean the guy is a stinking fascist.  The guy is Adolf Hitler.  He doesn??t care what the law makers say. He just says, ??I am going to make an executive order, thus saith the Lord, thus saith Governor Rick Perry.?? He says, ??Every school girl must be vaccinated when she goes into the sixth grade for an STD.?? And this is the first line of the...  I don??t know if you caught the first line that I read.  ??Many parents and conservative activists are saying, ??We feel like you are giving the green light to a sixth grader that she is entering the age of, you know, promiscuity, that now she can become active in that way.????
Can you imagine that?  A sixth grader.  Yes, you are giving her the green light when you say, ??Well, here, well, you know, we know you might do it. I mean, we are preaching against it. We are teaching against it.  But we know you are probably going to do it anyway and you might pick up this disease and so just across the board every single girl entering the sixth grade we are going to give them this vaccine to prevent them from getting this STD.??
You are giving them the green light, my friend. You are telling them, ??Well, we know you are going to do it anyway, so just...you know, hint, hint, wink, wink, nod, nod.  Don??t do it. But if you do, you know, here, let me shoot you up with this in case you get the disease.??
Is that wicked? Is that wicked as hell or is it just me?
And why does he feel like he has the right to make laws and bypass the United States?? methods of doing things of a republican form of government and just think that he has the right to be a dictator in Texas and just say, ??I am making the laws. I say what we do.??
Well, let??s read on.  ??The HPV vaccine provides us with an incredible opportunity,?? this is what the government says, ??to effectively target and prevent cervical cancer.  Opponents say Perry should have let the legislature decide whether to impose a mandate.??
Or how about don??t mandate anything because what is it your business what people do...?  You know, it is none of your stinking business.
????He??s circumventing the will of the people,?? said Dawn Richardson, president of Parents Requesting Open Vaccine Education, a citizens group that fought for the right to opt out of other vaccine requirements.??
You know, at least some people are fighting to say, ??Can you, at least, like fill out some paperwork and maybe just say I don??t want my sixth grade daughter getting this.  You know, she doesn??t need this.??
And she said, ??There??s no emergency except in the boardrooms of Merck,?? that??s the company who made the vaccine, ??where this is failing to gain the support that they had expected.??
Here is what it is.  They spent billions of dollars to produce this vaccine for HPV and when they spent all that money, they put it out on the market and it wasn??t really that popular. Nobody is really getting it, right?  So listen to this.
????The executive order is effective until Perry or a successor changes it, and the Legislature has no authority to repeal it,?? said Perry spokeswoman Krista Moody.??
I mean they can??t even get like a two-thirds majority to repeal it, just no chance to repeal it.


Now an executive order is supposed to be in like a national emergency or something.  He is just using it. ??Vaccinate these girls against an STD a year and a half from now.?? 
I mean you don??t think it could have gone through the process in the next year and a half? This is America. This is the United States. This is where we live. 
??Why do you preach like this, pastor Anderson???
Who else is going to preach like this?  Who else is saying this?  Somebody has got to point these people out.
??Merck could generate,?? this is the company Merck, ??...could generate billions if Gardasil at $360,?? per shot to get shooted up with this vaccine, ??were made mandatory across the country. Most insurance companies now cover the vaccine which has been shown to have no serious side effects.??
But listen to this.  ??Perry,?? this is the governor, ??Perry has ties to Merck,?? yeah, ok.  Listen to this, ??...and Women in Government,?? which is another organization promoting it. ??One of the drug companies three lobbyists in Texas is Mike Toomey, Perry??s former chief of staff, his current chief of staff??s mother in law, Texas Republican state representative Diane White Delisi is a state director for their lobby group, Women in Government. The governor also receives $6000 from Merck??s political action committee during his reelection campaign.??
Don??t they put these people in jail for this stuff?  I mean here he is the governor. He got 6000 bucks from this drug company and then all this...just coincidentally he just makes it mandatory.  I mean, this is unprecedented in the history of the United States.  Is that unbelievable? It has just happened yesterday. This is yesterday.
And I am not going to go through that [?].
And they did it in two places. One was the state of Texas, one was Washington, DC.  This is what an editorial writer in the Washington Post Washington, DC newspaper said, ??Let's say you have an 11-year-old daughter in D.C. public schools. She'll be a sixth-grader next year. You are reminded that she must be immunized before she will be allowed to return to school. She'll need the usual vaccinations against measles, rubella and chickenpox. But this time, there's another disease on the list, one that the D.C. government is strongly urging your daughter be immunized against: the human papillomavirus, or HPV, which is an STD.  After all, your daughter is 11 and probably black, so the assumption is she'll be having unprotected you know what in no time -- but don't take offense.??
This is what the guy is saying, because Washington, DC is, you know, predominantly black. 


And it says, ??Surely the HPV Vaccination Reporting Act of 2007, which was introduced before the DC Council yesterday, is for her own good.?? He is mocking. You know, he is making light of this. This is an editorial writer for the Washington Post.  ??HPV causes cervical cancer in about 10,000 women in the United States each year and kills about 3,700. The rate of the disease in the country is 8.8 per 100,000 females.??
So 8.8 in 100,000, that is not that many to be honest with you. 8.8, in 100,000 get cervical cancer for whatever reason, not even necessarily from this particular virus, ok.  8.8 in 100,000 and only about, I believe...let me just look at these numbers real quick, I believe about only one third of those will even die, so maybe three in 100,000.  So let??s just vaccinate every 11 year old and give here the green light.
??Go ahead, honey, and shack up and do whatever.??
I mean it is ridiculous.
??Because HPV is not casually transmissible, they argue there is less compelling rationale for requiring protection against it than against measles or pertussis.??  You know, which you can get by somebody coughing on you.  ??...in the absence of potential harm to a third party, such laws may be considered unacceptably paternalistic.??
??Dad, thank you, dad. Thank you, daddy Perry, for giving us...for taking care of my kids and shooting them up with whatever you want,?? paternalistic.
??Oh please. If the parents were doing their jobs, then there would be no need for a paternalistic government. Isn't that right, DC? Some of your elected officials certainly seem to think so.  Requiring HPV vaccination by law will almost certainly achieve more widespread protection against the disease than will policies that rely exclusively on persuasion and education. The only way to ensure that as many girls as possible receive the HPV vaccine is to require it before they enter middle school.??  Because that is where it is all going to start, right in middle school. 
Well, that is what you are telling them, anyway. That is what you are teaching them by giving them the vaccine at sixth grade.  And on and on.


And he goes on to talk about the history of vaccines and birth control methods being targeted at blacks, you know, just the racism behind this whole thing which there is a lot of racism behind it. And so on and on. 
You say, ??Pastor Anderson, what do you think about vaccines???
Well, by the way. Remember how I told you HPV how it kind of reminds you of something else, HIV?  This is what they are doing. They psyching you up for a mandatory HIV vaccine that is going to be coming out in the next few years. They are getting you used to it. 
Because [?] HPV, HIV, whatever. You know, they are getting you psyched up for it.
And, by the way AIDS is a judgment of God on the homos, yes it is.  It is the judgment of God on people who go out and fornicate and do wrong.
But listen to this.  ??Crunch time for AIDS vaccines nears in 2008.?? It??s coming to a head, the different companies that are competing to make the AIDS vaccine. 
??The hunt for a vaccine against AIDS is about to enter a critical stage, with results in 2008 from large-scale clinical trials of two candidates set to determine the future direction of research.  Highest hopes are pinned on a vaccine from Merck and Company.?? They are the ones who are in the lead for creating this vaccine.  They are the ones who are giving money to a governor who is requiring them to mandate its processor, its precursor the HPV vaccine. 
Isn??t this horrible?  Isn??t this wicked as hell?
What do I think about vaccines?  Well, let??s think about the Bible. ??They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick.??[18]
Do you think that I am going to take my beautiful, healthy, new born baby and take it to some doctor so that they can shoot it up with who knows what? No. Never in a million years.  Who knows what they are putting into it. They are putting in live viruses. I don??t...think about this. Think about just from a biblical standpoint.  Have you ever read the book of Leviticus?  Remember that boring book that, oh, who needs it anyway?  It is so archaic and worthless. 
Hey, why don??t you pick it up and read it sometime and you will find out that God says, ??Don??t touch things that aren??t clean Don??t take things into your body that aren??t clean.?? Clean yourself up.  And why would I put dirt and filth and disease into my children??s bodies because it is going to strengthen their immunity. No, sir. No, my friend. Jesus says in my healthy baby...my baby...my son here, John, two years old.  Never been to a doctor, praise the Lord.  Praise God.  I hope he never goes to the doctor.  I hope he lives to be 100 years old and never sees a doctor in his life.
Now if he has to see a doctor we will take him to the doctor. You know, if he breaks his leg or something or if he gets some kind of an illness where he needs to see a doctor. I??ll take him to the doctor. I am not saying that I am against all doctors.  But I am going to tell you something.  As long as he is healthy like he is right now, I am not going to mess with him. I am going to keep him the way he is. I am not taking him to get vaccinated. 
Here...how about this for you?  Put this in your pipe and smoke it.  Here is a list of all the vaccines that are being offered today?  Which ones are made from aborted fetuses and which ones are made from animal cells?  So those are your two choices. 
This is put out by, you know, an anti abortion group who is telling you which ones, if you want to, you know, go to your doctor and specify which ones are not from aborted fetuses.  But to be honest with you, I don??t really feel comfortable injecting monkey kidney cells into my son either, to be honest with you.  I don??t really feel comfortable injecting him with something that came off a chick embryo or a monkey. 
No, my friend, read the Bible some time.
??What are you talking about?  Preach the Bible for a while.??
Hey, this is the most biblical preaching I could be preaching. Hey, keep yourself clean. Be clean. 
Polio vaccine. There??s two different kinds.  One from kidney cells from a monkey and one from aborted fetuses. 
Ok, chicken pox vaccine?  Only available from aborted fetuses is where they culture the virus cells.


Rubella, hepatitis A, Ebola or HIV, only come from research done with aborted fetuses and they take the cells and culture those diseases in aborted fetuses. The actual cells that are being injected into your child??s body when you get your kid vaccinated are from an aborted fetus. 
And then there are the ones that offer alternatives, polio, mumps, rabies, measles and small pox can get one that is not.  But do you think that that is the one that they are offering you when you get to the doctor?  No, because you are getting the MMR which is all in one shot which was made by Merck and company which is made from, cultured on aborted fetuses.
Now this is what they want me to do to my kid, right here. I have got a chart right here. This is what they want me to do to little Johnny and my new born baby that is going to be born this month, God willing. This is what they want me to do, 21 injections by the time he is 18 months old, 21 times he will be shot up with this stuff because he has got to have his hepatitis B three times. He has got to have his D-tab four times. He must have his hemophilus influenza type B.  I mean, the flu. He has got to have that four times by the time he is 18 months old.   At birth they are going to give him hepatitis B before he leaves the hospital is what it says here.  Of course, not in my case. 
Polio virus, three times, MMR I believe once, varicella which is chicken pox, pneumococco four times and on and on and on and on is just what they are saying.  If I were to try to enroll my kid in the public schools which hell will freeze over before that ever happens because I home school my kids like the Bible says.  If I were to try to put my kids in a public school or a Christian school, or a Christian school, or a Christian school I would have to do this, 19 shots into the arm of my child, putting in aborted fetuses, monkey kidney cells and who knows what. 
And you say, ??This is an offensive sermon. This isn??t popular.??

Well, that has never stopped me before.  It is not going to stop me now. And you know what?  I had something else. I am trying to find...I have so much stuff here.  I am trying to stay somewhat organized.  Oh, here we go...which leads us into another subject that the Bible doesn??t talk about, right? Stem cell research.  And if you want to know about stem cell research get my sermon on the seven sins of IBF.  But let??s talk about the guy who started stem cell research.  Do you know what his name is?  Anderson, figures, huh? 
This is his name, William French Anderson.  He is known as the father of gene therapy for his work on a promising, but controversial experiment medical treatment that involves injecting healthy genes into sick patients as stem cell research. They take the genes from a newborn baby, an aborted fetus, actually. While they are aborting it, they take out the stem cells and they use these to help sick patients, to help perverts like Christopher Reeve, you know, walk again. 
But let me tell you what happened to this guy this week, this father of gene therapy, this Nobel prize...or, let??s see. I think he might have won the Nobel prize, even, or he was nominated for it or whatever. 
William French Anderson, the father of gene therapy, the man who started this. Do you know what happened to him? He was sentenced this week to 14 years in federal prison for molesting a girl from the time she was 10 to 14 years old. 
Wow, isn??t that a shock?  Wow.  Remember my controversial sermon back several months ago on the seven sins of IBF?  Boy, I was way off the mark, wasn??t I?  Boy, I was blowing it, wasn??t I?  Well, it??s amazing that just this week the guy is a pervert. The guy is a child molester. 
Wow, I??m shocked, aren??t you?  Aren??t you shocked?  No, I am not shocked at all.  I am not surprised at all. 
But on and on, you know. That...we see that if you apply the Bible and you may not like the way that the chips fall when you apply the Bible to these types of decisions. So when I ask myself am I going to vaccinate my children?  I just open the Bible. ??They that be whole need not a physician.??[19]  And I read the book of Leviticus about sanitation and cleanliness and quarantining people, getting people away from the disease, not building up their immunity to the disease, separating them from the disease.


And so I just got my answer from the Bible on that.  Forgive me.


But, number two of my main points.  My main point, I have several sub points in the introduction, but my main point was, number one, don??t go to the doctor unless you have to.  And if you have to, hey, do what you have got to do.  But try and stay away from the doctor because, number two, many doctors actually do more harm than good.
Look, if you would, at Mark chapter five and I will show you this from the Bible.  Mark chapter number five and I will show you this interesting verse in verse number 26.  But we will start reading in verse number 25, Mark 5:25.  The Bible reads, ??And a certain woman...??[20]  I??ll give you a minute to be there, but Mark 5:25. 
And a certain woman, which had an issue of blood twelve years, And had suffered many things of many physicians...[21]
So who is making her suffer?  The physician made her suffer.  Are you listening to this?  ??And had suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse.??[22]  Did you hear that?  I mean, she is suffering at the hand of a physician. She has spent all her money.  She is not getting any better. In fact, she is getting worse is what the Bible says.
And then I will finish reading the story just for interest.
When she had heard of Jesus, came in the press behind, and touched his garment.  For she said, If I may touch but his clothes, I shall be whole.   And straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up; and she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague.[23]
Again, it is mentioned in Luke 8:43. Turn there quickly, the next book in the Bible, Luke 8:43.  Luke chapter eight, verse number 43.  And don??t be upset by anything I am saying in the sermon. I am not telling you what to do. Anybody who goes to this church knows that I don??t tell anybody what to do.  I have no rules. We have no rules about how people dress when the come here. I mean we have no rules about what people can and can??t do in their person life and be a member. We have no rules. We don??t need rules because we preach the Bible. We preach liberty.  And we preach the Bible so hard that people want to do what is right. You know, they love God.  They want to do what is right. We don??t need rules.  We have no rules, none.  We just preach the Bible and it is amazing how when you preach the Bible like it is meant to be preached and you really preach as hard as needs to be preached, people love God. People want to do what is right. They don??t need me being their parent as the pastor telling them what to do or coming to them and telling them what to do.
And so I am not telling anybody what to do.  This is an informational sermon. You can take it or leave it.  If you don??t like what I am saying, that??s...you know, fine.  Go suffer many things of many physicians. That??s up to you. But I am just telling you what the Bible says.  I am just trying to educate you. If you don??t like it, just come back next week. It will be about something totally different. You probably won??t like that either. 

So look at Luke 8:43.  The Bible says, ??And a woman having an issue of blood twelve years, which had spent all her living upon physicians...??[24]  That sounds familiar.  ??neither could be healed of any, Came behind him, and touched the border of his garment: and immediately her issue of blood stanched.??[25]
And, of course, we saw Job 13:4 said, ??But ye are forgers of lies, ye are all physicians of no value.??[26]  Are there some physicians that would harm you rather than do good to you, that are liars, that the Bible says are robbers, they want your money and they lie to you and they rob you and they make you suffer and you get worse and you never get better and you go for 12 years and nothing gets better? Why?  Because they are physicians of no value. They are worthless is what God is saying.??
But look at...well, let me read this quickly for you, the next thing in my stack here about health care spending.
Health care spending last year, two trillion dollars, two trillion dollars in the United States. Well, you know, I did a little math.  And that averages out to about $6700 per person per year.  I mean that is man, woman, boy, child.  That means in my house, I mean this is the average, ok. In my house we have five people, you know, sixth is on the way.  But we have five people in my family times $6700.  Ok, so the average would be if we were spending, you know, $33,000 approximately?  What is that, 6700...my wife is looking at me like I am...like I am doing my math wrong or something here, but 6700 times five is $33,500, honey.  Ok, come on.  $33,500 is what we would be spending as a family.
You say, ??Well, how in the world would you get that kind of money, pastor Anderson?  Do you...pastor Anderson, did you [?] $33,500.45 last year for medical health care???
Well, that is where Uncle Sam says it. That is where dad comes in. That??s where daddy, governor Perry comes in, chancellor Adolf Perry comes in and he will help us out because he will pay it for us. He will buy it is for us. 
That is why of the two trillion dollars that was spent, 26% of it came from just two programs, just Medicare and Medicaid, 26% of it came from that, ok. 
So that amounts to 521 billion dollars of tax dollars which amounts to per person, man, woman, boy, girl, we are not talking about per household. Like I am the only breadwinner in this house.  But it would be five times this, that would mean that like I would pay about, you know, on average 7500 bucks of my money for this stuff, for a government, you know, health care program and so forth. And maybe even more than that since I don??t think everybody pays their fair share, do they? 
And that is why there is something called self employment taxes that I paid for my fire alarm business where I spent 3.8% I think it is, right off the top of my income before anything comes out, before any of my deductions I pay to Medicare, Medicaid. Thank you, father Perry for helping me out.  And I am just using him as a personification of everything that big government and government health care stands for. 
And I love this phraseology.  The government loves to use this phraseology.  They are talking about how medical costs have gone up this year it looks like 7.9% even though inflation was only 3.4%.  Ok. So more than double inflation, ok.  And listen to this. 
Hospital services grew 7.9%. Doctor and clinical services rose 7%.  Prescription drug spending also increased 5.8% tempered by reduced use of pain relievers such as Merck??s...it??s on and on.  But then listen to this. I love this phrase. This is something the government loves to use.  Premium growth slowed, ok.  It sounds like you are paying less for the health insurance premiums.  Premium growth slowed to 6.6%. Here is what they are saying.  Italy went up 6.6% which is still double inflation, ok.  But last year it was 7.9% so it slowed to 6.6%.  So it almost sounds like it is going down like have you read that? 
You know, they are cutting spending. When the government says they are cutting spending, they are not increasing it as much as they increased it last year. They are still increasing it, literally. When the cut spending, they are cutting the increase that they thought they were going to have, literally.
And so I have got to hurry just to blow through this stuff.  Maybe that is why one of the presidential hopefuls of the Democratic party, Jonathan Edwards, his biggest plan that he is announcing on Monday, raise taxes for health care. That is his biggest plan.  This is his platform.
Democratic US presidential candidate John Edwards on Sunday said that he would raise taxes, chiefly on the wealthy, yes, stinking wealthy. Of course they are the ones who pay the employees and they are just going to cut their pay.  They are not getting rid of their yacht, ok. And so they are going to...it all trickles down, you know.  You end up paying for it. Keep it on the wealthy to pay for expanded health care coverage under a plan costing 90 billion to 120 billion dollars a year to be unveiled on Monday. 
We??ll have to raise taxes. The only way you can pay for a health care that costs anywhere from 90 to 120 billion dollars is to have a new revenue source. If we would expand Medicaid, because 26% of the biggest industry in America is health care, two trillion dollars, biggest industry in America. What was it of the GNP?  16% of the gross domestic product, the GDP is health care. 16% of all revenue, anything for anything in America is health care. And 26% of that is Medicare and Medicaid. They would expand Medicaid. That is what we need. We need it even bigger.
??Would you please take more money from my check in self employment tax and offer subsidies for the uninsured.??
He said, ??We are asking employers to play a bigger role, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.??
That is not what we need.  We don??t need more physicians. We don??t need more doctors.  We need...well, we??ll get to what we need. 
But number three.  So number one was don??t go to the doctor unless you absolutely need to.  It is a last resort. Number two, many doctors can do more harm than good.  That is a fact from the Bible. And number three don??t worship the doctor. The doctor is not a God man like the world makes the doctor out to be a God man. You know, you think about this.  Whenever you...and turn to 1 Kings chapter 15 while I am talking to you about this.  1 Kings chapter 15 and we are going to look at an example of a man named Asa in the Old Testament.  Look at 1 Kings chapter 15.
But the doctor is not a God man. And you think about how everything that you do it seems like if the doctor puts his stamp of approval on it, it is ok, we can do it, you know, consult your physician.  Consult your physician. Talk to your doctor. Talk to your doctor. He??ll tell you whether, you know, just about anything.  You know, if you...
I was thinking about this. This would be a good blurb for our church. If you have high blood pressure, anxiety attacks or if you have panic attacks, anxiety disorders or if you are startled suddenly, please consult a physician before attending Faithful Word Baptist Church because sometimes the preaching can be loud. It can be, you know, it might startle you. It might scare you a little.  You know.  And so please consult a physician.  You know, call your doctor today and ask him if Faithful Word Baptist Church is right for you, you know.
And so...but look at 1 Kings chapter 15 verse number eight. 
And Abijam slept with his fathers; and they buried him in the city of David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead.  And in the twentieth year of Jeroboam king of Israel reigned Asa over Judah.[27]
So basically Abijam passes on and his son Asa takes over.  ??And forty and one years reigned he in Jerusalem,??[28] referring to Asa.
And his mother??s name was Maachah, the daughter of Abishalom.  And Asa did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, as did David his father.[29]
And so is this a good guy? This is a great man, right, Asa, King Asa.  ??[He] did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, as did David his father.??[30]  He is even comparing him to David for how good he was. 
What is the...boy, what made this guy so good? Look at verse number 12.  ??And he took away the sodomites out of the land.??[31] Praise the Lord. ??And removed all the idols that his fathers had made.??[32] And he turned American Idol off the air.  ??And also Maachah his mother, even her he removed from being queen, because she had made an idol in a grove; and Asa destroyed her idol, and burnt it by the brook Kidron.??[33] Here is a great man.  And even his mother was involved in idolatry. He actually...he was not a respecter of persons. He removed her from her position. That??s all he did. He just removed her from being the queen because she had created this idol. He said, ??I am going to break your idol. I am going to burn it up and I am going to throw it in the river.?? And that is what he did and he said, ??You can??t be the queen anymore because you are leading the nation into idolatry.??
And he took her out of that position.  I??m sure he still loved his mother. I mean, he just took her out of that position.
??But the high places were not removed: nevertheless Asa??s heart was perfect with the LORD all his days.??[34]
Now flip over to 2 Chronicles chapter 16. Go forward in your Bibles, toward the end of the Bible, 2 Chronicles 16 verse number seven, 2 Chronicles 16:7 and we will see a little more about the life of Asa.
The Bible reads in 2 Chronicles 16:7, ??And at that time Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah, and said unto him, Because thou hast relied on the king of Syria, and not relied on the LORD thy God, therefore is the host of the king of Syria escaped out of thine hand.??[35]  Here is what happened. Asa was being invaded by several other nations. He was scared. He did not trust God even though a preacher had told him, ??God can protect you.  God can fight for you.??
Remember our sermon on the safety is of the Lord?  God is going to protect you. God is going to go to battle for you.
Well, he decided instead to yoke up with the unsaved and the ungodly Syria and form a league with Syria and he said, ??Now, Syria is going to go to battle for me.??
Well, that worked, but he says to him, this prophet, Hanani says to him, ??Well, now Syria is going to be your enemy. You know, you could have subdued Syria as well, but because you teamed up with them, now they are going to be come a thorn in your side,?? is what he is saying there.
But look at verse number eight. So you see here, this is where Asa begins to go down hill in his life.  He is still a good guy. The Bible says he was a good guy all the way to the end of his life. But he starts to go down hill because he is relying on this unsaved king because he doesn??t have faith in God to take care of him.
Look at verse number eight. ??Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubims a huge host, with very many chariots and horsemen???[36]  These are people that he had defeated earlier in his life relying solely upon God.  ??Yet, because thou didst rely on the LORD, he delivered them into thine hand.  For the eyes of the LORD...??[37]  Boy, this is a great verse. Boy, you could put this up on the wall or memorize this verse. ??For the eyes of the LORD run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him.??[38]  Man, underline that verse. It is a great verse, a great promise from God.  He is just looking for people that he can bless and fight for. 
And the Bible says, ??Herein thou hast done foolishly: therefore from henceforth thou shalt have wars.  Then Asa was wroth with the seer.??[39]  He got angry at the preacher. ??...and put him in a prison house; for he was in a rage with him because of this thing. And Asa oppressed some of the people the same time.  And, behold, the acts of Asa, first and last, lo, they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.??[40]
Here is a little interesting verse that God throws in here. ??And Asa in the thirty and ninth year of his reign...??[41]  This is two years before the end of his reign.  In the 39th year of his reign, ??was diseased in his feet, until his disease was exceeding great: yet in his disease he sought not to the LORD, but to the physicians.??[42] Boy, isn??t that interesting that God says that, that God accuses Asa. He says, ??First he didn??t trust me when we were fighting this battle and then he had a disease in his feet and he sought not to the Lord. He just went running to the doctors.??
Now, is it wrong to go to the doctor?  No, and I already showed you from the Bible that it is not wrong.  I don??t believe it is wrong.
But I will tell you this.  If you take an aspirin, which I don??t even recommend.  I don??t ever take an aspirin. I just tough it out. But if you take an aspirin and you don??t pray first and say, ??God, will you take away my headache??? I think that is a sin to be honest with you.  You just run to some drug. You know, you run to some doctor.  I mean the first thing that happens to you when you have an illness is to say, ??God, you know, would you help me, God? Or would you give me some wisdom from the Bible, God? Can you give me some help in this area???
And then, you know, God may lead you to do something else, you know. Or he may let you know that you need to go to the physician and, you know, you may even need some kind of surgery or whatever the case may be.  But don??t just seek the physicians and not seek God. Seek God first.  Go to God first. Don??t be like King Asa. I mean, he put a whole verse in the Bible telling you King Asa??s mistakes where he didn??t even mention God.  He just said, ??Run and get the doctor. The doctor is a god man.  The doctor is my god. He is going to help me out.??


And so what happened? Within two years he was dead from a disease in his feet that killed him less than two years later because he sought not the Lord, but he sought to the physicians.
People worship the doctor in the place of God.  I mean they think doctors know everything in the day that we live. I mean that is literally the truth if you talk to people.
Here is an example. My wife is due this month, February 18th is her due date.  And we are having a home birth and she is going to give birth at the house, you know. And did you know that...and I studied this out because my first son Solomon was born in a hospital. And the subsequent two have been born at home, ok. And I studied it out. Did you know that the statistics will show...any statistics you want to look at will show that home birth is literally twice as safe as in the hospital? The mortality rate which means the death rate, the rate of someone dying of the mother, more than double in the hospital, of the child more than double in the hospital.


Listen to this.  I have a sign this in the state of Arizona in order to...let me see if I can find it. But I had to sign this in order to, you know, have my child born at home in the state of Arizona.  You know, they want you to sign this with the midwife, you know, that comes out, the lady who comes out and delivers the child who is a midwife, not a doctor. It is the informed choice and disclosure statement. It is something that she has to have us sign by law.  And it gives us all the facts.  I mean this is the government. I mean, they are just telling you. It is just the facts so that you know what you are getting into. 
The risks and benefits of home births. Let me read it to you. ??Benefits and safety of home birth. A research study entitled ??Scientific Research on Child Birth Alternative?? by Lewis Male, M.D., compares 1046 hospital births with 1046 home births.  Couples from each group were matched couple by couple based on a variety of factors including number of previous pregnancies, maternal age, socio economic status, educational background.?? Basically it is apples with apples, you know, they took the same situations of 1046 couples here and 1046 couples there, same situation. And the fetal distress during labor, 119 at the hospital, 20 at home, fetal distress during labor.
Incidence of newborn resuscitation, 52 in the hospital, 14 at home needed to be resuscitated. 
Birth injuries, 30 in the hospital, none at home because the birth injuries were the forceps where they stick in a pair of tongs and pull it out by the head. 


Boy, that kind of reminds me of the leeches back in George Washington??s day, doesn??t it?  Sticking in a metal tong and pulling the kids out by the head, wow.
And caesarean section, 8.2% because this study was done a while back. Now it is over 33% just in the short time since this study was done that they tell you about in this informed consent. Now it is up to 33%. But back then it was 8.2% of this particular group.  Nationwide it is over 33% in he hospital and 0.4% for the ones who did a home birth and then had to, you know, transfer to a hospital because it lead to c-section 0.4% compared to 8.2% which is actually 40%, you know, now just...it just hit 40% last year of hospital births that are a c-section. 
And so on and on and I already told you about the mortality rate being less than one half of a tenth.


So literally just, I mean just reason with me for a second.  According to all the statistics there is a double...more than double risk that if I bring my wife to the hospital and she gives birth at the hospital it is more than twice as likely to die.  And the baby is more than twice as likely to die. Then that is what the numbers are saying.  The numbers don??t lie about this.


And it is like four times likely to have those complications that we read about. It was about four times or three times as much. 
Yet, when I tell people that my wife is going to give birth at home with  midwife... what if something happens? 
Hey, what if something happens and you go to the hospital?  What if they start getting out the knives and start cutting? What if they start getting out the tongs and start pulling on its head? I am scared to death.  The germs that are there, the sanitation. I mean, why would I want to go to a place filled with sick people so that my wife can give birth? She is not sick.
Did you know that childbirth is not a sickness?  This is going to shock you. Did you know that getting pregnant is not an STD, ok?  It is not, ok? It is not...you know, it is not a disease that you pick up.  It is actually a normal thing that has been going on for the last 6000 years. 
Why would I take my wife and a newborn baby to a place filled with sick people?  It doesn??t make sense.  Let??s go to a building full of people that are sick and bring a newborn baby and hand it around to people.
I mean, are people nuts?  But why?  Because the doctor is a god man, because the doctor...as long as the doctor is there everything is going to be ok, everything is going to be fine.
And do you know what?  Literally the sad thing is if I had a baby born at the hospital and it died, everybody would just say, ??Well, there is nothing you could do about it,?? right? But if it died at home they would say, ??You monster,?? you know. ??You...you are responsible.??  Even though the odds are twice as much of it happening the hospital.  Why? Because the doctor did not put his stamp of approval on it. The god man did not pronounce it as this is ok for you to do to give birth at this time and so forth.
Look that is the kind of mentality that I am preaching against. That is the kind of mentality that God is preaching against in 2 Chronicles 16. 
Now if you choose to have a child at the hospital that is your prerogative. If I choose to give birth...again, I am not a dictator. I am against.  I mean, I am against everything. I mean I want freedom. That is...boy, I like that statement. I am against everything. 


But anyway, hey, I am not a dictator.  I am for freedom. I think there should be a lot more freedom than there is right now. I am for people making their own choices, doing their own thing.  But I am just going to tell you something.  A mentality that says that the doctor knows everything when God says something different...
You see when Asa...when the Bible talks about Asa going to God, let??s bring this to reality.  He didn??t seek the Lord. He sough the physicians. How do you seek the Lord?  By picking up this book and reading it. That??s how you seek the Lord.  This is the Lord. ??In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.??[43]
Well, let??s see what God says. Well, you will never find an OB-GYN, especially not a male OB-GYN in the Bible. But you will find in Genesis 35, Genesis 38 and Exodus chapter one, midwives giving birth, I mean delivering God??s people??s children, women like Rebekah, well, you know, women like Rachel using a midwife, godly women, women like the Jews that were in Egypt, the Egyptians. It doesn??t mention any of them using a midwife, but the Jews were.
You say, ??That??s just a coincidence.??


Nothing in the Bible is a coincidence.  Nothing in the Bible is a coincidence. It was written by God. It is God??s Word. And so I would rather go with that any day of the week.


But why have we been so modernized, why have we been so modernized as independent fundamental Baptists where we are old fashioned, right?  King James Bible. Singing the old hymns.  Old fashioned dress code.  You know, old fashioned preaching. Old fashioned standards.  Keep it old. You know, the old fashioned, the same way it has been for years.  Let??s preach the Bible just the way it was written 2000 years ago.


But then when we step into the realm of health care and medicine, all of the sudden all that goes out the window. All the wisdom of the ancients goes out the window and all the sudden it is just let??s just buy into the newest, latest, greatest most modern thing as independent fundamental Baptists.  No, my friend, I am an independent fundamental Baptist. I am old school, old fashioned traditional, all the way across the board. And when I make a health care decision I don??t go with all this modern stuff. I don??t... do you think I am going to let a male gynecologist look at my wife? You are crazy.  You are nuts.  I have been accused. I have gotten more flack about that.  I have an essay about that on my website, ??What is wrong with male gynecologists???  I have gotten more hate mail. I have gotten more flack. I have had people write me. I have had pastors write me and say, ??It is the stupidest thing I have ever read in my life. You are an idiot. You are the Taliban.  You are Osama Bin Laden,?? as I have been called.
I say, ??Hey, listen to me. No man is going to look at my wife nude. You??re nuts.?? That??s what I say to them.  ??You are crazy.??
You know, I get out the phone book.  When people talk to me about this I get out the phone book.  I look it up, gynecologist.  It is like 75% men. I hope up the Heath Valley Dex Yellow pages.  Adam, Mark, James, Scott, James...and do you know what? These guys are God men.  They don??t think dirty thoughts when they look at my wife nude.  You believe...you expect me to believe that, my friend?  
And you say, ??Pastor Anderson, I can??t believe you are talking about this in the pulpit.??
Hey, I can??t believe that 99% of the men in the pulpit in America, this is the reality of their life. This is where their wife goes.  That is what I can??t believe, my friend. 
Do you think that Scott and James and Stephen and Joseph and Bruce are going to come anywhere near my wife?  You are nuts. Do you think Ernesto, Robert, Paul, Michael, Jeffrey, Brock, Stephen, Brian, Joseph, Stephen, Robert, Paul, Bruce, Jamal, Raoul, Gerald, Daniel...?
Hey, my friends. This is my wife and God said the man and his wife were both naked and they were not ashamed.[44]  And the Bible says that nudity is a sin and when you step inside of a doctor??s office, nudity is still a sin, my friends. It is still a sin. Yes, it is still a sin. I don??t believe in situational ethics.  Not until the 20th century in the United States of America was that considered normal that a male medical professional would examine a nude woman. It is filthy.  It is ungodly. It is hell. It is more ungodly than Playboy and Penthouse all put together. It is filthy and ungodly. 


I am going to preach against...I don??t care.  Send me another hate mail. Hey, anybody out there hearing this. Can you hear me across the street?  Hey, send me another one. I??ll pin it up on the wall.  I will wall paper my bathroom with this and say, ??Praise God from whom all blessings flow.?? Because I am going to tell you something, I am going to stand for God and be old fashioned no matter what it is.  I don??t care what anybody says. I don??t care if anybody thinks that it is right. Nobody is going to look at my wife.
And do you know what? I remember when I was a younger man. And I am still very young, but when I was even younger I talked to some of my friends that were my age in their late teens, early 20s who were thinking about marriage, some of them, maybe even just gotten married. Some were more engaged. Some of them were just getting into these things just like I was at the time. And I took them aside and said...you know, I am talking about five, six years ago. I took them aside and I said, ??Let me tell you something.?? I said, ??I am going to tell you something right now.?? I said, I am going to say, ??You know what? When I got married and my wife was going to the doctor for the first time because she was going to have a baby,?? because we had our first babies in the hospital, OB-GYN and everything. And I opened up the list.  I said, ??There is no way in the world that she is going to a man.?? That is what I told them.
And I said, ??Listen to me.??  I said, ??Is it is right for a woman to be nude in front of another man??? I mean I am talking about somebody??s wife to be nude in front of another man. 
They said, ??No.?? 
I said, ??Why would that be allowed.??  I said, ??Would you be able to do that job every day and keep a clean mind???


And they said, ??No.??
I said, ??Well, neither would I.??
I am not going to lie to you. I am not going to lie to you.  Hey, it is the truth. It is what God says. It is what the Bible says.
And I said, ??Do you think that that man is a god man to where he can do it and keep a clean mind all day.??
And they said, ??No way.  There is no way.??
They grew up in the locker room like I did.  They heard all the filthy perverts that are there in the public school, in the Christian school. They know what people are really like. ??The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked: who can know it???[45]
And even a born again fundamental Baptist couldn??t do it and he is not a pervert or anything, I mean, he is just honestly admitting, you know, I couldn??t just look at that all day and not think anything bad.  He is just being real.


Let alone Jamal, let alone Raoul.  Let alone Ernesto and Bruce.  They are not fundamental Baptists. They don??t believe the Bible. They don??t even believe that there is a God. They don??t go to this church. They don??t go to any church. They go to the church of Charles Darwin.  They go the church of you are animal.  That is what they go to. That is their church. That is where they go on Sunday.
And I am going to tell you something. They are not thinking clean thoughts. They are dirty.  And I can tell you about people that I know in my own extended family. I can tell you about people that I talk to you that have told me, ladies that have told me that they have been violated in a doctor??s office by one of these male gynecologists, perverts, perverts. Every single one is a pervert.


Well, what about this independent, fundamental Baptist? Yes, he is a pervert.  Yes, he is a pervert. Yes, he is a pervert. I wish I could remember the names of all of the. I would give them to you. I will tell you where they go to church, churches that I have been in, these male gynecologist perverts, perverts.  Yes, they are. 
I am going to tell you something.  If you think that a man can transcend that...
You say, ??Well, he looks at it all day.??


Ok, well, then look at pornography all day, brother Dave, and you??ll never think a dirty thought again.
Are these people nuts?  It is the vaccine mentality, right?  Let??s just inoculate them.  Let??s just show him enough and then you will never think a bad thought again.
Oh, really, well this doctor has been looking at it his whole life. I bet his mind is as pure as the driven snow.
You are nuts. You are crazy.  You are out of your mind. I am not the Taliban. You belong in a straight jacket if you think that that guy is not thinking bad thoughts.
??Yeah, well, he is a nice old man.  He has been doing it for 50 years.??
What was he thinking in college? 


[1] Job 13:4

[2] Matthew 9:12

[3] See Matthew 9:12; Mark 2:17; Luke 5:31

[4] Matthew 9:12

[5] Colossians 4:14

[6] Ibid.

[7] Job 12:2

[8] Ibid.

[9] Job 12:3

[10] Job 12:6

[11] Ibid.

[12] Job 12:7-9

[13] Job 12:9-13

[14] Job 12:13-14

[15] Job 13:2

[16] Job 13:2-4

[17] Matthew 9:12

[18] Matthew 9:12

[19] Matthew 9:12

[20] Mark 5:25

[21] Mark 5:25-26

[22] Mark 5:26

[23] Mark 5:27-29

[24] Luke 8:43

[25] Luke 8:43-44

[26] Job 13:4

[27] 1 Kings 15:8-9

[28] 1 Kings 15:10

[29] 1 Kings 15:10-11

[30] 1 Kings 15:11

[31] 1 Kings 15:12

[32]  Ibid.

[33] 1 Kings 15:13

[34] 1 Kings 15:14

[35] 2 Chronicles 16:7

[36] 2 Chronicles 16:8

[37] 2 Chronicles 16:8-9

[38] 2 Chronicles 16:9

[39] 2 Chronicles 16:9-10

[40] 2 Chronicles 16:10-11

[41] 2 Chronicles 16:12

[42] Ibid.

[43] John 1:1

[44] See Genesis 2:25

[45] Jeremiah 17:9

 
 
