


The Devil's Master Plan for the End Times
Video
March 8, 2015

Flip over, if you would, to 2 Thessalonians 2. We're going to come back to Revelation 13, but let's look quickly at 2 Thessalonians 2. What I want to preach to you about tonight is the devil's master plan for the end times. The devil's master plan for the end times. What is he doing? I've done a lot of sermons on Bible prophecy. A lot of them were devoted to just attacking the fallacy of the preacher of rapture and just exposing that for the fraud that it is. Obviously, I've done the Revelation's whole series where I went through and preached each chapter in the Book of Revelation and so forth.
I want to just fill in a few gaps tonight and just give a big picture of what is the devil doing in our world today in these last days. As we get in to the final days, what is the master plan? What is the overarching design behind it? Look what the Bible says in 2 Thessalonians 2:1: "Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him," which is obviously a reference to the rapture when we will be gathered together, caught up together with him in the clouds, "That you be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition."
Of course, this, just very quickly, tells us that this teaching that Jesus Christ can return at any moment is a lie and that the day of Christ at hand, that's not really true. There are all these other things that happen have to happen first, and the Bible says that the falling away is going to come first. Now, what is that falling away that's going to come first? Well, it is apostasy. It is people falling away from the faith and turning from the truth unto fables. The Bible says in verse 4, right after saying that the son of perdition, the man of sin will be revealed, says in verse 4: "Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God."
Now, before the day of Christ comes, the Bible is telling us very clearly that there is going to be a man known as the man of sin or the son of perdition. This man will oppose and exalt himself above all that is called God or that is worshipped so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God. This man of sin, this son of perdition, will claim to be God. He will claim divinity and he will seat himself in the temple and claim to be God.
Let's keep reading. Says in verse 5: "Remember ye not, that, when I was yet with you, I told you these things?" this is something that Paul has already preached to the Thessalonians while he was there. They'd heard a sermon audibly about this. Now, he's just writing it to them because they've gotten a little bit confused on it and he wants to set the record straight. "And now ye know what withholdeth that he might be revealed in his time. For the mystery of iniquity doth already work: only he who now letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way." letting means hindering. When it says, "He who now letteth," it's talking about he who is hindering, which has to do with the withholding in verse 6.
It says, "He who now letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way. And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming: Â Even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie: That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness."
This man that's going to claim to be God and he's going to declare that unto all men and he's going to be seated in the temple, the Bible says that he is coming is after the power of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders. Now, what are wonders in the Bible? What's the more common word that we would use for that?

Male:	Miracle.

Pastor Anderson:	Miracles, right? This man, through the means of miracles and power that he has, is going to deceive the people that dwell upon the earth. Then, ultimately, he is going to be destroyed by the Lord Jesus Christ. One thing I want to point out here is in verse 7 where the Bible says, "For the mystery of iniquity doth already work." Keep in mind, this was being written all the way back in the 1st century AD. This is almost 2,000 years ago. The Bible is saying the mystery of iniquity doth already work. This working toward this antichrist being in power, and that's who we're reading about, the antichrist. That is a Biblical term that God uses. That spirit of antichrist was already at work even back in the days of the Apostle Paul.
Go to 1 John 2. 1 John 2. Obviously, it if was already at work back then, then we know that it is working today. These things are happening around us. You say, "Well, why is this relevant to preach about this?" What if we're not in that generation or what if this happens after we're gone?" No, the mystery of iniquity already works. We need to be able to see this and understand this and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them.
It says in 1 John 2:18:Â "Little children, it is the last time: and as ye have heard that antichrist," that singular, "Shall come, even now are there many antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last time." You see, even now there are antichrists. Flip over, if you would, to 1 John 4, just a couple chapters to the right there. The Bible says, "And every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God," and this is that spirit of antichrist. Notice that term. "The spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come; and even now already is it in the world." The thing that I really want to drive in with this is that today, there is already a spirit of antichrist in this world and there is already a mystery of iniquity that is at work today that is taking this world to the point where the antichrist will be the supreme leader and where all nations will worship him and he will declare himself to be God on earth.
Go, if you would, to Revelation 13 with all that in mind. Let's look at this chapter. This is the key chapter about the antichrist in the Book of Revelation. Revelation 13:1, the Bible reads, "And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy. And the beast which I saw was like unto a leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion: and the dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great authority."
Now, I don't have time to delve into this too much because I'm trying to give an overview. These animals that are listed there do have significance when we go back to the Book of Daniel. We don't have time to delve into the Book of Daniel tonight. In the Book of Daniel, these same beasts are mentioned. These beasts are mentioned in the context of these great empires of man that were taking over huge portions of the world. If you remember, Daniel received a vision that there would be that Babylonian empire followed by the Medo-Persian Empire, followed by the Greek Empire, and then ultimately followed by the Roman Empire. That Roman Empire was in power at the first coming of our Lord Jesus Christ when Jesus came to this earth. Rome is at rule.
You remember how when Jesus Christ was born in that Christmas story that we've heard so many times in Luke 2, that Caesar Augustus gives a decree that the whole world should be taxed? I mean you have a lot of power when you're making a decree that the whole world should be taxed. What the Bible shows us in Daniel and even into the New Testament with that world empire of the Roman Empire is basically a prototype or a foreshadowing of the global government that Satan will one day institute upon this earth. In Daniel, we have a foreshadowing of that. The Babylonian empire represents that and the Roman Empire represents that.
That's why even in the Book of Revelation, we're reading about Babylon because it's that spirit Old Testament antichrist, that spirit of a one world global government and global religion. This is often popularly referred to in 2015 as the new world order. That's become the buzz word for a global government. You say, "Well, what does this have to do with global government?" Let's keep reading, and I just want to point out though that in verse 2, the beast here ties in with those world empires of Daniel chapter 2 and elsewhere in Daniel.
It says in verse number three: And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death; and his deadly wound was healed: and all the world wondered after the beast. And they worshipped the dragon which gave power unto the beast." Obviously, the dragon is Satan, "And they worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the beast? Who is able to make war with him? And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months. And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. Â And it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them: and power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations."
This is global government when one man has power over all kindreds, tongues, and nations. One man in power over all nations equals global government, because they're all under his rule. That's what we mean when we say that the Bible teaches that there will, one day, be a one world government. Now, when you look at this Scripture, sometimes you can read it and become confused just because there's so much talk about the beast and the seven heads and the ten horns. It can seem to be cryptic and difficult to understand. What you have to understand is that when the Bible talks about this beast, it's not just talking about one person but it's talking about a whole system, the whole government structure.
That's why there are seven heads and ten horns. But then one of those heads is wounded to death. That's the singular person. When the Bible talks about the beast here, it's talking about, in one sense, this great worldwide global kingdom, but then it is also used to refer to the single pan, the son of perdition, the man of sin, the antichrist. That one of the heads that basically has the deadly wound that is healed. Basically, out of this one world system, there's going to be one guy who basically receives a deadly wound and that deadly wound is going to be healed. When that deadly wound is going to be healed, this man is going to be worshipped by the entire world.
Now, you can see why this man will be worshipped after his deadly wound is healed because  of the fact that we know that this man is known as the antichrist elsewhere in Scripture, in 1 John and 2 John. If he's called the antichrist, what does that mean? That means that he is impersonating Jesus Christ. What did Jesus Christ do to prove and authenticate that he was the Son of God? He died, he was buried, and he rose again. This is a counterfeiting of that. The deadly wound is healed.
Now, you can say, "Well, it doesn't say he died. It just says he got a deadly wound and it was healed." First of all, the world would not wonder about that. The world would not be amazed by someone receiving a deadly wound and not dying, because there are often people that you hear about in the news who get shot right in the face, shot right in the head, and everybody thinks they're doomed and they end up pulling through. That's not really that amazing.
Go to Revelations 17, just a few pages to the right in your Bible. We'll come back to chapter 13. Look over at Revelation 17:8 and let's get another clue about this beast or antichrist or man of sin or son of perdition, all terms for the same person. It says in verse 8: "The beast that thou sawest was, and is not ?¦" Now, you have to understand, when you're reading the Bible, it'll often use the term "is not" to refer to someone who is not alive. For example, back in Genesis, when Joseph had been sold into slavery, but his father thought he was dead. His father said this: "Joseph is not," meaning he no longer is alive. He no longer exists on this earth."
When it says "The beast that thou sawest was, and is not," meaning he's dead, "And shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition: and they that dwell on the earth shall wonder." Why are they wondering? Well, because he was and then he is not and then he ascends out of the bottomless pit. Then it says, "That they that dwell on the earth shall wonder whose names were not written on the book of life from the foundation of the world, when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is." Now, we may not be able to fully understand what is being described here, but I can tell you one thing for sure. He receives a deadly wound. He dies. He goes to hell and somehow is brought back or somehow is revivified.
We don't know the exact details of how it's going to play out. That is what the world finds amazing. That is part of how he deceives them that dwell on the earth. This is one of the signs and wonders that he works in order to deceive those that dwell on the earth. He gives us a little bit of a hint here in verse 9. It says, "Here is the mind which hath wisdom. The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman sitteth. And there are seven kings: five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come; and when he cometh, he must continue a short space. And the beast that was, and is not," see how it keeps emphasizing that? "Even he is the eighth, and is of the seven, and goeth into perdition. And the ten horns which thou sawest ?¦"
Remember how that beast had seven heads and ten horns? It says, "The ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, which have received no kingdom as yet; but receive power as kings one hour with the beast. Â These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the beast." What do we see here? We see ten man who are ten great world leaders, ten kings as it were, who will then all vote unanimously to relinquish their own sovereignty and their own power and to just give all the power onto the antichrist. Just ten leaders that will give all the power. They'll have one mind and they'll be in total agreement. Yes, this is our savior. This is our leader. We're going to give him all the power. Is the picture starting to come clear for you?
Go back to Revelation 13. I'm just trying to simplify this because some people become confused by the different symbolism of the beast and the horns and the heads. Back to chapter 13 where we were, it said in verse 7: "It was given unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them." He is persecuting God's people. Now, the saints are the saved. That's what it means to be a saint. You can study that all through Scripture. There are plenty of Scriptures you could use to prove that saints are people that are saved, people who have been sanctified by the blood of Jesus Christ once for all are known as saints.
For example, I mean just one place out of scores of places we could turn, but this popped into my mind, 1 Corinthians 1:2 where it says: " Unto the church of God which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints, with all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both their's and our's." All people in every place who call upon the name of the Lord Jesus Christ are saints. That's just one Scripture. We've got many others.
Who is it that the antichrist is making war with? He is making war with the saints, the saved, true believers in the Lord Jesus Christ, those who have called upon the name of the Lord Jesus. Now, let me just stop and mention what the word antichrist means, because a lot of people misunderstand this word. We have a prefix in modern English, "anti," and it means that you're against something. If I said I'm anti-abortion or anti-vaccine or anti-war, what does that mean? I'm against those things. That is not what the "anti-" in antichrist means. That is a modern prefix. That is not a prefix that is ancient. That is something that is in our modern English tongue.
In fact, the prefix "anti" in the Bible, because this is a Greek word, antichrist, it's taken directly from Greek straight into English, "antichristos" to just antichrist. It means one that is in the place of Christ. That's what that prefix means. We don't want to become confused by the modern anti definition and lose sight of what the antichrist is. For example, a place where this word is used is where it talks about how when Jesus went down into Egypt in Matthew chapter 2 as a baby and grew up there as a young child. Not a baby, but a young child. Then when he comes back, it says that his father Joseph heard that Archelaus did reign in Judea in the room of his father, Herod; in place of his father. That is "anti," is what the word is there.
What it's saying here, "antichrist," is saying in the place of Christ, a substitute for Christ, a different Christ. Not Jesus Christ, but a different Christ. Someone who is in his place. Of course, Jesus said, "Many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive man." Then there are many antichrist, but then there's going to be one big antichrist someday who pretends to be Jesus Christ. Let's keep reading. It says in verse 8: "And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. Â If any man have an ear, let him hear." Let's jump out for sake of time.
Verse 11: And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth; and he had two horns like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon. And he exerciseth all the power of the first beast before him, and causeth the earth and them that dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed. And he doeth great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men, and deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by the means of those miracles." Sound familiar? Remember, all the lying signs and wonders it said in 2 Thessalonians 2? Not only is he rbrought back from the bottomless pit, but now he has this false prophet that basically preaches before him and prophesize before him, basically a false John the Baptist, to point people unto him.
This is the anti-John, all right, is what we'll call him. And this guy is performing miracles where he brings down fire from heaven in the sight of men on the earth, like Elijah called down fire from God. If you remember the children of Israel, when they saw Elijah bring down from heaven. They said, "Oh, the Lord, he is the God." Why did they need to see that? We're suppose to just believe God's word and it's a wicked and adulterous generation that seeketh after a sign. The Bible says the Jews seek after a sign. The Greek seek after wisdom. We preach Christ crucified to the fence on the both because we don't believe in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ because of a sign and we don't believe in it because of the wisdom of this world. We believe in it by faith and faith cometh by hearing and hearing by the word of God.

Group:	Amen.

Pastor Anderson:	This weak Israelites, they did not have faith when they saw a fire come down and their ?¦ If that fire would have come down for Baal, they would have worshipped Baal. They would have. They would have worshipped Satan right then and there. Then Elijah brings down the fire, but there were 7,000 men who already had not bowed to the knee to the image of Baal before Elijah ever brought down any fire. They just believed it by faith in the Word of God. That's something that we see here, the deception of false miracles, lying signs and wonders.
The Bible warns of this in the Book of Deuteronomy, that a false prophet would come along and do wonders and do miracles and believe him not. Some of it is through sleight of hand and some of it is through the power of Satan. The Bible says that he deceiveth them, verse 14, that dwell on the earth by the means of those miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the beast; saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an image to the beast, which had the wound by a sword, and did live.
"And he had power to give life unto the image of the beast, that the image of the beast should both speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the image of the beast should be killed. And he causeth all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads: And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name. Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast: for it is the number of a man; and his number is Six hundred threescore and six."
Now, in order for this all to play out, there are things that work right now to bring this to past, because the mystery of iniquity does already work. The spirit of antichrist is even now already in the world, and so this is where our evil world is headed today. In order for this story in Revelation 13 to play out, there are some things that are going to have to happen first. In order for ten kings to give all the power unto the antichrist, what do you have to have? You have to have a global system of government in place for the antichrist to take the helm. You're not just going to go overnight from just every nation being completely separate and completely sovereign to just being all united overnight.
No, they're already starting to unite right now and the world government is already in its embryonic stage and it's known as the United Stations. That embryonic world government has to be there in order for this to play out. Not only that, but in order to keep anyone from buying or selling without a mark in their right hand or in the forehead, you must have a cashless society. You see, if you don't have a cashless society, how can you stop people from buying or selling? People do all kinds of illegal buying and selling everyday and no one can stop them because they use cash. You can buy drugs. You can buy illegal weapons. You can buy whatever you want but you're going to be paying cash. If they said, "Hey, you can't buy or sell, but you can produce gold or silver or cash," then could they really stop you from buying or selling? No, you have the black market going.
If there's no cash, if it's all electronic, if it's all on a card, if it's all credit, it's all PayPal, it's all Visa, it's all MasterCard, it's all an electronic debit from your account, then it could easily be rolled out to where you can't buy or sell without a mark in your right hand or in your forehead. These are the things that we already see happening around us preparing for this world system.
Economically, what does this look like? A one world currency where all of the monetary systems have been connected to where you get a mark in your right hand or in your forehead and you can't buy or sell without that mark. Cash will no longer be of any value. Now, why would the cash be of any value? It's a piece of paper. The only reason that that piece of paper that you call a dollar bill has any value is because we think it has value. As long as we have confidence in it and think it has value, it will be worth something. As soon as the government just says, "Your bills are no longer worth anything," they won't be worth anything.
I mean if the government came out today and said, "I'm sorry, but every federal reserve note is now null and void," you could go to the store, you could go to your buddy and offer them stacks of hundred dollar bills and they're not going to take it because they would say this stuff is worthless. It's trash. It's a piece of paper, what good is it? You're trying to get real goods for me, this is worthless money. Now, this has already happened before. I mean all throughout history this has happened. For example, in Germany, after all World War I, when the inflation was driven up so high that literally wheelbarrows of money were needed to buy a load of bread, they just kept adding zeroes and zeroes on to the end of the German currency.
Not only that, but the Confederate States of America was defeated by the United States of America and then the Confederate States of America money was declared to be worthless. You have paper money that has zero value and people had saved up a bunch of Confederate money stuffed in the mattress and is worth nothing. Why? Because it's paper. It has no real intrinsic value. That's what we see with the economic system of cashless society. We see the banking system in place to facilitate these electronic transactions. I mean we're already there to the point where this story could play out.
I'm not saying that this is going to happen in the next year or two. I don't know when this could ?¦ It could happen in the next few years. It could happen a hundred years from now. We don't know. Everybody thinks it's always in their generation, but I'll say this. We have the technology for everything in this story to play out now. It's already there. It could easily shut off access to paper money transactions and just say, "Hey, it's all electronic." I mean now people can take credit cards on a smartphone. You go to a lot of businesses now and it's the trendy thing for them to come to your table with like an iPhone. Who's ever been to a restaurant where they took your credit card on an iPhone literally at a big restaurant? Yeah, I've been seeing it lately.
We've gone places where the waitress will just whip out an iPhone and just "tjjiitt" and just scan your deal and you pay right there with the card. You know what? What do we need cards for? Because cards could be stolen and lost. Why not just get it in your hand and then just "prrrrt," you've paid. That's where this is all going economically. We see where it's going politically where the Europeans have already ?¦ I mean, look, if anybody has hated each other and fought each other historically, it was these European nations. Think about all the wars over the last few thousand years where the European nations have fought and fought and hated each other and fought and fought and fought. Now, we see them all united in the European Union. They're joining together in that conglomerate.
We already have the United Nations. We have the loan superpower, the United States, that literally has bases everywhere. I mean almost every nation in the world is subservient unto the United States. We give money to almost every country in the world. You hear about foreign aid, how our country gives money to almost every country in the world. Why? Because the one who pays the bills is the one who makes the rules, and when you accept people's money there are strings attached. That's why you say, "Why does out country give all these money away? We're in debt up to our eyeballs?" Why? Just to show our power. Just to dominate them. Why? Because we are the headquarters of the world government. In New York, in the United Nations and so forth, I mean we're the main sponsor behind the United Nations as a nation.
We see what's happening monetarily. We see what's happening politically, but what is the devil's plan spiritually? That's what I want to talk about now. What is the spiritual plan here? Because in order to get all nations and all kindreds and all tongues to worship this man, the antichrist, he's going to have to basically create a religion that everybody can agree on. Isn't that right? I mean if you're going to get Hindus to worship this guy, you're going to get Buddhist to worship this guy, you're going to get Muslims to worship this guy, Jews, Christians, and I used the term Christian loosely because the Bible says that none of the elect will be deceived.
No true believer in the Lord Jesus Christ will be deceived, but there are a lot of people who think that there are Christian and there are not. There's a lot of false Christianity out there, apostate Christianity that will be deceived, the unsaved false Christians will believe on the antichrist. Now, who is the antichrist, because what is this going to look like? You say, "Well, why speculate? What does it matter?" Because the mystery of iniquity doth already work. That's why. Let me tell you something. The spirit of antichrist and the mystery of iniquity that is bringing us toward this financial system of the end and it's bringing us toward this political system of the end.
Let me tell you something. It is at work in churches today to bring us toward a one world religion, and that spirit is already infiltrated into even Baptist churches, Christian churches, non-denominational churches to bring us into conformity with this religion that's coming, this worldwide global religion. It's funny. My wife was in Costco today and this guy was behind her in line. He pressured her to let him go first because he had less stuff and my wife, because she's buying a lot of stuff because we have a big family. She's at Costco and this guys tarts talking to John about how sharp he is dressed and he must be at church this morning. He asked him about church and John said, "Well, my dad is a pastor, Faithful Word Baptist Church."
This guy said, "Oh, I'm a pastor, too." This guy's church was called The Logos Center in Scottsdale, and he is explaining to my son that the Greek word "logos" means word which he already knew but he was polite and pretended not to have already known, because it's not polite to be a know it all. When people tell you things, you act like you're hearing them for the first time. That's a polite way to handle that. He told them that and he said, "Oh, check us out online. My wife pulled up on the phone and this guy literally had all these symbols on the website showing like a cross, a yin yang, a Star of Remphan, the crescent of the Muslims, all the different symbols of the world.
He had a book for sale called "Why Jesus Taught Reincarnation." He's talking about giving psychic readings and it says this organization that's bringing all these religions toget- ?¦ You know what? This getting more and more com- ?¦ Baha'i faith, have you heard of it? It's a major religion today and Baha'I faith is all about uniting all religions taking something from Christianity, taking something from Judaism, taking something from Islam and putting it all together, Buddhism, putting it all together. Another one of these religions that's out there that's trying to synthesize religion is the Nation of Islam, the Nation of Islam; Louis Farrakhan and Elijah Muhammad, whatever they're called.	These guys with the newspapers and the sharp haircuts and the suits and they walk around and they sell the newspaper. Who knows what I'm talking about? Yeah.
By the way, did you know that Louis Farrakhan lives in South Phoenix and I've been to his door three times on [inaudible 00:33:33]? He was never home. I've been there three times. I've spoken to his servants. I've preached the gospel onto Louis Farrakhan's  ?¦ I don't want to call them servants, I'm getting all in Bible mode ?¦ his employees there, I guess, you'd call them in our modern vernacular. We've been there? Who's been to his house with me [inaudible 00:33:53]? A couple of people been to his big mansion. It's funny because he lives in a very humble neighborhood but he's got a big, nice house and everything. We talked to those servants and we have gone back and forth with them and given them the whole salvation and they'll tell you we believe in the Bible and the Quran.
That's what the Nation of Islam is. It is a mixing of Christianity and Islam and it goes even beyond that because they will sit there and say that, "Hey, all monotheistic religions of the world are all worshipping the same God," and they're very inclusive and they also were praising the Torah unto us, which is the first five books of the Bible, but they were saying that the Jews, the Jews are wonderful also and their religion is wonderful. We can learn from them and we all go back to the Torah. They said, "Hey, Christianity, Islam, Judaism, we all agree on the Torah and we all agree on Moses, and stuff like that." We're seeing more and more of these interfaith type movements and this uniting of various religions.
I remember, I was putting a fire alarm in a Catholic school one time and lo and behold, I walked in to the Religion class in a Catholic school and the teacher looked like a hippie kind of a guy and he was teaching them about the Tao Te Ching and he was teaching them eastern mysticism as truth as I sat there and worked on the system. I walked down the hall to the Science class and they're teaching evolution. Anyway, all these things are just signs of these religions coming together and putting aside differences and "Hey, let's all agree on one thing.
On the surface, it can sound good, but that's not what the Bible teaches. Now, I got to hurry up because I really want to get in ?¦ This is the main thing I want to get into. Who is the antichrist? What is the spirit of antichrist? What is the focal point of this one world religion? Go to 1 John 2 quickly. 1 John 2. What is it that is going to identify this one world religion of the antichrist? We don't have to wonder about it. It doesn't have to be a wild speculation. The Bible tells us the answer because it says in 1 John 2:22: "Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ?" Let me point out that the word "Christ" means Messiah over and over again. John 1:41, for example, "We have found the Christ," which, being interpreted, is the Messiah.
I know that when Messiah's cometh, that is Christ, he'll show us all things. what is this saying? Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Messiah. He is antichrist, that denieth the Father and the Son. Now, what religion would be best identified by the denial that Jesus is the Messiah? Judaism, because they're the ones who say, "Hey, there's a Messiah. It's not Jesus. They're denying that Jesus is the Messiah and they deny the doctrine of the Father and the Son. That is the antichrist. If one religion is the anti- ?¦ Now, a lot of people say, "Well, all false religions are against Christ." Wait a minute, that's not what antichrist means. Antichrist means in the place of, a guy who's coming in the place of Christ.
Look, if you don't believe Jesus the Messiah, you still believe another Messiah is coming, of course, that's the spirit of antichrist, because who's really coming? The antichrist. Judaism is the antichrist religion that says, "Hey, there's a Messiah out there but it's not Jesus." You can't believe that Jesus is not the Messiah unless you believe that there is a Messiah. If you believe the Messiah doesn't exist, you can't believe that Jesus is not the Messiah because you don't believe in any Messiah. If you say, "Well, there is a Messiah, it's not Jesus," that's Judaism, that's antichrist. Now, this makes perfect sense that Judaism would be the focal point of this world religion because what is it that Islam, "apostate Christianity," and Judaism all have in common? Hey, we all looked back to the Old Testament, the Torah.
Muslims talk a lot about the Torah. We, of course, believe in the true Torah, Genesis through Deuteronomy as found in our Bible here, and then, of course, Judaism tell the Torah even though they don't really follow any of it, but they claim to believe in the Torah. This is basically going to be the religion upon which all these other religions are attached. It's not going to be a situation of just, "Hey, it's going to be a brand new religion out of nowhere." No, it's going to be Judaism. The whole world, listen to me, listen to me now, the whole world is going to be brought into conformity with Judaism. That is the antichrist religion.
If we just look up the word "antichrist" in the Bible, that's what we find, a religion that denies that Jesus is ?¦ That's why he calls them the synagogue of Satan in the Book of Revelation. In the Book of Revelation, the term Jews is only mentioned twice. Both times it refers to them as the synagogue of Satan. Revelation 2:9 and Revelation 3:9. Now, what's interesting, you say, "Okay, well, I can see how the Jews are bringing in these other faiths, because of the fact that, for example, we see a mass movement in 2015." Listen to me. A huge movement of Christians finding their Hebrew roots. It's huge. It's everywhere. I am 33 years old. I'm a young man, but I have never seen or heard of anything like this my entire life except just in the past few years, this mass Hebrew roots movement.
I don't remember this in the '80s. I mean who can testify? I mean do you ?¦ Brother Garrick, do you remember a lot of talk about this in the '80s, '90s, of just every things about going back to the Hebrew roots, but it's everywhere now. Everywhere. It's like, "Oh, we got to get on the Hebrew calendar and the blood moons and the harbinger and Rabbi Jonathan Cahn," and "Oh, we've got to get back to celebrating these feast days and Shabbat, Shalom and gideons," and all this. It is like never before being pushed, this Hebrew roots movement. It's everywhere you turn today more than ever. Then you have on the Pentecostal side this foaming at the mouth, John Hagee, saying, "Hey, Jews don't have to believe in Jesus to be saved because they're saved under the Old Testament and we're saved under the New Testament."
You got that with the charismatic. By the way, did you know about 18,000 people go to his church every Sunday? Isn't that small movement. John Hagee who gets up and says, "Don't evangelize the Jews. Don't give them the gospel. They don't have to believe in Jesus. They're already saved." Eighteen thousand people come to his church. It's huge in San Antonio, Texas. I've talked to people who go there. Then you've got just amongst other Christian groups just this huge movement toward the Hebrew roots and the ?¦ Look, it also goes by this term: Torah observing Christians. It's everywhere.
When you go to the home school convention, it's the buzz amongst the homeschoolers, they're all into it. Whoa! Where is this coming from? You say, "Okay, I can see how they're infiltrating Christianity big time when you've got the Israeli flag and the Star of Remphan and all these other things being portrayed in Christian churches now." You say, "Well, what about religions outside of Christianity, Islam, Judaism. How's Judaism going to bring in the Buddhist and the Hindus. That seems a little far-fetched Pastor Anderson." Oh, not at all. You apparently have never heard of the Jew-Boos. There's a movement known as the Jew-Boos, Jew Buddhist. Now, sometimes they're known as the Boo-Jews. Take your pick: Boo-Jew, Jew-Boo.
Listen to this. Did you know that Jews only make up 2% of the American population but that it is estimated that at least one-third of Western Buddhist in America are Jewish by birth? Aside from all the Asians that are ?¦ Obviously, Asians are coming from Buddhist countries and so forth, but amongst, translation, White people or Black people that are Buddhist, it says one-third of non-Asians that are Buddhist are Jews, even though they're only 2% of the population. Is that a little odd that there's just this huge percentage of them that are these Jew Boos?
Moreover, many of the leading Buddhist teachers in America come from Jewish families including Bernard Glassman, Sharon Salzberg, Joseph Goldstein, Jack Kornfield, Norman Fischer, Bhikkhu Bodhi, Natalie Goldberg, Thubten Chodron, Sylvia Boorstein, Allen Ginsberg, Lama Surya Das, just to name a few. Not only that, but more than one-fourth of the professors teaching Buddhism in American colleges and universities were born Jewish. Hold on. It seems to me that Jews are a major force in Buddhism. They have taken over Buddhism and hijacked Buddhism in a sense. Why? Because there's going to be a uniting of even Judaism and Buddhism. It's already happening.
You hear a lot about the ecumenical movement amongst Christians and you hear a lot about the Chrislam and the Nation of Islam and the merging of the Bible and the Quran and you see the Hebrew roots movement and then you see even Jews saying, "Well, Jesus and the Son of God, he's not the Savior of the world, but he was a Messiah. He was a good teacher. He was a good rabbi," or whatever. Just this merging. Even the Buddhist, my friend, are getting in on this and they're being merged. It's all being brought together.
Listen to what Rabbi Irving Greenberg said: "Tha Dalai Lama taught us a lot about Buddhism, even more about menschlichkeit, and most of all about Judaism." Here's what he's saying. The Dalai Lama taught us about Judaism. Are you listening? "As all true dialogue accomplishes, the encounter with the Dalai Lama opened us to the other faith's integrity. Equally valuable, the encounter reminded us of neglected aspects of ourselves, of elements in Judaism that are overlooked until they're reflected back to us in the mirror of ?¦" what? Buddhism. Buddhism is helping us understand Judaism. The Jew Boos. They're of antichrist.
In fact, I watched a thing recently of this guy, Rabbi Jeremy Gimpel and this guy was speaking at fellowship Bible chapel at a non-denom Christian church. They bring in a Christ-rejecting rabbi that just file and says, "I don't believe in Jesus" and he let him speak for two hours. This guy gets up and he's talking about the Messiah, because they're saying, "Why don't you believe in Jesus?" Because he's like, "Ask me anything. Nothing offends me." Of course, somebody asked him like, "So why not believe in Jesus?" He tells them, "Well, you know, we don't believe in Jesus. Not the Messiah and this and that."
Then somebody else raised their hand and said, "Well, you know, I love you so much and you're so wonderful thou special chosen one, but I'm just nervous that the Jews are going to believe in the antichrist when he comes since they're still looking up for a Messiah. What do you think about that?" I was thinking, "That's a good question." This guy is like, "Well, you know, we don't have any prophecy of the antichrist in the Old Testament or the Talmud, so I'm just not really worried about it. I don't believe in the antichrist." He said, "I'll tell you this."
He said, "When a guy comes and unites the whole world and all religions of the earth accepting and believe on him and all nations believe on him, then I will bow down to him and say, 'You are the Messiah. You are the king of Israel' no matter who he is." He said, "You know what? When that happens," he said, "We'll say it's the first coming. You'll say it's the second coming, but you know what, it won't even matter." This is what he said. He said, "You know, we're going to have some questions for the Messiah when he comes. Is this your first time or your second time here? If he's smart, he won't answer us. He won't tell us if he's smart."
They're like, "I don't have any problem. You think it was Jesus the first time, no problem. They're already ready. The Jews are already saying, 'It's okay if you think it's his second time and we think it's the first time as long as we're already; rallying around him now, as long as he's brought peace now, as long as we're all uniting around him now.'" He said, "The one enemy that has to be destroyed," he said, "is radical Islam and then we'll all be ready." This is what he said. He said, "The Messianic era is so close, oh, we can't taste it. So close I can taste it. It's right there. It's right there." He said, "There's just one more enemy we have to destroy: radical Islam."
Here is the thing. How many Muslims are there in the world? There are over a billion Muslims. I mean Muslim make up a huge population. Here's what he said. He said, "Well, it's not ?¦" Listen. This guy was foaming at the mouth about how bad radical Islam is and he's real upset about it. Let me tell you this, and of course, I'm totally against Islam. Let me tell you this. He said, "I don't want to get rid of Islam." He said, "We don't need to get rid of Islam." He just said there just needs to be a different way of interpreting Islam where it's compatible and can co-exist with Judaism.
See? That's the message today. It's not, "Hey, get rid of Islam; get rid of Christianity." No, no, no. it's unite Christianity and Judaism and Islam and Buddhism and we're all going to join together, but listen, it's the dragon that's behind it. You know what? If you're deceived by it, if you're deceived by it, the Bible ?¦ What's the Bible saying? You're not even saved if you're deceived by it, but we see it creeping in. The Bible says the elect will not be deceived. Look, you can see how people could be fooled by this stuff, don't you? If they don't believe the Bible, they haven't studied it. We see that all coming together now.
Just quickly, let's compare Jesus Christ versus the antichrist as far as what is he going to do when he comes. Go to Psalm 2 quickly. Psalm chapter 2. The message that Judaism is ?¦ By the way, this guy wasn't some liberal ?¦ This guy was an Orthodox Jewish rabbi. He was of one of the straightest sects. I mean he had the fringes, he had the funny hat, and he was literally an important player. He's even a guy that is a political guy over there and he's a player in the Israeli government. He's a an Orthodox rabbi. He's high up in a couple of different organizations and so forth. Even the most Orthodox of the Orthodox is saying, "Hey, we'll co-exist. Hey, we're looking forward to joining with you Christians when our Messiah comes. I can't wait until the Jews and the Christians are worshipping the same God." That's even the Orthodox.
Look, you talk to the liberal Jews, the reformed Jews, they're even more like, "Come on in, Buddhism. Come on in, Hindu. Come on in homosexuality. Come on, it's great. It's wonderful." Look at Psalm 2 because let's see what the differ- ?¦ Because what's the antichrist going to do according to the Bible? All nations and tongues and kindreds will all be won over to him by the miracles. He'll do the miracles and they'll all worship him. He'll unite them all. Let me ask you something. Will Jesus at his second coming unite all religions and be believed on by all the world because of miracles?

Male:	No.

Pastor Anderson:	No. Let's read what the Bible says in Psalm 2. We'll read the entire Psalm. "Why do the heathen rage and the people imagine a vain thing? The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed." See, this uniting of rulers, these nations coming together? It's against the Lord. They're uniting against Jesus. They're uniting against the Bible. They want to unite and bring in wickedness and blasphemy and everything that is anti, everything that we stand for. God says it's in vain. You can't win. You're imagining vain thing.
They take counsel against the Lord and against his anointed. Now, the word "anointed" means Christ. This exact verse is quoted in Acts chapter 4. It says, "Take counsel against the Lord and against his Christ. "Saying," so it's, "Against the Lord and against his Christ saying, 'Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.'" Basically, this is that parable that Jesus told where they said, "We will not have this man to rule over us," refusing the prince of life, refusing the true Messiah, refusing the Lord Jesus Christ and his righteousness.
"We will not have this man to rule over us. Let us break their bands asunder and cast away their cords from us. He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in derision. Â Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure. Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion. Â I will declare the decree: the Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee. Â Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Â Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel."
Does it sound like he is just going to come in do some miracles and everybody is going to believe on him? Now, the first time he came in, did miracles, was rejected. Many believed the words which he spake, but, of course, by the nation as a whole, he was rejected. The Bible says here that when he comes back the second time, he's not going to come meek and lowly riding upon a donkey, riding upon the foal of an ass. He's going to show up the second time in wrath and vengeance to punish the earth. He will set up his kingdom and he will rule with a rod of iron.
He's not going to sit at the negotiating table with Islam, Buddhism, and Judaism. It's not going to happen. He's not bringing Judaism and Buddhism and Hinduism all together. Here's the thing, you say, "How are Hinduism and Buddhism going to unite?" They're already so similar. These Eastern religions are all connected. He says, "Ask of me and I shall give thee." I mean the Lord just gives it to ?¦ The Lord just gives the king of the world to Christ. It's all in his power. Jesus said, "All power is given unto me." He's going to rule with a rod of iron.
Look in verse 10: "Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: be instructed, ye judges of the earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him." Jesus Christ is not coming to unite the religions of the world. He is actually coming to destroy all false religion and to destroy the armies of the antichrist and to just wipe them out. He just has the power to do it, by pouring out his wrath supernaturally. He's not going to come and take power and die and come back again. He's already done that the first time. He's going to come in and he's going to destroy false religion.
What is the Lord Jesus Christ kingdom going to look like? You know what? It's going to be a kingdom of righteousness and godliness and it's going to be a kingdom where he rules with a rod of iron. Look, it's not saying that he's ruling with a wet spaghetti noodle. He's ruling with a rod of iron.

Male:	Amen.

Pastor Anderson:	He's going to break these nations in pieces like a potter's vessel. He's not coming with some ?¦ Here's what's so funny. People think he comes and he's going to be this soft leader that's just going to be like, "Yeah, open sodomy and just total permissiveness." No. Remember all those laws that everybody hates from the Old Testament? Oh, so strict. What do you think is he going to be ruling with?

Group:	Amen.

Pastor Anderson:	Is he going to rule out some whole new law? No, it's going to be the type of laws that you see in the Old Testament. Why? Because it's perfect. It's so funny that we think in our minds as Christians often that he is just going to show up and turn everything into a big United States of America. Like he's going to have a Congress and a Senate and it's going to be all this prison industrial complex and everything. No. It's going to be all the punishments that are in the Bible. That's what's going to be meted out.
Some of you, if you want to rule and reign with Jesus Christ, need to figure that out or else he's going to be like, "You know, I don't know how high of an authority I can give you. You don't even understand my law."

Male:	That's right.

Pastor Anderson:	I mean think about it. If you want to rule and reign, you better understand his laws in order to rule justly. At least you'll have some time up in heaven to get some remedial training. Take Law 101 up there when you get there. Look, I'll just close with it. What's the master plan? What's the title of the sermon? The title of the sermon is "The Devil's Master Plan for the End Times." What's he doing? We could see what he's doing financially. We could see what he's doing politically, this globalism, this internationalism, but what's he doing spiritually? He's bringing all religions together.
When you see a spirit of "Hey, let's bring in the rabbi and start learning stuff from Judaism," that's the worse, because that is actually ?¦ On that wheel of all these different false religions of antichrist, the spoke would be that Star of Remphan. In fact, I wouldn't be surprised if the mark of the beast is that star, because it's a perfect 666, because it's six points and six triangles and it's made by drawing six lines. I mean it could easily be that symbol. Wouldn't surprise me one bit at all if that were the symbol.
Christians are so gaga about the Hebrew roots. They just be so excited to finally get to have their Star of David tattoo or whatever. Just, "Oh, this is how I show my support for Israel." I don't know. I'm not going to try to speculate about that, but the bottom line is this spirit of antichrist that's already in the world, the mystery of iniquity is already working, it's to unite Christianity, Islam, Judaism, Buddhism, Hinduism. That's why we hear Christians talk so much bout karma. It's not karma. It's called whatsoever, a man soweth that shall he also reap. Why don't we use the Bible's term? You're Christian talking about nirvana. It's heaven. Where do we get this eastern mysticism coming in?
This spirit that wants to just bring in all these junk from other religions and bring in all their junk and try to import it into Christianity, that is the spirit of antichrist. When it's coming from Judaism, it's double antichrist. We need to keep our doctrine pure. This is the only book, the Bible. No Tao Te Ching, Quran, none of it. The Bible. Period. End of story. By the way, this teaching out there that says, "Oh, intelligent design." I'm sick of intelligent design. It's Jesus' design.

Group:	Amen.

Pastor Anderson:	I'm sick of people talking about God and the Lord without using the name of Jesus, because it's the name of Jesus that ?¦ There's no other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved. When you hear somebody just talking about God, God, God, God, the Lord, the Lord, the Lord, the Lord, intelligent design, no. It's not intelligent design. It's Jesus spake and created all things. According to Colossians 1, "All things are created by Jesus." According to John chapter 1, "All things were made by Him, and without Him was not anything made that was made."
Rallying around creationism with Jews and other religions, you just believe in intelligent design, that's why I'm not going to get all excited about, and I've never seen this, but everybody talks about this movie with Ben Stein called ?¦ What's it called? Expelled?

Male:	Expelled, yeah.

Pastor Anderson:	Expelled. It shows how there's an agenda to make sure that all the public school kids are brainwashed with evolution, I guess. I guess it's a film exposing out any scientist who comes out in favor of intelligent design. It's basically being exiled from the scientific community, blackballed, can't succeed. That doesn't surprise me. I'm sure that that's true, but I'll tell you what, I wouldn't give you a nickel for that movie because it's made by a Jew. Oh, that's racist. It's not a race. It's a religion. Ben Stein is a White dude and so am I. Am I being accused of being racist against White people?
I'm White. Is there any doubt about the fact that I'm White? Okay, well then, why am I accused of being racist against White people? That's just a cover that they play of we just point out the lies of their religion. I don't want to watch a movie by a guy who denies that Jesus is the Christ. Oh, but it's for intelligent design. Guess what? People were going to hell long before evolution was ever even come up with because evolution is a new teaching form the 1800s. Oh, if we could just defeat  evolution, we're going to get everybody saved. No, because people didn't ?¦ By the way, intelligent design isn't even saying that evolution is not true because a lot of them will believe in like atheistic ?¦ Well, it's intelligent design. He designed evolution. No, it's garbage.
We don't believe in intelligent design. We don't believe in theistic evolution. We believe that the Lord Jesus Christ is our creator and he's our God. There is no salvation in any other. He created this world and this world is not millions of years old. That is a fraud from the devil. You say, "Well, how do you know? Show me the science?" The Bible.

Group:	Amen.

Pastor Anderson:	Oh, you just believe that book. Yes!

Group:	Amen.

Pastor Anderson:	Oh, say, "Oh, so you teach your kids about science. I'm going to teach my kids the Bible."

Group:	Amen.

Pastor Anderson:	This is the true Word of God. This is the science. This is all knowledge that I need. "Ah, you're just an imbecile because you don't understand Star Trek and Star Wars." No, I don't need the science falsely so-called. You know what the Bible says? Avoid oppositions of science falsely so-called. You know what? I know that the Bible is true by the power of the Holy Ghost.

Group:	Amen.

Pastor Anderson:	Not because of any fossil that I've discovered. Let's bow our heads and have a word of prayer. Father, we thank you so much, Lord, that we're saved through the blood of the Lord Jesus. Lord, help that name to be on our lips, Lord, where we don't just talk in vagueness about God like we're a politician but that we actually use the name of Jesus. Lord, when we get around Jews, help us not to just all of a sudden stop using the name Jesus and just switch to God so that we can all rally around it. Lord, help these Hebrew roots teachings not to slip into our church because, honestly, we are different than these other religions and we need to stay separate from them.
If our nation were following you, we would stay separate from the other nations of the world and not be a part of this conglomerate that is against the Lord and against his anointed. Father, help us to be wise and to know the times and to be awake and to watch and be sober and to understand the book that you titled Revelation because you wanted us to understand what you have revealed, not concealed. In Jesus' name we pray. Amen.
 
 
