INTRO.- ILL.- After twenty years of shaving himself every morning, a man in a small Southern town decided he had enough.  He told his wife that he intended to let the local barber shave him each day.  So he went to the barber shop which was owned by the pastor of the town Baptist Church.The barber?s wife, Grace, was working, so she performed the task.  Grace shaved him and sprayed him with lilac water and said, "That will be $20."The man thought the price was a bit high, but he paid the bill and went to work.  The next morning the man looked in the mirror, and his face was as smooth as it had been when he left the barber shop the day before.  Not bad, he thought.  At least I don?t need to get a shave every day.The next morning, the man?s face was still smooth.  Two weeks later, the man was still unable to find any trace of whiskers on his face.  It was more than he could take, so he returned to the barber shop."I thought $20 was high for a shave", he told the barber?s wife, "but you must have done a great job.  It?s been two weeks and my whiskers still haven?t started growing back."The expression on her face didn?t even change, expecting his comment.  She responded, "You were shaved by Grace.  Once shaved, always shaved."Brothers and sisters, you can make whatever you want of this story.  But let me say, once you know the joy of the Lord that joy should remain.  You may have some tough days, but overall, the joy of the Lord should be with you and bless you always.The world knows nothing of this joy.ILL.- Sometime ago, a poor, nervous wreck of a man called on a famous London doctor.  The doctor said: ?You need to laugh.  Go down and hear Grimaldi, the famous clown.  All London is holding its sides laughing at him.?  But the visitor straightened himself and said, ?Doctor, I am Grimaldi.?For me, this illustrates the so-called joy of this world.  It?s artificial.  It?s not real or lasting.  It?s all on the outside.ILL.- For example, look at how many Hollywood actors and actresses get hooked on booze and drugs and spend thousands and in some cases, millions of dollars on these things.  WHY?  Because they haven?t found true happiness.  They are always looking for a bigger high in life.  But they will never find it that way.  For example, the bright young actor, Heath Ledger, who played the "Joker" in the latest Batman movie.  He died on January 22nd of this year from an accidental overdose of prescription drugs.  BUT WHY WAS HE TAKING SO MANY PRESCRIPTION DRUGS?  Was he that sick?  Or was it something else?  Was he perhaps having emotional or spiritual turmoil in his life that he had to take these in order to cope with life?ILL.- As a third-century man was near death, he penned these last words to a friend: "It?s a bad world, an incredibly bad world.  But I have discovered in the midst of it a quiet and holy people who have learned a great secret.  They have found a joy, which is a thousand times better than any pleasure of our sinful life.  They are despised and persecuted, but they care not.  They are masters of their souls.  They have overcome the world.  These people are the Christians and I am one of them."  Amen.John 10:10 "The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy; I have come that they may have life, and have it to the full."I take it from this scripture that Jesus wants to give us a rich life, a full life, an abundant life.  Even though the world that surrounds us is full of lust, greed and evil, we live in a God-world, a God-centered world, and a God-controlled world.  And that is a joy-filled world!PROP.- Our text shows why being a Christian brings joy into our lives.  1- We?re called 2- We?re loved 3- We?re keptI. WE?RE CALLED BY CHRISTTo those who have been called.  Have you been called?ILL.- A middle-aged farmer felt the call to go into ministry and entered a seminary.  However, as the months went by his studies became increasingly difficult for him.  Finally he was called into the dean?s office for counsel. ?What ever made you think you should go into the ministry in the first place?? asked the dean kindly. ?Well, Sir, I was out in the field one day, and suddenly I had this vision.  Up in the sky were two large letters: ?P. C.?  I felt the Lord was telling me to go into the ministry to ?preach Christ? and so I came here to the seminary.? ?But not all of us have to go into the ministry to preach Christ,? said the dean.  ?Did you ever consider that those initials might also have meant ?Plow Corn???ILL.- I have been asked many times in life, "When were you called into the ministry?"  I find that a fascinating question because I can?t pinpoint any specific time. However, just after I was baptized into Christ when I was 20 years old I was encouraged to go to Ozark Bible College in order to increase my Bible knowledge since I was a new Christian.  AND I DID THAT.What happened?  There was a very strong emphasis at Ozark Bible College on evangelism and world-wide missions.  And the more I heard those messages the more it got to my heart.  So I thought I would try my hand at preaching.And, like many first time preachers, I wasn?t very good, but I kept working at it.  And since faith comes by hearing and hearing by the Word of God, my faith began to grow as well as my fire for winning people to Christ.I HAVE BEEN CALLED.  I believe with all my heart that I have been called to preach God?s Word.  And I believe that I have been called to witness for Christ whenever I can and wherever I can.  But God?s calling is not limited to preachers, evangelists and missionaries!  WE?RE ALL CALLED BY GOD!  It?s just some people don?t recognize their calling.What is God?s calling for your life?  He?s called you through the gospel to be saved.  We all want that or should.  But what else?  Does God have a special calling for your life?  Aren?t you supposed to do something for Him and His church on planet earth?  Doesn?t He have a task for you to fulfill?ILL.- When I say a name please tell me the first word that comes to your mind.  Billy Graham.  Tom Cruise.  Muhammed Ali. Michael Jordan.  Al Gore.  Angelina Jolie.  Now here?s another one to try.  YOUR OWN NAME.  If we announced your name, what would people most likely say? What would it be?  Christian.  Devout. Faithful.  Committed to Christ.  Soul winner.  A good witness.  Or perhaps something else?You have been called by Christ to serve Him in some form.  Have you discovered your calling?  And are you doing it?II. WE?RE LOVED BY GODLoved by God the Father.  Wow!  Wonder of wonders!  Wow!ILL.- Some time back my doctor prescribed a strong antibiotic.  He asked me if I had any kind of prescription insurance because he said it was expensive.  I had no idea how expensive he was talking about.  When I went to Walmart to get the prescription filled the lady behind the counter said, "Here is the regular price of this prescription."  DO YOU DARE TO GUESS HOW MUCH?  $387!  Of course, that was for 30 tablets but that?s still $13 a tab.  They told me that was their most expensive antibiotic.I went home and said, "Honey, I now know why I married you!"  Elaine has good insurance.  It only cost me $22.  Thank you, Lord!  And I?m glad that Elaine loves me!!!!And I?m even happier, more thrilled, more excited that God the Father loves me!  Elaine blesses my life in many ways, but God the Father does too.  In fact, He alone can bless my life with eternal life!  SO GUESS WHO DESERVES OUR GREATEST DEVOTION?ILL.- A mother and her little four-year-old daughter were preparing to retire for the night.  The child was afraid of the dark, and the mother, on this occasion alone with the child, felt fearful also.  When the light was out, the child caught a glimpse of the moon outside the window.  ?Mother,? she asked, ?is the moon God?s light??  ?Yes,? said the mother.  The next question was, ?Will God put out His light and go to sleep??  The mother replied, ?No, my child, God never goes to sleep.? Then the child said to her mother, ?Well, as long as God is awake, there is no sense both of us staying awake.? Isn?t this just one example of how much God loves us?  He watches over us at night so we don?t have to be afraid.Psalm 121 1 I lift up my eyes to the hills?where does my help come from? 2 My help comes from the LORD, the Maker of heaven and earth. 3 He will not let your foot slip?he who watches over you will not slumber; 4 indeed, he who watches over Israel will neither slumber nor sleep. 5 The LORD watches over you?the LORD is your shade at your right hand; 6 the sun will not harm you by day, nor the moon by night. 7 The LORD will keep you from all harm?he will watch over your life; 8 the LORD will watch over your coming and going both now and forevermore.   BEAUTIFUL!  Assuring!  In what other ways do we see God?s love for us?Matthew 6:33 "But seek first his kingdom and his righteousness, and all these things will be given to you as well."  The promise of provision.Matthew 7:11 "If you, then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good gifts to those who ask him!" The promise of answered prayer.Matthew 10:32 "Whoever acknowledges me before men, I will also acknowledge him before my Father in heaven."  The promise of being acknowledged by God.  Whoopee!Matthew 10:40 "He who receives you receives me, and he who receives me receives the one who sent me."We get to "double our pleasure" in life.  When we receive Jesus as our Lord and Savior we also get God as our Father!  How rich is that?  Throughout the NT we see the promises of God and they are all because HE LOVES SO VERY MUCH!III. WE?RE KEPT BY CHRISTKept by Jesus Christ: 2Mercy, peace and love be yours in abundance.ILL.- When my twin sister and I were small, perhaps 4 or 5 years old, mom and dad left us in the house to make a quick trip to the grocery store.   Sharon and I had fallen asleep on a bed.  After a short while, however, we woke up and discovered that mom and dad were gone.  We were very much scared.  We thought our parents had left us and we were all alone.  What did we do?  We ran to the neighbor?s house where we knew someone friendly.Brothers and sisters, there may be times in life when we feel like the person who is supposed to love us, has forsaken us.  NOT TRUE FOR GOD OUR FATHER!  We may forsake Him but He?ll never forsake us!Hebrews 13:5-6 "Keep your lives free from the love of money and be content with what you have, because God has said, "Never will I leave you; never will I forsake you."So we say with confidence, "The Lord is my helper; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?"What a tremendous promise from God!  He will not leave us because we have a relationship to Him through His son Jesus.The word "kept" may well indicate God?s desire for us in another way.  Matthew 4:1-3 "Then Jesus was led by the Spirit into the desert to be tempted by the devil.  After fasting forty days and forty nights, he was hungry.  The tempter came to him and said, "If you are the Son of God, tell these stones to become bread." Now picture yourself in the shoes of Jesus.  If you had just fasted 40 days and nights, how would you feel?  Starving!  We often feel this way and we?ve only missed one meal!What did Jesus to Satan when He was tempted?  IT IS WRITTEN.  What if Jesus had given in to Satan?  He wouldn?t have been much of a savior, would he? God His Father KEPT Him from giving in to Satan?s strong temptation.  How so?  With God?s Word.  Jesus quoted scripture. GOD?S WORD IS POWERFUL!  And He keeps us out of trouble by the power of His Word.ILL.- Preacher Chuck Swindoll was once holding a series of meeting in Canada one time.  He said he?d been away from home for 8 days and was having a pity-party for himself.  While riding the elevator to his room in the hotel two ladies were on the same elevator.  He punched #6.  Chuck asked, "Which floor?"  One said, "How about six?  Do you have any plans?"  He said, "We were all alone on that elevator.  I was flattered because most folks don?t usually mistake me for Robert Redford.  These women were available and I was lonely."He said, "Do you know what immediately flashed into my mind?  My wife and four children?  No, not at first.  My position and reputation?  No.  The possibility of being seen or set up?  No."Chuck said here is the thought that came immediately to his mind:  "Do not be deceived.  God is not mocked, for whatever a man sows, that shall he also reap."  WOW!  POWERFUL!  The powerful Word of God KEPT HIM SAFE!  So be it!Psalm 119:11 "Thy Word have I hid in my heart that I might not sin against thee."  Get away from God?s Word and you?ll lose your power and you could lose some of your "keptness."CONCLUSION-------------------What?s it like being a Shepherd?  I like it.  I love the name.  And I?m fortunate enough that it?s spelled correctly!  DO YOU KNOW HOW TO SPELL SHEPHERD CORRECTLY?  When I say, correctly, I mean it?s spelled like it is in the Bible.I have often had people say to me, "Well, that?s a good name for a preacher."  I do take pride in my name, but I am infinitely prouder and far more excited about the One to whom I belong!!!I belong, we belong to the Good Shepherd as do you. He is the great shepherd of the sheep.  We?re blessed to be a part of His flock!  And flock that is blessed and will be eternally blessed!What a joy it is to be one belonging to Christ, a Christian!