Sunday, February 19, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  The sad saga of Daniel and his three little buddies captured and castrated by cruel and merciless Babylonians, has evolved some 2,700 years later into a matchless love letter from our Father to us, His Elect children, in these last of the last days.  "In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah came Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon unto Jerusalem, and besieged it. And the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand, with part of the vessels of the House of God; which he carried into the land of Shinar to the house of his god; and he brought the vessels into the treasure house of his god. And the king spake unto Ashpenaz the master of his eunuchs, that he should bring certain of the children of Israel, and of the king's seed, and of the princes; Children in whom was no blemish, but well favored, and skilful in all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge, and understanding science, and such as had ability in them to stand in the king's palace, and whom they might teach the learning and the tongue of the Chaldeans. And the king appointed them a daily provision of the king's meat, and of the wine which he drank; so nourishing them three years, that at the end thereof they might stand before the king. Now among these were of the children of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, And Azariah: Unto whom the prince of the eunuchs gave names: for he gave unto Daniel the name of Belteshazzar; and to Hananiah, of Shadrach; and to Mishael, of Meshach; and to Azariah, of Abednego. But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself with the portion of the king's meat, nor with the wine which he drank; therefore he requested of the prince of the eunuchs that he might not defile himself. Now God had brought Daniel into favor and tender love with the prince of the eunuchs. And the prince of the Eunuchs said unto Daniel, I fear my lord the king, who hath appointed your meat and your drink; for why should he see your faces worse liking than the children which are of your sort? Then shall ye make me endanger my head to the king. Then said Daniel to Melzar, whom the prince of the eunuchs had set over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, Prove thy servants, I beseech thee, ten days; and let them give us pulse to eat, and water to drink. Then let our countenances be looked upon before thee, and the countenance of the children that eat of the portion of the kings meat; and as thou seest, deal with thy servants. So he consented to them in this matter, and proved them ten days. And at the end of ten days their countenances appeared fairer and fatter in flesh than all the children which did eat the portion of the king's meat. Thus Melzar took away the portion of their meat, and the wine that they should drink; and gave them pulse. As for these four children, God gave them knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom; and Daniel had understanding in all visions and dreams. Now at the end of the days that the king had said he should bring them in, then the prince of the eunuchs brought them in before Nebuchadnezzar. And the king communed with them; and among them all was found none like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: therefore stood they before the king. And in all matters of wisdom and understanding, that the king enquired of them, he found them ten times better than all the magicians and astrologers that were in all his realm. And Daniel continued even unto the first year of king Cyrus." (Dan. 1:1-21.)  Beloved, we are blessed with many young people, and sometimes I think we do not appreciate them near enough. (Well, MOST of the time, I think we appreciate them, ­ almost enough). Many of them give clear evidence that their calling and election is sure. They take up their cross daily, and follow the Lord Jesus Christ. At every transitional period, I worry a lot.  New students and new teachers pose a clear and present danger to their souls ­ and this is no hyperbole, because the National Education Assn. (NEA), has been dominated by the likes of the out-of-the-closet fag Kevin Jennings, who famously said to God, "Screw You, Buddy ­ I don't need you around anymore."  Sunday, February 19, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  That is a direct blasphemous quote from page 101 of Jennings' autobiographical book, "Mama's Boy, Preacher's Son." That's the kind of stuff being taught in all public schools to millions of captive audience school children in America ­ K-12 grades ­ today.  Kevin Jennings' father was a Southern Baptist preacher, and Kevin had the Bible read to him throughout all his formative years. Then he got a scholarship to Harvard, where whatever was left of decency, in Jennings' sordid life and vile message, was lost. Make no mistake: the filthy, Hellbound, godless sodomites totally control the schools of America, and that includes all branches of academia.  About 20 years ago, the humble souls of Westboro Baptist Church felt the moving of the Holy Spirit to take to the streets and call down the wrath of God upon this irreversibly abominable, filthy and evil nation. During the 20 years, we have had more than 48,000+ street-preaching missions, in 50 states and every major city. I tell you, Beloved, in the name of that Holy God Who sent us to preach this message of His condign, inescapable wrath ­ GOD HATES FAGS:  "Thou shalt not lie with mankind as with womankind; it is abomination;" (Lev. 18:22)  "If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination; they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them." (Lev. 20:13)  "Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins." (Isa. 58:1)  "Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, Cause Jerusalem to know her abominations." (Ezek. 16:1)  "Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot, they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded. But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed." (Lk. 17:28-30)  In the meanwhile, Kevin Jennings is busy planning organizations at public expense (e.g., GLSEN, Gay, Lesbian, Straight, Educational Network) with branches in all 50 states; now touted as "a national education organization with a presence in all fifty states." Yes, Beloved, that needs to be seen for what it is; to wit: GOD HATES FAGS, AND FAG ENABLERS; ergo, GOD HATES KEVIN JENNINGS and his GLSEN, network of sodomite evil.  Wake up, America. Jennings and his cohorts of the damned has already corrupted a whole generation of public school students, and his Satanic disciples have positioned themselves to recruit and train at taxpayers' expense the present Hell-bound generation. Just listen to some of the anecdotal swill that Jennings and his good-for-nothing sodomites use as so-called training material. This item was the runner up episode that led to Jennings' `screw you, buddy' insult to God; to wit: Jennings wants us to believe that he was trusting God to change his fag lusts to ordinary lusts, and God let him down. He says he was 17 years old, and "sat alone with the knowledge that, yet again, God's promise of salvation had proven to be an empty one. However willing my spirit might be, my flesh was too weak to resist such temptation. I developed a new attitude toward God as a result. Before, I was the one that was failing God; now I decided He was the one that had failed me. I had tried to please Him, had placed my faith in Him, had prayed for Him to lift this cross from my shoulders, and He had repeatedly let me down. Why put faith in Him? God hadn't saved my dad, hadn't saved me, had done nothing but cause me pain and anguish through His inaction and malevolence throughout my childhood. I DECIDED I HAD DONE NOTHING WRONG; HE had,  Sunday, February 19, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  by promising He would set you free, and never delivering on His promise. What HAD He done for me, other than make me feel shame and guilt? Squat. Screw you, Buddy ­ I don't need you around  any more, I decided. The Baptist Church had left me only a legacy of self-hatred, shame, and  disappointment, and I wanted no more of it or its Father. The long erosion of my faith was now  complete, and I, for many years, reacted violently to anyone who professed any kind of religion.  Decades passed before I opened a Bible again."  And so you see what kind of anti-Christian, godless, Hell-bound garbage is being fed to the captive students of American education ­ to this lost generation. And I do not believe there will be another generation, before the Second Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. Thomas Jefferson was not a Christian. Nevertheless, when he was President, he was also school superintendent for the District of Columbia, and as such, he imposed the requirement that each student have and regularly use his own copy of the Bible (King James Version), and also a copy of the famous 680-page "Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs," by Isaac Watts; valuable as a teaching aid, not only for daily readings in matters of religion, but also for daily readings in matters of accurate reading, writing, history, morals, etc. Isaac Watts (1674-1748) wrote over 750 hymns, many of which survive and are the most cherished hymns of the church today.  Matthew Arnold declared "When I Survey the Wondrous Cross" to be the finest hymn in the English language. Watts has, in fact, been called `the father of English hymnody.' Today, it is doubtful if more than a handful of English-speaking people ­ students, teachers, or parents, ­ could quote from memory the five verses of `When I Survey the Wondrous Cross;' to wit:  "When I Survey the Wondrous Cross, on which the Prince of Glory died, My richest gain I count but loss, and pour contempt on all my pride. Forbid it, Lord, that I should boast, save in the death of Christ my God (!) All the vain things that charm me most, I sacrifice them to his blood. See from his head, his hands, his feet, sorrow and love flow mingled down. Did e'er such love and sorrow meet? Or thorns compose so rich a crown (!) His dying crimson, like a robe, spreads o'er his body on the tree. Then am I dead to all the globe, and all the globe is dead to me. Were the whole realm of nature mine, That were a present far too small; Love so amazing, so divine, demands my soul, my life, my all."  Beloved, can you just imagine a public school (or any school, for that matter) where the pupils learn to read by reading the beautiful prose of the King James Version of the Bible? OK, so maybe that's a bit much, considering the strides the militant sodomites have taken in totally dominating the schools in every state. But do we have to teach the kids to read from trash sodomite books such as "Nancy Has Two Mommies," or whatever? And do we have to teach kindergartners all the sordid details of how babies are conceived and delivered? Beloved, "If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?" (Psa. 11:3.)  Some sixty years ago, at a little Christian and Missionary Alliance Church in Alabama, I heard an old time Gospel preacher preach from that short text; to wit: "If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?" (Psa. 11:3)  Louder and louder he bellowed, repeating his text each time he told some heart-rending anecdote. Have you got his modus operandi? He would give us a brief description of some outrageously sinful event that proved his text, or illustrated his text. Then he would cut loose with another and louder rendition; to wit: "If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do? What can the righteous do? You asking me what can the righteous do? I'll tell you what the righteous can do."  Sunday, February 19, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  And he took a deep breath. And I looked for the roof to blow off. And then the old preacher  thundered: "PLENTY (!) LOOK AT DANIEL AND HIS THREE LITTLE BUDDIES. (!)(!)(!)"  He then proceeded to preach a most magnificent sermon from the first chapter of Daniel. He painted a word-picture of a pitiful little Jewish boy, left an orphan of war, and rendered a miserable captive by the same cruel Babylonian army that had destroyed his home, his country, his religion, and his power to procreate (castration) ­ all pursuant to the ancient prophet Isaiah; to wit: "Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, Hear the word of the Lord of hosts; Behold, the days come, that all that is in thine house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be carried to Babylon; nothing shall be left, saith the Lord. AND OF THY SONS that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt beget, shall they take away; AND THEY SHALL BE EUNUCHS in the palace of the king of Babylon." (Isa. 39:5-7)  Hence, not only is the lad Daniel suffering great afflictions of mind and body and soul, but it appears that the God that Daniel loves and serves with all his heart has been prophesying against him for many years, through the prophet Isaiah. (Isa. 39:5-7.)  Nevertheless, Daniel, in the midst of innumerable providential afflictions, "PURPOSED IN HIS HEART THAT HE WOULD NOT DEFILE HIMSELF," by violating the dietary laws of Moses, or any other way. What a beautiful little vow and prayer to God, spoken from the sincere heart of one of God's young Elect; to wit: "But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself." Dan. 1:8.  Beloved, I am persuaded that the young lambs of this humble flock are as sincere and devoted to the Lord Jesus Christ as Daniel. Read his vow and prayer, over and over. Memorize the passage. Think of it, carefully and accurately. Put yourself in Daniel's place. Before the unprecedentedly devastating, doom of Jerusalem, you have been reading about it, as at Isa. 39:5-7; to wit: "Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, Hear the word of the Lord of hosts; Behold, the days come, that all that is in thine house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be carried to Babylon; nothing shall be left, saith the Lord. And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt beget, shall they take away; AND THEY SHALL BE EUNUCHS in the palace of the king of Babylon." (Isa. 39:5-7)  There you are, Beloved, a young man, no doubt dreaming and planning for a happy home life with wife and children and grandchildren ­ and all of a sudden you hear of Isaiah's prophesy. For her sins, Jerusalem will be completely ruined and looted, all your loved ones will be killed, and you will die childless (castrated). All at the hands of the God that you love and serve. And then, as the years roll by, all of Isaiah's doom's day prophesies begin to be fulfilled. Finally the dreaded day of castration for Daniel arrives, and surgery is scheduled. One does not have to imagine very much. There goes wife, family, and posterity. Such surgery is frightfully irreversible. The Savior said; to wit: "For there are some eunuchs, which were so born from their mother's womb; and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuchs of men; and there be eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake. He that is able to receive it, let him receive it." (Matt. 19:12)  The lesson from young Daniel, whatever the circumstances, "But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself." (Dan. 1:8.)  I love you. Amen.  
