Fall from Grace, Mid-1960s

When Pam gets to junior high, she is scared of everything: the cool ninth-graders, the gossipy girls, the social scene.

There is also the "strangeness," the feeling that she is evil.

She wants to talk to Lynnie, or maybe to her mother, but she doesn't know where to begin, how to tell them she feels "something's odd - within," words she would find much later in an Emily Dickinson poem. But the truth is that, even if someone had asked her what was wrong, she would have snapped, "Leave me alone!"

How can she tell anyone about this sense she's had for a while, that she isn't going to make it? A premonition that she'll never be the sort of grown-up who marries, has kids, holds a job. She is fearful and anxious and clings to Lynnie. She knows this annoys Lynnie - because Pam is supposed to be the one Lynnie leans on. Not the reverse.

Lynnie looks down the junior high hallway and admits to herself: Pammy looks weird. She squishes up against the wall, her arms hanging awkwardly by her side. Her hair is greasy, her clothes mismatched.

Always, in the past, Lynnie has felt flattered when people confused her with Pam. In fact, she has half-wondered why a boy would ever like her, if he could be with Pam. Pam was a version of her, only one step better.

Now Lynnie doesn't want to be associated with Pammy. "Why don't you wash your hair? It's dirty," she would say.

"But I washed it last week," Pam would tell her. She'd wonder to herself, "How do you know it's dirty? What is dirty hair?" and "How did Lynnie know so much about makeup and boys?"

Pammy's grades begin to slump. Concerned, Howard and Marian offer the girls a chance for private school. Both girls apply to Day Prospect Hill School in New Haven.

Pammy is delighted with the offer. The classes are smaller, the girls don't wear makeup. No one has to take a shower after gym. Lynnie scarcely considers it - if there are no boys, she's not interested.

About the age of 13, the girls begin to eat less and less. First Lynnie, who is copying a friend. Then Pammy joins in to keep up with Lynnie, but also for darker reasons related to Kennedy's death and her wish to disappear. By not eating, she hopes to be "one with the wind" or "a pair of ears on the wall."

Sisterly competition takes over. If Pammy has half an apple, Lynnie wants a quarter. The girls eat so many carrots - and so little of anything else - that their skin takes on a yellowish cast.

Dinners are nightmares. While everyone else tries to enjoy their meal, Pammy and Lynnie eat a quarter of a graham cracker and a half a carrot stick.

Inevitably, an argument breaks out. No one remembers exactly why. Looking back, it seems to Pam and Carolyn that their father believed they were eating so little just to annoy him. Often, Howard would make a comment that would send the twins storming from the table. Marian would leave the table angrily, tearfully.

Eventually, only Phil and Martha would be left. "We'd be wondering where everyone went," says Martha. The younger siblings would finish their meal quietly and play table football with a matchbook.

Everyone in the family remembers this time as turbulent. "I'd say in some ways we were worse, in some ways we were better than the average '60s dysfunctional family," says Phil.

The understanding of anorexia was limited then, and it doesn't occur to anyone to get help for the girls. Marian said she and Howard were simply hoping it would pass. "We blamed Twiggy." Thin was very in.

As the girls lose weight, Marian is worried, particularly about Pammy. She is becoming more and more withdrawn while Lynnie is growing more socially adept. The girls at Day Prospect are calling Pammy "zombie" because she avoids eye contact and looks zoned out.

When Pam refuses to serve hors d'oeuvres at her parents' parties, her father scolds her. "Stop this nonsense," he says.

Years later, Marian will wonder if that shyness was an early symptom of Pammy's illness. She also wonders, if Pammy hadn't been a twin, would mother and daughter have talked more? Would she have understood what was going on in her daughter's mind?
