Life with a handicap
The physicians warned of it, but I couldn't no more imagine to get a relapse into this illness. My main problem were the side effects - reduced nose respiration, mouth dryness and sexual disturbances. I also felt emotional very subdued. After 1½ years I stopped taking the tablets as a test against doctor's advice. After 5 days I got anxieties, the heart fluttered, also there were again optical phenomena in the dark (Sonapax withdrawal). After taking a dragee I calmed down again. In the next time I undertook very much. West Berlin was open - investigation tours with the bicycle - many new impressions, beautiful weather - investigation tours in the Mark of Brandenburg country (I had short-time work).
One day I got after something stress suddenly a strong feeling of pressure above the left collar-bone. I started feeling unwell and I took a dragee Sonapax, which I had with me thank God. In the evening I got fear, a trembling and heart anxieties. I thought, I would have to die. The emergency doctor said, I should take again the tablets and go on the next day to my lady doctor. In the following time I had strong pains at the left neck side with shoulder chest radiant emittance. Each effort of brain did pain. Suddenly again there were the allusions from the television. I frightened, however, detected that this came from the overtaxed brain. I withdrew myself. After two weeks the horror was past. 4 weeks after the evening of fear of heart I got also again the magnet phenomenon. I noticed, how a force penetrates my head in a certain direction. The magnetic field of the earth!? After 2 days was also that past. Only strong pulling on the neck remained still several weeks.
My second relapse : After arduous application discussions (by then I was unemployed), after a very painful antibiotic treatment and a stressful highway trip I got such heart anxieties and so much fear in the evening in bed that I thought for seconds: You must kill yourself! It was unbearable, enough to jump out of the window. I calmed down with my own voice. I got over the night - however with nightmare. In the following days I was quite weak. Even discussions at the desk were too much for me. Allusions from newspapers and TV were also again there. If I would have gone into the hospital, they would have given me certainly again Haloperidol. But I wanted to avoid that. After one week of total information abstinence I dared again out of the apartment. Only at a black car I came past only under largest overcoming and with heart anxieties. (with the colours, particularly with red and black, that must be somehow a paleologic of the brain - in the sense: Avoid black, look up red! Why like that is, someone would have to investigate.) The heart pain did not leave so simply. This time there was no magnet phenomenon. With stress the pains in the left chest side swelled again and again. I tried to live and work in such a way that the pains remained in the bounds of the bearable. 1992 I noted for the first time my psychosis memories, with typewriter, and only for the family. In the years before it I had collected the memory fragments on notes, if somewhat occurred to me, I noted it immediately.
Since I get Fluanxol in a low dosage, so I have a normal life, no heart pains occur and the feeling of head pressure disappears, which is present without medication. I am thus absolutely dependent on this medicine, in order to stay healthy. A little relapse again: Trigger was one night without sleep. I got again heart anxieties and fear, so that I could not drive with the rapid-transit railway. The many passengers and their discussions are in such a status too much stress. Sleep is very important for me. I need my 9 hours.
A problem is also, how do I tell the not visible handicap to my environment. If I have no choice but to tell someone something about my illness then I say only, I have it with the nerves or it is a metabolic disease - the diagnosis is not of their business, schizophrenia sounds not so good either, does it?