 2009-2-8 Loving Enemies.doc MLB 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here, 

the winter cold breaking at last, 

to worship, to celebrate the fullness of our lives,
 to weigh our lives in the same scales 

as music, stars, robins and whales, 

and to give thanks for our human heart, 

and our capacity to reason together. 

 
And so, though our ways of thinking and feeling abo
ut the meaning of our days may 
differ, we agree to journey together, side by side,
 face to face. Within this circle of 
strong spirit, mutual care, and ethical vision, may
 we ourselves remain open to 
being transformed by a welcoming heart and emerging
 justice. 
 
Sequence
  
The sun shines,  

the rain falls,  

the stars reel. 

It must be me.  

It must be you and me together 

who notice, who praise, who thank. 

The world hurts,  

and love hurts sometimes. 

It must be me.  

It must be you and me together 

who feel, embrace, heal, hold and speak out. 

Music nourishes,  

the very food of love, 

and it is me, it is you, it is you and me together 

who produce it with joy  

and are fed by it. 

But the world nourishes too 

with its own music 

of late winter robins and distant whalesongs, 

and Venus brightly piercing the night; 

and we are fed by that music,  

and so we thank, 

and praise,  

and then set down our praise  

for the safe heaven of this silence
.    
 
                           
silence
 
  
Hearts rejoice, hearts hurt:  

the songs of grandchildren,  

the lament of loss–
 and so we write ourselves  

into the music of love  

by naming aloud,  

or inside, the loves of our lives,  

the losses, 

the uncertainties.  

It must be you and me together 

who do this,  

who compose such music    

 
naming
  
 
Music nourishes,  

the very food of love, and it is me,  

it is you,  

who now are wondrously fed. 

 
The Readings
  
The 
First Reading
 comes from Obery Hendricks brilliant book, the 
Politics of Jesus
, 
published in 2006. I personally think it™s the fine
st religious book to have come out in this 
century.  

 
In 1990, House Whip Newt Gingrich hired professiona
l pollsters to produce what 
commentator Bruce Miller calls ?a lexicon of demoni
zation.? Gingrich circulated the 
results of the poll in a memo entitled ?Language: t
he Key Mechanism of Control.?  The 
memo instructed conservative politicians to describ
e liberals as often as possible by using 
pejorative words and phrases, including ?sick, path
etic, traitors, anti-flag, anti-jobs, anti-
family, corrupt, selfish, cheat, steal, criminal ri
ghts, permissive attitudes, pessimistic and 
radical.? 

 
Ann Coulter, a darling of the right, has made a cot
tage industry of demonizing liberalism. 
She writes ?Even terrorists don™t hate America the 
way liberals do.?  Sean Hannity 
equates liberalism with wickedness without you even
 having to open his 2004 book 
Deliver Us From Evil: Defeating Terrorism, Despotis
m and Liberalism.
 Journalist 
Michael Savage shows eagerness for his own ideas to
 be similar by the title of his book 
?Liberalism is a Mental Disorder.?
  
 
Not only do conservatives paint the political philo
sophy of liberalism as the product of 
insanity, they actually characterize it as the crea
tion of the devil. Rev. Jerry Falwell 
declared, ?Our battle is with Satan himself.? 

 
 Today™s conservatives (
most of whom claim to be Christian of some sort
) seem to ignore 
some of Jesus™ most important pronouncements, such 
as ?Love your enemies.? By this 
Jesus did not mean to give enemies free reign to wr
eak harm and havoc. He was referring 
to the disposition of one™s heart, to the importanc
e of ?keeping track of one™s own 
humanity,? as Cornel West puts it. 

 
The Second Reading
 is a wonderfully clear and spiritual poem by the la
te and great 
Polish poet Anna Swir. It™s called ?I Do Not Accept
.? 
 
I Do Not Accept 

 
I renounce this fingernail already worn 

by my grandfather. 

This head occupied for two thousand years 

by the bloody body of Julius Caesar. 

 
The dead sit on me like a mountain.   

The carrion of barbaric epochs, 

of bodies and thoughts decays in me. 

Cruel corpses of centuries 

ask that I be as cruel as they. 

 
But I am not going to repeat 

their dead words. 

I have to give myself  

a new birth.  I have to 

give birth to a new time. 

 
Sermon
  
Cruel corpses of centuries
, writes Anna Swir, 
ask that I be as cruel as they. 
But I am not going to repeat 

their dead words. 

I have to give myself  

a new birth.  I have to 

give birth to a new time. 
 
Those are beautiful lines to me. Clear and concise 
as good poetry often is. 
 
Anna Swir uses a phrase often associated with evang
elical Christianity. A ?new birth.? I 
have to give myself a ?new birth,? she says. It sou
nds a lot like ?born again,? to me. 
 
But Swir is not writing as an evangelical, or even 
a Christian. She is using the metaphor 
of new birth in a very different way. She is not tu
rning from her own personal sins, but 
from the cruelties of the culture in which she has 
been raised.  She speaks of Caesar™s 

 assassinated corpse, inside her head, bloody and de
ad, the carrion of the centuries, the 
decay of the ages. The human violence of ten thousa
nd years. Anna Swir wants to be 
born again, thrust out of that history, that cultur
e, that system, in which 
she
 was born, into 
a whole new world. And I think she would like us to
 join her. 
 
Anyone who has learned history from grade-school on
 up is filled to overflow with 
horrific images: with the trenches and stench of mu
stard gas, the billowing smoke rising 
above Auschwitz, the blazing desert oil wells, the 
rubble of cities, the wail of sirens, the 
verbal violence of propaganda and innuendo. 

 
Anna Swir wants to be born into a new life where vi
olent actions and language are not 
the norm, where she can be free to be kind, loving,
 caring, supportive, cooperative and 
tender. 

 
Guess what? I want to born again too, into that sam
e world. 
 
But before I am born again into a world where viole
nt action and language is not the 
norm, I have to be born again in myself.  I have to
 renounce the world of violent language 
and action in 
me
. After all, like most of us in this room, I have b
een soaking it up like a 
sponge all my life–from hearing the show 
Gunsmoke 
on the radio when I was a kid, 
(bang, bang) to seeing very well-intentioned but st
ill chilling films about violence like 
Schindler™s List
. And, I have also seen what I would call more porn
o-graphic films about 
violence, like almost everything Governor Schwartze
negger ever did in his movie star 
days, and most late-show horror movies involving th
e slashing of teenagers in some 
haunted house. The news-papers, the websites, the c
able news shows: reports of violence 
and innuendos are simply everywhere.  Like air. 

 
Obery Hendricks, in his magnificent book, 
The
 Politics of Jesus
, points out that some of 
the violent and distorting language of our 
present
 era was actually planned and created by 
real human persons. He names Newt Gingrich for exam
ple. Although this idea of 
orchestrating nasty language seems like a cynical t
hing to do, it was also, perhaps, 
strangely insightful about a great deal of human re
sponsiveness. Because God knows the 
response from many liberals has been tit for tat, n
ame for name, demonization for 
demonization. Sean Hannity, named by Rev. Hendricks
 as one of the blossoms grown 
from the seeds sewn by Gingrich, now even has a sec
tion on his popular TV show where 
political liberals get to call in, and then rant an
d rave and shout at him, denouncing him 
personally, which they do with explosive invective 
that probably has Mr. Gingrich 
rocking with glee. Mr. Hannity just smiles, and giv
es you that look:  ?See? Told you all 
the liberals were crazy!? 

 
As a Christian professor at Union, Obery Hendricks 
distances himself from the equally 
Christian (Roman Catholic) Hannity™s theological pr
onouncements about liberals by 
reminding us that Jesus™ central teachings were ent
irely liberal. Yes, 
that
 Jesus, the son of 
Mary, who was born in the Galilee two millennia ago
, and who died during the rule of the 
Roman prefect Pilatus in the year 30 or thereabouts
. 
That
 liberal Jesus. Now, of course, 
not liberal or progressive in the modern 
American
 political sense; I am not telling you 

 that Jesus has breakfast with President Obama every
 morning–that would be taking him 
out of time and place. But liberal in the basic mea
ning of the word:  generous to one and 
all, egalitarian, compassionately just, and radical
ly welcoming. 
 
Now as you know, over the centuries since his death
, people have made a big deal about 
Jesus. They turned him into a God. They converted h
im into a philosophical abstraction, 
or a frightening judge to scare children at summer 
camp. They painted him as a blond in a 
bathrobe and hung the picture in church parlors. Or
, more recently, among a small circle 
of skeptics, they have denied he ever lived, assumi
ng he was simply the god of wheat 
dressed up by cunning storytellers, or even a fairy
 tale invented by 
way
 too clever 
profiteers. 

 
As I have made clear over and over, none of these o
ptions are supported by the peer-
reviewed critical methods I have always found most 
trustworthy in uncovering historical 
reality as best we can. And today I uplift the gene
ral consensus of modern critical 
historians that although we can™t say much about Je
sus for sure, (where he was born, 
what he looked like etc), and although more than ha
lf of the words attributed to him come 
from later minds, later generations, there 
is
 little question that the historical person at the 
core of the reports actually said (albeit in his ow
n tongue):  ?Love your enemies.?  
 
Sadly, Christian commentary on that ancient proclam
ation is the history of avoidance and 
squirming, with very few exceptions. Part of the sq
uirming, of course, has to do with the 
word ?enemy? itself, which is hardly a soft and eas
y word. But ?love? is the word that 
really gets in the way.  ?How could anyone find any
 love in their heart for a brutal family 
member, a monstrous political tyrant (fill in the b
lank) or an oppressive religious leader?? 
 
But this word ?love? doesn™t say anything about lov
e in the sense of feeling, love of the 
romantic or appreciative or even worshipful kind. I
t simply uses the Greek verb ?agapao? 
which means to love with the mind rather than with 
the heart or body. It means to 
decide
 to love, not to 
fall
 in love, or 
warm up 
to someone.  
 
Furthermore, to love one™s enemy does not refer to 
isolated family brutes in the first 
place–no, the whole context of those words is set i
n a discussion of how to respond to 
the occupying army of Rome. And it doesn™t involve 
feeling cuddly toward a centurion 
(or your abusive father), it involves 
refusing to forget
 the essential, if damaged, humanity 
of the centurion– or your father. 

 
What does that mean? To love one™s enemies means to
 remember that those who oppress 
are also caught up in their own web of oppression, 
and that they 
can be reminded
 of that. 
When you love your enemy you never forget or deny t
he violence of your oppressor–on 
the contrary, you name their oppressions loud enoug
h for them to hear. But, you invite 
them, by your actions–
not
 your feelings–to understand what they are doing to
 you in a 
new way. Jesus gave many examples of what this mean
s - both hair-raising and 
humorous - but let™s use a modern example instead. 
Let™s cross the ocean–after all, far 
away examples always seem to be easier to take than
 things too close to home. This story 
comes from Walter Wink, a brilliant liberal Christi
an theologian. And it takes place in 

 South Africa during the days of Apartheid, when whi
tes ruled and blacks suffered.  
Picture a city street if you will. A sidewalk. A bl
ack woman, about 35, is walking down 
the street with her three children, ranging in age 
from, say, five to ten. An older white 
man, his face distorted with his own inner bile, wa
lks past the woman and spits in her 
face. She looks at him with a smile and says ?Why, 
thank you! And now, for the 
children–? 

 
Suddenly made conscious of what he has done, his co
nscience suddenly alive, the white 
man™s face falls, droops. He darts across the stree
t, and tries to get away from the painful 
self-reflection on his experience with the woman an
d her children. But I assure you, he 
will not be able to run away from it–it will shadow
 him all the rest of his days–and 
sleepless nights. 

 
By saying what she said, she loved her enemy. She d
id not imagine him to be beyond 
hope, or worthy of crucifixion, but rather, she inv
ited his heart to open to what he was 
actually doing. His act was totally despicable, but
 she still regarded him as human as 
herself. And her act serves to clarify the meaning 
of loving one™s enemy.  To love one™s 
enemy is to affirm that the human race is not divid
ed into two, and only two, 
categories–the indescribably good, and the monstrou
sly evil.  To love one™s enemy is to 
affirm that we either all work together  (despite t
he suffering visited upon some humans 
by other humans), or we don™t have even a small cha
nce to survive until the end of the 
century.  It™s to realize with Anna Swir that, in o
rder to survive, we have to be 
deliberately born again as human beings who refuse 
to continue to do what our ancestors 
did before us:  

Cruel corpses of centuries, 
she writes, 
 ask that I be as cruel as they.  

But I am not going to repeat 

their dead words. 

 
You see, loving enemies is a decision, not a romanc
e.  
 
?I am not going to repeat
–? she insists–even if she 
feels
 like she wants to. 
 
Now the story of the woman in South Africa is a ver
y dramatic example. And the 
children™s story we heard this morning was a very p
layful reminder that many people 
who irritate us are not really our bitter enemies–w
e may just misunderstand their 
motivations, context or approach, and over time, we
 will come to love them, with warm 
feelings and everything. 

 
So I want to offer you an example somewhere between
 these two poles. I hope this will 
illuminate the phrase ?love of enemies? clearly. 

 
Before the recent Presidential inauguration, I read
 and heard all of the complaints that 
Pastor Warren was going to offer the invocation at 
that amazing event. Most of the upset 
came from a community that I suppose I am part of, 
the so-called ?gay community.? But, 
unlike many vocal protestors, and even though I am 
in no way an evangelical Christian 

 (or a Christian at all, in any ordinary meanings of
 that term), I was actually moved by 
Senator Obama™s leadership in asking Warren to pray
.  
 
The issue as to whether there should be prayers at 
all at such a function is not on my 
mind today (although I think if you™re waiting arou
nd for that to change before another 
century passes, you may have to live with disappoin
tment). 
 
President-elect Obama knew that this country is mad
e up of people of all kinds, including 
people, like Warren, with distorted and disastrous 
understandings of people like me. But 
this guy is not going to just wake up one morning a
nd suddenly be a pro-gay/lesbian 
marriage champion. Picketing his church, writing hi
m excoriating letters, chiding him for 
his prejudicial and unkind biblical interpretations
 may make 
me
 feel good, but it™s hardly 
appealing to this man™s humanity. Or my own, for th
at matter. 
 
And Pastor Warren is human. To categorize him or hi
s compatriots as devils, as 
monsters, is to merely take a page from his theolog
y book and fling it back at him. It™s to 
divide the world up between the saved and the damne
d, the right and the wrong, the 
righteous and the evil, the ?us? and the ?them,? th
e ?either? and the ?or.?  
 
Did he say cruel things during the Prop 8 campaign 
in California? Yes. I can™t interpret 
them any other way. Does he proclaim things I find 
baffling and outside the realm of 
what I would ordinarily call moral, i.e. the blood 
atonement of Christ, the reality of hell 
etc.? Yes, indeed. Do I think he has spoken from bo
th sides of his mouth at times? Yes. 
There is enough evidence of that. And is he a human
 being, a citizen of the nation I claim 
as my own, I who also am a human being? Yes. Vilify
ing him will not change him. But, 
inviting him to pray in front of the world, in fron
t of literally billions of people, as 
Senator Obama did, appealed to his very real humani
ty. And Pastor Warren, wouldn™t 
you know it, rose to the occasion. In a country whe
re many televised conservative 
evangelical mouths (Robertson, Hagee, etc.) excoria
te Islam on a daily basis, Warren 
quoted from the Qu™ran several times, beautifully. 
In a world where the president of the 
Southern Baptist Convention once famously said, ?Go
d does not hear the prayer of a 
Jew,? Warren quoted the 
Sh™ma
, the foundational Jewish devotional text. And in t
he 
middle of his prayer, he said, ?When we focus on ou
rselves, when we fight each other, 
forgive us. We are united 
not by religion
–(i.e. this is NOT a 
Christian
 nation MLB)– 
but by our commitment to freedom and justice 
for all
. Help us to share, to serve and seek 
the common good for all.? And at the end, he didn™t
 pray in the name of Jesus Christ 
Our
 Lord, co-opting all listeners as if they were part 
of some Christian Nation. No, he spoke 
only of his own personal experience, which he did n
ot foist off onto anyone else.  
 
Pastor Warren spoke the downright liberal words I j
ust quoted. They are everywhere on 
the internet. He cannot take them back. ?Freedom an
d justice for all.?  ?Seek the common 
good for all.? These are progressive words. Inclusi
ve words. Expressions of what Obery 
Hendricks would call, with acclaim, ?liberalism.? 

 
 Admittedly, I would have prayed a much different ki
nd of prayer had I been asked. I do 
not share theology with Pastor Warren at most count
s. But, so what? He rose to the 
occasion from within his tradition, stretching it t
o be as inclusive as possible.  
 
As I say, this is as the President-Elect suspected 
he would.
 President Obama, you see, is a 
sort of liberal Christian. He disagrees with Warren
 on many things, including, quite 
pointedly, Roe Vs. Wade, which he has said to his f
ace. But he knows that he has to be 
president of a nation that includes folks like Warr
en by the tens of millions. And millions 
more even more conservative in theology and politic
s. 
 
And that, if the conservatives were to kill off all
 the liberals they excoriate, and the 
liberals were to kill off all the conservatives tha
t make them blow steam out of their ears, 
we™d end up with a whole nation of righteous, but v
ery dead corpses. Dead as Caesar 
with knife wounds, dead as Jesus with nail wounds, 
dead as healing women and heretics 
burned to piles of white ash, dead as a thousand mi
llion slaves. 
 
Warren is not Obama™s enemy at the level of that So
uth African woman™s white 
oppressor. But their disagreements are real and pow
erful, and there is no question that 
Pastor Warren used oppressive language in Californi
a. I think President-elect Obama was 
completely aware of that. But Mr. Obama chose to de
cide to act in a loving way even to a 
man who, although good in many ways, has really hur
t my brothers and sisters. By doing 
so, Senator, now President, Obama, I think, demonst
rated a far greater respect for the 
teachings of Jesus than Pastor Warren did in Califo
rnia. 
 
But in asking him to pray, he appealed to a humanit
y deeper than his religion, and 
Warren rose to the occasion. I am not so cynical as
 to think it was calculated, by the way, 
politics as usual, a just-for-show-choice. I think 
it was a principled decision, based on the 
teachings of Jesus, the wise Galilean Jew. And for 
that matter, the gay Quaker Bayard 
Rustin, the Baptist Martin Luther King Jr., the Hin
du Mahatma Gandhi, the Catholic 
humanist Danilo Dolci, the Muslim Badshah Khan, the
 Maori Te Whiti, the mothers 
circling the Plaza in Argentina and the Unitarians 
and Universalists Noah Worcester, 
Lydia Maria Child, Mary Ovington, John Haynes Holme
s, and Adin Ballou.   
  

That™s real leadership, by the way. Taking such ris
ks. And I applaud the president for it. 
Anna Swir is right. To continue to use the violent 
language of our dead ancestors is to 
perpetuate their bloodshed all over again. To call 
those who despise us as devils by the 
same names they call us is only to mirror and slavi
shly imitate their tragic games. To 
name their cruelty plainly, to resist it, to find w
ays to call them to account, but to refuse 
to demean them or use violence against them, is to 
be born anew, and to recognize that all 
of us, all of us are human, and that we™re all equa
l in the eyes of Love. 
 
Offering
  
We offer an opportunity for folks who are members a
nd friends of this congregation to 
express their love for this house of challenge and 
care by bringing something of their 
substance to the common purse. Some send their gift
s by mail, others by computer, and 

 some bring them forth in this time when we speak of
 our deepest values. Thank you for  
your kind gifts, however you give them. 

 
Bartokian Prayer 
(to a tune in the Concerto for Orchestra by Bela Ba
rtok) 
 
And when the winter clouds fade away, 

and the ground below our feet warms, 

we™ll know that soon the shoots  

of a scented spring  

will be blossoming by the May. 

 
And when the human heart human stays, 

and when frozen hate also warms 

we™ll know that soon a peace 

better than any spring 

has a chance to hallow our days. 

