Growing up a Spiro

If Marian Spiro had stopped after the twins, she might have doubted the existence of "a mother's instincts."

Pammy and Lynnie were collicky and hard to soothe. It seemed to the young mother - far from home on an Army base in Washington state - that as soon as she calmed one down, the other would kick up.

Marian and Howard had met in the late '40s at Harvard University; she was a technician in the lab where he was doing medical research.

A Fall River, Mass., native with a Mayflower Pilgrim in her lineage, Marian, then 21, was strong-minded though shy.

Howard Spiro (pronounced SPY-ro), 25, whose father was a Lithuanian immigrant and lawyer, grew up in Newton, Mass., and had excelled: He went to Harvard College and on to Harvard Medical School.

At first, Marian was irritated by Howard. She found him bossy - how dare he tell her the Friday after Thanksgiving was a workday? "It's not a workday for me because I'm going home," she announced.

But the fireworks between them had more to do with attraction than aversion. They married in 1951. He joined the Army and they moved to Tacoma, Wash., where the twins were born on Nov. 17, 1952.

Two years later, Phil, dubbed Chipper, arrived. And then in three years Martha came. By then the family had moved to Connecticut and Howard was teaching at Yale School of Medicine.

Marian found it far easier to mother her younger children. She was more likely to talk to them one to one. And they were more likely to come to her with their troubles.

Pam and Lynnie turned to each other for comfort. It was difficult for Marian to bond individually with them because they were such a twosome. It was always: Chipper, Martha and "the girls."

Carolyn says now, "No question, our mother felt left out, pushed out, kept out."

During those early years, Marian was a stay-at-home mom with diverse interests - all of which she shared with her children.

She taught them basketball, tennis, swimming, sailing. She took a geology course, and led her children on walks to help them identify mica or shale.

When Lynnie didn't care for reading, Marian could understand why. What's interesting about Dick, Jane and Sally? So Marian wrote stories that would pique Lynnie's interest, and put up a ballet bar and mirrors in the cellar when the girls took dance. She built them a small stage in a bedroom for their dramas.

At Yale, Howard was acquiring prestige and success. He was writing what would become the textbook on gastroenterology for many years.

Howard loved his tiny flock, insisting when they were small that they be kept awake until he got home from the office. To him, Pammy and Chipper were the ones with the most promise; later they would say they could never do well enough to please him. Lynnie was more timid, more likely to cry. Martha, the youngest, was the most easygoing. Pam's interests ran most parallel to her father's: literature, history, religion.

Often, Howard would gather his children on his lap to tell them Bible stories and Greek myths. The stories were sometimes frightening - particularly one of the Greek myths. Pam thought her father was talking about her: "Pam-dora's Box."
