Sunday, April 21, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 1  "But some man will say; how are the dead raised up? And  with what body do they come? Thou fool." (1 Cor. 15:35,36.)  This abrupt answer by Paul suggests that the great apostle may be running out of tolerance for such rhetorical questions. If so, Paul gives way too much credit for the knowledge of his posterity. After preaching all over America for more than 60 years, I can testify that almost nobody is ready to give an answer -- a good, clear, crisp, short answer -- to that question; to wit: "With what body do they come?" The short answer is as follows: If the soul died asleep in Jesus, his new body will be beautiful, powerful, agile, and impassible (impervious to pain); if the soul died outside of Christ, his resurrected body will be in all important points the opposite. Make no mistake, sinner; YOU WILL RISE FROM THE DEAD. YOUR SCOFFING DAYS ARE OVER. Westboro Baptist Church and her fellow martyrs -- from Adam to the end of time -- suffered much at your bloody hands.  When you reach your end of days, you will have full and complete knowledge of your circumstances; because we at WBC have carefully preached to you. Listen again -- carefully -- to this most important of all messages to you; to-wit: YOU WILL RISE FROM THE DEAD -- LIKE IT OR NOT. You will be weak, ugly (think, hideous, brute beast. Frankenstein Monster, Gargoyle mutant beast); and experience unbearable pain incessantly, day and night 24/7. Even as the just in their resurrection do come forth in incorruption, the unjust in their resurrection, shall come forth in their corruptions; for though the ungodly at their resurrection, shall for ever after, be incapable of having body and soul separate; or of their being annihilated into nothing, yet it shall be far from them to rise in incorruption; for if they arise in incorruption, they must arise to life, and also must have the conquest over sin and death. But, that they shall not; for it is the righteous only, that put on incorruption, that are swallowed up of life. "But some man will say, How are the dead raised up? and with what body do they come? Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die: And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain: But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to every seed his own body. All flesh is not the same flesh: but there is one kind of flesh of men, another flesh of beasts, another of fishes, and another of birds. There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another. There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption: It is sown in dishonour; it is raised in glory: it is sown in weakness; it is raised in power: It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body. And so it is written, The first man Adam was made a living soul; the last Adam was made a quickening spirit. Howbeit that was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural; and afterward that which is spiritual. The first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is the Lord from heaven. As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy: and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly. Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the  Sunday, April 21, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 2  kingdom of God; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption. Behold, I shew you  a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, In a moment, in  the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the  dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this corruptible  must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. So when this  corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on  immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is  swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy  victory? The sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks  be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore,  my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work  of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord."  (1 Cor. 15:35-58)  The wicked's resurrection, it is called the resurrection of damnation. "Verily, verily, I say unto  you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and  shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death unto life. Verily, verily, I say  unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of  God; and they that hear shall live. For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to  the Son to have life in himself; And hath given him authority to execute judgment also,  because he is the Son of man. Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that  are in the graves shall hear his voice, And shall come forth; they that have done good, unto  the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. I  can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge; and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me." (Jn 5:24-30.)  These, in their very resurrection, shall be hurt of the second death. They shall arise in death, and shall be under it, under the gnawings, and terrors of it, all the time of their arraignment. As it were, a living death shall feed upon them; they shall never be spiritually alive, nor yet absolutely dead; but much after that manner, that natural death, and hell, by reason of guilt, doth feed on him, that is going before the judge, to receive his condemnation to the gallows. You know, though a felon go forth of the jail, when he is going to the bar for his arraignment, yet he is not out of prison, or out of his irons for that; his fetters are still making a noise on his heels, and the thoughts of what he is to hear by and by from the judge, is still frightening and afflicting his heart; death, like some evil spirit or ghost, doth continually haunt him, and playeth the butcher continually in his soul and conscience, with frights and fears about the thoughts of the sudden, and insupportable aftermath, that by and by, he will meet.  Therefore I say, the wicked will come out of their graves, having yet the chains of eternal death hanging on them, and the talons of that dreadful ghost fastened in their souls; so that life will be far from them, even as far as heaven is from hell. This morning to them, is even as the shadow of death. They will then be in the very terrors of the shadow of death. (Job 24:17.) As Christ saith, "Where their worm dieth not and the fire is not quenched." (Mk 9:44.) From death to eternity, it never shall be quenched, their bed is now among the flames; and when they rise, they will rise in flames; while they stand before the judge, it will be in flames, even in the flames of a guilty conscience. They will, in their very coming before the judge, they will be already within the jaws of death and destruction. I love you. Amen.  Sunday, April 21, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 3  Thus I say, the ungodly shall be far off from rising as the saints; for they will be even in the region and shadow of death. The first moment of their rising, death will be ever over them, ever feeding on their souls; and ever presenting to their hearts, the heights and depths, of the misery that now must seize them, and, like a bottomless gulf, must swallow them up. "They shall move out of their holes like worms of the earth: They shall be afraid of the Lord our God..." (Micah 7:17)  Further, as the resurrection of the godly shall be a resurrection in glory; so, the resurrection of the wicked, will be a resurrection of great dishonour. Yea, as the glory of saints, at the day of their rising, will be glory unspeakable; so the dishonour of the ungodly at that day, it will be dishonour beyond expression. As Daniel saith: "And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt." (Dan. 12:2.) And again, "As a dream when one awaketh; so, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shalt despise their image." (Ps. 73:20.)  Never was a toad or serpent more loathsome to any, than these will be in the eyes of God, in their rising forth of their graves. When they go to their graves, saith Job, "His bones are full of the sin of his youth, which shall lie down with him in the dust." (Job 20:11.) And arise they shall, in the same noisome and stinking condition; for as death leaves, so judgment finds them. At the resurrection then of these ungodly, they will be in a very loathsome condition. The ungodly at their death are like the thistle seed, but at their rising, they will be like the thistle grown, more noisome, offensive, and provoking to rejection abundance. Then such dishonour, shame, and contempt will appear in them, that neither God nor Christ, saints nor angels, will so much as once regard them, or vouchsafe once to come near them. "He beholdeth the wicked afar off," because in the day of grace, they would not come to hand, and be saved, therefore now they shall, all as thorns, be thrust away, as with fences of iron. "But the sons of Belial shall be all of them as thorns thrust away, because they cannot be taken with hands: But the man that shall touch them must be fenced with iron and the staff of a spear; and they shall be utterly burned with fire in the same place." (2 Sam. 23:6-7)  Their rising, is called the resurrection of the unjust, and so they at that day will appear, and will more stink in the nostrils of God, and all the heavenly hosts, than if they had the most irksome plague-sores in the world running on them. If a man at his birth, be counted as one cast forth to the loathing of his person; how loathsome, and irksome, dishonorable, and contemptible, will those be that shall arise Godless, Christless, Spiritless, and graceless, when the trumpet sounds to their judgment, they coming out of their graves, far more loathsome, and filthy, than if they should ascend out of the most filthy hole on earth. As the just shall arise in power, so the wicked and unjust, in weakness and astonishment. Sin and guilt bringeth weakness, and faintness in this life; how much more, when both with all their power and force, like a giant, fasten on them; as God saith, "Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong, in the days that I shall deal with thee? I the Lord have spoken it, and will do it." (Eze. 22:14.) Now will the gastly jaws of despair gape upon thee, and now will condemnings of conscience, like thunder-claps, continually batter against the weary spirit. It is the godly that have boldness in the day of judgment. "Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment: because as he is, so are we in this world." (1 Jn 4:17)  But the wicked will be like the chaff which the wind driveth away. (Ps. 1:4.) Oh the fear, and the heart-aching that will seize them in their rising! The frightful thoughts that then will fill  Sunday, April 21, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 4  their throbbing hearts! Now must that soul that hath been in hell-fire among the devils possess  the body again. Possess it, I say, pangs shall take hold on them!  "Howl ye; for the day of the Lord is at hand; it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty. Therefore shall all hands be faint, and every man's heart shall melt: And they shall be afraid: pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them; they shall be in pain as a woman that travaileth: they shall be amazed one at another; their faces shall be as flames. Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate; and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it." (Isa. 13:6-9)  Everything they see, hear, or think of, shall tend to their discomfort. They must needs be weak, whom God hath left, whom guilt hath seized, and whom death is swallowing up for ever. As the just shall arise spiritual bodies, so the unjust shall arise only as mere and naked lumps of sinful nature; not having the least help from God, to bear them up under this condition. Wherefore, so soon as ever they are risen out of their graves; they will feel a continual sinking under every remembrance of every sin, and thoughts of judgment; in their rising they fall ­ fall! I say, from thenceforth, and for ever. And for this reason the dungeon into which they fall is called "bottomless." "And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand." (Rev. 20:1)  Because, as there will be no end of their misery, so there will be no stay or prop to bear them up in it. Only, as I said before, they shall not now, as afore, be separate body from soul; but both together, be bound in the cords of sin and iniquity, in which they shall now tremble as thieves and murderers, as they go before the Judge, to hear what he will say unto them.  Now, when the wicked are thus raised out of their graves, they shall, together with all the angels of darkness, their fellow-prisoners, be brought up, being shackled in their sins, to the place of judgment; where there shall sit upon them Jesus Christ, the King of kings and Lord of lords, the Lord Chief Judge of things in heaven, things in earth, and things under the earth. On whose right hand, and left, shall sit all the princes, and heavenly nobles; the saints and prophets, the apostles and witnesses of Jesus; every one in his kingly attire, upon the throne of his glory. "Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles; Prepare war, wake up the mighty men, let all the men of war draw near; let them come up: Beat your plowshares into swords, and your pruninghooks into spears: let the weak say, I am strong. Assemble yourselves, and come, all ye heathen, and gather yourselves together round about: thither cause thy mighty ones to come down, O LORD. Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat: for there will I sit to judge all the heathen round about. Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe: come, get you down; for the press is full, the fats overflow; for their wickedness is great. Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision: for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision. The sun and the moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall withdraw their shining. The Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem; and the heavens and the earth shall shake: but the Lord will be the hope of his people, and the strength of the children of Israel." (Joel 3:9-16) Then shall be fulfilled that which is written, "But those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me." (Luke 19:27.)  I love you. Amen.  
