VI . THE HARLEM " HATE-GANG " SCARE

In May, 1 964, the New York daily newspapers began to increase circulation with lurid stories about the alleged existence of a band of young Negroes, calling themselves "Blood Brothers, " who had been organized by "dissident Black Muslims" to maim and kill whites. In response to the newspaper incitation against black militants and black nationalists, the Militant Labor Forum of New York or­ ganized a symposium on "What 's Behind the 'Hate-Gang ' Scare?"

Invitations to speak were accepted by Junius Griffin, New   York   Times reporter who had written a series of articles claiming that such a "hate-gang" did exist in Har­ lem; Clifton DeBerry, presidential candidate of the Socialist Workers Party; Quentin Hand, assistant executive director of the Harlem Action Group; William Reed, of New York

CORE; and Ja mes Shabazz, secretary to Malcolm X.

Two last-minute changes were made in the panel of speakers. Griffin decided that journalistic ethics did not permit him to speak at the symposium and withdrew. Malcolm X, who had recently returned from his first trip abroad, asked permission to substitute for James Shabazz and replaced him at the symposium, which was held on May 2 9 at the Militant Labor Forum Hall. His remarks on this occasion made it plain that his trip abroad, while broadening his views on race, had in no way altered his militancy against racial oppression; and that, in addition, it had deepened his identification with the colonial revolu­ tion and introduced new elements into his thinking about capitalism and socialism.

Mr. Chairman, fellow speakers, friends: I didn't know until this   afternoon about the forum this evening. But one of my co-workers, who is very able and capable,

The Harlem "Hate-Gang" Scare                        65

Brother J ames [ Sh abazz], told me about it, and I couldn't resist the opportunity to come. Some writer said one of my weaknesses is that   I   can't resist a platform. Well, that's   perhaps true.   Whenever   you have something to say and you're not afraid to say it, I think you should go ahead and say it, and let the chips fall where they may. So I take advantage of all platforms to get off my mind what's on it.

Also, they say travel broadens your scope, and re­ cently   I've   had an opportunity to do a lot of it in the Middle East and Africa. While I was traveling I noticed that most of the countries that had recently emerged into independence have turned away from the so-called cap­ italistic system in the direction of socialism. So out of curiosity, I can't resist the temptation to do a little investi­ gating wherever that particular philosophy happens to be in existence or an attempt is being made to bring it into existence.

Thirdly, the first time I ever heard about the "Blood Brothers," I happened to be in Nigeria, in West Africa. And someone, a doctor, a Nigerian but who had spent too much time in Europe, was the first one to bring it to my attention, and ask me about it. It didn't make me sad at all. And I don't see why anybody should be sad or regret­ ful in any way, shape or form - if such does exist. I re­ call in   1 959 when everybody began to talk about the Black Muslims, all the Negro leaders said no such group existed. In fact, I recall, on the Mike Wallace show Roy Wilkins was   asked about the   Black Muslims; he said he never heard of it - and then they flashed a picture of

him on the screen shaking hands with me.

And I think one of the mistakes that our people make - they're too quick to apologize for something that might exist   that the power structure finds deplorable or fmds difficult to digest. And without even realizing it, sometimes we try and prove it doesn't exist. And if it doesn't, some­ times   it   should.    I am   one person who believes   that anything the black man in this country needs to get his freedom right now, that thing should exist.

As far as I'm concerned, everybody who has caught the same kind   of hell that I have caught is my blood

-----------------------------------------------------Page 35-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
66                                 Malcolm X Speaks

b rother.   And I h ave plenty of them. Because all of us have caught the same hell. So the question is, if they don't exist, should they exist? Not d o they exist, should they exist? Do they have a right to exist? And since when must a man deny the existence of his blood brother? It's like denying his family . . . .

If we're going to talk about police brutality, it's be­ cause police brutality exists. Why does it exist? Because our people in this particular s ociety live in a police state. A black man in America lives in a police state. He doesn't live in any democracy, he lives in a police state. That's what it is, that's what Harlem is. . . .

I visited the Casbah in C asablanca and I visited the one in Algiers, with some of the brothers - blood brothers. They took me down into it and showed me the suffering, showed me the conditions that they had to live under while they were being occupied by the French. . . . They showed me the conditions that they lived under while they were colonized by these people fro m Europe. And they also showed me what they had to do to get those people off their b ack. The fust thing they had to realize was that all of them were brothers; oppression m ade them brothers; exploitation m ade them brothers; degradation made them brothers; discrimination made them brothers; segregation m ade them brothers; humiliation made them brothers. And once all of them realized that they were blood brothers, they also realized what they had to do to get that man off their b ack. They lived in a police state; Algeria was a p olice state. Any occupied territory is a police state; and this is what H arlem is. Harlem is a police state; the police in H arlem, their presence is like occupation forces, like an occupying army. They're not in H a rlem to protect us; they're not in H arlem to look out for our welfare; they're in H arlem to protect the interests of the businessmen who don't even live there.

The   same conditions that p revailed in Algeria that forced the people, the noble people of Algeria, to resort eventually to the terrorist·type tactics that were necessary to get the monkey off their b acks, those same conditions prevail today in America in every Negro community.

The Harlem "Hate·Gang" Scare                         67

And I would be other than a man to stand up and tell you that the Afra.Americans, the black people who live in these communities and in these conditions, are ready and willing to continue to sit around nonviolently and patiently and peacefully l ooking for some good will to change the conditions that exist. No! . . .

Police   Commissioner Murphy is a d angerous man. He's dangerous because either he lacks understanding or he has   too   much understanding and knows what he's doing. If he's functioning as he is from lack of knowledge and understanding, he' s d angerous; and then if he's doing as   he is from understanding, he's dangerous. Because what he's doing is creating a situation that can lead to nothing but bloodshed. Almost every public statement he makes is designed to give the police in H arlem courage to resort to tactics that are inhuman.

And in my opinion this type of incitement on the part of the police commissioner to make these policemen act other than they should, stems from a lack of understand· ing of the true spirit that exists among the young gener· ation in   H a rlem.   He must have been misinformed by some of that old generation who have been ready and willing to suffer brutality at the hands of someone just because   he has   on a uniform. Nowadays, our people don't care who the oppressor is; whether he has a sheet or whether he has on a uniform, he's in the same category. You will find that there is a growing tendency among us, among our people, to do whatever is necessary to bring this to a halt. You have a man like Police Com· missioner Murphy - and I'm not against the law; I'm not against law enforcement. You need laws to survive and you need law enforcement to have an intelligent, peaceful society; but we have to live in these places and suffer the type of conditions that exist from officers who lack under­ standing and who lack any human feeling, or lack any feeling for their fellow human being . . . . I ' m not here to apologize for the existence of any blood brothers. I ' m not here to minimize the factors that hint toward their existence. I 'm here to say that if they don't exist, it's a miracle . . . . If those of you who are white have the good of the

-----------------------------------------------------Page 36-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
68                                  Malcolm   X Speaks black people in this country at heart, my suggestion is that you h ave to realize now that the day of nonviolent resis­ tance is over; that the day of passive resistance is over . . . . The next thing you'l1 see here in America - and please don't blame it on me when you see 1t - you will see the same things that have taken place among other people on this earth whose condition was p arallel t.o the 22 million Afro-Americans in this country.

The people of China grew tired of their oppressors and the people rose up against their oppressors. They didn't rise u p nonviolently. It was easy to say that the odds were against them, but eleven of them started out and today those eleven control 800 million. They would have been told back then that the odds were against them. As the oppressor always points out to the oppressed, " The odds are against you."

When Castro was up in the mountains of Cuba, they told him the odds were against him. Today he's sitting in H avana and all the power this country has can't remove him.

They told the Algerians the s ame thing: 'What do you have to fight with?" Today they have to bow down to Ben Bella. He came out of the jail that they put him in, and today they ha' e to negotiate with him because he knew that the one thing he had on his side was truth and time. Tim:e is on the side of the oppressed today, it's against the oppressor. Truth is on the side of the oppressed today, it's against the oppressor. You don't need anything else. I would just like to s ay this in my conclusion. You'll see terrorism that will terrify you, and if you don't think you'll see it, you' re trying to blind yourself to the historic development of everything that's taking place on this earth today. You 'll see other things.

Why will you see them? Because people will realize that it's impossible for a chicken to produce a duck egg-even though they both belong to the same family of fowl. A chicken just doesn't have it within its system to produce a duck egg. It can't do it. It can only produce according to what that p articular system was constructed to produce. The system in this country cannot produce freedom for an Afro-

The Harlem "Hate-Gang" Scare                         69

American. I t is impossible for this system, this economic system, this political system, this social system, this system, period. It's impossible for this system, as it stands, to pro­ duce freedom right now for the black man in this country. And if ever a chicken did produce a duck egg, I'm quite sure you would say it was certainly a revolutionary chkken!

From the Question Period

Question:   What political and economic system does

Malcolm X want?

Answer: I d on ' t know. But I'm flexible . . . . As was stated earlier, all of the countries that are emerging today from under the shackles of colonialism are turning toward socialism. I don't think U's an accident. Most of the coun­ tries that were colonial p owers were capitalist countries, and the last bulwark of capitalism today is America. It' s impossible for a white persor to believe i n capitalism and not believe in racism. You can't have capitalism without racism. And if you find one and you happen to get that person into a conversation and they have a philosophy that m akes you sure they don't have this racism in their outlook,   usually   they're   socialists or their political philosophy is socialism.

Question: Do you think it's possible for an integrated organization working within a country like this to succeed, with the C aucasian members of the organization conspicu­ ous in the organization?

Answer: That's a very important question. Because it boils right down to the b asic tactics that have been em­ ployed by the various groups during the past ten years whe n the freedom struggle has gotten so much publicity. If you notice, the outstanding characteristic of the freedom struggle that is partidpated in by integrated groups has always been nonviolence. Any time you have an integrated group the emphasis is always on nonviolence. Because it has been substantiated, when you study these integrated groups, that usually the whites, who get involved in the action where the Negro is supposed to benefit if they're

-----------------------------------------------------Page 37-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
70                                     Malcolm X Speaks

successful, are more inclined toward taking a nonviolent approach.   That is what is causing the black people to become suspicious.   And the groups that are ready to flght are usually not integrated. So all we say is this: We feel we've waited long enough. And we feel that all this crawling and sitting-in and crying-in and praying­ in and begging-in hasn't gotten any meaningful results. In my recent travels into the African countries and others, it was impressed upon me the importance of having a working unity among all peoples, black as well as white. But the only way this is going to be brought about is that the black ones have to be in unity first. Then those whites who want to help cannot help by joining and leading in the struggle f which they've tried to do in the p ast. If the whites are genuinely interested in the freedom of the black people in this country, you don't need to give us a crutch. The black man has to be shown how to free himself, and the white one who is sincerely interested has to back what­ ever that black group decides upon to do. . .     .

Question: [About his letter from Mecca on religion. J Answer: Travel broadens one's scope. Any time you do any travel, your scope will be broadened. It doesn't mean you change - you broaden. No religion will ever make me forget the condition   of our people in this country. No religion will ever make me forget the continued fighting with dogs against our people in this country. No religion will make me forget the police clubs that come up 'side our heads. No God, no religion, no nothing will make me forget it until it stops, until U's flnished, until it's eliminated. I want to make that point clear . . . .

We will work with anyone, with any group, no matter what their color is, as long as they are genuinely interested in taking the type of steps necessary to bring an end to the injustices that black people in this country are afflicted by. No matter what their color is, no matter what their political, economic or social philosophy is, as long as their aims and objectives are in the direction of destroying the vulturous system that has been sucking the blood of black people   in   this country, they're all right with us. But if

The Harlem "Hate-Gang " Scare                         71

they're i n any way that compromising, dangerous type of person, then we think they should be dealt with. When the Algerians were struggling for their freedom, some Frenchmen came and said, WWe're with you." Okay, the Algerians accepted them, but they first tested them. They s aid, "Prove it." I won't tell you what the test was, but they put them to the test. Nowadays, as our people begin to wake up, they're going to realize, they've been talking   about   Negro revolt,   Negro   revolution     You can't talk that stuff to me unless you're really for one. I don't .even want to hear it unless you're really for one. And most of you aren't. When the deal goes down, you back out every time.

From the Summary

So in essence, the summary is that there's a problem that is confronting the black people. And until the problem of the black people in this country is solved, the white people h ave a problem that's going to cause an end to this society, system and race as you know it. The best way to solve your problem is to help us solve our problem. I'm   not   a   racist. I've never been a racist. I believe in indicting the system and the person that is responsible for our condition.

And the only defense that the people, who are in con­ trol of the power structure and system that's exploiting us, have had is to label those who indict it without com­ promise as racists and extremists. Now if there are white people who are genuinely and sincerely fed up with the condition that black people arE' in, in America, then they have to take a stand, but not a compromising stand, not a tongue-in-cheek stand, not a nonviolent stand.