X I I I . A FT E R TH E B O M B I N G

On Feb ruary 1 3 , 1 965, Malcolm X returned home from a trip to the European continent where, amo ng other things, the French g overnment had, Without explanation, barred h im from entry. A few hours later, at 2:30 a. m. on Feb ru­ ary 1 4, Molotov cocktails were hurled into the home in East Elmhurs t, Queens, where Malcolm, h is Wife and four young   children   were asleep.   The house was seriously damaged,   but the family managed to escape with out injury.   In the following week Malcolm actually had to defend himself agailist h ints and charges, sp read by the police,   the p ress   and   the Black Muslims, that he h ad arranged the arson-bomb ing himself.

Malcolm was scheduled to speak o n the day of the b om bing at a tneeting in Detroit sponsored by the Afro­ American   Broadcasting   Company.   Although   he   was fatigued and distraught, he felt it necessary to appear a t this meeting, which the local press had refused to publi­ cize in any way.

Attorney Milton Henry, distinguished guests, brothers and sisters, ladies and gentlemen, friends and enemies: I want to point out first that I am very happy to be here this evening   and   I   am   thankful to the Afro-American Broadcasting Company for the invitation to come here this evening. As Attorney Milton Henry has stated - I should   say   Brother Milton   Henry because that's what he is, our brother - I was in a house last night that was bombed,   my   own. It didn't destroy all my clothes but you know what fire and smoke do to things. The only thing I could get my hands on before leaving was what I h ave on now.

It isn't something that made me lose confidence in what

-----------------------------------------------------Page 81-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
158                                  Malcolm X Speaks

I   am   doing, because my wife understands and I have children from this size on down, and even in their young age they understand. I think they would rather have a father or brother or whatever the situation may be who will take a stand in the face of reaction from any narrow­ minded people rather· than to compromise and later on have to grow up in shame and disgrace.

So I ask you to excuse my appearance. I don't nor­ mally come out in front of people without a shirt and tie. I guess that's somewhat a holdover from the Black Muslim m ovement which I was in. That's one of the good aspects of that movement. It teaches you to be very careful and conscious of how you look, which is a positive co ntribu­ tion on their p art. But that positive contribution on their p art is greatly offset by too many liabilities.

Also, last night, when the tem perature was about 20 above and when this explosion took place, I was caught in what I had on - some pajamas. In trying to get my family out   of the house,   none   of us stopped for any clothes at that point, so we were out in the 20 degree cold. I got them into the house of the neighbor next . door. I thought   perh aps   being in that condition for so long I would get pneumonia or a cold or something like that, so a doctor came today, a nice doctor, and shot something in my arm that naturally put me to sleep . I've been back

there as leep ever since the program started in order to

get b ack in shape. So if I have a tendency to stutter or slow down, it's still the effect of that drug. I don't know what kind it w as, but it was good; it makes you sleep, and there' s nothing like sleeping through a whole lot of excitement.

Tonight   one   of the things that has to be stressed, which    has    not , only    the   United States   very   much worried   but   also   has   France, Great Britain and most of the powers   who formerly were known as   colonial powers   worried,    and   that   is   the   African   revolution. They   are   m ore   concerned with the revolution   that is taking place on the African continent than they are with the   revolution in   Asia   and in    Latin   America.   And this   is   because there   are   so   many   people   of African ancestry within the domestic confines or jurisdictions of

After the Bombing                                   159

these   various   governments .       There   is   an   increas­ ing number of dark-skinned people in England and also in France.

When I was in Africa in May, I noticed a tendency on the part of the Afro-Americans to - what I call lolly­ gag. Everybody else who was over there had something on the ball, something they were doing, something con­ structive.   Let's take Ghana as an example. There would be many refugees in Ghana from South Africa . . . . Some were being trained in how to be soldiers but others were involved as a pressure group or lobby group to let the people   of   Ghana   never forget what   happened to   the b rother   in South   Africa.   Also   you had brothers there from Angola and Mozambique. All of the Africans who were exiles from their p articular country and would be in a place like Ghana or Tanganyika, now Tanzania ­ they would be training.   Their every move would be de­ signed to offset what was happening to their people back home where they had left. . . . When they escaped from their respective countries   that were still colonized, they didn't try and run away from the family; as soon as they got where they were going, they began to organize into pressure groups to get support at the international level against the injustices they were experiencing b ack home. B ut the American Negroes or the Afro-Americans, who were   in these various countries, some working for this government, some working for that government, some in business - they were just socializing, they had turned their back on the   cause over here, they were partying, you know. When I went through one country in p articular, I heard a lot of their complaints and I didn't make any move.   But when I got to another country, I found the Afro-Americans there were m aking the same complaints. So we sat down and talked and we organized a branch in this particular country of the Organization of Afrb­ American Unity. That one was the only one in existence at that time. Then during the summer when I went back to Africa, I was able in each country that I visited to get the Afro-American community together and organize them and make them aware of their responsibility to those of us who are still here in the lion's den.

-----------------------------------------------------Page 82-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
160                                  Malcolm   X Speaks

They began to do this quite well, and when I got to Paris   and London - there are many Afro-Americans in Paris, and m any in London- in November, we organized a group in Paris and within a very short time they had grown into a well-organized unit. In conjunction with the African community, they invited me to Pa'ris Tuesday to address a large gathering of Parisians and Afro-Americans and   people from the   Caribbean and also from Africa who were interested in our struggle in this country and the rate of progress that we have been making. But the French government and the British government and this government here, the United States, know that I have been almost fanatically stressing the importance of the Afro­ Americans uniting with the Africans and working as a coalition, especially in areas which are of mutual benefit to all of us. And the governments in these different places were frightened . . . .

I might p oint out here that colonialism or imperialism, as the slave system of the West is called, is not something that is just confined to England or France or the United States. The interests in this country are in cahoots with the interests in France and the interests in Britain. It's one huge complex or combine, and it creates what's known not as the American power structure or the French power structure, but an international power structure. This in­

After the Bombing                                   161

that structure - I hope you understand what I am trying to say.   The newly awakened people all over the world pose a problem for what is known as Western interests, which is imperialism, colonialism, racism and all these other negative isms or vulturistic isms. Just as the external forces pose a grave threat, they can now see tha� the in­ ternal forces pose an even greater threat. But the internal forces pose an even greater threat only when they have properly analyzed the situation and know what the stakes really are.

Just advocating a coalition of African, Afro-Americans, Arabs, and Asians who live within the structure automati­ c ally has upset France, which is supposed to be one of

the most liberal countries on earth, and it made them ex­

pose their hand. England is the same way. And I don't h ave to tell you about this country that we are living in now. When you count the number of d ark-skinned people in the Western hemisphere you can see that there are prob­ ably over 1 00 million. When you consider Brazil has two­ thirds what we call colored, or non-white, and Venezuela, Honduras and other Central American countries, Cuba and Jamaica, and the United States and even Canad a ­ when you total all these people up, you have probably over 100 million. And this 100 million on the inside of the power structure today is what is causing a great deal

ternational power structure is used to suppress the masses

of concern for the power structure itself . .

.

.

of dark-skinned people all over the world and exploit them of their natural resources, so that the era in which you and I have been living during the past ten years most specifically h as witnessed the upsurge on the part of the black man in Africa against the power structure.

He wants his freedom and now. Mind you, the power structure   is   international,   and its domestic   base is in London, in Paris, in Washington, D. C., and so forth. The outside or external phase of the revolution which is mani­

fest in the   attitude and action of the Africans today is

We thought that the first thing to do was to unite our people,   not only internally, but with our brothers ar,d sisters abroad. It was for that purpose that I spent five months in the Middle East and Africa during the summer. The trip   was very enlightening, inspiring, and fruitful. I didn't go into any African country, or any country in the M iddle East for that matter, and run into any closed door, closed mind, or closed heart. I found a warm re­ ception and an amazingly deep interest and sympathy for the black man in this country in regards to our struggle

troublesome enough. The revolution on the outside of the

for human rights .

.

. .

hQuse,   or the   outside of the   structure,   is troublesome enough. But now the powers that be are beginning to see

that this   struggle on the outside by the black man is

affecting, infecting the black man who is on the inside c.

I hope you will forgive me for speaking so informally tonight, but I frankly think it is always better to be in­ formal. As far as I am concerned, I can speak to people better in an informal way than I can with all of this stiff

-----------------------------------------------------Page 83-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
162                                   Malcolm X Speaks

formality that ends up meaning nothing. Plus, when people are informal, they are relaxed. When they are relaxed, their mind is more open, and they can weigh things more objectively. Whenever you and I are discussing our prob­ lems we need to be very objective, very cool, calm and collected. That doesn't mean we should always be. There is a time to be cool and a time to be hot. See - you got messed up into thinking that there is only one time for everything. There is a time to love and a time to h ate. Even Solomon said that, and he was in that book too. You' re just taking something out of the book that fits your cowardly nature when you don't want to fight, and you say, "Well, Jesus said don't fight." But I don't even believe Jesus said that . . . .

Before I get involved in anything nowadays, I have to straighten out my own position, which is clear. I am not a racist in any form whatsoever. I don't believe in any form of racism. I don't believe in any form of dis­ crimination or segregation. I believe in Islam. I am a Muslim and there is nothing wrong with being a Muslim, nothing wrong with the religion of Islam. It just teaches us to believe in Allah as the God. Those of you who are Christians probably believe in the same God, because I think you believe in the God who created the universe. That's the one we believe   in, the one who created the u niverse - the only difference being you   call him God and we call him Allah. The Jews call him Jehovah. If you could understand Hebrew, you would probably call him Jehovah too.   If you could understand Arabic, you · would probably c all him Allah. But since the white man, your friend, took your language away from you during slavery,   the only language you know is his language. You know your friend's language, so when he's putting the rope around your   neck,   you call for God and he calls   for God.   And   you wonder why the one you call on never answers . . . .

Elijah Muhammad had taught us that the white man could not enter into Mecca in Arabia and all of us who followed him, we believed it . . . . When I got over there and went to Mecca and saw these people who were blond and blue-eyed and pale-skinned and all those things, I

After the Bombing                                  163

s aid, "Well," but I watched them closely. And I noticed that though they were white, and they would call them­ selves white, there was a difference betweell them and the white ones over here. And that basic difference was this: In Asia or the Arab world or in Africa, where the Muslims are, if you find one who says he's white, all he's doing is using an adjective to describe something that's incidental about him, one of his incidental characteristics; there is nothing else to it, he' s just white.

But when you get the white man over here in America and he says he's whlte, he means something else. You can listen to the sound of his voice - when he says he's white, he m eans he's boss. That's right. That's what white means in this language. You know the expression, "free, white and twenty-one." He made that up. He's letting you know that white means free, boss. He's up there, so that when he says he' s white he has a little different sound in his v oice. I know you know what I ' m talking about . . . . Despite the fact that I saw that Islam was a religion of brotherhood, I also had to face reality. And when I got back into this American society, I ' m not in a society that practices brotherhood. I ' m in a society that might preach it on Sunday, but they don't practice it on any day. America is a society where there is no brotherhood. This society is controlled primarily by the racists and segregationists who are in Washington, D. C., in positions of power. And from Washington, D.C., they exercise the s ame forms of brutal oppression against dark-skinned people in South and North Vietnam, or in the Congo, or in Cuba or any other place on this earth where they are trying to exploit and oppress. That is a society whose government doesn't hesitate to inflict the most brutal form of punishment and oppression upon d ark-skinned people all over the world.

Look right now what's   going on in   and   around Saigon and Hanoi and in the Congo and elsewhere. They are violent when their interests are at stake. But for all that violence they display at the international level, when you and I want just a little bit of freedom, we' re supposed to be nonviolent. They're violent in Korea, they're violent

-----------------------------------------------------Page 84-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
164                                  Malcolm X Speaks

in Germany, they're violent in the South Pacific, they' re violent in   Cuba, they're violent wherever they go. But when it comes time for you and me to protect ourselves

against lynchings, they tell us to be nonviolent.

That's   a shame. Because we get tricked into being nonviolent,   and   when somebody stands   up   and talks like I just did, they say, "Why, he's advocating violence." Isn't that what they say? Every time you pick up your newspaper, you see where one of these things has written into it that I am advocating violence. I have never ad­ vocated any violence. I h ave only said that black people who are the victims of organized violence perpetrated upon us by the Klan, the Citizens Councils, and many other forms, should defend ourselves. And when I say we should defend ourselves against the violence of others, they use their press skilfully to make the world think that I am calling for violence, period. I wouldn't call on anybody to be violent without a cause. But I think the black man in this country, above and beyond people all over the world, will be more justified when he stands up and starts to protect himself, no matter how many necks he has to break and heads he h as to crack . . . .

The Klan is a cowardly outfit.. They have perfected the art of m aking Negroes be afraid. As long as the Negro is afraid, the Klan is safe. But the Klan itself is cowardly. One of them never come after one of you. They all come together. They're scared of you. And you sit there when they're putting the rope around your neck saying, "For­ give them , Lord, they know not what they do." As long as they've been doing it, they're experts at it, they know what they're doing. No, since the federal government has shown that it isn't going to do anything about it but talk, then it is a duty, it's your and my duty as men, as human beings, it is our duty to our people, to organize ourselves and let the government know that if they don't stop that Klan, we'll stop it ourselves. Then you'll see the government start doing something about it. But don't ever think that they're going to do it just on some kind of mo­ rality basis. No. So I don't believe in violence - that's why I want to stop it. And you can't stop it with love, not love of those things down there. No! So, we only mean vigorous

After the Bombing                                   165

action in self-defense, and that vigorous action we feel we're j ustified in initiating by any means necessary.

Now, for saying something like that, the press calls us   racist and people who are "violent in reverse." This is how they p sycho you. They make you think that if you try to stop the Klan from lynching you, you're practicing violence in reverse. Pick up on this, I hear a lot of you parrot what the man says. You say, " I don't want to be a K u Klux Klan in reverse." Well, if a criminal comes around your house with his gun, brother, just because he' s got a gun and he's robbing your house, and he's a robber, it doesn't make you a robber because you grab your gun and run him out. No, the man is using some tricky logic on you. I say it is time for black people to put together the type of action, the unity, that is necessary to pull the sheet off of them so they won't be frightening b lack people any longer. That's all. And when we say this, the press calls us "racist in reverse." "Don't struggle except within   the   ground   rules   that   the people you're struggling against have laid down." Why, this is insane, but it shows how they can do it. With skilful manipulating of the press they're able to make the victim look like the criminal and the criminal look like the victim.

Right now in New York we have a couple of cases where the police grabbed a brother and beat him unmer· cifully - and charged him with assaulting them. They used the press to m ake it look like he is the criminal and they are the victims. T his is how they do it, and if you study how they do it here then you'll know how they do it over there.   It's the same game going all the time, and if you and I don't aw aken and see what this man is doing to us, then it will be too late. They may have the gas ovens built before you realize that they're already hot.

One of the shrewd ways that they project us in the image of a criminal is that they take statistics and with the press feed these statistics to the public, primarily the white public. Because there are some well-meaning per­

sons in the white public as well as bad-meaning p ¢ rsons

in the white public. And whatever the government is i going

to do, it always w ants the public on its side - whether it is the local government, state government or federal gov-

-----------------------------------------------------Page 85-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
166                                   Malcolm X Speaks

ernment. At the local level, they will create an image by . feeding statistics to the public through the press showing the high crime rate in the Negro community. As soon as this high   crime   rate   is   emphasized through the press, then people begin to look upon the Negro community as a community of criminals.

And then any Negro in the community can be stopped in the street. "Put your hands up," and they pat you down. Might be a doctor, a lawyer, a preacher or some other kind of Uncle Tom, but despite your professional standing, you'll find that you're the same victim as the man who's

in the alley. Just because you're black and you live in a

black community which has been projected as a commu­ nity of criminals. And once the public accepts this image, it also p aves the way for police-state type of activity in the Negro   community - they can use   any kind   of brutal methods to suppress blacks because they' re criminals any­ way. And what has given us this image? The press again, by letting the power structure or the racist element in the power structure use them in that way.

A very good example was the riots that took place during the sum mer. I was in Africa, I read about them over there.   If you noticed, they referred to the rioters as vandals, hoodlums, thieves, and they skilfully took the burden off the society for its failure to correct these nega­ tive conditions in the black community. They took the burden com pletely off the society and put it right on the community by using the press to make it appear that the looting and all of this was proof that the whole act was nothing but vandals and robbers and thieves, who weren't really interested in anything other than that which was

negative. And   I   hear many dumb" brainwashed Negroes

who parrot the same old p arty line that the man handed down in his paper.

It was   not the case that they were just knocking out store windows ignorantly.   In Harlem, for instance, all   of the stores are owned by white people, all of the b uildings are owned by white people. The black people are just there - paying rent, buying the groceries; but they don't own the   stores, clothing stores, food stores, any kind of stores; don't even own the homes that they live in.

After the Bombing                                   167

These are all owned by outsiders, and for these run-down apartment dwellings, the black man in H arlem pays more money than the man down in the rich Park Avenue sec­ tion. It costs us more money to live in the slums than it costs them to live down on Park Avenue. Black people in Harlem know this, and that the white merchants charge us more money for food in H arlem - and it's the cheap food, the worst food; we have to pay more money for it than the man has to pay for it downtown. So black people know that they're being exploited and that their blood is being sucked and they see no way out.

When the thing is finally sparked, the white man is not there - he's gone. The merchant is not there, the landlord is not there, the one they consider to be the enemy isn't there. So, they knock at his property. This is what makes them knock down the store windows and set fire to things, and things of that sort. It's not that they're thieves. But they [the newspapers] are trying to project the image to the public that this is being done by thieves, and thieves alone.   And   they ignore the fact that it is not thievery alone.   It's   a corrupt,   vicious, hypocritical system that h as castrated the black man, and the only way the black man can get back at it is to strike it in the only way he

knows how.

[When   I say] they use the press, that doesn't mean that   all   reporters   are b ad.   Some of them are good, I suppose. But you can take their collective approach to any problem and see that they can always agree when it gets to you and me. They knew that the Afro-American Broadcasting   Company was   giving this   affair - which is designed to honor outstanding black Americans, is it not? But you find nothing in the newspapers that gives the slightest hint that this affair was going to take place - not one hint, though there are supposed to be many sources of news. If you don't think that they're in cahoots, w atch. They' re all interested, or none of them are inter­ ested. It's not a staggering thing. They're not going to s ay anything in advance about all affair that's being given by any black people who believe in functioning beyond the scope of the ground rules that are laid down by the liberal elements of the power structure.

-----------------------------------------------------Page 86-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
168                                   Malcolm   X Speaks

When you start thinking for yourselves, you frighten them, and they try and block your getting to the public, for the fear that if the public listens to you then the public won't listen to them anymore. And they've got certain Negroes   whom they have to keep blowing up in the papers to make them look like leaders. So that the people will keep on following them, no m atter how many knocks they get on their heads following them. This is how the man does it, and if you don't wake up and find out how he does it, I tell you, they'll be building gas chambers and gas ovens pretty s oo n - I don't mean those kind you've got at home in your kitchen - r and] . . . you'll be in one of them, just like the Jews ended up in gas ovens over there in Germany. You're in a society that's just as capable of building gas ovens for black people as Hitler's society was . . . .

Now what effect does [the struggle over Africa] have on us? Why should the black m an in America concern

himself sin � e he's been away from the African continent

for three or four hundred years? Why should we concern ourselves? What impact does what happens to them have upon us? N umber one, you have to realize that up until 1 959 Africa was d ominated by the colonial powers. Hav­ ing complete control over Africa, the colonial powers of Europe projected the image of Africa negatively. They always project Africa in a negative light: jungle savages, cannibals, nothing civilized. Why then naturally it was so negative that it was negative to you and me, and you and I began to hate it. We didn't want anybody telling us anything about Africa, much less calling us Africans. In hating Africa and in hating the Africans, we ended up hating ourselves, without even realizing it. Because you can't hate the roots of a tree, and not hate the tree. You can't hate your origin and not end up hating your­ self. You can't hate Africa and not hate yourself.

You show me one of these people over here who has been thoroughly brainwashed and has a negative attitude toward Africa, and I'll show you one who has a negative attitude toward himself. You can't have a positive attitude toward yourself and a negative attitude toward Africa at the same time. To the same degree that your understand-

After the Bombing                                   169

ing of and attitude toward Africa become positive, you'll find that your understanding of and your attitude toward yourself will also become positive. And this is what the · white m an knows. So they very skilfully make you and me h ate our African identity. our African characteristics. You know yourself that we have been a people who h ated our African characteristics. We hated our heads, we hated the shape of our nose, we wanted one of those long dog-like noses, you know; we hated the color of our skin, hated the blood of Africa that was in our veins. And in hating our features and our skin and our blood, why, we had to end up hating ourselves. And we h ated ourselves. Our color became to us a chain - we felt that it was holding us back; our color became to us like a prison which we felt was keeping us confined, not letting us go this way or that way. We felt that all of these restric­ tions were b ased solely upon our color. and the psycho­ logical reaction to that would have to be that as long as we felt imprisoned or chained or trapped by black skin, black features and black blood, that skin and those fea­ tures and that blood holding us back automatically had to become hateful to us. And it became hateful to us. It made us feel inferior; it made us feel inadequate; made us feel helpless. And when we fell victims to this feeling of inadequacy or inferiority or helplessness, we turned to somebody else to show us the way. We didn't have confidence in   another black man to show us the way. or black people to show us the way. In those days we didn't. We didn't think a black man could d o anything except play some horns - you know. m ake some sound and m ake you happy with some songs and in that way. But in serious things, where our food, clothing, shelter and education were concerned. we turned to the man. We never ' thought in terms   of bringing these things into existence for ourselves,   we never thought in terms of doing things for ourselves. Because we felt helpless. What m ade us feel helpless was our hatred for ourselves. And our hatred for ourselves stemmed from our h atred for things African . .     .      .

After 1 959 the spirit of African nationalism was fanned to a high flame and we then began to witness the complete

-----------------------------------------------------Page 87-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
170                                  Malcolm X Speaks

collapse of colonialism. France began to get out of F rench West Africa, Belgium began to m ake moves to get out of the Congo, Britain began to m ake moves to get out of Kenya, Tanganyika, Uganda, Nigeria and some of these other places. And although it looked like they were getting out, they pulled a trick that was colossal.

When you're playing ball and they've got you trapped, you don't throw the ball away - you throw it to one of your teammates who's in the clear. A nd this is what the European powers did. They were trapped on the African continent, they couldn't stay there - they were looked upon as colonial and imperialist. They had to pass the ball to someone whose image was different, and they passed the ball to   Uncle Sam. And he picked it up and has been running it for   a touchdown ever since. He was in the clear, he was not looked upon as one who had colonized the African continent. At that time, the Africans couldn't see that though the United States hadn't colonized the African continent, it had colonized 22 m illion blacks here on   this   continent.    Because   we're   just   as thoroughly colonized as anybody else.

When the ball was p assed to the United States, it was passed at the time when John Kennedy came into power. He picked it up and helped to run it. He was one of the shrewdest backfield runners that history has ever recorded. He surrounded himself with intellectuals - highly educated, learned and well-informed people. And their analysis told him that the government of America was confronted with a new problem. And this new problem stemmed from the fact that Africans were now awakened, they were enlight­ ened,   they   were fearless, they would fight. This meant that the Western powers couldn't stay there by force. Since their   own   economy,   the   European economy   and the American economy, was based upon their continued in­ fluence over the African continent, they had to find some means of staying there. So they used the friendly approach. They switched from the old openly colonial imperial­ istic approach to the benevolent approach. They came up w ith some benevolent colonialism, philanthropic colonial­ ism, humanitarianism, or dollarism. Immediately every­ thing was Peace Corps, Operation Crossroads, "We've got

After the Bombing                                   171

to help our African brothers." Pick up on that: Can't help us in Mississippi.    Can't help us in Alabama, or Detroit, or out here in D earborn where some real Ku Klux Klan lives. They're going to send all the way to Africa to help. I know Dearborn; you know, I'm from Detroit, I used to live out here in Inkster. And you had to go through Dearborn to   get to   Inkster.   Just like driving through Mississippi when you got   to   Dearborn.   Is it still that way? Well, you should straighten it out.

So, realizing that it was necessary to come up with these new   approaches,   Kennedy   did it. He created an image of himself that was skilfully designed to make the people on the African continent think that he was Jesus, the great white father, come to make things right. I ' m telling you, some o f these Negroes cried harder when he died than they cried for Jesus when he was crucified. From 1954 to 1964 was the era in which we witnessed the emerging of Africa. The impact that this had on the civil-rights struggle in America has never been fully told. For one thing, one of the primary ingredients in the complete civil-rights struggle was the Black Muslim move­ ment. The Black Muslim movement took no part in things political, civic - it didn't take too much p art in anything other   than   stopping people from   doing this drinking, smoking, and so on. Moral reform it had, but beyond that it did   nothing.   But it talked such a stroJlg talk that it put   the   other Negro organizations on the spot. Before the   Black Muslim movement came along, the NAACP w as looked upon as radical; they were getting ready to investigate it.   And then along came the Muslim move­ ment and frightened the white man so hard that he began to say, "Thank God for old Uncle Roy, and Uncle Whitney and Uncle A. Philip and Uncle" - you've got a whole lot of uncles in there; I can't remember their names, they're all older than I so I call them "uncle." Plus, if you use the word "Uncle Tom" nowadays, I hear they can sue you for libel,   you know.   So I don't call any of them

Uncle Tom anymore. I call them Uncle Roy.

One of the things that made the Black Muslim move­ ment grow was its emphasis upon things African. This was the secret to the growth of the Black Muslim move-

-----------------------------------------------------Page 88-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
172                                   Malcolm X Speaks

ment.   African   blood.   African   origin.   African. culture, African ties. And you'd be surprised - we discovered that deep within the subconscious of the black man in this country.   he   is   still more African than hf) is American. H e thinks that he's more American than African, because the man is j iving him,   the man is brainwashing him every day. He's telling him, "You're an American, you're an American." M an, how could   you think you're an American when you haven't ever had any kind of an American treat over here? You have never, never. Ten men can be sitting at a table eating, you know, dining, and I can come and sit down where they're dining. They're dining;   I've got a plate in front of me, but nothing is on it. Because all of us are sitting at the same table, are all of us diners? I'm not a diner until you let me dine. Just being at the table with others who are dining doesn't m ake me a diner. and this is what you've got to get in your head here in this country.

Just because you're in this country doesn't m ake you an   American.   No,   you've   got to go farther than that before you can become an American. You've got to enjoy the fruits of Americanism. You haven't enjoyed those fruits.   You've enjoyed the thorns.   You've enjoyed the thistles. But you have not enj oyed the fruits, no sir. You h ave fought harder for the fruits than the white man has, you have w orked harder for the fruits than the white man has, but you've enjoyed less. When the man put the uni­ form on you and sent you abroad, you fought harder than they did. Yes, I know you - when you're fighting for them, you can fight.

The B lack M uslim movement did make that contri­ bution. They made the whole civil-rights movement be­ come more militant, and more acceptable to the white power structure.   He would   rather have them than us. I n fact, I think we forced many of the civil-rights leaders to be even more militant than they intended. I know some of them who get out there and "boom. boom. boom" and don't mean it.   Because they're right on back in their corner as soon as the action comes.

John F. Kennedy also saw that it was necessary for a new approach among the American Negroes. And dur-

174                                   Malcolm X Speaks

The masses   of our people still have bad housing. b ad    schooling    and   inferior   jobs,   jobs   that   don't compensate with sufficient salaries for them to carry on their life in this world. So that the problem for the masses has gone absolutely unsolved. The only ones for whom it has been solved are people like Whitney Young, who is supposed to be placed in the cabinet, so the rumor says. He'll be the frrst black cabinet man. And that answers where he's at. And others have been given jobs, like Carl Rowan. who was put over the USIA. and is very skil­ fully trying to make Africans think that the problem of black men in this country is all solved.

The worst thing the white man can do to himself is to take one of these kinds of Negroes and ask him, "How do your people feel, boy?" He's going to tell that man that we are satisfied. That's what they do, brothers and sisters. They get behind the door and tell the white man we're satisfied. "Just keep on keeping me up here in front of them. boss, and I'll keep them behind you." That's what they talk when they're behind cloced doors. Because. you see, the white man doesn't go along with anybody who's not for him. He doesn't care are you for right or wrong, he wants to know are you for him: And if you're for him. he doesn't care what else you're for. As long as you're for him, then he puts you up over the Negro community. You become a spokesman.

In your   struggle it's like standing on a revolving wheel; you're running, but you're not going anywhere. You run faster and faster and the wheel just goes faster and faster. You don't ever leave the spot that you're stand­ ing in. So, it is very important for you and me to see that our problem has to have a solution that will benefit the masses, not the upper class - so-called upper class. Actually

there's no such thing as an upper-class Negro, because h   ;

catches the same hell as the other class Negro. All of them catch the same hell, which is one of things that's good about this racist system - it makes us all one . . . . If you' d tell them right now what is in store for 1965

they'd think you crazy for sure. But 1965 will be th ;

longest and hottest and bloodiest year of them all. It has to be, not because you want it to be, or I want it to be,

-----------------------------------------------------Page 89-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
After the Bom bing                                   173

ing his entire term in office, he specialized in how to psycho the American Negro. Now, a lot of you all don't like my saying that - but J wouldn't ever take a stand on that if I didn't know what 1 was talking about. By living in this kind of society, pretty much around them, and you know what I mean when I say "them," 1 learned to study them. You can think that they mean you some good ofttimes, but if you look at it a little closer you'll see that they don't mean you any good. That doesn't mean there aren't some of them who mean good. But it does mean that most of them don't mean good.

Kennedy's new approach was pretending to go along with us in our struggle for civil rights. He was another proponent of rights. But I remember the expose that Look magazine did . on the Meredith situation in Mississippi. Look magazine did   an expose showing that Robert Kennedy and Governor Barnett h ad made a deal, wherein the Attorney General w as going to come down and try to force Meredith into school, and Barnett was going to stand at the door, you know, and say, "No, you can't come in." He was going to get in anyway, but it was all arranged in advance and then Barnett was supposed to keep the support of the white racists, because that's who he was upholding, and Kennedy would keep the sup­ port of the Negroes, because that's who he'd be uphold­ ing. It was a cut-and-dried deal. And it's not a secret; it was written, "they write about it. But if that's a deal, how m any other deals do you think go down? What you think is on the level is crookeder, brothers and sisters, than a pretzel, which is most crooked.

So in my conclusion I would like to point out that the approach that was used by the administration right up until today was designed skilfully to make it appear they were trying to solve the problem when they actually weren't, They would deal with the conditions, but never the cause. They only gave us tokenism. Tokenism bene­

fits only a few. It never benefits the masses, and the mas­

ses are the ones who have the problem, not the few. That one who benefits from tokenism, he doesn't want to be around us   anyway - that's why he picks up on the token . . . .

After the B o mbing                                 175

or we want it to be, but because the conditions that created these explosions in 1963 are still here; the conditions that created explosions in 1 964 are stUl here. You can't say that you're not going to have an explosion when you leave the conditions, the ingredients, still here. As long as those explosive ingredients remain, then you're going to have the potential for explosion on your hands.

And, brothers and sisters, let me tell you, I spend m y time out there i n the streets with people, all kinds o f peo­ ple, listening to what they have to say. And they're dis­ satisfied, they're disUlusioned, they're fed up, they're get­ ting to the pOint of frustration where they begin to feel,

"What do we have to lose?" When you get to that point '

you , re th e type of person who can create a very dan- gerously explosive atmosphere. This is what's happening in our neighborhoods, to our people.

I read in a poll taken by Newsweek magazine this week,    saying   that    Negroes    are   satisfied.    Oh. yes, Newsweek, you know, supposed to be a top magazine with a top pollster, talking about how satisfied Negroes are. Maybe I haven't met the Negroes he met. Because I know he hasn't met the ones that I've met. And this is dangerous. This is where the white man does himself the most harm. He invents statistics to create an image, thinking that that image is going to hold things in check. You know why they always say Negroes are lazy? Be­ cause they want Negroes to be lazy. They always say Negroes can't unite because they don't want Negroes to unite.   And o nce they put this thing in the Negro's mind, they feel that he tries to fulfUl their image. If they say you can't unite black people, and then you come to them to unite them, they won't unite because it's been s aid that they're not supposed to unite. It's a psycho that they work. and it's the same way with these statistics.

When they think that an explosive era is coming up, then they grab their press again and begin to shower the Negro public, to m ake it appear that all Negroes are satisified. Because if you know you're dissatisfied all by yourself and ten others aren't, you play it cool; but if

you know that all ten of you are dissatisfIed ' you get with

it. This is what the m an knows. The man knows that if

-----------------------------------------------------Page 90-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
176                                   Malcolm   X Speaks

these Negroes find out how dissatisfied they really are -'­ even Uncle Tom is dissatisfied, he's just playing his part for now - this is what makes the man frightened. It frightens them in France and frightens them in England, and it frightens them in the United States.

And it is for this reason that it is so important for you and me to start organizing among ourselves, intel­ ligently, and try to find out: "What are we going to do if this happens, that happens or the next thing happens?" D on't think that you're going to run to the man and say, " Look, boss, this is me." Why, when the deal goes down, you'll look just like me in his eyesight; I'll make it tough for you. Yes, when the deal goes down, he doesn't look at you in   any better light than he looks at me . .     .     . I point these things out, brothers and sisters, so that you and I will know the importance in 1 965 of being in complete unity with each other. in harmony with each other, and not letting the man m aneuver us into fighting one another. The situation I have been maneuvered into right now, between me and the B lack Muslim movement, is something that I really deeply regret, because I don't think anything is more destructive than two groups of black people fighting each other. But it's something that can't be avoided because it goes deep down beneath the surface, and these things will come up in the very near future.

I might say this before I sit down. If you recall, when I left the Black Muslim movement, I stated clearly that it wasn't my intention to even continue to be aware that they existed;   I   was going to spend my time working in the . non-Muslim community. But they were fearful if they didn't do something that perhaps many of those who were in the [ Bl ack Muslim] mosque would leave it and follow a different direction. So they had to start doing a takeoff on me, plus, they had to try and silence me because of what they   know that I know. I think that they should know me well enough to know that they certainly can't frighten me. But when it does come to the light - excuse me for keeping coughing like that, but I got some of that smoke last night - there are some things involving the

Ajter the Bom b ing                                   177

Black Muslim movement which, when they come to light,

will shock you.

The thing that you have to understand about those of us in the Black Muslim m ovement was that all of us believed 1 00 per cent in the divinity of Elijah Muhammad. We believed in him. We actually believed that God, in Detroit by the way, that God had taught him and all of that. I always believed that he believed it himself. And I was shocked when I found out that he himself didn't be­ lieve it. And when that shock reached me, then I began to look everywhere else and try and get a better understanding of the things that confront all of us so that we can get together in some kind of way to offset them.

I want to thank you for coming out this evening. I think it' s wonderful that as many of you came out, con­ Sidering the blackout on   the meeting that took place. M ilton Henry and the brothers who are here in Detroit are very progressive young men, and I would advise all of you to get with them in any way that you can to try and create some kind of united effort toward common goals, common objectives. Don't let the power structure m aneuver you into a time-wasting battle w ith others when you could be involved in something that is constructive and getting a real job done . . . .

I say again that I ' m not a racist. I don't believe in any form of segregation or anything like that. I'm for brotherhood for everybody, but I don't believe in forcing brotherhood upon people who don't want it. Let us prac­ tice brotherhood among ourselves, and then if others want to practice brotherhood with us. we're for practicing it with them also.   But   I   don't think that we should run around trying to love some;"ody who doesn't love us. Thank you.