The economic and social aspect of life in Palestine was very closely interwoven, and the needs of the people, both material and spiritual, were ever His concern. Baba has explained that when He distributes food and clothing to the poor, He is at the same time dealing interiorly with the economic question of the lives of those who need access to the fruits of nature which are essential to material well-being. This aspect of Jesus’ work throws a flood of light upon His inner activities for future generations and mankind. We observe the course of evolution in ideas, scientific discoveries and changes in the institutions of the people, but are in complete ignorance of the work of the Master in the inner planes wherein are sown the seeds of such developments during His life on earth. Jesus was found also at the feasts to which the crowds flocked, at a village wedding, and as guest of the pharisee as well as at Bethany at the house of Mary and Martha, and from His parables and other utterances it is clear that He had a practical knowledge of the people's occupations. 
JESUS AND POLITICS 
The political organization in the life of the nation under the Romans involved the payment of tribute, through which the opponents of the Master endeavoured to trap Him by the question: "Is it lawful to give tribute to Cæsar or no?" One may perhaps detect a subtle humour in Jesus' method of dealing with this in His request to see the tribute money, which they brought, and His question to them: "Whose is this image and superscription?" Their answer, "Cæsar’s", enabled His final words to carry its full force: "Render, therefore, to Cæsar the things that are Cæsar's and to God the things that are God's." It must also be remembered that such simple actions as bringing the piece of money and concentrating on the Master's question and 

awaiting His answers and further questions give opportunities for the Master's internal work. The Master will take infinite pains to deal an apparently simple situation, in order to drive home a special lesson outwardly, as well as use the occasion for His inner work. There is the instance in the school at Meherabad, when Baba was admin­istering cough mixture to the lads, and through an oversight, the bottles had been confused with others containing iodine, similar in colour and shape. From those handed to Him, He gave the contents to two boys, but with the next, He corked it tightly and commenced playing with it, surprising all who were present. Suddenly, the overseer who was responsible for the mistake became conscious of it. Baba knew it all the time, but adopted this method of awakeing the overseer's conscious­ness, and then warned him to be very careful in future. Those who live with Baba know that His most trivial actions may have a deep meaning and that his instructions should be implicitly followed for the same reason. 
Early in his ministry, Jesus con­tacted the Roman authorities in the person of the Centurion whose faith exceeded all he had found in Israel, and it was another Centurion who witnessed to His divine nature, when on the Cross. Before the Roman Governor, Pilate, Jesus also appeared, and as His time was come, before which His enemies had been powerless, He was handed over to the priest to judge; although the Governor declared Him guiltless, he would have been compromised had he refused the plea of the priests, and in spite of his wife's dream and message "that he should have noth­ing to do with that just man", he washed his hands of all resposibility in the matter. 
Baba has pointed out that instead of invoking the aid of His super­human powers, Jesus met the indignities heaped upon Him and a cruel death, with Love; that love has survived the Empire of that day and effected the upliftment of humanity that the unifying but external sway of the Roman was a preparation for. 
So little is known of the pre­paratory work of Jesus before His manifestation, that it is hardly possible to compare it with Shri Meher Baba's work which we are today witnessing. He also contacts the various aspects of the world's activities—political, econ­omic, social and religious, although His work is not directly connected with them. In His travels, His presence often coincides with important public events, quite independently of His outer plans, and the proximity of a Perfect Master and His inner work which never ceases affect the spiritual outcome of happenings on the material plane, as the Life of Jesus undoubtedly did. Baba’s interest in the film world and visits to Hollywood, His time in New York and the Capitals of Europe and centres of spirituality there and in the East, His means of commun­ication, which would be ordinary events for other people, are vehicles for His own special work, which require His physical presence to be effective. The concluding portion of His World Message, already quoted from, shows the ultimate issue, and are a reminder of the culmination in the work of Jesus, to which He con­tinually referred His own disciples and those opposed to Him. Baba says: "In the near future, a great universal drama will be enacted, the divine theme of which will be pure love, selfless service. I will play the leading role in this world-awakening drama." 

The physical crucifixion of the Master is an aspect of His continuous spiritual agony, for through the universal consciousness, He is experiencing the travail of the world in its separation from the Divine Love, while having the bliss of Union with the Divine, undis­turbed, both infinite suffering and infinite joy. The agony of Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane, which His physical body showed so un­mistakably, is an instance of the Master's Love transmuting the sanskaras of the world. It must be obvious that the Master is using His spiritual powers for His work for humanity, although His outer life is also so inspiring and transcendent. 
The gospel story of the temptation of Jesus and the account of His transfiguration on the Mount indicate aspects of His work on the inner planes. The mystical aspect of the "wilderness" where the temp­tation occurred is a state of inner consciousness where egotism and self-aggrandisment are paramount. The devil is represented as tempting the Master to make bread out of stones, which is a mistake of power on the subtle plane, which can be acquired without spiritual develop­ment. He also showed the Master "all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time" over which power can be exercised by those who have entered the consciousness of the mental "world" by the direct exer­cise of "mind" faculties, indepen­dent of the physical and subtle senses, and to function thus is not necessarily a sign of spiritual development. In His serial on the successive planes of consciousness which the pilgrim passes from the mundane to the superconscious which is the goal, Baba places the faculty of seeing throughout space at one and the same moment, as an attribute of the fifth plane of cosmic consciousness, which is the first of the mental planes. Thus the tempta­tion to which Jesus submitted is in the form of a parable of the perils of spiritual pride which 

are a terrible pitfall to those in whom egotism is allowed to sway the unfolding vistas of the heaven worlds in the inner spheres, which seeks not only material power but domination over the emotional and mind natures direct without the intervention of physical means. It was part of work of the Master to deal with this sphere of the lower consciousness, and so He submitted Himself to its conditions, as He did afterwards on the physical plane to the same forces in material mani­festation. Thus he accomplished His work on the inner spheres first, and then completed it on the physical. Baba has said that perfect work is only accomplished when it is carried through on all planes with complete consciousness of the whole, and to the Master the whole is God, to whom all else is a passing and ever changing illusion. 
Mystics also understand the mount of transfiguration as a high state of consciousness in which the Master is fully conscious, whereas Peter, James and John were dazed, and finally swooned. Their meeting with Moses and Elias linked the new and the old dispensations, on the inner planes, whereby the Master created an inner harmony in that sphere, and had access to those centres of energy which the ancient Jewish religious worship undoubt­edly embodied. Its relationship with Egypt is but one indication of its connection with earlier aspects of humanity's approach to the Divine. 

It is possible that the apparent contradiction in the words of the Master, after the last supper and before His crucifixion, and when He was on the cross, when on each occasion He said His work was finished, is explained by the fact that when Judas went out to take his final step to betray, the Master had fully accomplished His work on the inner planes, whereas on the Cross, He finished His outer work. 

(To be continued) 
