 May 28, 1989    Bethlehem Baptist Church    John Piper, Pastor    
    
    MANHOOD AND WOMANHOOD BEFORE SIN    (Genesis 2:18-25)    
    Then the Lord God said, "It is not good that the man should be   alone; I will make him a helper fit for him." So out of the ground   the Lord God formed every beast of the field and every bird of the   air, and brought them to the man to see what he would call them;   and whatever the man called every living creature, that was its   name. The man gave names to all cattle, and to the birds of the   air, and to every beast of the field; but for the man there was   not found a helper fit for him. So the Lord God caused a deep   sleep to fall upon the man, and while he slept took one of his   ribs and closed up its place with flesh; and the rib which the   Lord GOd had taken from the man he made into a woman and brought   her to the man. Then the man said, "This at last is bone of my   bones and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called Woman, because   she was taken out of Man." Therefore a man leaves his father and   his mother and cleaves to his wife, and they become one flesh. And   the man and his wife were both naked, and were not ashamed.    
    
    Last week we focused on the mess that men and women are in because   of sin. We saw that sinful men use their unique powers to exploit   women for their evil purposes. And we saw that sinful women use   their unique powers to exploit men for their evil purposes. There   is at least one muscle that is probably equally strong in both men   and women &#151; the tongue. And you can hear sinful men and   sinful women in their little pockets of derision wielding this   weapon to tear each other down.    
    But we have seen for two weeks now that this is not the way God   created the world. And so we asked, How were man and woman   supposed to relate to each other before sin ruined things. What   did manhood and womanhood look like before sin distorted them into   what we see today?    
    Part of the answer we said was that man and woman were created in   the image of God as male and female. And we stressed that this   means at least that they are to enjoy equality of personhood,   equality of dignity, mutual respect, harmony, complementarity, and   a unified destiny. But we stressed that this is only part of the   answer.    
    It leaves open this question: Within the equality of personhood   and the equality of dignity might there not be some special   responsibilities that man has because he is man and that woman has   because she is woman? In showing mutual respect and care might   there not be some special ways that a man is to respect a woman   and special ways that a woman is to respect a man? Does equality   of personhood and mutuality of respect demand sameness of   responsibilities or even equal access to all responsibilities? Or   did God intend from the beginning that our equality be expressed   differently in the way we relate to each other as man and   woman?    
    That is the question we take up today. And we will stay with it   for several weeks as we try to find what the Bible teaches about   this matter of diversity and complementarity. Today we will look   at the Biblical description of manhood and womanhood as God   intended them to be before sin ruined things.    
    I think this is a good question to ask for two reasons. One is   that Genesis chapter 2 calls for this kind of question. In Genesis   1 Moses tells us how God sovereignly created all things out of   nothing and put them together in an orderly way so that everything   serves man. Then God creates man as male and female in His own   image, and declares that everything is very good.    
    But in Genesis 2 Moses puts the zoom lens on his camera and comes   in for a close up on that sixth day of creation. And as you come   to the end of the chapter you realize that one of the reasons he   has done this is to say something tremendously important about the   relationship of man and woman. In Genesis 1 he had said something   very important: both are created in the image of God. Now in   chapter 2 he says something more specific. So chapter 2 calls for   the question: how are manhood and womanhood different?    
    The other reason I think this is a good question (i.e. God's   intention for manhood and womanhood before sin) is that in the New   Testament Jesus and Paul, when they use the Old Testament to   answer questions about how man and woman should relate to each   other, go back to what things were supposed to be like before the   fall. They don't take the messed up relationships of Genesis 3 and   make them normative. They come back to Genesis 2 and talk about   how it should have been from the beginning.    
    So what I want to do is make four observations that begin to   answer the question of whether man and woman, in their equality of   personhood, are supposed to have some different responsibilities.   Does Genesis teach that there are special responsibilities that   come with being male and special responsibilities that come with   being female?    
    1. The first thing chapter 2 makes clear is that man was created   first and then after some intervening events woman was created.   Verse 7: "Then the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground,   and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became   a living being." Verses 21f: "So the Lord God caused a deep sleep   to fall upon the man, and while he slept took one of his ribs and   closed up its place with flesh; and the rib which the Lord God had   taken from the man He made into a woman and brought her to the   man."    
    In 1 Timothy 2:13 the apostle Paul simply says, "Adam was formed   first, then Eve."    
    Now why did God create man and woman in this way? Why did He not   create them both simultaneously from the same lump of clay. Would   that not have established their equality of personhood more   clearly? The answer is that he had already established that beyond   all doubt in Genesis 1:27 where it says that both were created in   His image.    
    Now God wants to say something more about the relationship between   man and woman. And what He wants to say is that when it comes to   their differing responsibilities there is a "firstness" of   responsibility that falls to the man. This is not an issue of   superior value. That issue has been settled in Genesis 1:27. It's   an issue of a sinless man, in childlike dependence on God, being   given a special role or responsibility. God makes him the initial   half of the pair to say something about his responsibility in   initiating. God makes him lead the way into being to say something   about his responsibility of leadership.    
    Some teachers have said that the order of creation means nothing   because in Genesis 1, for example, the animals were created first   and then man. So if order implies responsibility for leadership   then the animals should lead man.    
    There are two answers to that objection. One is this: When the   Hebrew people gave a special responsibility to the "firstborn" in   the family it never entered their minds that this responsibility   would be nullified if the father happened to own cattle before he   had sons. In other words when Moses wrote this he knew that the   first readers would not lump animals and humans together as equal   candidates for the responsibilities of the "firstborn" .And we   shouldn't either.    
    The other answer to this objection is that the apostle Paul, who   was inspired by the Holy Spirit in his handling of the Scripture   did see significance in the man being created first (1 Timothy   2:13). We will talk about that in a couple weeks. We do well not   to say there is no meaning in something where an inspired apostle   finds significant meaning.    
    So the first observation is very significant: man was created   first, then the woman. And this points to a leadership   responsibility for the man, especially in view of the other   observations that follow.    
    2. The second observation to make is this: One of the   responsibilities that came with being there first was the primary   responsibility (not the only, but the primary responsibility) to   receive and teach and be accountable for the moral pattern of life   in the garden of Eden.    
    Before woman was created God came to man in verse 16 and said,   "You may freely eat of every tree of the garden; but of the tree   of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat, for in the   day that you eat of it you shall die."    
    After the woman was created there is no record that this pattern   of moral life for the garden was repeated by God to the woman. I   think that Moses, as he writes, expects us to conclude that Adam   is entrusted with the moral pattern of the garden and with the   primary responsibility of sharing it with Eve and being   accountable for it.    
    Are we on track here or are we reading too much into Adam's being   given the moral instruction? The third observation is to me a very   strong indication that we are on track.    
    3. After the moral pattern had been broken by both Adam and Eve,   God came to call them to account in chapter three. And even though   the woman had eaten the forbidden fruit first God came to Adam   first, not Eve, to hold him accountable for the failure to live by   the pattern He had given.    
    Verse 9: "But the Lord God called to the man, and said to him,   'Where are you?" Adam where are you? Verse 11 (still interrogating   Adam first): "Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten of   the tree of which I commanded you not to eat?"    
    Why would God come to the man first, and call him to give and   account instead of going to the woman first, especially since she   ate the fruit first? The most natural answer is that God gave to   the man a primary responsibility for the moral life of the garden   and therefore man has a primary accountability for the failure to   live by it.    
    Make no mistake: God does hold the woman accountable for her   actions. She is a personal, morally accountable being in the very   image of God. And what man does or fails to do relieves her of no   personal, individual responsibility to know and to obey God. But   in their relationship to each other God looks to the man and says,   "Have you been the moral and spiritual leader you ought to have   been?"    
    James Dobson ( of "Focus on the Family") has seen the tremendous   importance of this truth very clearly and the terrible effects   when a husband and father abdicates his responsibility. Here is   what he said,    
    A Christian man is obligated to lead his family to the best of his   ability . . . If his family has purchased too many items on   credit, then the financial crunch is ultimately his fault. If the   family never reads the Bible or seldom goes to church on Sunday,   God holds the man to blame. If the children are disrespectful and   disobedient, the primary responsibility lies with the father . . .   not his wife . . . In my view (says Dobson), America's greatest   need is for husbands to begin guiding their families, rather than   pouring every physical and emotional resource into the mere   acquisition of money. (Straight Talk to Men and Their Wives, Word   Books, 1980, pp. 64f.)    
    I agree with Dobson because I think that is what is being taught   in these chapters. God brought man onto the scene first as the   leader. He entrusted him first with the moral pattern of the   garden. And He called him to account first for the failure of   disobedience. Therefore even though man and woman bear equal   individual responsibility before God for their own obedience   (that's what it means to be created in His image), nevertheless in   relationship to each other man bears a greater responsibility for   leadership than woman does.    
    This is the way God meant it to be before there was any sin in the   world: sinless man, full of love, in his tender, strong, moral   leadership in relation to woman; and sinless woman, full of love,   in her joyful, responsive support for man leadership. No   belittling from the man, no groveling from the woman. Two   intelligent, humble, God-entranced beings living out, in beautiful   harmony, their unique and different responsibilities.    
    Now Satan knows that this is a beautiful arrangement. He knows   that God's pattern of life is designed for man good. But Satan   hates God and he hates man. He is a liar and a killer from the   beginning. And so what does he do? This is the fourth   observation.    
    4. Satan assaults God's pattern by attacking the woman instead of   the man. If God means for man to bear special responsibility for   leadership in the garden then Satan will do what he can to destroy   that pattern.    
    Why did he approach the woman in Genesis 3:1? Why did he draw her   into discussion first and make her the spokesman for the couple?   Why did he lure her into being the moral guardian of the garden?   Was it because she was easier prey? Is woman more gullible than   man? Or could the answer be: Satan drew the woman in first, and   made her the spokesman and the moral guardian because that is   exactly what should not have been done?    
    In other words Satan spurns the order that God has established and   simply ignores the man and takes up his subtle battle with the   woman. And in doing that he makes man into exactly what he wants   him to be: a silent, withdrawn, weak, fearful, passive, wimp. And   a masculine wimp is a very dangerous person. One moment he's   passive and follows his woman; and the next moment he's angry and   blames her for all of his problems.    
    And Satan laughs to himself and says, "Now I have created such a   confusion of roles they will never sort this out. They will look   at the abusive man and tell him to be more passive with women. And   they will look at the abused woman and tell her to be more   assertive with men. And they will never get to the root of the   problem.    
    But in Genesis 3:17 God goes right to the root of the problem. He   says to the man, "Because you have listened to the voice of your   wife, and have eaten of the tree of which I commanded you, 'You   shall not eat of it,' cursed is the ground because of you." In   other words, "Adam, you were listening when you should have been   leading. God is not confused about what Satan did.    
    And he doesn't want us to be confused either. He created man   first; He gave him the moral pattern of the garden first; He held   him accountable for failure first; and He punished him for falling   right in line with God's arch enemy when Satan lured man and woman   into a great role reversal at the fall.    
    So what should we do? Well, men, we should humble ourselves before   God for our failures. All of us. This is not a call to exalt   yourself over any woman. This is not a call to domineer, or   belittle or to put woman in her place. She is, after all, a fellow   heir of God and destined for a glory that will blind us some day.   This is a call to stoop down and to take the responsibility to be   a leader &#151; a servant leader in the various ways that are   appropriate to every different relationship to women.    
    It's a call to us men    that we should take the risk of getting egg on our faces;    that we should pray like we've never prayed for help in this   tremendous responsibility;    that we should be in the word more than we ever have been to know   what God expects of us;    that we should plan things more than we do, and be intentional and   thoughtful and less carried along by the mood of the moment;    that we should be disciplined and ordered in our lives;    that we should be tender-hearted and sensitive;    that we should take the initiative to make sure that there is a   time and a place to talk to her about what needs to be talked   about &#151; this "her" could be a friend, a date, a colleague, a   wife, a sister;    that we should be ready to lay down our lives in discharging this   responsibility to be the leaders God is calling us to be.    
    May God continue to teach us and humble us and heal us in all our   relationship for His great glory and for our joy.       
        Copyright 1989, 1998 John Piper      Piper's   Notes            
