  April 14, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor      JESUS CHRIST Infinitely Greater than the Angels   (Hebrews 1)    
   1 God, after He spoke long ago to the fathers in the prophets inmany portions and in many ways, 2 in these last days has spoken to usin His   Son, whom He appointed heir of all things, through whomalso He made the world. 3 And He is the radiance of His glory and theexact representation of His nature, and upholds all things by theword of His power. When He had made purification of sins, He sat downat the right hand of the Majesty on high; 4 having become as muchbetter than the angels, as He has inherited a more excellent namethan they.    
      A More Excellent Name    Somehow thinking about angels had gotten out of hand in thechurches that the book of Hebrews was written to. You can tell thisby how much space this writer gives to setting things straight. Allthe rest of chapter one starting at verse four and going into chaptertwo deals with angels. It is a major issue to set straight. I wonderif we think straight about angels. Let's measure our thoughts thismorning by the thoughts of scripture.  If you have eyes to see it, this will prove very relevant to yourlife. It will show you things about the Lord Jesus to help you trusthim and worship him; and it will show you (in verse 14) that angelsare sent to serve you as Christians even today; and it will stir youup to lay hold on the Word of God in a diligent way lest you driftinto indifference.  The main point, remember, of verse 3 was that Christ sat down atthe right hand of the Majesty of God on high after he had made aperfect purification for sins and was raised from the dead. Now verse4 adds that Christ did that -- he sat down at God's right hand,"having become as much better than the angels, as He has inherited amore excellent name than they."  Now the main thing here in verse 4 is that Christ is better thanangels. He is better than angels!  How  he is better and  howmuch  he is better is what the rest of the chapter is about.  In sum, verse 4 answers this with a comparison: He is "as muchbetter than the angels, as He has inherited a more excellent namethan they." Now what does that mean? What name did Christ inheritthat shows he is so much greater than angels? When Christ died andmade purification of sins and triumphed over death and Satan (Hebrews2:14), he was enthroned as the king and seated at the right hand ofGod. When a king was enthroned in the Old Testament there was anacclamation that now he was formally taking up his title andinheritance which had been his by birth. And one of the ways thisacclamation was given was with the words spoken by God, "You are mySon. Today I have begotten you." (Compare Psalm 2:7 and Psalm89:27=LXX 88:28)  This is why the writer says in verse 5, in response to Christ'senthronement:  For to which of the angels did He ever say, " Thou art my son,today I have begotten thee"?  And again,  "I will be a father tohim and he shall be a son to me"?   This is a quote from Psalm 2:7 and 2 Samuel 7:14. The point ofthis verse is to tell us what the name is that is so superior toangels. It's the name "Son." So verse 4 says that Christ hasinherited a more excellent name than angels. Then verse 5 says," for      to what angel did God ever say, 'You are mySon'?" So the superior name is  Son of God .  In Romans 1:4, Paul says that Christ was "declared the  Son ofGod with power      by the resurrection from the dead."He has always been the Son of God, just like he has always been heirof all things (v. 2). But when he had made purification for sins andtriumphed over death and Satan, Christ was declared Son of God andheir of all things on a new basis and in a new way. Now he reigns asthe God-man Jesus Christ -- the Son of God not only by his eternalright, but now by the right of his victory over sin and death. He isSon of God in manifest power by the resurrection.  Now the point in verse 5 is to say that God never said such athing to any angel. No angel sits at God's right hand as the Son ofGod in power.    
      Angels Worship Jesus    Then verse 6 draws out an implication of this truth that makes thedegree of superiority of Christ to angels crystal clear. It says,"And when He [i.e., God] again brings the firstborn into the world,He says,  "And let all the angels of God worship him."  I thinkthe reference here is to the Second Coming of Christ. When God bringsChrist "again" a second time into the world at the "Second Coming"(Hebrews 9:28),all the angels, every knee, will bow, as Paul says, inheaven (=angels) and on earth (=humans) and under the earth(=demons), and all creation,  including all angels,  willworship Jesus.  So the point of verse 6 is that since Jesus is the Son of God heis not an angel but is so superior to angels that all angels worshiphim. Now worshipping Jesus is a huge issue. It separates Christianityfrom Judaism on one side and Islam on the other side and from cultslike the Caesar cult in the early centuries that killed Christiansfor not worshipping Caesar and from the Jehovah's Witnesses todaythat say Jesus is an archangel. All of these religions say Jesus is not  to be worshipped. And that is understandable, unless theSon of God is God.  Which brings us to verses 7-9, because this is exactly what theseverses say he is.  And of the angels He [that is, God] says, " Who makes his angelswinds,   and his ministers a flame of fire " [Psalm 104:4]. 8But of the Son He says, (quoting Psalm 45:6-7) " Thy throne,   O GOD,    is forever and ever, and the righteousscepter is the scepter of his kingdom.   9  Thou hast lovedrighteousness and hated lawlessness; therefore God, thy God, hathanointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy companions."   What this writer sees in Psalm 45:6-7 is the stunning fact thatthe human king is called God ("Thy throne, O God . . ." is areference to the king of the people) in verse 8 and yet in verse 9,God is called his God: "Therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee."So here in the Old Testament itself we have a king of whom we have tosay God is his God and he is God. Many translations will obscurethis, but not the best ones. It is stunning and it is true.  The reason Christ is worshipped by angels (in verse 6) is not thatChrist is the Son of God like an angel is or like Christians are, butbecause he is the Son of God in the sense that he is God, the Son."Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever."  Test yourself. Do you love Jesus as God? Does Jesus hold a placein your life worthy of God? When we say that "we exist to spread apassion for the supremacy of God in all things for the joy of allpeoples," do we mean a passion for the supremacy of Jesus Christ? O,I plead with you, love Christ. Worship him. Worship him. He is God.    
      Jesus is God    Which is why this writer can take Psalm 102:25-27 which refers toGod the Creator, and apply it to the Son -- for the Son is God. So hesays in verses 10-12,  10 And,  "Thou, Lord, in the beginning didst lay the foundationof the earth, and the heavens are the works of thy hands.  11 They will perish, but thou remainest, and they all will become oldas a garment,  12  and as a mantle thou wilt roll them up, as agarment they will also be changed. But thou art the same, and thyyears will not come to an end.   This is simply drawing out what he had said in verse 2, where hesaid that God had made the world  through the Son . Only now hesays that this means that the Son made the world and that what can besaid of God's creating can be said of the Son's creating because theSon is God. Jesus Christ is the Creator of the universe. He is God.He is to be worshipped.  Do you have this sense of awe and reverence and love and trust andjoy in Jesus Christ? Is he your God and your Savior and your Masterand your Friend and your Treasure? Are you earnest about him? Do youthink on him and keep close fellowship with him through the day?  Or are you like so many who make light of him -- through neglector scorn or trifling? Does it grieve you, for example, when you heara comedian like Bill Cosby get everybody laughing by saying that hethought his brother's name was dammit and his was Jesus Christ,because his dad always said, "Dammit, get in here. Jesus Christ!where have you all been!"? Funny? Yes, sort of? The kind of "funny"that brings the whole world to ruin by trifling with infiniteholiness and infinite horror.  The point of this chapter and of the whole Bible is to make uspassionately devoted to the glory of Jesus Christ as Revealer andRuler and Redeemer and Creator and God.    
      Angels Are Servants    So he gives one last contrast in verses 13-14,  But to which of the angels has He ever said,  "Sit at my righthand, until I make thine enemies a footstool for thy feet" ? 14Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out to render service forthe sake of those who will inherit salvation?  He returns to where he started in verse 3 -- Christ sat down atthe right hand of Majesty as King of the universe and as Son of Godin power and as Heir of all things and as God -- remember verse 8,"Thy  throne , O God, is forever and ever." This seat  beside God is the seat  of  God. So he comes back (in verse 13) tothis triumphant place of the Son: "Sit at my right hand until I makeall your enemies a footstool for your feet." And he says, God neversaid that to an angel.  But look what he says of angels to show the contrast. Verse 14:"Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out to render service forthe sake of those who will inherit salvation?" What's the contrasthere? Several things:  Jesus is sitting as King, they are sent as servants.  There is only one King, there are many servant angels.  They are servants of Christians -- those who by faith areinheriting salvation (6:12).  Christ is the King  over  the church; angels do his bidding for  the church.  So he is far above these serving angels.  But  how  do they serve us? The connection between verse 13and 14 gives us a clue. Verse 13 says that while Christ is seated onthe throne, something is happening to bring his enemies under hisfeet like a footstool. What is that? What is happening? One of thethings is that angels are being "sent" to serve those who are toinherit salvation. In other words, there are enemies of our salvation-- enemies that want to bring the work of Christ to nothing and makeit fail, enemies that want to keep Christians from inheritingsalvation (demons, false ideas, sinful impulses, evil persons, etc.).So God accomplishes two things through his angels. 1) He "sends" themto serve us so that we persevere in faith and inherit our salvation.2) And in the angels' serving us, the enemies of God are made afootstool for Christ's feet.  Now let's step back and sum up what we've seen and close with avery faith-building observation. There was some wrong thinking aboutangels in these churches, especially as they related to Jesus. It mayhave been a lot like the Jehovah's Witnesses error of making a greatangel out of Jesus Christ. The answer of this writer is  Jesus is the Son of God in a way that no angel ever was or is (v.5).  Jesus is not an angel; he is worshipped by angels (v. 6).  Jesus is not an angel; he is God (v. 8).  Jesus is not an angel; he is the eternal Creator of all things(vv. 10-12).  He is seated on the throne as king and angels are dispatched to dothe king's bidding.  Now notice something very encouraging for our faith in futuregrace -- God's ministry to us today and tomorrow and the rest of ourlives. From verse 5 to verse 14 we have been talking about Jesus'superiority to angels. One is tempted to ask, Why then does Godbother with creating angels? What's the point?    
      That God's People Might be Satisfied    The answer of this section is really remarkable. Once you seeangels in their proper place their role is a magnificent one. Theyhave a role toward Christ and they have a role toward the people ofChrist. Toward Christ, verse 6 says their role is to worship. Towardthe people of Christ, verse 14 says their role is to serve and helpus reach salvation. Which means -- if you're willing to let me usethe familiar language -- that God created angels that his Son mightbe glorified and his people might be satisfied.  I want you to leave this morning with this truth ringing in yourheart: Jesus Christ is infinitely superior to angels. They werecreated not to compete with Christ, but to worship Christ and honorhim. And the chief way that they do that on the earth is by servingus so that we hold fast to Christ and trust him and love him andtreasure him and finally reach him in the fullness of our salvation.So angels were created for Christ's everlasting glory and for oureverlasting joy -- which, as you well know, are not contradictoryaims. Because Christ is most glorified in us when we are mostsatisfied in him.  The universe is filled with helpers. Christ wants you to beencouraged and hopeful. That's why this chapter ends with thisamazing promise. The heavenly worshippers are all -- all of them --sent to serve you and bring you safely home.  Copyright 1996 John Piper  
  
