To honor Sea Shepherd's brave volunteers and campaigns, Mike Galesi and the Big G Charitable Foundation is issuing a challenge grant to Sea Shepherd supporters. The foundation will match donations to Sea Shepherd Conservation Society dollar-for-dollar, up to $30,000!

This generous donation comes at a very important time, as we urgently raise funds for our latest campaign, Operation Jairo II. This is our largest sea turtle defense campaign to date and we need your help to support our ground crew in three countries, to save endangered sea turtles.  Help us save these amazing creatures that have called our oceans "home" since dinosaurs roamed the Earth over 500 million years ago. While humans are the biggest threat to sea turtles, we also hold the key to their survival. 


How Operation Jairo II Will Make a Difference
In Florida, we will work to save turtles from light pollution that disorients the turtles away from the ocean, causing them to die from dehydration or to be killed by cars. In Costa Rica and Honduras, we will fight the many human-induced threats to sea turtles like pollution and poaching. In all locations, we will conduct beach clean-ups to protect the turtles. Our 2015 sea turtle campaign saved over 12,000 turtles and hatchlings!  

Your Gift Will Support Other Missions
Sea Shepherd Conservation Society continues to combat illegal fishing, over-fishing, whaling, sealing, dolphin killing, plastic pollution and preventing the destruction of coral reefs and other oceanic ecosystems. In addition to supporting Operation Jairo II, your gift will support other upcoming campaigns, including efforts to stop salmon farming, to protect the critically endangered vaquita porpoise and totoaba bass, combat ongoing efforts to oppose Orcas in captivity and so much more. 

Donate and We'll Double Your Gift Today!
Please take advantage of this amazing opportunity to double your gift through our matching grant. We cannot save our oceans without you. Thank you in advance for making all Sea Shepherd campaigns possible. Double Your Gift 

For the Oceans, 

Paul Watson

Captain Paul Watson
Founder and Executive Director
Sea Shepherd Conservation Society