 12008-11-09 And So.doc MLB 

 
Kindling of the Chalice
  
Opening Words
 We are here 

on the weekend after a significant election 

to worship, to let go of the superficial 

that we might go deeper, within and around us. 

Called to honesty, we face our fears. 

Called to love, we take hold of love. 

 
And so, though our ways of thinking and feeling abo
ut the meaning of our days may 
differ, we agree to journey together, side by side,
 face to face. Within this circle of 
strong spirit, mutual care, and ethical vision, may
 we ourselves remain open to 
being transformed by a welcoming heart and emerging
 justice. 
 
The Sequence 

 
Look! The harvest time comes in the fall 

of the year, when the leaves fly off the branches 

red as can be, and ginkgo trees turn into sunlight.
 Pumpkins and apples, bright wheat and corn.  

So much abundance, color, nourishment, joy! 

 
The harvest time comes in the early years in this c
entury, when feet of many colors, 
worn smooth from marching, rest for a while; 

and when souls who resisted humiliation 

for years stand up straight again for a while; 

and when eyes whose tears before the lynching  

tree and broken ballot box are finished weeping 

for a while, 

and they all bring out the sharp sickle of their jo
y and reap the sweet yield of harvest day. 
 
The harvest time comes today, 

when the week™s warm sun and cold rain 

joys, worries, ecstasies and sorrows,  

emotional somersaulting, and exhaustion 

finally make it through the finale of ads and signs
, painful commercials and daily wincing 
 
into the bright clearing of this moment, 

where the quietness is neither red or blue 

or even purple, but where now we reap 

some abundant silence to feed us for a while–
  
silence 

 2 
The harvest of a lifetime spreads before our inner 
eye, all the faces of our years rise 
before us, the loves and losses, the challenges and
 disappointments, the suffering and the 
strong.  Some especially rise before us at this tim
e, led their by our hearts. These let us 
recognize and name or see inside us, or name out in
to the shared and safe space of this 
place– 

 
naming 

 
The harvest of days, of good-bye and hello, 

of rising questions and rhythmic salutations 

now flows out of the cornucopia called music: 

 
The First Reading 
is from the great novelist, and essayist James Bald
win, who wrote the 
following words in his 1972 essay Malcolm and Marti
n. 
 
The hope of the world lies in what one demands, not
 of others, but of oneself. 
 
The Second Reading 
is a poem written by my late mentor, Harry Scholefi
eld™s great 
granddaughter, while a freshman in college.
 (It was written as a Christmas present to her 
great-grandmother, Diene Bull Scholefield,) The tit
le is 
On the Question of Race, Alicia 
Chambers 2007.
  
They ask me to write down my race 

 
And I think 

And I think 

Very seriously 

 
And I consider  

Writing down the truth 

And have my answer read 

 
I have a strong woman 

Colored like coffee 

Whispering the secrets of our past 

Inside this body 

 
I have a wise man 

Dark as chocolate 

Beating his drum, fighting for freedom 

Inside this body 

 
I have a brave woman 

Pale as snow 

Reminding that we are more  

 3Than meets the eye 

Her secret is safe 

Inside this body 

 
I have a lost man 

Colored like me 

He is weak 

Stumbling from place to place 

Trying to find his way home 

Warning me of everything 

I do not want to become 

 
I have all this music inside this body 

The rhythms guiding me 

Salsa 

Meringue 

Swing 

Songs of freedom and hope 

A name that can™t begin to  

communicate 

Where I™ve been or where I plan to go 

Inside this body 

 
They ask me to write down my race 

 
And I think 

And I think 

Very seriously 

 
And I consider  

Writing down the truth 

And have my answer read 

 
I have the heart of my great- 

grandmother 

The strength of mi abuelita 

The spirit of my grandfather 

And my mother™s understanding 

Inside this body 

 
I have jacks 

Dr. Seuss 

Lullaby and Good-night 

And marbles 

Inside this body 

 
 4I have Ray Charles 

James Taylor 

Bob Marley 

Sly and the Family Stone 

And We Five 

Inside this body 

 
I have a brother whose appearance 

Does not reveal his culture 

 
I have all our past 

And so much future 

Inside this body 

 
But I stop and simply write down 

?Other? 

 
 
Sermon 

 
And so? Now what? 

 
Well, first, I have to say that my tears seem to be
 drying up, at least for a while. I did cry 
a lot Tuesday night late. My tears, as many of you 
know, are very  accessible to me, but 
on Tuesday, I didn™t stop sobbing for a long, long 
time. My tears kept on welling up. 
 
My tears started when I heard Senator McCain™s conc
ession speech. I thought it both 
gracious and beautiful, enough to prime my tears. 

 
Then I heard president-elect Obama™s acceptance spe
ech. As a man who struggles with 
his writing and with his over-writing, I heard some
thing that night which I could only call 
a masterpiece, maybe even a Gettysburg Address for 
our century. Simple words, short in 
length, unmistakable clarity. Power. 

 
And, when he was done, I felt fully included as a c
itizen of my nation. And so I wept. 
 
I don™t always feel that way.  Fully included as a 
citizen. Does that surprise you? Most 
states, including this benighted one, have cheerily
 passed laws relegating me to second 
class citizenry. It does not make me happy.  

 
And, many people of color tell me they find that th
ey do not feel themselves fully 
included either. I found it interesting how many pe
ople with entirely European ancestry 
claimed to be completely surprised by that simple f
act when they heard all of the angry 
sermons of Rev. Jeremiah Wright making that plain o
n television and across the 
computer screens of America. But Rev. Wright was al
ways expressing 
more
 than just his 
own personal feelings. 

 5 
And my gay and lesbian friends in California all cl
aim a great deal of alienation right 
now because of Proposition 8, which changes the con
stitution to forbid people of the 
same gender to marry in that august state. I™ve hea
rd people I love, sensible folks all of 
them, say that riding on the subway is a new experi
ence now, as they gaze at folks around 
them wondering who voted to keep them second class 
citizens, who voted to mock and 
vilify their very real love for their very real spo
uses. Their paranoia and pain is palpable, 
especially since many of them put so much time into
 this election. Only the presidential 
candidates raised more money in their cause than th
e people both fighting and supporting 
Prop 8. 

 
And so, there are tears of sorrow after this electi
on, as well as tears of joy for me. I have a 
sense of trouble in my heart, even as my heart beat
s with new hope. But this mixture of 
trouble and hope does not surprise me. The ancient 
story of Pandora you heard this 
morning reminds me that hope and trouble are always
 loose in the world, and there is 
probably not going to come a time when I can actual
ly stuff all the troubles of the world 
back into some box leaving hope outside, and sit ar
ound smiling hopefully forever 
without those troubles snapping at me like demons–
  
Now talking about the sadness in California helps m
e make my way into the main point 
of this sermon. Pay attention now. Here comes the t
ransition.  
 
Now many of you have heard me say this before, but 
I need to say this again to get this 
going. Words like 
gay
 and 
straight
 and 
bi
 are 
political words only
. They do not offer any 
information about the personal reality, the ?existe
ntial? reality (if you don™t mind me 
pulling out the five dollar words) of every human p
erson™s sexuality. Every sexuality is 
unique–political terms like gay and straight merely
 help us to work together without 
letting those personal details get us all confused.
  
In the same manner, black and white can both be see
n as political terms. White, as I have 
mentioned before, is not descriptive, since I do no
t really resemble fresh fallen snow; but 
it is a political term. It was deliberately created
 in the fifty years after the Baker Rebellion 
of 1676 in the Virginia Colony. The word ?black,? w
hich, although not descriptive either, 
(since my friend Devere does not resemble a stick o
f licorice one bit) was indeed used 
since Roman times as a poetic description of people
 of African origin. But even still, it 
never referred to a ?race?–a completely false notio
n biologically, till after Immanuel 
Kant invented that terminology, and the privileged 
few in Virginia began to compact all 
people of African origin into that utterly perverse
 and ridiculous category imported from 
Europe: race. ?White? as a race was created at arou
nd the same time, in Virginia, to 
maintain the privilege of the upper-classes and get
 the lower classes–of both African 
and European origin–to fight it out among themselve
s. 
 
But in reality, each of us is unique in personal hi
story, ethnic blend and rooting. Even me. 
Yes, I can trace my history back hundreds of years 
in Emilia, Italia, through all four of 
my grandparents. The last name of one of my grandmo
ther™s was Turchi.  The last name 
of one of my grandfathers was Galli, which means ?a
 citizen of Gaul,? i.e. a land 

 6populated by Celtic tribes. And even the Etruscan p
eople, which appear to root my most 
ancient ancestry arrived in Italy on ships from som
ewhere in the Asian part of the Middle 
East, a place where they read alphabets from right 
to left, unlike the Romans, and us, who 
read left to right. Go back long enough, and all of
 us our ?mixed.? 
 
And so, as we move into the next years under Presid
ent Obama, I would love it if we 
each can commit to naming ourselves as unique peopl
e, as well as members of political 
communities. I say this although we will need to ma
intain, at least for a while, all the 
politicized categories of black and white and Asian
 and Latino and gay and straight and 
men and women, etc. We do need to all work together
 to get things done, after all. But I 
think our 
spiritual
 health and wholeness rather depends on each of us 
remaining faithful 
to our uniqueness, our otherness. We may have to co
me together across our boundaries of 
uniqueness to fight the good fight and achieve poli
tical and ethical ends.  But our souls 
will be saved by being entirely honest about oursel
ves. 
 
Like Alicia Chambers says in her moving poem, she d
oes not fit into any category certain 
people might put her in because of the color of her
 skin. She is  simply ?other.? She is 
neither black, or white, or Latino. She does contai
n within her African, Latin and 
Scandinavian realities. She is Alicia, a human pers
on worthy of every dignity–
just like 
every single other person alive. 

 
White and black and Latino do have very real and co
mplex cultural associations. I hardly 
am denying that. 

 
But it™s also true what Alicia says: 

I have a wise man Dark as chocolate 

Beating his drum, fighting for freedom 

Inside this body 

I have a brave woman Pale as snow 

Reminding that we are more  

Than meets the eye 

Her secret is safe Inside this body 

 
I have a lost man Colored like me 

He is weak Stumbling from place to place 

Trying to find his way home  

Warning me of everything I do not want to become. 

 
And this is true, I must say, of President-elect Ob
ama. Barack Obama is seen as a black 
man by our media. I understand that politically.  S
o does Obama, since he™s a smart guy. 
But existentially, really, honestly, he is more lik
e Alicia: ?other.? With a white woman 
and a black man inside him, music from several cont
inents, the wisdom of several 
cultures, including our own culture, Unitarian Univ
ersalism, since one set of his 
grandparents faithfully attended a Unitarian Univer
salist congregation out west for a 
while. 

 
 7When he stood before that amazing crowd in Chicago,
 with all those different faces and 
sizes and ages, it seemed to me that Senator Obama 
actually embodied, in his flesh, the 
new America, where you can™t just check off a box t
o say who you ?are,? but you are 
bold and happy to admit that you are ?other.? 

 
Jolinda Stephens, our thoughtful Director of Religi
ous Education, pointed out to our 
teachers in her weekly blog that Obama™s grandmothe
r (the one who helped raise him, 
and who just died in Hawaii) was a white woman. ?I 
was just thinking,? she wrote? of 
what President-elect Obama said about his beloved g
randmother during his speech on 
race a few months ago. He said that she had poured 
all she had into him, and yet, she 
–had prejudices and stereotypes about black folks. 
It's important that we find ways to 
help our children, more diverse than the adult cong
regation, yet still very ‚white,™ feel 
that it is important to keep trying to work for fai
rness for all people and to speak up when 
we see unfairness, even when we don't do it perfect
ly. It's better to make mistakes than to 
do nothing.? 

 
I agree.  

 
I would imagine that is part of the reason Obama to
ld that story. And I think this is the 
other part of the reason he told that story: 

 
Back when I was a child, I remember being transfixe
d when I saw President Kennedy, on 
our small black and white TV, pausing dramatically 
before he uttered, in his famous 
Bostonian accent, ?Ask not what your country can do
 for you. Ask what you can to for 
your country.?  His election was amazing too, becau
se no Roman Catholic had ever 
before been elected President of our nation. But th
at sentence of his resonated even with 
folks who despised the Catholic Church, as many did
 in those days, because it was an 
undeniably wise statement. It wasn™t just a clever 
platitude mind you, but an invitation to 
take seriously the old saw from President Lincoln (
a saw he in turn borrowed from 
Unitarian minister Theodore Parker) that we are ?a 
government of the people, by the 
people, for the people.?   

 
And so I turn to the wise words of James Baldwin, w
ho said: ?The hope of the world lies 
in what one demands, not of others, but of oneself.
?  I™ve noticed that Obama, from the 
start, has been asking us to make demands of oursel
ves. To take political work seriously. 
To show up. To understand that showing up is the re
al and only privilege worth fighting 
for in this life. Not to be blue or red, white or b
lack, not to be more powerful, more 
connected, more fashion conscious, but to simply sh
ow up. Like his grandmother, 
struggling with her own prejudices. 

 
He is asking us to take our work seriously, to orga
nize, together, as the people of a single 
nation, because without organizing to create a nati
on that welcomes its 
own
 people, let 
alone immigrants, there is no hope at all. Just wis
hful thinking, a sense of lazy 
entitlement, a whole lot of mindless bureaucracy, a
nd late night television infomercials 
selling snake-oil to dupes by the gallon. 

 
 8And so, the gift of organizing to make a world wher
e no one feels exiled to the outskirts 
of the nation is not over because the election is o
ver. My depressed friends in California, 
and elsewhere, are aware of that, even in the depth
s of their sadness. There is more work 
for them to do, once we™ve rested–and wept–wept bot
h tears of joy, and tears of grief. 
And, in all fairness to what I said earlier, not al
l gay and lesbian people voted for Obama, 
and not all of them voted against Prop 8, just as n
ot all Republicans voted for Senator 
McCain, and vice versa. You see, no category tells 
the story. 
Ever.
 And the honesty it 
takes to tell the true story, to claim our uniquene
ss, is hard and relentless work. 
 
The vision of America lifted up by President-elect 
Obama in his acceptance speech is not 
going to make everyone happy. Fox News and Mr. Limb
augh are already firing every 
spear of innuendo and implication they can.   

 
And a vision is a vision, not final reality. But ho
w comforted I am that the man lifting up 
this vision is, in his very flesh, heritage and sou
l, an actual 
embodiment 
of that vision. 
 
Offering 

 
For the support of this congregation and its vision
, we offer this time of giving. Some 
give by mail and electronically, but others like of
fering their support within the context of 
this morning celebration, which is the time when we
 express the deepest values and 
visions of our hearts in the context of hope and hi
story.  The morning offering will now 
be given and received.  

 
Gloria 

 
Glory, Glory, Halleluiah! 

In this month of gratitude, I thank you Anna Dickin
son and Frederick Douglas and a 
thousand nameless men and women of many colors, for
 working so hard to bring the 
voting box to the disenfranchised of color in this 
nation. May you still stand with us in 
the flow of history. And may we stand by you.  Glor
y, Glory, Halleluiah! I thank you 
Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Lucretia 
Mott, Lucy Stone, Lucy Burns, 
Alice Paul, Carrie Chapman Catt, and so many others
, both women and men, for bringing 
the ballot box to women in this nation. May you sti
ll stand with us in the flow of history. 
And may we stand by you.  Glory, Glory, Hallelujah!
  I thank you Martin Luther King Jr. 
and Coretta Scott King, and Unitarians James Reeb, 
and Viola Liuzzo and so many others 
of every color and gender for risking life itself t
o tear down the ridiculous walls which 
claim the power to divide us all. May you still sta
nd with us in the flow of history. And 
may we stand by you.  Glory, glory, Hallelujah!  I 
thank you Harvey Milk, Bayard 
Rustin, Keith Boykin, Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon a
nd so many others of every gender 
and color for daring to be who you are without fear
 of what cruelties folks might say 
about your sexual orientation. I thank you allies, 
and the utterly sympathetic. May you 
stand with us in the flow of history. And may we st
and by you.  Glory, Glory, Hallelujah!  
 
 
