Sunday, September 9, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Then brought he me the way of the north gate before the house; and I looked, and, behold, the glory of the Lord filled the house of the Lord; and I fell upon my face. And the Lord said unto me, Son of man, mark well, and behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears all that I say unto thee concerning all the ordinances of the house of the Lord, and all the laws thereof; and mark well the entering in of the house, with every going forth of the sanctuary. And thou shalt say to the rebellious, even to the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God; O ye house of Israel, let it suffice you of all your abominations, In that ye have brought into my sanctuary strangers, uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to pollute it, even in my house, when ye offer by bread, the fat and the blood, and they have broken my covenant because of all your abominations." (Ezek. 44:4-7.)  The minutest attention to what God has required is found repeatedly stated in both the Old and in the New Testaments. For examples: "Now therefore, hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes and to the judgments which I teach you, for to do them... Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your God which I command you. Your eyes have seen what the Lord did because of Baal-peor; for all the men that followed Baal-peor, the Lord thy God hath destroyed them from among you. But ye that did cleave unto the Lord thy God, are alive every one of you this day. Behold, I have taught you statutes and judgments, even as the Lord my God commanded me, that ye should do so in the land whither ye go to possess it. Keep therefore and do them; for this is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people. For what nation is there so great, who hath God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for? And what nation is there so great, that hath statutes and judgments so righteous as all this law, which I set before you this day? Only take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life; but teach them thy sons, and thy sons' sons." (Deut. 4:1- 9) "And when they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter; should not a people seek unto their God? For the living to the dead? To the law and to the testimony; if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them." (Isa. 8:19,20) "Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free course, and be glorified, even as it is with you; and that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men; for all men have not faith. But the Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you from evil. And we have confidence in the Lord touching you, that ye both do and will do the things which we command you. And the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the patient waiting for Christ. Now we command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that walketh disorderly, and not after the tradition which he received of us. For yourselves know how ye ought to follow us; for we behaved not ourselves disorderly among you; neither did we eat any man's bread for nought; but wrought with labor and travail night and day, that we might not be chargeable to any of you; not because we have not power, but to make ourselves an example unto you to follow us. For even when we were with you, this we commanded you that if any would not work, neither should he eat. For we hear that  Sunday, September 9, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  there are some which walk among you disorderly, working not at all, but are  busybodies. Now them that are such we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus  Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat their own bread. But ye, brethren, be  not weary in well doing. And if any man obey not our word by this epistle, note that  man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. Yet count him not  as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. Now the Lord of peace himself give  you peace always by all means. The Lord be with you all. The Salutation of Paul  with mine own hand, which is the token in every epistle; so I write. The grace of our  Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen." (2 Thes. 3:1-18)  "Whereunto I am appointed a preacher, and an apostle, and a teacher of the Gentiles. For the which cause I also suffer these things; nevertheless I am not ashamed; for I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day. Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou hast heard of me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus. That good thing which was committed unto thee keep by the Holy Ghost which dwelleth in us. This thou knowest, that all they which are in Asia be turned away from me; of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes. The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus; for he oft refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain; but, when he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found me. The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day; and in how many things he ministered unto me in Ephesus, thou knowest very well." (2 Tim. 1:11-18)  Beloved, this man -- this dear brother in Christ -- Onesiphorus by name -- is a bright, shining  example of one who is giving diligence to make his calling and election sure. He saw one of God's precious Elect little sheep in prison, and he came unto him. Therefore the king placed him  with those on his right hand, and said to those on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father,  inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world, you saw me in prison and  you came unto me. (Matt. 25.) To wit: "When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all  the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory; And before him shall  be gathered all nations; and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth  his sheep from the goats: And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the  left. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father,  inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: For I was an hungred,  and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in:  Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me.  Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, and fed  thee? Or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? Or  naked, and clothed thee? And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you,  Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto  me. Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into  everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels: For I was an hungred, and ye gave me  no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: I was a stranger, and ye clothed me not: sick,  and in prison, and ye visited me not. Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw  we thee an hungred, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not  minister unto thee? Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye  Sunday, September 9, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. And these shall go away into  everlasting punishment: but the righteous into life eternal." (Matt. 25:31-46)  Beloved, it is everywhere declared that we must suffer for the cause of God and truth in this world and in this lifetime -- if we intend to reign eternally with Christ in the world to come. "Wherein I suffer trouble as an evil doer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound. Therefore I endure all things for the elect's sakes, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory. It is a faithful saying; For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he also will deny us." (2 Tim. 2:9-12.) "Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. But continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them; and that from a child thou hast known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus. All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; That the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works." (Or, Perfected.) (2 Tim. 3:12-17.)  Beloved, only the pure Scriptures of God have intrinsic power to bind the conscience of mankind. "My little children, let us love not in word, neither in tongue; but in deed and in truth. And hereby we know that we are of the truth; and shall assure our hearts before him. For if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knoweth all things. Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight. And this is his commandment, That we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us commandment. And he that keepeth his commandments dwelleth in him, and he in him. And hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given us." (1 John 3:18-24.)  Beloved, here is an amazing fact, which the Bible speaks very plainly about, and which we should give more thought and attention to. It regards the gifts or donatives of Christ, generally referred to as an UNCTION FROM the Holy One (1 Jn. 2:20) or the EARNEST OF THE SPIRIT IN OUR HEARTS. (2 Cor. 1:22.) Moreover, the Savior promised His beloved disciples and apostles that after His departure, He would send the Holy Spirit to anoint them, to comfort them, to take the things of Christ and explain them, and show them things to come. (Jn. 14:25, et. seq.) "But ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things. I have not written unto you because ye know not the truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth, Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? He is antichrist, that denieth the Father and the Son. Whosoever denieth the Son, the same hath not the Father; but he that acknowledgeth the Son hath the Father also. Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the beginning. If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father. And this is the promise that he hath promised us, even eternal life. These things have I written unto you concerning them that seduce you. BUT THE ANOINTING WHICH YE HAVE RECEIVED OF HIM ABIDETH IN YOU, and ye need not that any man teach you; but as the same anointing teacheth you of all  Sunday, September 9, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him. And  now, little children, abide in him; that, when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and not  be ashamed before him at his coming. If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one  that doeth righteousness is born of him." (1 Jn. 2:20-29.)  On the eve of His arrest, torture, and crucifixion, the Savior seemed especially anxious to comfort His disciples thereby to prepare them for the sorrows they presently faced. ("I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you" -- Jn. 14:18.) See how His blessed words tumble over each other in near repetition; to wit, e.g.: "Let not your hearts be troubled; ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my Father's house are many mansions, if it were not so I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also." (Jn. 14:1-3.) Now notice the similarity; to wit: "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you; not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come again unto you..." (Jn. 14:27,28.) Beloved, all of God's Elect -- without exception -- have received a HOLY MIRACLEUNCTION -- or ANOINTING whereby marvelous spiritual gifts, comforts and empowerments are imparted to the faithful; to wit: "These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues; yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service. And these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the Father, nor me. But these things have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may remember that I told you of them. And these things I said not unto you at the beginning, because I was with you. But now I go my way to him that sent me; and none of you asketh me, Whither goest thou? But because I have said these things unto you, sorrow hath filled your heart. Nevertheless I tell you the truth; It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you. And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment: Of sin, because they believe not on me; Of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more; Of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged. I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will shew you things to come. He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you. All things that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I that he shall take of mine, and shall shew it unto you." (Jn. 16:1-15.) The UNCTION, or, the ANOINTING, helps the Elect soul in giving diligence to make his calling and election sure (2 Pet. 1:10); to wit: "For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The Spirit itself beareth witness, that we are the children of God; and if children then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together. For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us." (Rom. 8:14-18)  I love you. Amen.  
