The Concept of Liberation 

BY DR. C. D. DESHMUKH, M. A, Ph. D. 

ANALYSIS OF THE CONCEPT OF LIBERATION 

Liberation in itself seems to be a purely negative idea, but it implies the existence of that which is in some way limited and which can be freed from these limitations. Man knows himself to be finite owing to the many limita≠tions of which he is always conscious. The awareness of limitation or bondage is an everyday fact which no one can deny. But this consciousness of limita≠tion is possible only if there is some objective towards which life is striving. If a person wants to get out of a room, then alone can he have the sense of being imprisoned in that room. If he wants to remain in it, there is no sense of limitation. Most people live under a sense of limitation and restriction be≠cause of their having certain desires which cannot be fulfilled. The sense of freedom can, therefore, come only in the successful attainment of some fun≠damental urge; if it is frustrated there 

is immediately the sense of limitation. LIBERATION AND DESIRES Had there been only one desire in consciousness, one could have unhesi≠tatingly said that the freedom of con≠sciousness consists in the fulfilment of that desire. However, we actually find in consciousness a host of desires which often come into conflict with one another. Further, most of these desires are dependent upon external things or circumstances; and the freedom which the soul may have in relation to them is, therefore, not absolute but con≠tingent. When there is a conflict, the freedom of soul makes itself felt through choice. But choice is a process of self-torture, since the person has to rule out one or more alternative desires in favour of some particular desire. Thus, in choice, the soul experiences limitation. The search for absolute freedom, therefore, involves the search for the ultimate purpose of the life of the individual 


Parama Purushartha. This is the posi≠tive aspect of liberation. This ultimate purpose is hidden by the surging of diverse desires which dominate the stream of consciousness. However, it is a mistake to think that desires are mere obstacles; for they can, if intelligently handled, be turned into so many aven≠ues which indirectly lead to the ul≠timate goal by bringing about multi≠form experiences and thus creating opportunities for a real understanding about the Telos of life. 

Therefore, a purely negative method which shuns life and its experiences will not lead the individual to the perception or the realization of the goal of life. But if the individual accepts and welcomes experience and digests it through critical understanding, he can come closer to the final fulfilment of his life. The capacity of an experience for awakening the individual depends upon how rich and profound it is. The experience which is most useful in this connection is the experience of love. Mostly the experience is not strong enough to break down the walls of the prison of consciousness, because it is clouded by different factors like ego≠ism, fear, jealousy or a selfish motive. But if the power of love is freed from these encumbrances, it can lead the individual to final release and fulfil≠ment. 

THE LAW OF KARMA The limitations of consciousness can all be ultimately traced to the effects of past actions (which include thought and feeling) which give a specific shape and character to the temperament of the individual. Just as the flow of the river cuts its own bed, so also, the action of the individual leaves behind it certain mental traces which not only serve the purpose of recalling the original situa≠tions but also operate as dispositions which give a specifically directed momentum to the subsequent mental process. The bondage of Karma can, in the last analysis, be reduced to uncon≠scious mental habits which prevent intelligent response to the rapidly changing circumstances. It is true that with regard to many technical achievements habits conserve a great deal of practical experience and usually save us from the need of 





  



fresh efforts for adjustment and coor≠dination of responses, for we are there concerned with recurring problems which repeat themselves in uniformity. But mental habits have a tendency to obstruct true perception of values and also to hinder the release of intelligent response, because every fresh situation in the life of the individual is unique and therefore requires critical thought and unique response. 

For the limiting influence of Karma we have, in abnormal psychology, a good analogue in fixed ideas, which introduce unhealthy rigidity in mental operations. But apart from mechani≠zation of the mind the mental habits can often limit activity from another point of view also, because most mental habits are due to ignorant and misdirected actions. They, therefore, not only make the mind a rigid and semi-mechanical instrument, but also positively pervert the mind. The problem of Liberation is, therefore, the problem of freeing the mind from the limiting influence of past actions. 


The psychological question with 

which we are here confronted may be formulated as follows: "Is the mind eternally doomed to operate under the yoke of its own past, or is there any way for emancipating it from that influence?" It is futile to expect any clue from the solutions offered in connection with the problem of free will, where a reconciliation between determinists and libertarians is effected by defining freedom as self-determination, since, in such solutions, the self is tacitly identified with its character and the operation of what is called the whole self can hardly be distinguished from the collective result of totality of dispositions. 

The cardinal fallacy of such solution lies (1) in looking upon the individual as having no being other than his psychological products which constitute his empirical self, and (2) in hastily forming a theory of human personality without thorough investigation into the nature of ultimate values or the final purpose of human existence. Having accepted narrow empiricism such theories have to be content with the formal freedom of self-deter≠



mination which secures internal har≠mony but fails to assure the realization of supreme values. It is, therefore, not surprising that they ignore the other important condition of positively signi≠ficant freedom which has been beau≠tifully expressed by Christ when He said: "You shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you free." 


The chief condition of freedom is that the entire personality should be illumined by a comprehensive and uni≠fying ideal. In the last analysis it will be found that nothing short of Infinity can bring real fulfilment to human personality. Whatever is fragmentary or temporary must leave the soul dissatisfied. Even the ideal of Infinity merely intensifies human discontent so long as it is objectified and appre≠hended as some-thing which may be realized in future, for it intensifies the awareness of existing limitations. Thus true freedom requires the transcendence of all limitations (or the bonds of Karma) and the realization of one's own Infinity here and now. 

During the process of transcending limitations, it is however necessary that the mind should be wholly centred upon the realization of the Infinite. So long as the mind is caught up in the temporal process, owing to various desires, it is neither possible nor desirable to avoid the creation and the pursuit of the Ideal. And if the ideal is as vast as Infinity, it releases in the individual that power which enables him to transcend his spiritual limit≠ations. 

After perceiving the ultimate goal, the life force which has so far been forging for one 's self the multifarious chains of trivial desires is withdrawn from all dissipating channels; and it comes to be released in a manner which will in no way create a sense of limit≠ations. Modern psycho-analysis has not yet fully recognized (1) the possibility of completely annulling the effects of past experiences and actions, and the possibility of complete sublimation of the libido. But this is largely due to its being exclusively based upon abnormal data and its somewhat ungenerous attitude towards the 


entire range of supernatural experien≠ces. 


The most essential requirement for Liberation is that the individual should be able to step outside his limiting per≠sonality in the sense that his vision is no longer clouded by exclusive concen≠tration of interest in his own self. The limitations of consciousness are ulti≠mately rooted in some kind of deep rooted ignorance about the place and function of the individual in the totality of life. The understanding of life is perverted by the fact that the individual has a tendency to judge everything and to react to it from the point of view of the ego. The ego creates duality and all the complications of duality. It divides life into fractions and destroys its har≠mony and integrity. The individual, therefore, constantly lives in a sense of conflict, frustration and limitations. But if through intense love and under≠standing, the individual succeeds in dropping the idea of his being separate from life, he breaks through his limita≠tions and is united with the one indivisible Reality. 

LIBERATION AND EXTINCTION Those thinkers who look upon Liberation as total extinction of life and consciousness have certainly misunder≠stood its true nature. This view is sometimes attributed to Lord Buddha; but there is ample evidence to believe that he looks upon Nirvana as a posi≠tive state of consciousness. Extinction as such can hardly have any fascination for the individual. For those who can≠not think of any other life than the life of the ego, Liberation may look like total extinction; but in fact it is an initiation into the Life Eternal, for the individual is then united with the Infinite Reality. Even the positive conception of Liberation, however, differs according to whether one looks upon the Ultimate 

Saguna Mukti. 

SAGUNA MUKTI Reality as a Personal God or as an Impersonal Absolute. The worshippers of a personal God believe in three kinds of Liberation : 

(1) 

Salokya, or residing in the world of the God worshipped;



 (2) 

Samipa, or living in close proxi≠mity with Him, and 


(3) Sarupya, or becoming like Him in nature and form. 

Liberation is here looked upon as a blissful state of existence in some sup≠ersensible world; and this kind of ideal can only appeal to few persons since, for most persons, the existence of the other world is either theory or a matter of faith. Further along this view, all hope of fulfilment comes to be centred upon life after death; and the present mundane life of man tends to be de≠prived of all intrinsic significance since it is regarded as being merely a period of preparation for the life to come. It will also be seen that all these forms of Saguna Mukti consist of varying degrees of companionship of God. But in so far as they all equally posit irreducible dualism between God and man, they do not do full justice to man 's aspiration for Infinity. 

NIRGUNA MUKTI The fourth form of Mukti, which 

kind is called Sayujya, is, therefore, looked upon as the highest of Liber≠ation, since it consists in becoming one with the Ultimate Reality. The duality of personal relationship is here superceded by the realization of supra-relational identity between man and the Ultimate Reality. This concept of Lib≠eration appeals to those who look upon the Ultimate Reality as an Impersonal Absolute and who long to be merged in it. This type of Nirguna Mukti is not to be looked upon as a result of a process whereby the individual becomes what he was not; it is rather a culmination of a process of self-knowledge whereby he realizes fully what he already is, has been and ever will be.* 

According to Sankara, Liberation in≠volves the complete merging of the individual in the Ultimate Reality so that he ceases to have any separate existence of his own; but Ramanuja maintains that the individual retains his separate 
   

and unique existence although he comes to have the most intimate relation with the Ultimate Reality. However, in view of the fact that even ordinary experiences of love and under≠standing point out to a confluence or interpenetration of selves, it seems pro≠bable that, in the state of Liberation, the individual knows himself to be the All-self Ü from the point of view of content consciousness; and he ceases to iden≠tify himself with the limited person≠ality; but this articulate self-knowledge of the All-self is explicitly present only in the centre consciousness which has attained Liberation; and Liberation is in this sense purely a personal matter. 

The paradox is more intelligible to us if we remember the inseparability of the subjective and the objective factors in ordinary knowledge of the finite self. The true function of the subjective factors is to grasp, develop and intel≠lectually appropriate the objective world and not itself as an isolated or self-sufficient centre. However, owing to certain psychological factors like desires, the centre does not function perfectly, and it creates a prison for itself in the form of the ' I ' or the ego, on the basis of the bodily existence. Identification with the body is thus responsible for the illusion of separ≠ateness. But as the centre of con≠sciousness frees itself from its limiting desires, it goes beyond the artificial division between the subject and the object and realizes the unity of the two. Just as the true function of a mirror is to reflect all other things but not itself, the real value of the centre of consci≠ousness lies in its capacity to reveal the true nature of Ultimate Reality. It is egoism which makes it identify itself with a narrow and finite empirical self; but when the ego disappears through right understanding, it knows itself to be identical with the one indivisible Reality. 


In Liberation the individual tran≠scends duality and there is therefore for him no antithesis between the self and the society. It is equally incapable of 

selfish and altruistic actions. But this does not necessitate the cessation of all action. In fact, Liberation implies the release of perfect action which springs from a poise of love and understand≠ing. It is not born of desire and is, therefore, not the seeking of some unrealized dream of fulfilment; but it is at once an expression and a part of an eternally fresh and creatively self-renewing blissful fulfilment which is unaffected by the sufferings and the conflicts experienced by the unliberated soul. 