  September 22, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor   
       He Is The Source Of EternalSalvation For All Who Obey Him   (Hebrews 5:4-10)    And no one takes the honor [of the high priesthood] to himself,but receives it when he is called by God, even as Aaron was. 5 Soalso Christ did not glorify Himself so as to become a high priest,but He who said to Him, "Thou art my Son, today I have begotten Thee"[glorified Christ]; 6 just as He says also in another passage, "Thouart a priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek." 7 In thedays of His flesh, He offered up both prayers and supplications withloud crying and tears to the One able to save Him from death, and Hewas heard because of His piety. 8 Although He was a Son, He learnedobedience from the things which He suffered. 9 And having been madeperfect, He became to all those who obey Him the source of eternalsalvation, 10 being designated by God as a high priest according tothe order of Melchizedek.    
      Dignity, Eternity and Purity    I want to hang the message this morning on three words thatdescribe Christ in this passage:  dignity ,  eternity  and purity . Now I know that those are big words for children, andmaybe even for adults. But do you know what wise children say? Wisechildren say, "Pastor John uses some big words, and I don'tunderstand them all; but I'm glad he doesn't just use words that Ialready understand, because then he would have to leave out a lot ofimportant things in the Bible and I wouldn't grow in myunderstanding." So let me try, for the children and the adults, totell you what I mean by  dignity, eternity  and  purity .  But let's set the stage with the main point. The main point ofthis passage (verses 4-10) is found in verse 9b: "He [Christ] becameto all those who obey Him the source of eternal salvation." Christ isthe source of eternal salvation -- salvation from the guilt andcondemnation and power of sin and from the wrath of God and the fearof death and a life of meaningless work. And this verse says that allof that salvation comes from Christ. He is the source, or the cause,of that salvation. And it is eternal: "he became the source of eternal  salvation." It lasts forever. It starts in this lifeand it lasts through death, through judgment and goes on forever andever. This is what the book of Hebrews is about. It is what the Bibleis about -- salvation that lasts forever based on Jesus Christ.  That's the main point of these verses. "Christ became the sourceof eternal salvation for all who obey him." Everything else in theseverses explains how Christ could do that. That's where the words dignity ,  eternity  and  purity  come in. I want totry to show from these verses that Christ became the source ofeternal salvation because of his    dignity   as the Son of God, and because of his     eternity   in the priestly order ofMelchizedek, and because of his     purity   in the crucible of suffering.      Dignity     means worthiness of honor. A dog hasmore dignity than an ant; that is, it's worthy of more honor. That'swhy nobody gets upset when you poison ants, but would get angry atyou if you poisoned all the dogs in the neighborhood. And childrenhave more dignity than dogs, because humans are worthy of more honorthan dogs are. The humane society gathers up stray dogs andmercifully puts some of them to sleep. But nobody would let them dothat with children. And God has more dignity than children -- oradults -- because he created us and owns us and is infinitelysuperior to us in every way. So dignity means worthiness of honor.Christ has infinite dignity as the Son of God.    Eternity     means forever. Something that haseternity has no beginning and no ending. If something lasts for awhile and stops, it does not have eternity. If something didn't existfor a long time and then it was created or came into being, itdoesn't have eternity. Eternity means forever -- backward andforward. No beginning and no ending. Christ has eternity in thepriestly order of Melchizedek (which I will explain in a minute).    Purity   means unsoiled, not dirty. It means that whenJesus suffered and was tempted he did not give into the impurities ofanger or bitterness or cursing or self-pity and unbelief. He prayedfor help and God helped him stay pure.  
    Christ is our Source of Eternal Salvationbecause of those Qualities    Now the main point is this: Christ became for us a source ofeternal salvation because of his  dignity ,  eternity  and purity .  Someone may ask, "What about his death for our sins? I thought hebecame the source of salvation by dying for our sins. Why talk abouthis dignity and eternity and purity as the way he became the sourceof eternal salvation?" That's a very good question. There are threereasons.  One is because that is what this text does: it talks aboutChrist's dignity as the Son of God and his eternity as a priest likeMelchizedek and his purity in suffering.  The second reason is that these three things explain why Jesus wasa suitable Savior to die for our sins. And when you know why he was asuitable Savior, your confidence in your salvation and your Savior isstronger; and when your confidence is stronger, you are morecourageous to live the kind of risk-taking, self-sacrificing lovethat this book is going to call for in chapters 10-13.  The third reason Hebrews talks about the dignity and eternity andpurity of Jesus as the way he became our source of eternal salvationis that knowing him -- really knowing who he is and what he is likeand what he experienced -- makes a personal relationship possible.The less you know about a person, the less you can have significantpersonal relationship with him or her. We need to meet the real Jesusin the Word of God. We need to see him in his dignity as the Son ofGod and in his eternity as a priest in the order of Melchizedek andin his purity in the midst of incredible suffering. This is how youhave a personal relationship with Jesus.  For these three reasons at least, Hebrews tells us that Christ hasbecome the source of eternal salvation because of his dignity, hiseternity and his purity. So let's look at these one at a time. Andpray as we go that the effect will be deepened confidence in yoursalvation and deeper love in your personal relationship with Jesus.    
      Christ's Dignity -- Glorified by God theFather    1. Verse 4 begins, "And no one takes the honor [of the highpriesthood] to himself, but  receives it  when he is called byGod, even as Aaron was [see Exodus 28:1]." In other words, the officeof high priest is an office of immense dignity and you can't justdecide to have it. God has to call you to it like he called Aaron inthe Old Testament.  Then verse 5 says, "So also Christ did not glorify Himself so asto become a high priest, but he who said to Him, 'Thou art my Son,today I have begotten Thee [He glorifies Christ in this way].'" Inother words, Christ did not glorify himself with the dignity of theoffice of high priest; God the Father did. But what's surprisingabout this verse is that the title "Son of God" replaces the title"High Priest". The first half of the verse says that Christ did notglorify himself as High Priest, and we expect the second half of theverse to say, No,  God  made him High Priest. But instead itquotes Psalm 2:7 about God begetting Christ as his Son.  The point, I think, is that Christ is qualified to be our HighPriest and to become the source of eternal salvation because he isthe Son of God, and it was God himself who qualified Christ in thisway. Christ is begotten of God from all eternity; and God declaredhim the Son of God in power by raising him from the dead (cf. Hebrews1:5; Acts 13:33).  So Christ has the  dignity  to be our High Priest and tobecome the source of eternal salvation. No one but the Son of Godcould do it. No other being in the universe has the dignity that wasrequired to obtain an eternal salvation. It took an infinite dignity.No priest of Aaron's line and no angel in heaven could do it. Onlyone could do it -- the Son of God. So we see how important it is toknow the  dignity  of Christ.  All hell will rage at you one day with this one message --especially when you are nearing death: your salvation is notsufficient; your guilt remains; condemnation hangs over your head;and the wrath of God is not removed. At that moment you will needtruth about the foundation of your eternal salvation. And one truththat will strengthen your confidence in that hour is the truth thatyou have no ordinary High Priest, but one who has the infinitedignity of the Son of God, and he has  therefore  become thesource of eternal salvation.    
      Eternity of Christ -- High PriestForever    2. Second, consider the  eternity      of Christ asa priest in the order of Melchizedek. He has become the source ofeternal salvation because he is an eternal priest. Verse 7: "Just asHe says also in another passage [Psalm 110:4], "Thou art a priestforever according to the order of Melchizedek."  Now Hebrews 7 takes up this Melchizedek idea in detail. So I amgoing to save most of our thoughts about it until that sermon. Butlet me give you a summary here. Melchizedek is mentioned two times inthe Old Testament (Genesis 14:18 and Psalm 110:4), that's all. InGenesis he meets Abraham coming back from a military conquest andblesses him, and Abraham gives him tithes. The text simply says, "Hewas a priest of God Most High." There is no information about hisparents or his ethnic origin. He appears and disappears until athousand years later in the time of David, who quotes God as sayingthat the Messiah is "a priest forever according to the order ofMelchizedek." And that's it. Nothing more about Melchizedek untilthis writer mentions him here.  The point is this: Melchizedek symbolizes in the Old Testament apriesthood different from the priesthood of Aaron and the tribe ofLevi. Melchizedek became a kind of symbolic pointer to a priesthoodwith no beginning and no ending. That's why Psalm 110 and Hebrews 5:6stress the word "forever" -- "You are a priest  forever according to the order of Melchizedek."  Now we'll come back to Melchizedek in chapter 7 but the point hereis this: Not only does Christ have the  dignity  of the Son ofGod, but he also has the  eternity  of the "priestly order ofMelchizedek. What Melchizedek symbolized, Christ realized. Christreally is a High Priest, as Hebrews 7:3 says, "having neitherbeginning of days nor end of life." He has eternity.  That is the second reason he has become for us a source of" eternal  salvation." Not only was his death infinitelyvaluable and infinitely effective because he has infinite dignity , but he goes on ministering the effect of that deathfor us in heaven forever and ever and never dies. He has eternity  in the order of Melchizedek.  This too is for the sake of your  confidence  in the face offear and doubt and temptation and accusation. Do you want to becomean oak tree saint instead of a cattail saint? The Bible says,"Meditate on the word of God day and night" (Psalm 1). This is thesort of thing to meditate on: Christ has become a source of eternalsalvation because he has the  dignity  of the Son of God andbecause he has the  eternity  of the priesthood of Melchizedek.  Here's another way to say it. You can ask your friends, Wouldn'tit be an all-satisfying experience if two things were true? 1) If youhad a treasure of infinite value -- I mean infinite with nothinglacking that is truly valuable; and 2) if you had the guarantee thatyou could go on enjoying its infinite resources forever and ever withno end and no diminishment? In other words, infinite  value with infinite  duration  is what would bring us completesatisfaction. The best thing possible and never-ending enjoyment.Then tell them that this is exactly why you are a Christian --because Christ has become the source of eternal salvation because heis the infinitely valuable Son of God and because his care andadvocacy is never-ending.    
      Christ's Purity -- He LearnedObedience    3. But there is one last foundation for our eternal salvation.Christ became the source of eternal salvation, not only because ofhis  dignity  and  eternity,  but because of his purity . And not just the purity that he brought to hisministry as the Son of God, but purity that he had to forge in thefurnace of suffering.  If you ask, Did his divine  dignity  and his priestly eternity  give him automatic  purity ?, the answer is No.It was not automatic. Verse 8 says, "Although He was a Son, He learned obedience  from the things which He suffered." Thisdoes not mean he moved from being disobedient to being obedient. Itmeans he moved from being untested to being tested and proven. Hemoved from obeying without any suffering to obeying throughunspeakable suffering. It means that the gold of his natural puritywas put in the crucible and melted down with white-hot pain, so thathe could learn from experience what suffering is and prove that hispurity would persevere.  And did this come automatically? No. Verse 7 says that it wasprayed for and begged for and cried out for and wept for with tears.This was no fake test of Christ's purity. Everything in the universehung on this test.  Was it brief? Some take verse 7 to refer only to the battle inGethsemane when he sweat drops of blood and pleaded with God. I don'tthink so. Notice the word "days" in verse 7 -- "In the  days  ofHis flesh." Not just a night or a day, but during all the "days ofhis humanity" he was wrestling and praying and begging and crying outand weeping. It was not brief. It was a lifetime of warfare againstsin.  And when verse 7b says that he was praying and crying "to the Oneable to save Him from death," does that mean that he was mainlypraying for deliverance from physical death? Was that the main aim ofhis praying in the days of his flesh? I don't think so, because verse7 says "he was heard." I think that means God gave him what he askedfor, and verse 8 describes the effect of that answered prayer: helearned obedience. Jesus was praying for obedience -- for perseveringpurity.  In other words, Jesus knew that there was a death worse thandeath. Much worse. Physical death is bad enough and he desired thatthere be another way to do the Father's will than to die on thecross. But far more horrible than dying on the cross was the impurityof unbelief and disobedience. That was the great and horrible threat.So he prayed all his life against that, and he was heard by hisFather and, instead of caving into sin, he learned  obedience from what he suffered.  He became a source of eternal salvation because of his dignity  as the Son of God and his  eternity  in thepriesthood of Melchizedek and his  purity  in the crucible ofincredible suffering.    
      Do You Have this Eternal Salvation?    Which leaves one last question: Do you have this eternalsalvation? Not everyone does. Verse 9 tells us who does: "And havingbeen made perfect, He became  to all those who obey Him  thesource of eternal salvation." Those who are obeying Christ have theeternal salvation that he obtained for us. Are you obeying Christ? Orare you living in disobedience to his will?  One thing is very clear from Hebrews: the will of Christ that hasto be obeyed is first and foremost the command to trust him, to holdfast to our hope (3:6), to guard against a heart of unbelief (3:12)to hold fast to our confession (4:14) and to draw near to Christ forhelp (4:16). In other words, the first and main act of obedience isto believe in the promises of God (3:18-19) and to hope in him. Allother obedience, according to Hebrews, is the fruit of this first androot act of obedience (10:34; 11:8, 24-26; 13:5-6, 13-14). So dailyacts of practical obedience are the evidence of this first obedientact of saving faith.  If you are not walking in obedience to Jesus, then I call you torepent and to stop putting your hope in the promises of sin and tostart putting it in the promises of God. He is the source of eternalsalvation to all who obey him, that is, to all who hope in hispromises and live like it.  Copyright 1996 John Piper  
  
