Sunday, March 2, 2008 page 1  Sermon Outline  "And he did so, walking naked and barefoot." Isa. 20:2.  "At the same time spake the Lord by Isaiah the son of Amoz, saying, Go and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, and put off thy shoe from thy foot. And he did so, WALKING NAKED AND BAREFOOT. And the Lord said, Like as my servant Isaiah hath walked naked and barefoot three years for a sign and wonder upon Egypt and upon Ethiopia; so shall the king of Assyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners, and the Ethiopians captives, young and old, --(walking) -- naked and barefoot, even with their buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Egypt. And they shall be afraid and ashamed of Ethiopia their expectation, and of Egypt their glory. And the inhabitant of this isle ­ (i.e., this lonely "country" of Israel, the 10 northern tribes, sequestered and isolated from all other countries) ­ Israel shall say in that day, Behold, such is our expectation, whither we flee for help to be delivered from the king of Assyria: and how shall we escape?" (Isa. 20:2-6)  Gill; to wit: "Signifying that it was vain and foolish, and they had acted a very weak, as well as a wicked part, in having recourse to the Egyptians and Ethiopians to help them against the Assyrians, as it plainly appeared by both nations now being conquered by the Assyrians; and how shall WE escape? seeing that the Egyptians and the Ethiopians had not escaped, who were more powerful than Israel; and how could they think that they could save the Israelites, who could not even save themselves? and so the Targum, `If they have not delivered their souls (themselves), how shall we be delivered?'"  Maybe this sermon should be titled, "The Signs and Wonders of Isaiah the Prophet." The Lord said, "My servant Isaiah hath walked naked and barefoot three years for a sign and wonder upon Egypt and upon Ethiopia." Isa. 20:3. Isaiah was obedient to the divine command, Gill says, "not regarding the disgrace which might attend it, nor the danger of catching cold, to which he was exposed, and hence he has the character of a servant of the Lord, and a faithful obedient one he was."  Earlier in his long career as an obedient servant of the Lord, Isaiah's complete dedication to the publication of his message from God led to the naming of his first son; to wit: "Shearjashub" (Isaiah 7:3) ­ which Strong says was the "Symbolic name of a son of Isaiah" ­ meaning, "A remnant shall return." What a beautiful name. The Remnant. What a wonderful word. "Even so then at this present time also there is a remnant according to the election of grace." Rom. 11:5. What a beautiful concept. What a beautiful sound, just to say the words. "Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah." Isa. 1:9. What a glorious sign and wonder ­ that a little boy should be running around the house all day every day bearing such a name; to wit: "The Remnant shall return."  Sunday, March 2, 2008 page 2  Sermon Outline  "Thus saith the Lord of hosts; If it be marvellous in the eyes of the  remnant of this people in these days, should it also be marvellous in  mine eyes? saith the Lord of hosts." (Zech. 8:6)  And, lo and behold, here comes another sign ­ another wonder ­ thanks to the dedication of Isaiah to publishing the message God gave him; to wit: "And I went unto the prophetess; and  she conceived, and bare a son. Then said the Lord to me, Call his name Maher-shalal-hashbaz." Isa. 8:3. The meaning of the new baby's name is one of the great themes of Isaiah's message; to wit: "Flee ye, flee ye, to the spoil." Isaiah's message was, that God's wrath will soon be upon a filthy, backslidden, sodomite nation; such that only the destruction and looting of spoil will remain. God Hates Israel. Israel is Doomed. "And shall not God avenge His own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily." Lk. 18:7,8. The words of Isaiah's Master. Now hear Isaiah's own words ­ the heart of the same glorious message ­ as dictated by the Holy Spirit working in Isaiah; to wit:  "Howl ye; for the day of the Lord is at hand ­ (Maher-shalal-hash-baz, flee  ye, flee ye, to the spoil) ­ it shall come as a destruction from the  Almighty. Therefore shall all hands be faint, and every man's heart shall  melt: And they shall be afraid: pangs and sorrows shall take hold of  them; they shall be in pain as a woman that travaileth: they shall be  amazed one at another; their faces shall be as flames. Behold, the day of  the Lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land  desolate: and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it. For the stars  of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not give their light: the sun  shall be darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her  light to shine. And I will punish the world for their evil, and the wicked  for their iniquity; and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease,  and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible." (Isa. 13:6-11)  In a word: "Maher-shalal-hash-baz!"  "God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth; the Lord revengeth, and is  furious; the Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he  reserveth wrath for his enemies. The Lord is slow to anger, and great in  power, and will not at all acquit the wicked: the Lord hath his way in the  whirlwind and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his feet. He  rebuketh the sea, and maketh it dry, and drieth up all the rivers; Bashan  languisheth, and Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon languisheth. The  mountains quake at him, and the hills melt, and the earth is burned at his  presence, yea, the world, and all that dwell therein. Who can stand  before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of his anger?  Sunday, March 2, 2008 page 3  Sermon Outline  His fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him."  (Nah. 1:2-6)  In a word: "Maher-shalal-hash-baz!"  "The great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hasteth greatly, even  the voice of the day of the Lord: the mighty man shall cry there bitterly.  That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of  wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of  clouds and thick darkness, . . . And I will bring distress upon men, that  they shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the  Lord: and their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as the  dung. Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in  the day of the Lord's wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured by the  fire of his jealousy: for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them  that dwell in the land." (Zeph. 1:14-18)  Again, in a word: "Maher-shalal-hash-baz!" Flee ye, flee ye, to the spoil. This rage and fury of God involves that attribute of God called his jealousy; to wit: The preamble to the Ten Commandments, "for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me." Ex. 20:5. The Jews were ordered to completely destroy all other religions ­ all their altars, idols, images and groves (Ex. 34:13) ­ "For thou shalt worship no other god: for the Lord, WHOSE NAME IS JEALOUS, is a jealous God." Ex. 34:14. Beloved, adultery is a vile, mean business. "Men do not despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul when he is hungry; but if he be found, he shall restore sevenfold; he shall give all the substance of his house. But whoso committeth adultery with a woman lacketh understanding: he that doeth it destroyeth his own soul. A wound and dishonour shall he get; and his reproach shall not be wiped away. For jealousy is the rage of a man ­ (how much more the rage of God, whose very name is Jealous, and who says that He is "FRETTED" [made to tremble, quiver, shake with rage and jealousy by such infidelities ­ Ezek. 16:43]) ­ therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance. He will not regard any ransom; neither will he rest content, though thou givest many gifts." (Prov. 6:30-35)  By such passages the Lord our God conveys accurate notions of His vengeance and wrath upon the children of disobedience. Put another way, He gives us insight and understanding of Mahershalal-hash-baz. Flee ye, flee ye, to the spoil. Total defeat of his enemies. Only dead men and loot, scattered everywhere. It is a separate law in the Mosaic Code ­ that seems to trump everything. Beloved. A complete and separate law to deal with a vile and mean and dirty business ­ infidelity.  Sunday, March 2, 2008 page 4  Sermon Outline  Now we have TWO little boys running around the house all day every day, as non-stop little  sound trucks with a holy message. Now we have signs and wonders for sure. Isa. 8:16; to wit:  "Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples. And I will wait upon the Lord, that  hideth his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him. Behold, I and the children  whom the Lord hath given me are FOR SIGNS AND FOR WONDERS in Israel from the  Lord of hosts, which dwelleth in mount Zion." Isa. 8:16-18.  Beloved. What is it that has "FRETTED" the Lord? Ezek. 16:43. Remember that word, "Fretted?" The only place the word is used in the Bible. What is it that has so outraged the Lord God that He is said to be trembling, shaking, quaking, quivering with anger, wrath, rage? That's what the word "Fretted" means. Look at the context of Ezek. 16:43; to wit:  "Because thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, but hast FRETTED me in all these things; behold, therefore I also will recompense thy way upon thine head, saith the Lord God: and thou shalt not commit this lewdness above all thine abominations." (Ezek. 16:43)  What we are talking about here in Ezekiel chapter 16, is the worst kind of unfaithfulness by a wife to her husband. Think, the very best possible husband in the history of the world; married to the very worst possible wife in the history of the world. Now you are close to understanding the message of Ezekiel chapter 16 ­ all 63 verses. Now you are close to understanding the meaning of the word, "Fretted." The wonderful husband is the Lord; and the unfaithful, slut of a wife is Israel, and, by logical extension, the whole of mankind, except the Elect.  And next, we must hook up Numbers, chapter 5, verses 11 to 31 ­ I say we must hook those verses up to the remarkable 63 verses of Ezekiel chapter 16. In Numbers 5, you will find the separate and distinct law that I told you about a while ago ­ a part of the Mosaic Code ­ that appears to trump all other law ­ in several vital respects. It may help explain the FRETTING of the Lord God ­ what it takes to send the Lord God ­ whose Name is Jealous ­ into a quakingwith-rage condition. The name of this law is plainly given; to wit: The Law of Jealousies. Num. 5:29. "This is the law of jealousies, when a wife goeth aside to another instead of her husband, and is defiled: Or when the spirit of jealousy cometh upon him, and he be jealous over his wife, and shall set the woman before the Lord, and the priest shall execute upon her all this law." Num. 5:29,30. Under this law, if the husband ­ ("the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous" - Num. 5:14) ­ I say, if the husband merely suspected his wife of adultery, he was allowed to bring her before the priest, with an offering, called "an offering of jealousy." Num. 5:15. "And the priest shall bring her near, and set her before the Lord." Num. 5:16.  Thereupon the priest performed an elaborate ­ but awful ­ little ceremony, with dreadful and fearsome consequences if the woman was guilty. Briefly, the woman was made to drink a small amount of water mixed with dust from the floor of the tabernacle. If she was guilty her belly would swell and her thigh would rot; to wit: "Then the priest shall charge the woman with an oath of cursing, and the priest shall say unto the woman, The Lord make thee a curse and an oath among thy people, when the Lord doth make thy thigh to rot, and thy belly to swell; And  Sunday, March 2, 2008 page 5  Sermon Outline  this water that causeth the curse shall go into thy bowels, to make thy belly to swell, and thy  thigh to rot: And the woman shall say, Amen, amen." Num. 5:21,22.  "This is the law of jealousies, when a wife goeth aside to another instead of her husband, and is defiled: Or when the spirit of jealousy cometh upon him, and he be jealous over his wife, and shall set the woman before the Lord, and the priest shall execute upon her all this law." (Num. 5:29,30)  Beloved, this chapter in Scripture ­ called the Law of Jealousies is yet another way the Lord has provided to show unto us ­ and to all mankind ­ what a heinous thing adultery is, and why, ­ in full flower, ­ both physical and spiritual adultery is continually FRETTING the Lord our God, leading to the outpouring of God's wrath (Ezek. 16:43); to wit: "Because thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, (i.e., days of innocency, before thy vile, outrageous adultery set in, all as fully described in Ezekiel 16), but hast FRETTED me in all these things; behold, therefore I also will recompense thy way upon thine head, saith the Lord God." Ezek. 16:43. Maher-shalal-hash-baz! Walking naked and barefoot three years. Shearjashub (a remnant shall return). Signs and wonders. Note the difference, Beloved, between the relative paucity of adultery and jealousy ("the Law of Jealousies) in Num. 5; and the depths of depravity in Ezek. 16. In Num. 5, we have one little woman who MAY have been guilty of adultery ­ ONE TIME ­ being on frightful trial to determine guilt. In Ezek. 16, we have a whole nation of married people merrily fornicating with others than their spouses, all day, every day; to wit: "Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations." Ezek. 16:1,2. The grim business of Num. 5 ­ ("and her belly shall swell, and her thigh shall rot: and the woman shall be a curse among her people" - Num. 5:27) ­ I say, the grim business of Num. 5 has become the gaudy, arrogant, sinful pleasure-house (whorehouse) of Ezek. 16 ­ ("But thou didst trust in thine own beauty, and playest the harlot because of thy renown, and pourest out thy fornications on every one that passed by; his it was." - Ezek. 16:15). The words of Ezekiel ­ dictated by the Holy Ghost and preserved for us ­ so that we might declare them to our generation, and to the world at large, and in particular to doomed America, are these; to wit: "And in all thine abominations (sodomy) and thy whoredoms thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, when thou wast naked and bare, and wast polluted in thy blood. And it came to pass after all thy wickedness, (woe, woe unto thee! saith the Lord God;) That thou hast also built unto thee an eminent place ­ (i.e., a sodomite whore-house), ­ and hast made thee an high place ­ i.e., a house of idols, -- (i.e., an Arminian church) ­ in every street. Thou hast built thy high place ­ (i.e., a big Arminian church) ­ at every head of the way . . .and hast opened thy feet ­ (i.e., spread thy legs) ­ to every one that passed by . . . to provoke me (God) to anger ­ (i.e., thou hast FRETTED me)." (Ezek. 16:22-26) Amen.  
