Sunday, November 11, 2007 pg.1  Sermon Outline  America's sin is written with iron pen, diamond point  "The sin of Judah (America) is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond: it is graven upon the table of their heart, and upon the horns of your altars; ­ (i.e., America's sin is indelibly and prominently stamped upon the nation's religions; i.e., all their religions are apostate, defiled, corrupt; and nothing but pagan idolatry ­ pure atheism ­ and it is abundantly clear that such is the case; i.e., written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond)." Jer. 17:1. "Whilst their children remember their altars and their groves by the green trees upon the high hills." Jer. 17:2. The meaning is that this condition of idolatry and atheism ­ false religions on every street corner of every street in America ­ calling themselves by the name of churches ­ that this pagan condition has continued for so long a time now, that a whole generation of children knows absolutely nothing of the truth of God ­ knows absolutely nothing of the Bible, or the God of the Bible. Just look at this generation of undisciplined, heathen brats. America is now in the hands of a whole generation of godless, heathen hellions, who know absolutely nothing about true Christianity. It is the curse of God upon America. As it is written: "And I will give children to be their princes, and babes shall rule over them...As for my people, children (spoiled brats at any age) are their oppressors, and women (effeminate, sugary weaklings of whatever sex) rule over them. O my people, they which lead thee cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths. The Lord standeth up to plead, and standeth to judge the people. The Lord will enter into judgment with the ancients of his people, and the princes thereof." Isa. 3:4,12-14. I.e., you older people are to blame for this mess. You raised this crop of wild, twisted, Bible-dumb idiots now running this God-forsaken country. "Therefore my people are gone into captivity, because they have no knowledge: and their honorable men are famished, and their multitude dried up with thirst." Isa. 5:13. Meaning that they are headed for Hell ­ every last one of them. America is doomed. She has squandered away her day of grace, and has crossed the line of no return. Listen to these solemn words from God Almighty; to wit: "Therefore Hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth without measure: and their glory, ­ (America's glory) ­ and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoiceth, shall descend into it. And the mean man shall be brought down, and the mighty man shall be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled: But the Lord of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and God that is holy shall be sanctified in righteousness." (Isa. 5:14) SEARCH THE SCRIPTURES! What is the scripture evidence when a nation has crossed the line of no return? ­ has sinned away her day of grace as a nation?, and is doomed as a nation? FIRST, there is a great and total contempt for and ignorance of the Bible. Nobody can say it's OK to be gay, unless that person is ignorant of what the Bible teaches, and is contemptuous for what the Bible teaches. Because the Bible says, "Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with  Sunday, November 11, 2007 pg.2  Sermon Outline  womankind; it is abomination." Lev. 18:22. And the Bible prescribes the death penalty for  sodomy. Lev. 20:13. Same thing with abortion. "Thou shalt not kill." Ex. 20:13. Same  thing with divorce and remarriage. "Whosoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth another,  committeth adultery; and whosoever marrieth her that is put away from her husband  committeth adultery." Lk. 16:18. "For the Lord, the God of Israel, saith that he hateth  putting away...therefore take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously against the  wife of thy youth." Mal. 2:15,16.  CNN is reporting that China has announced a complete ban on Bibles at the forthcoming Olympic Games, to be held in China next summer. Let's see what America's response will be. China sees how this evil nation is persecuting Westboro Baptist Church ­ sees America for the lying hypocrites they are ­ and concludes that the United States is just as contemptuous of the Bible as China is ­ the only difference being that China is not as hypocritical about it. We did not want the United States of America to put WBC on trial for our holy religion, ­ like the Spanish Inquisition. But they insisted, so that the whole world now knows that the First Amendment has now become a farce. A total FARCE. That which has made us great as a nation exists no longer, and is another casualty of our addiction to sodomy ­ another fatality of the "power of the dog (political power of the militant faggots)." Psa. 22:20.  They put us on trial, against their own eternal interest. America ­ Land of the Sodomite Damned ­ has a great and total ­ and crass ­ contempt for, and total ignorance of ­ the Bible. "Crass" means crude, unrefined, coarse, and lacking in sensibility. America has a "crass" contempt for the Bible. You should have heard that judge. "Crass" describes him, and describes the United States of America. Remember, Beloved, the solemn words of our Savior; to wit: "Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." Mat. 18:18.  These are the days foretold by the prophet Amos; to wit: "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord: And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it." (Amos 8:11,12)  Beloved. God has sent America ­ and the world ­ a great famine. Search the Scriptures ­ as did the noble Jews at Berea. Acts 17:11. Discern the Signs of the Times ­ as the Lord commanded us to do. Mat. 16:3.  THE FIRST LINE OF EVIDENCE IS IN; to wit: There is a great and total and crass contempt for ­ and ignorance of ­ the Bible; to wit: "O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord." Jer. 22:29. "I have seen also in the prophets of Jerusalem ­ (that is to say, America) ­ an horrible thing: they commit adultery, and walk in lies: they strengthen also the hands of evildoers, that none doth return from his wickedness: they are all of them unto me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah." Jer. 23:14.  Sunday, November 11, 2007 pg.3  Sermon Outline  THE SECOND LINE OF EVIDENCE, is the appearance on the scene of the rare prophet of  God ­ (call him or her a prophet, angel, messenger, seer, or otherwise) ­ who typically issues a  pithy, timely, and topical warning ­ and is thereupon crassly rejected, and flagrantly and cruelly  abused ­ oftentimes to the death. A good example is Zechariah, son of good old Jehoiada, who  was slain by the ungrateful king Joash ­ pursuant to a conspiracy ­ after Zechariah appeared on  the scene and warned the nation of the wrath of God. Think, WBC, appearing on the American  scene, and warning of God's wrath and irreversible doom. Good old Jehoiada died, being 130  years old, and after his death the nation turned real bad, real quick; to wit: "Now after the death  of Jehoiada came the princes of Judah, and made obeisance to the king. Then the king  hearkened unto them. And they left the house of the Lord God of their fathers, and served  groves and idols: and wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem for this their trespass. YET  HE SENT PROPHETS TO THEM, to bring them again unto the Lord; and they testified  against them: BUT THEY WOULD NOT GIVE EAR." 2 Chron. 24:17-19.  Think WBC warning America; and think America's refusal to hear. Then God moves in a final, extraordinary way; by sending the courageous messenger, Zechariah, upon the scene; to wit: "And the spirit of God came upon Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the priest, which stood above the people, and said unto them, Thus saith God, Why transgress ye the commandments of the Lord, that ye cannot prosper? BECAUSE YE HAVE FORSAKEN THE LORD, HE HATH ALSO FORSAKEN YOU." 2 Chron. 24:20. Think WBC, and WBC's Spirit-filled message to America; to wit: "Listen up, America! Because ye have forsaken the Lord, he hath also forsaken you."  NOW COMES THE THIRD LINE OF EVIDENCE that the nation has sinned away its day of grace, and is irreversibly doomed. The holy man's word from God to the people ­ uncompromising and final ­ triggered the usual response in such cases. "For the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up; and the reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me." (Psa. 69:9)  "For even Christ pleased not himself, but, as it is written, The reproaches of them that reproached thee fell on me." (Rom. 15:3) The only way for the evildoers, the workers of iniquity, the Hell-bound reprobates ­ to get at God, is to persecute and slay God's spokesman; to wit: "And they conspired against him ­ (that is, against Zechariah), ­ and stoned him with stones at the commandment of the king, ­ (that is, king Joash, whose life Jehoiada had saved when he hid him as a baby for six years when the wicked queen Athalia sought his life.) ­ in the court of the house of the Lord." 2 Chron. 24:21. A greater act of murderous ingratitude is scarcely to be found in all of recorded history; to wit: "Thus Joash the king remembered not the kindness which Jehoiada HIS FATHER had done to him, but slew his son. AND WHEN HE DIED, HE SAID, THE LORD LOOK UPON IT AND REQUIRE IT." 2 Chron. 24:22. And in the sequel, before the year was out, the Lord "executed judgment against Joash;" (2 Chron. 24:24.), for it appears that Joash slew more sons of his benefactor Jehoiada; to wit: "And when they were departed from him, (for they left him in great diseases,) his own servants conspired against him for the blood of THE SONS of  Sunday, November 11, 2007 pg.4  Sermon Outline  Jehoiada the priest, and slew him on his bed, and he died: and they buried him in the city of  David, but they buried him not in the sepulchres of the kings." 2 Chron. 24:25. Think,  WBC; and think, the vengeance of a righteous God; to wit: "Seeing it is a righteous thing with  God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you." 2 Thes. 1:6.  A FURTHER INSTANCE OF THIS PATTERN OF THE LORD'S DEALING WITH DOOMED NATIONS, is this bit of fatal idolatrous folly of king Amaziah; to wit:  "Now it came to pass, after that Amaziah was come from the slaughter of the Edomites, that he brought the gods of the children of Seir, and set them up to be his gods, and bowed down himself before them, and burned incense unto them. (Note: Nothing is more calculated to bring down the wrath of God on a nation, than for the leaders to practice open, highly visible, God-defying sins.) Wherefore the anger of the Lord was kindled against Amaziah, and HE SENT UNTO HIM A PROPHET, which said unto him, Why hast thou sought after the gods of the people, which could not deliver their own people out of thine hand? (Note: Nothing is more calculated to enrage a tyrant than to ask him a sensible, simple question, the answer to which is devastating to the tyrant.) And it came to pass, as he talked with him, that the king said unto him, Art thou made of the king's counsel? forbear; why shouldest thou be smitten? (Translated: If you keep picking at this thing, which clearly shows me up as a guilty, Hell-bound sinner, and a fool beside, which is none of your business since I haven't appointed you as one of my official counsellors ­ I am going to have you "smitten," i.e., decapitated.) Then the prophet forbare, and said, I know that God hath determined to destroy thee, because thou hast done this, and hast not hearkened unto my counsel." (2 Chronicles 25:14-16)  Think, WBC; think how our message is morphing into our faithfully warning this evil nation that their refusal to heed us ­ and in fact going about to destroy us unless we shut up ­ is a worse sin than their current abominations. America's official persecution is even further, ­ and stronger, ­ proof that God has determined to destroy America. These are awful words, America:  "Then the prophet forbare ­ (i.e., Then the prophet ceased to warn the guilty nation. Why? Why did the prophet cease to warn Judah? Because God had communicated a secret, dreadful knowledge of His intentions toward the guilty nation; to wit:) "I know" (said the prophet) "that God hath determined to destroy thee, because thou hast done this, and hast not hearkened UNTO MY COUNSEL." (2 Chron. 25:16)  "Behold, the days come, ­ (America) ­ saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the WORDS OF THE LORD. And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it. In that day shall the fair virgins and young men faint for thirst." (Amos 8:11-13)  This is metaphoric language, meaning, every true prophet of God has disappeared from off the face of the earth.  Sunday, November 11, 2007 pg.5  Sermon Outline  FURTHER SHOCKINGBIBLE PROOFTHAT DOOMIS NEAR; and it happened in the  fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, recounted in the 36th chapter of  Jeremiah. For some reason, Jeremiah was forbidden to speak in public ­ some kind of legal  injunction. Some kind of "GAG ORDER." And so, Jeremiah's good friend and helper, named  Baruch, took down a lengthy message from Jeremiah, and read it to the people; to wit:  "And Jeremiah commanded Baruch, saying, I am shut up; I cannot go into the house  of the Lord: Therefore go thou, and read in the roll, which thou hast written FROM  MY MOUTH, THE WORDS OF THE LORD in the ears of the people in the Lord's house  upon the fasting day: and also thou shalt read them in the ears of all Judah that  come out of their cities." (Jer. 36:5,6)  The words from God were very alarming, and caused a great stir among the leaders AND the people, who thought it should be read by the king ­ Jehoiakim, son of good king Josiah. (Note here, that even the best of men can have the vilest of children, occasionally; and this is one of the clearest of those cases. His doom was sealed when he pursued God's prophet ­ Urijah ­ into Egypt, brought him back in chains, and slew him ­ all because he didn't like his preaching; to wit: "And Jehoiakim the king sent men into Egypt...And they fetched forth Urijah out of Egypt, and brought him unto Jehoiakim the king; who slew him with the sword, and cast his dead body into the graves of the common people." Jer. 26:20-23).  Now it was to this evil king that the people, and the leaders of the people, thought that Jeremiah's alarming message of doom from God should be read; to wit: "So the king sent Jehudi to fetch the roll:...And Jehudi read it in the ears of the king, and in the ears of all the princes which stood beside the king. Now the king sat in the winterhouse in the ninth month (cold): and there was a fire on the hearth burning before him. And it came to pass, that when Jehudi had read three or four leaves, he ­ (that is, the king) ­ CUT IT WITH THE PENKNIFE, AND CAST IT INTO THE FIRE that was on the hearth, until all the roll was consumed in the fire that was on the hearth." Jer. 36:21-23.  And, Beloved, the most shocking and blasphemous part of this amazing story is coming up; to wit: "YET THEY WERE NOT AFRAID, nor rent their garments, neither the king, nor any of his servants that heard all these words." Jer 36:24. It was only a very few years to go before Judah's horrific doom, and the bloody Babylonian Captivity ­ "YET THEY WERE NOT AFRAID" to blaspheme God and His Word and his prophets.  But there's more and worse blasphemy; to wit: "Nevertheless Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah ­ (three relatively good men in a sea of doomed earth-dwellers) ­ had made intercession to the king THAT HE WOULD NOT BURN THE ROLL: BUT HE WOULD NOT HEAR THEM." Jer. 36:25. And what is worse, Beloved; here is the capstone of the king's evil, and proof certain that the nation is doomed, and that swift destruction is on the way ­ ("capstone" means the crowning or final stroke; culmination; acme) ­ ; to wit: The supremely wicked king ordered the arrest ­ (and death, no doubt) ­ of Baruch and Jeremiah; to wit:  "But the king commanded Jerahmeel the son of Hammelech, and Seraiah the son of Azriel, and Shelemiah the son of Abdeel, TO TAKE BARUCH THE SCRIBE AND JEREMIAH THE PROPHET: BUT THE LORD HID THEM." (Jer. 36:26) Amen.  
