Sunday, November 4 pg.1  Sermon Outline  The Lord's "Strange" Work: "A Consumption Determined."  The last two weeks have seen the Lord God at work in a mighty way. One might even say, a "strange" or new way. The United States of America put WBC on trial for our deeply-held religious beliefs. They said ­ in effect ­ that if our preaching offended anybody, they could sue us.  Mind you, in New York Times vs. Sullivan, they said that in political debate, speech can be "robust, wide-open, and uninhibited" ­ even if it offends people. Now, they have said during the past two weeks, that if WBC preaches too much on such doctrines as Eternal Hell Fire and Brimstone, or the Coming Great and Dreadful Day of Judgment ­ and somebody gets upset by it ­ they can sue us. Beloved, THAT's strange. Let us analyze it. Begin with Mk. 1:21 ­ "And they went into Capernaum; and straightway on the Sabbath Day he entered into the synagogue, and taught. And they were astonished at his doctrine: for he taught them as one that had authority, and not as the scribes." (Mk. 1:21,22.) Our Lord Jesus Christ laid the ax to the root of the trees, and when His servants preach the blessed, holy word of God like they mean it ­ like He taught them to do ­ sparks will fly. But stranger things than these we have experienced of late, are on the way ­ a cause of great rejoicing for us. To wit: "For the Lord shall rise up as in mount Perazim, he shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his STRANGE work; and bring to pass his act, his STRANGE act." (Isa. 28:21). What is this "STRANGE WORK" of God that He will certainly do? This "STRANGE ACT" of God, that He will certainly bring to pass? By Strong's definition it is said to be something totally foreign to anything we have experienced before; something totally different and wonderful, to the point of being outlandish, unthinkable to the carnal mind.  Commentators hook it up to 2 Sam. 5:20, Jer. 30:14 and Lk. 19:27. By comparing these and other scriptures ­ in the aggregate ­ we will discern the mind of God taught herein, "even as those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil; (Heb. 5:14)." To wit: "But when the Philistines heard that they had anointed David king over Israel, all the Philistines came up to seek David," ­ (i.e., to kill David, the preeminent type of Christ, of whom Satan and his minions fighting us today say) ­ "But his citizens hated him, and sent a message after him, saying, We will not have this man to reign over us (Lk. 19:14)." "And they gave him audience unto this word, and then they lifted up their voices, and said, `Away with such a fellow from the earth: for it is not fit that he should live. And as they cried out, and cast off their clothes, and threw dust into the air.'" (Acts 22:22) ­ (and) ­ "spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim (or, Valley of the Giants). And David enquired of the Lord, saying, Shall I go up to the Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? And the Lord said unto David, Go up: for I will doubtless deliver the Philistines into thine hand. And David came to Baal-perazim, and David smote them there, and said, THE LORD HATH BROKEN FORTH UPON MINE ENEMIES BEFORE ME, AS THE BREACH OF WATERS. Therefore he called the name of that place Baal-perazim. And there they left their images, and David and his men burned them." (2 Sam. 5:17-21).  So, the "strange work" that God will do is somehow involved with a mighty breaking forth upon His and His people's enemies, as the breach of mighty waters, as when a mighty dam suddenly breaks and sweeps all before it. NOW TO THIS PARTIAL EXPOSITION OF THE PASSAGE, add Jer. 30:12-14; to wit: "For thus saith the Lord, Thy bruise is incurable, and thy wound is grievous. (Here is inserted in the margin, 2 Chron. 36:16; to wit: "But they mocked the  Sunday, November 4 pg.2  Sermon Outline  messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of the Lord  arose against his people, till there was no remedy.") There is none to plead thy cause, that thou  mayest be bound up: thou hast no healing medicines. All thy lovers have forgotten thee; they seek  thee not; for I have wounded thee with the wound of an enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel one,  for the multitude of thine iniquity: because thy sins were increased." (Jer. 30:12-14).  THERE SHALL COME IN THE LAST DAYS SCOFFERS  NOW FOR THIS FURTHER LIGHT ON THE PASSAGE, ADD LUKE 19:27; to wit: "But those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me." (Lk. 19:27). Peremptory Judgment. Final. Webster: "Putting an end to all debate or action. Not allowing contradiction or refusal." And now to continue the oracle, the text, the solemn passage under consideration; to wit: "Now therefore be ye not MOCKERS." (Isa. 28:22). The time of the STRANGE WORK of God, is the time of institutional MOCKERY. OFFICIAL MOCKERY at the highest of places, and thence downward to all of the levels and elements of society. A time when MOCKERY is the norm. A time when those who DO NOT MOCK are virtually non-existent.  Listen to Peter; to wit: "Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, And saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation. For this they willingly are ignorant of." (2 Pet. 3:3-5).  Based on our experience this past two weeks in the case of the United States of America vs. WBC ­ Beloved! Has God's STRANGE WORK begun. Day after day after day ­ over and over and over again ­ the court and counsel mocked the Word of God, calling WBC a cult, a freak show, a traveling circus; and calling WBC's message from God to this doomed nation and this doomed world, ­ Calling this humble church of the Lord Jesus Christ the vilest of names. Trouncing WBC's religion and WBC's many verbatim, relevant, squarely-applicable quotations directly from the Bible ­ setting the court's and counsel's own heretical and really non-existent knowledge as decisive, in controlling opposition thereto.  In denying the JURY'S request ­ mind you ­ for a copy of the King James version of the Bible, the court said in open court to defense counsel John Katz, "I've read the Bible, Mr. Katz, strange as that may sound to you." Thus pitting the government's interpretation of Scripture against WBC's interpretation of Scripture. Amazing. Just exactly what the Supreme Ct. has often said courts may not do.  What if Westboro Baptist Church is the apple of God's eye, whose dear, humble members, under great distress, are often crying out to God in the words of Psalm 17 ­ "Keep me as the apple of the eye, hide me under the shadow of thy wings, From the wicked that oppress me, from my deadly enemies, who compass me about...Arise, O Lord, disappoint him, cast him down: deliver my soul from the wicked." (Psa. 17:8,13)? What if WBC members are ­ as they profess themselves so to be ­ God's Elect ­ who cry to Him night and day?  Christ put the rhetorical question, "And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them?" Without leaving the rhetorical question alone to bear the affirmative answer in its teeth with it, as it left the Savior's lips, Christ gave the thundering reply Himself, immediately; to wit: "I TELL YOU THAT HE WILL AVENGE THEM SPEEDILY." (Lk. 18:7,8).  Sunday, November 4 pg.3  Sermon Outline  IN MY DISTRESS I CALLED UPON THE LORD  Each humble little one from Westboro Baptist Church, has this testimony, for all the world to hear ­ and for all the intelligent universe to hear ­ for all eternal ages to come ­ again, THIS TESTIMONY; to wit: "The sorrows of death compassed me, and the floods of ungodly men made me afraid. The sorrows of hell compassed me about: the snares of death prevented me. In my distress I called upon the LORD, and cried unto my God: he heard my voice out of his temple, and my cry came before him, even into his ears. Then the earth shook and trembled; the foundations also of the hills moved and were shaken, because he was wroth. There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured: coals were kindled by it. He bowed the heavens also, and came down...yea, he did fly upon the wings of the wind...He sent from above, he took me, he drew me out of many waters. He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them which hated me: for they were too strong for me...He brought me forth also into a large place; he delivered me, because he delighted in me." (Psa. 18:4-10,16,17,19).  Again I ask, What if these things are all true about Westboro Baptist Church ­ as we assuredly believe them to be ­ then what exceeding great woes are most certain to befall those evil ones who have lifted up their wicked hands against us; to wit: "And it came to pass after all thy wickedness, (woe, woe unto thee! saith the Lord God.)" (Ezek. 16:23).  And this institutionalized MOCKERY is immediately connected to the time when the Lord God's STRANGE WORK will inevitably be done in the earth. Taking up the text where we left off; to wit: "For I have heard from the Lord God of hosts A CONSUMPTION, EVEN DETERMINED UPON THE WHOLE EARTH." (Isa. 28:22). What is this CONSUMPTION determined upon the whole earth? It means to utterly consume or destroy, to make a complete end of, to quite take away, and to make a clean riddance of.  Now since this fearful consumption is on the way, WHAT ELSE BESIDE INSTITUTIONALIZED MOCKERY are we to look for? Well, the context suggests that those with the spirit of the gifted Bezaleel and Aholiab ­ of original tabernacle-building fame ­ will appear on the earth to join with the Great God in the doing of His STRANGE WORK and bringing to pass His STRANGE ACT.  Recall how it was with the two God-blessed and gifted ones ­ Bezaleel and Aholiab ­ and consider that each of God's Elect ­ especially in these days of God's strange work ­ may assume the nickname of Bezaleel or Aholiab, whichever one you like best; to wit: "And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, See, I have called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah: And I have filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship, To devise cunning works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass, And in cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of timber, to work in all manner of workmanship. And I, behold, I have given with him AHOLIAB, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan: and in the hearts of all that are wise hearted I have put wisdom, that they may make all that I have commanded thee; THE TABERNACLE OF THE CONGREGATION, and the ark of the testimony, and the mercy seat that is thereupon, and all the furniture of the tabernacle, And the table and his furniture, and the pure candlestick with all his furniture, and the altar of incense, And the altar of burnt offering with all his furniture, and the laver and his foot, And the cloths of service, and the holy garments of Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister  Sunday, November 4 pg.4  Sermon Outline  in the priest's office, And the anointing oil, and sweet incense for the holy place: ACCORDING TO  ALL THAT I HAVE COMMANDED THEE SHALL THEY DO." (Exodus 31:1-11).  THE SPIRIT OF WISDOM, KNOWLEDGE, AND UNDERSTANDING  In those days the work of God was the construction of the Tabernacle, and many full and lengthy chapters of Exodus and Numbers are dedicated to directing them in elaborate detail as to how to build that Tabernacle. Only certain men and women were called of God and gifted of God to do the work ­ all under the leadership of Bezaleel and Aholiab. Similarly, today, the work of God is to preach and warn all mankind that the USA and the world are doomed, due to their abominable sins and transgressions. And again, similarly, today only certain ones are called and gifted of God to do this specialized work ­ think, PICKETING; and think, Westboro Baptist Church.  Beloved, who else in the world has the 17 years of expertise such as God has given us? Such as making these altogether appropriate signs, with their altogether appropriate Bible messages? Such as managing the massive logistics necessarily involved in delivering our message on the mean streets of wicked America in more than 30,000 pickets, in more than 500 cities and towns, in all 50 states? Can it not be said of WBC's humble servants of God, as it was said of BEZALEEL & AHOLIAB, that God gave them the spirit of wisdom, and knowledge, and understanding, in all manner of workmanship, to do and devise the cunning and curious work of God which He commanded them, despite constant and intense persecution & opposition for 17 yrs.  The metaphor of the PLOWMAN ­ used in immediate connection with the STRANGE WORK of God and the CONSUMPTION DETERMINED ­ also demonstrates that the time of the end is near ­ (and incidentally gives the servants of God another nickname; to wit: God's PLOWMAN). Now consider the holy parable of the PLOWMAN and the FITCHES; To-wit: "Give ye ear, and hear my voice; hearken, and hear my speech. Doth the plowman plow all day to sow? doth he open and break the clods of his ground? When he hath made plain the face thereof, doth he not cast abroad the FITCHES (little dill seed) and scatter the cummin, and cast in the principal wheat and the appointed barley and the rie in their place? For his God doth instruct him to discretion, and doth teach him. For the FITCHES are not threshed with a threshing instrument...but the FITCHES are beaten out with a staff...This also cometh forth from the Lord of hosts, which is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working." (Isa. 28:23-29).  The picketing ministry of WBC is a divine work of infinite wisdom, knowledge, understanding, of cunning & curious workmanship. Despite America's court's demonic contempt for WBC's picketing ministry, ­ (freak show, indeed) ­ they would do well to heed the words of John Gill in his exposition of this passage; to wit:  "The whole is intended to show the wisdom of the husbandman (plowman), in sowing different seeds in ground suitable to each of them; and in the mystical sense designs the execution of divine judgments on men, in proportion to their sins, after they have been admonished of them, and reproved for them." Mankind should be well advised, that WBC's picketing ministry is of God, who instructed us to discretion, and teaches us all along the way as to the content of our signs. Beware your godless criticisms. Our ministry "cometh forth from the Lord of hosts, which is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working." (Isa. 28:29).  "For who hath despised the day of small things?" (Zech. 4:10). Amen.  
