Sunday, June 22, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 1  "What shall the end be of them that obey not the  gospel of God? And...where shall the ungodly  and the sinner appear?" 1 Pet. 4:17(b),18(b).  Two questions that are approximately if not exactly the same ­ because, "they that obey not the gospel of God" are the same persons who are identified as "the ungodly and the sinner." And, because the question, as to "what shall the end" of these people be, is substantially the same as, "where shall they appear (on that Great and Terrible Day of Judgment)." And, a specific answer to the question is found at 2 Thes. 1:8-10; to wit: they "that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ" ­ on the Great Day of Judgment ­ "when He shall come to be glorified in His saints" ­ shall be found in "the presence of the Lord" ­ face to face and eye to eye with the Lamb. THAT'S where they that obey not the Gospel will be; screaming for the mountains and rocks to fall on them and hide them from the blessed face of the Lord Jesus ­ as it hath been known and clearly "spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." Acts 3:21. And, all as it is more clearly declared at Rev. 6:12-17; to wit: "And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and, lo, there was a great earthquake; and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon became as blood; And the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind. And the heaven departed as a scroll when it is rolled together; and every mountain and island were moved out of their places. And the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every free man, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains; And said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: For the great day of his wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand?" (Rev. 6:12-17)  Please note the all-inclusiveness of the declaration ­ nobody is left out. From the kings, down through the categories of all mankind as listed specifically or as necessarily inferred ­ down to and including "every bondman and every free man." "The kings of the earth" subsumes ­ (i.e., to classify under a general group) ­ I say, "the kings of the earth" subsumes every governmental or political official ­ however lowly, and whoever lived on earth from Adam to the last person born to the Judgment Day. And so on down the list through the various groupings, to "every bondman and every free man." No human being who ever lived will be left out. Muslims ­ by the billions ­ all of whom deny the deity of Jesus Christ ­ all of them are included in the damned who are screaming in desperation for the mountains and rocks to hide them from the blessed face of our Lord Jesus Christ ­ to no avail.  Next come the billions upon billions of Chinese, with their idolatrous ancestor-worship and their rejection of the deity of Christ who now sits on the throne of Judgment, to dispose of their miserable souls in Hell for ever and ever, even as He hath warned from ancient times; to wit:  Sunday, June 22, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 2  "Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which  keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love him and keep his  commandments to a thousand generations;" ­ (BANG!) ­ "AND REPAYETH  THEM THAT HATE HIM TO THEIR FACE, to destroy them: he will not be slack  to him that hateth him, he will repay him to his face." (Dt. 7:9,10)  And then there are the Jews ­ by the billions, from the days of Abraham to now, whose very own scriptures ­ the Torah and their own prophets from Isaiah to Malachi ­ all warning them for centuries; to wit: "Howl ye; for the Day of the Lord is at hand; it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty. Therefore shall all hands be faint, and every man's heart shall melt: And they shall be afraid: pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them; they shall be in pain as a woman that travaileth; they shall be amazed one at another; their faces shall be as flames. BEHOLD, THE DAY OF THE LORD COMETH, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate: and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it. For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not give their light: the sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine. AND I WILL PUNISH THE WORLD FOR THEIR EVIL, and the wicked for their iniquity; and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible." (Isa. 13:6-11)  Now to sample the so-called Minor Prophets of the scriptures of the Jews; even the prophet Zephaniah; to wit: "The great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord: THE MIGHTY MAN SHALL CRY THERE BITTERLY. That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness...And I will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord: and their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung. Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the Lord's wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy: for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the land." Zeph. 1:14-18.  Beloved. Remember the queries of our text: "What shall the end be of them that obey not the GOSPEL OF GOD? And, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?" 1 Pet. 4:17(b), 4:18(b). Billions upon billions of Muslims, Chinese, and Jews ­ all of whom openly and boldly DENY AND REJECT THE "GOSPEL OF GOD!" Then call up the Indians, and see more teeming billions of Buddhist peoples, all of whom deny and reject the deity of Christ, and choose instead to worship cobra snakes, and rats, monkeys, and cows. Now get another Scriptural picture of the Lord Jesus, upon His throne, from another angle, upon the dawning at last of the Great Day of Judgment; to wit: "And I saw a GREAT WHITE THRONE, and HIM THAT SAT ON IT, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away; and there was found no place for them" ­ (i.e., no place for them to hide, and therefore, as before, they all screamed in desperation for the mountains and rocks to fall upon them and hide them from the face of him that sat upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the Great Day of His Wrath was come, and who shall  Sunday, June 22, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 3  be able to stand?)." Rev. 20:11. "And I saw a great white throne" ­ the same throne as that  throne the Lamb was seated on that we read about earlier in Rev. 6:16, from which the sinners  desired to be hidden: "Hide us!" they cried, "from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and  from the wrath of the Lamb; for the great day of his wrath is come; and who shall be able to  stand?" Rev. 6:17. And these are the same billions upon billions of lost souls, desiring to flee  and hide from the Lamb, "for the great day of his wrath has come, and who shall be able to  stand?" "And there was found no place for them. And I saw the dead, small and great, stand  before God." Rev. 20:12. There they are, Muslims, and Chinese, and Jews, and Indians, and  Europeans (who have long ago apostatized and are now practicing atheists), as are virtually all  idolatrous Americans, and Central and South Americans by the billions, drunk on the wine from  the golden cup of the Roman Catholic whore. Rev. 17:4; to wit:  "And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet color, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication: And upon her forehead was a name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration." (Rev. 17:4-6)  Now, to finalize answers to the questions of our text ­ "What shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God? And where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?" 1 Pet. 4:17 -18. ­ I say, to finalize answers to those questions, I point to Rev. 20 and Rev. 16. To wit: "And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works. And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged every man according to their works. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second death. And whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire." (Rev. 20:12-15)  QUESTION: "What shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God?" In other words, "Where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?"  ANSWER: "The Lake of Fire," "prepared for the Devil and his angels." Mat. 25:41; to-wit: "Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels." Then go to Rev. 14, following these words; to wit: Many things in the Bible are somewhat dark and recondite ­ mysterious ­ but THIS DOCTRINE IS NOT ONE OF THEM! What will happen to those in the NEXT life, ­ who do not "obey the Gospel" in THIS life, ­ is crystal clear! Or, to use a familiar scripture on this subject, that this or that thing is so simple and clear, that "the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not ere therein." Isa. 35:8.  Again, QUESTION: "What shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God?" In other words, "Where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?"  Sunday, June 22, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 4  ANSWER: Rev. 14:10,11; to wit: "The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which  is poured out without mixture" ­ (i.e., without dilution, meaning with full strength) ­ "into the  cup of his indignation; and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the  holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb:" ­ (i.e., the Lord Jesus Christ, including all His  elect people who are His mystic body, all of whom are actively engaged in directly administering  the torments of and to the damned); ­ "And the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and  ever: and they have no rest day nor night." Rev. 14:10,11. Beloved. It is old fashion,  everlasting, red-hot, Hell-fire and Brimstone burning torment! Hell! THAT'S "what the end  shall be for all them (all the billions of billions of them) that obey not the Gospel of God!!! "  Make no mistake. Let no man deceive you. Not Billy Graham, who no longer believes in the Hell of the Bible, (and who will end up in Hell himself very soon now). Not that rich organization in Texas ­ called the "Lion & Lamb Ministries" ­ who spin clever, false and lying eschatological attacks upon the Bible doctrine of Hell. And not these hundreds of thousands of churches, synagogues, religious schools and seminars ­ these false and fraudulent preachers, priests, rabbis, professors and so-called scholars ­ all of whom combine in one unholy, blasphemous, Satanic conspiracy to deny and disprove the Bible doctrine of Hell. Beloved, it is time to remind mankind that all these heretics are Johnnie-come-lately ignoramuses. They are 6,000 years too late. It is time to contend for the truth. It is time to be contentious for the cause of God and truth in the earth. In a word, it is JUDE TIME. It was 2,000 years ago that our brother Jude, "the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James," wrote to the Elect of God in his day, as follows:  "Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you that ye should EARNESTLY CONTEND for the faith which was once" ­ (i.e., once and for all time, final, complete) ­ "delivered unto the saints. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ." (Jude 3-4)  BROTHER! IF YOU GET HELL WRONG, YOU GET EVERYTHING WRONG. Period. Further, if you get Hell wrong, you are GOING to Hell! ­ BY AN IRREVERSIBLE DECREE. Jude said that you are a cancerous spot when you eat at the Lord's table, doomed for eternal Hell, but feeding your gluttonous self without any fear of God before your eyes; "clouds they are without water, carried about of winds; trees whose fruit withereth, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots;" (Jude 12) and that you are raging waves of the sea, like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest in your evil works, whose waters cast up mire and dirt, foaming out your own shame; wandering stars without stability in the sky for accurate guidance in life; and to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. And Jude described all this dismal condition of things as being precursory to the mighty coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in power and glory ­ all preparatory to the final condemnation of the masses of mankind and the casting of these masses into eternal Hell ­ all as prognosticated by the mouths of all His holy prophets since the world began. Acts 3:18-21; to wit:  Sunday, June 22, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 5  "But those things, which God before had showed by the mouth of all his  prophets, that Christ should suffer, he hath so fulfilled. Repent ye therefore,  and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of  refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; AND HE SHALL SEND  JESUS CHRIST, which before was preached unto you: Whom the heaven must  receive UNTIL THE TIMES OF RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS, which God hath  spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began."  (Acts 3:18-21)  Beloved. "Since the world began," faithful men have preached the things that we preach now ­  EXACTLY. These things are crystal clear. Our brother Jude then called up testimony from dear old Enoch ­ only the 7th generation from Adam ­ as his witness, so to speak, ­ in living proof that  the doctrines we preach are the one and only message of God to the sons of men from the  beginning of the world to now! To wit:  "And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold,  the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, To execute judgment upon  all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds  which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which  ungodly sinners have spoken against him." (Jude 14,15)  John Trapp, in his commentary on those verses, said, "Enoch foretold the Day of Judgment before  Noah foretold the Flood (2353 B.C.). The Great Day of the Last Judgment is longer BEFORE it  comes, but shall be more terrible WHEN it comes. And Tertullian tells us that the book of Enoch's  prophesies was preserved by Noah in the ark, and that it continued and was read until the times of  the apostles." (Beloved, does it thrill your heart just thinking about old Noah sitting in that great  ark, reading the same things about the Coming of the Lord, from the book of Enoch's prophesies  4,000+ years ago that we are preaching about today?) "But because Enoch's book contained many  famous testimonies concerning Jesus Christ, the Jews, out of malice, suppressed and abolished the  whole book. Where St. Jude got ahold of this prophesy by Enoch does not much matter. It was,  like all Scripture, dictated to Jude by the Holy Spirit. The Jews have yet at this day some relics of  it in their writings. Where Enoch saith, "Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his  saints," it were better translated, With His holy myriads; saints and angels; he shall not leave a  single one of them behind him in heaven when He comes. And whereas it is said, The Lord  cometh, it shows that he is already on his way, and will be with us shortly." Pointing certainly to  the verses of St. Peter, at 1 Pet. 4:7; to wit:  "But the end of all things is at hand: be ye therefore sober, and watch unto  prayer. And above all things have fervent charity among yourselves: for  charity shall cover the multitude of sins. Use hospitality one to another  without grudging." (1 Pet. 4:7-9)  Now let us return to our text; to wit: QUESTION: "What shall the end be of them that OBEY  NOT THE GOSPEL of God?" And "where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?" 1 Pet.  4:17(b),18(b).  ANSWER: They shall be with the goats at the fearful left hand of the avenging Savior when He  comes with all the holy saints and angels to execute wrath and to pour out His retaliatory  vengeance upon His and His people's enemies; to wit:  Sunday, June 22, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 6  "When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him,  then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: And before him shall be gathered  all nations: and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd  divideth his sheep from the goats: And he shall set the sheep on his right hand,  but THE GOATS ON THE LEFT HAND...Then shall he say also unto them on the  LEFT HAND, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the  devil and his angels...And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but  the righteous into life eternal." (Mat. 25:31-33,41,46)  With this little background, we are even more powerfully convinced, that this holy doctrine of Everlasting Punishment for the wicked, inflicted personally by Christ and His people and His angels, throughout eternity ­ is as clear as crystal in the Scriptures, from one end to the other. And, no other doctrine is more comforting to the saints in the midst of persecution and Hellish affliction. To Paul, no other church was more praiseworthy than the church of the Thessalonians insomuch that Paul gloried in them in all the other existing churches of God for their patience and faith "IN ALL YOUR PERSECUTIONS AND TRIBULATIONS THAT YE ENDURE: Which is a MANIFEST TOKEN of the righteous judgment of God, that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer." 2 Thes. 1:4-5.  Suffering persecutions was proof positive that they were born again and bound for the promised land. And, heavenly comfort in the midst of persecution came from intelligent contemplation of the damnation of the wicked at the return of Christ. To wit: "Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; And to you who are troubled rest" (take comfort) "with us," (just intelligently contemplating the glorious Day of the Lord to Come) "when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, IN FLAMING FIRE TAKING VENGEANCE on them that know not God, and that OBEY NOT THE GOSPEL OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST: Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction" ­ (i.e., the administering of infinitely painful punishments, by the Lord Jesus personally, together with His people and His mighty angels, throughout eternity) ­ "FROM the presence of the Lord, and FROM the glory of his power (or, from His glorious power)." 2 Thes. 1:6-9.  Goodwin says, "His saying FROM his presence, and also FROM the glory of his power, manifestly notes power put forth in execution, and inflicting that destruction, and glorifying himself upon the wicked thereby." Those who cannot see, understand, believe and embrace this doctrine, "because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved." 2 Thes. 2:10.  "And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie...But we are bound to give thanks alway to God for you, brethren beloved of the Lord, because God hath from the beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth...God... [will] comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work." (2 Thes. 2:11,13,16-17)  Amen.  
