Sunday, December 30, 2007 pg.1  Sermon Outline  "As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated"  I have been preaching, praying and watching things on the world scene really, really closely for sixty-one (61) years now. I was reading in Ephesians chapter 6 this week about the Christian armor ­ "Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil." Eph. 6:11. After describing the various parts of what Paul calls "the whole armour of God," Paul concludes with the admonition to pray and to WATCH; to wit: "Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and WATCHING thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all saints; And for me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the gospel." Eph. 6:18,19. "For we wrestle not against flesh and blood (i.e., ONLY), but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the EVIL DAY, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; And your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace; Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God;" (Eph. 6:12-17) Now comes the kicker! without which the armour would not be adequate at all. And here it is; to wit: Pray, Pray, Pray for all the saints (our co-elect), use all kinds of prayers and supplications. And pray for me! That God will give me abundant opportunities and great boldness of utterance, in preaching the mystery of the gospel. And when this same apostle Paul is about to die ­ in his last letter to young Timothy ­ near the close of his letter, as he outlines four areas of activity Paul wanted Timothy to constantly engage in ­ in light of the fact that Paul's departure was at hand, and he was then ready to be offered; ­ item #1 of FOUR THINGS; to wit: "(#1) WATCH THOU in all things, (#2) endure afflictions, (#3) do the work of an evangelist, (#4) make full proof of thy ministry." 2 Tim. 4:5. Watch thou in all things! Beloved, I have watched this world scene ­ as a minister of the Gospel ­ for 61 years, and one amazing thing stands out; to wit: THE UNANIMITY of mankind ­ wherever mankind is found ­ of whatever country, language, color, nation, kindred, tongue or tribe, or professed religion ­ I say, THE UNANIMITY of their belief in certain simplistic, trite, religious statements ­ all in one way or the other revolving around ONE such statement; to wit: GOD LOVES EVERYBODY ­ without any conditions. Yes. GOD LOVES EVERY INDIVIDUAL OF MANKIND ­ past, present, and future. Wherever you find a human being ­ that human being will tell you ­ in one of 200 or so languages ­ and tell you immediately, without any hesitation, without needing to think about it twice ­ that GOD LOVES EVERYBODY. It's amazing. And he is very likely to fight you about it, if you disagree. A while back, the Capital-Journal ran a big editorial about that question, in which they blasted me at some considerable length, and then  Sunday, December 30, 2007 pg.2  Sermon Outline  roundly declared that God does in fact love everybody; and scoffed at any notion that God (any god, any religion) would (or could) hate any of the creatures He had Himself created. In my debate with the famous Harvard theologian, one segment of the debate allowed us to ask the other side a question. My question to the really smart Harvard theologian was, "Does God love those billions of souls who are now in Hell?" Well, he muddled around with that question a while, and then came forth with a brilliant, Harvard answer. He said that God even loves those billions in Hell, because God loved them enough to give them their free will, and they chose Hell, and so God would just let them go to Hell, to prove how much He loved them. Say, what? That's how really, really smart Harvard theologians are. But, Beloved, even if they goofed up and went to Hell, once they wake up in Hell, surely somebody would change his mind, and say something like this: Oops! I guessed wrong! I change my mind. I've got free-will, you know. By my free-will that you (God) loved me enough to give me, I now want out of this place. If you (God) loved me enough to give me my free-will ­ (and, every individual of mankind, in addition to believing that God loves everybody, also believes he has a free-will, that God must honor) ­ surely, God, thou wilt not take my free-will away from me, just because I am now in Hell. God, You sent me to Hell in the first place because my free-will said I wanted to go to Hell rather than Heaven because Fred Phelps and those hateful people at Westboro Baptist Church are in Heaven, and I often told them on the street corner with their signs, that if they were in Heaven, I wanted to go to Hell. But, God, free-will includes the right to change my mind; and the minute I hit these flames, I said, I've changed my mind. Send Lazarus with water, Father Abraham, and get me out of here. "I AM TORMENTED IN THIS FLAME" "I am tormented in this flame." Lk. 16:24. "But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things, but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. And beside all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed; so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot; neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence." Lk. 16:25,26. "Neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence!" ­ no matter how much Dives and his FREE WILL wants to "pass to us," ­ (i.e., pass to Heaven where Abraham, Lazarus, and all the righteous dwell,) ­ "that WOULD come from thence," ­ (i.e., that WOULD COME from Hell where you now dwell, no matter how much you exercise your so-called FREE-WILL to leave Hell and rise to Heaven.). Where did you get the idea that your fundamental status would change when you pass from this life to the next life; from this world to the world to come? God's Word says the exact opposite; Rev. 22:11; to wit: "He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still." Heaven or Hell? That question is settled in this life ­ forever. Richard Baxter said, "If you could ask thousands in Hell (or, billions, more like it), what madness brought them thither? they would most of them answer, `We were sure of being saved till we found ourselves damned. We would have been more earnest, but we verily thought we were Christians already. We have flattered ourselves into these torments, and now there is no remedy. There is none of this believing in hell.' It was Satan's stratagem, that being blindfold, they might follow him the more boldly; but then he will uncover their eyes, and they shall see where they are. In  Sunday, December 30, 2007 pg.3  Sermon Outline  Hell they shall lose all their hopes. In this life, though they were threatened with the wrath of God, yet their hope of escaping it bore up their spirits. So strong are men's vain, unscriptural hopes, (says Baxter), that they will dispute the cause with Christ himself at the judgment, and plead their `having eaten and drunk in his presence, and prophesied in his name, and in his name cast out devils.'" Specifically, the conversation as recorded by the Lord Jesus went as follows; to wit: "When once the master of the house is risen up, and hath shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; and he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence ye are. Then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets. But he shall say, I tell you, I know you not whence ye are; depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." Lk. 13:25-28. "DEPART FROM ME, YE THAT WORK INIQUITY" And again, these solemn words of eternal damnation, spoken by the Lord Jesus to the devoutly religious Christians (so-called, but lost souls); to wit: "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven. MANY will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you; depart from me, ye that work iniquity." Mat. 7:2123. They will stiffly deny that they ever neglected Christ, in hunger, nakedness, or in prison, till he confutes them with the sentence of their condemnation. See, Mat. 25. These shallow-thinking, vain, God-loves-everybody heretics have a favorite verse of Scripture, which they have twisted and perverted into a Satanic lie, ­ just so they can have a proof text for their crooked theology. They snipe from the bushes, and sometimes lob that verse, like a handgrenade, which never explodes, due to lack of powder. A man yelled it at me from the audience ­ (just lobbed it over 20 or 30 rows of people) ­ in Casper, Wyoming, during the 3-hour debate with the Harvard theologian that I mentioned earlier. "What about John 3:16?" he yelled. Well, what about it? Even if you have a brain the size of a pea, or a BB, ­ or even if you checked your brain at the door such as is required at most churches, ­ you would know right away that John 3:16 does not support your miserable case, and you would leave it on a big sign at NFL Professional Football games behind the goal post. Some guys used to buy seats behind the goal post, where they would hold up a big sign reading "John 3:16," so that whenever the TV cameras panned to the end zone behind the goal post ­ such as touchdowns, field goals, etc. ­ the millions watching Sunday afternoon NFL football would be evangelized by the sign, John 3:16. Yeah, like everybody in America doesn't know John 3:16; which is the sum total of their religious experience. Take a close look at John 3:16; to wit: "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." (John 3:16) Now put up 1 John 2:15 right next to John 3:16 ­ and learn a thing or two about Bible exposition; and quit using your own laziness as an excuse for being so Bible dumb. Here's what 1 John 2:15 says; to wit:  Sunday, December 30, 2007 pg.4  Sermon Outline  "Love NOT the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him." (1 John 2:15) In other words, if you love the world, you are lost and on your way to Hell. 1 John 2:15. You get that? If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him; and if the love of the Father is not in him, he is lost and on his way to Hell; ergo, if any man love the world...he is lost and on his way to Hell. So, those two verses taken together reach an illogical and unreasonable conclusion ­ if you insist on John 3:16 meaning God loves every individual of mankind. They come to this: God loves the world; but if man loves the world he's lost and on his way to Hell. The truth is that the word "world" appears some 288 times in the Bible, and it means several different things, depending on its context ­ but, interestingly enough, the word "world" NEVER MEANS EVERY INDIVIDUAL OF MANKIND. The trouble with you is that you are a Jakeleg Arminian heretic; and what you need to do, to win this debate, ­ or to keep debating at all ­ is to produce ONE verse that says, God so loved every individual of mankind. If John 3:16 doesn't prove that God loves everybody, you better hang it up. It goes downhill from there for you. Like this one, where in His Almighty prayer of John 17, the Savior said: "I pray for them (i.e., my Elect people): I PRAY NOT FOR THE WORLD, BUT FOR THEM WHICH THOU HAST GIVEN ME; FOR THEY ARE THINE." John 17:9. SLOGAN OF THE DAMNED: "LOVE THE SINNER, HATE THE SIN" Another false doctrine of the Arminians ­ closely associated with the "God-loves-everybody"; indeed, it may be the same false doctrine articulated in other words ­ I say, another false doctrine of the Arminians is, "Love the sinner, hate the sin." Beloved, it is my opinion ­ based on WATCHING the world pass by ­ based on closely WATCHING the world scene ­ for 61 years ­ it is my opinion that virtually every individual of mankind believes the lie, that God loves the sinner, and only hates the sin; ergo, God loves everybody and doesn't hate anybody ­ just hates their sins. By sincerely asking yourself one question, and giving yourself an honest answer, you will dispose of that false doctrine; to wit: Who, or what, does the judge send to the penitentiary?, the guilty criminal, or his crime? Then, who, or what does God Almighty punish in Hell forever?, the impenitent, guilty sinner? or just his sins? If you will take a long, hard look at the sinner suffering in Hell, depicted in Luke 16 & Rev. 14 by the third angel, you will be a long way toward straightening out your phony, soul-damning theology; to wit: "And the third angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, If any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation; and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: And the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever; and they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his image, and whosoever receiveth the mark of his name." (Rev. 14:9-11)  Sunday, December 30, 2007 pg.5  Sermon Outline  Marks are for identification and ownership. If you serve the devil, you identify yourself as one who is owned by the devil. You thereby take his mark. You ­ AND NOT YOUR SIN ­ YOU shall be tormented with fire and brimstone as the Lamb (i.e., the Lord Jesus, and His Elect people, His Body, who are one with Him) and His holy angels ­ not only look on ­ but participate joyfully in the administration of Hell's punishment of the wicked. Whereby the justice, power, and fidelity of God are vindicated. They shall be tormented with fire and brimstone (sulfur), without rest or intermission, day and night, for ever. Note, Beloved. People ­ not sins ­ are being tormented, for their sins, which flowed from their being subservient to the Beast (i.e., for all practical purposes, Satan), whose mark they take. It would be of the utmost stupidity to read that passage of Scripture, and still say, God loves the sinner, and only hates the sin. Where did you get that ridiculous idea? You did not get it from the Bible, although all the world THINKS it's in the Bible. Ben was listening to National Public Radio the other day, where some so-called experts were discussing a book that contains hundreds of pithy quotes and where they came from ­ including, "Hate the sin; love the sinner." Well, Sir, would you believe. That quote came straight from the filthy old Hindu heretic, GANDHI. Hindus make up almost half the world's population. They bathe their sins away in dirty Indian rivers filled with raw sewage that kills 1,600 PER DAY! Did you hear that? Yes. 1,600 per day die of diarrhea. But their Hindu religion commands it. So, BATHE. So, DIE. The Hindu religion forbids eating cows ­ while millions of people starve to death in India alone, and millions of fat cows dine sumptuously in India every day. So, DON'T EAT. So, DIE. The Hindu religion says through Gandhi that God loves everybody, and therefore, Love the sinner; hate the sin. So, BELIEVE THAT LIE. So, DIE. God's Word says: "As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I HATED." (Rom. 9:13)  "The foolish shall not stand in thy sight: thou HATEST all workers of iniquity." (Psa. 5:5) "And when the Lord saw it, he ABHORRED them because of the provoking (i.e. persecuting) of his sons, and of his daughters." (Deut. 32:19)  "As a dream when one awaketh; so, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou  shalt DESPISE their image." (Psa. 73:20)  And the Bible is full of such passages. The great majority of the masses of mankind are going to  Hell. Mat. 7:13,14 and Lk. 13:24. Concerning those billions now in Hell, and other billions  headed for Hell, God repeatedly declares that He HATES them, ABHORS them, and DESPISES  them. In answer to this overwhelming body of evidence, the pipsqueaks still squeak out their  Arminian religion from the squalid, disease-ridden, religious rivers of raw sewage in India. Hear  them squeak: "I don't care what the Bible says, God loves everybody, Love the sinner, hate the  sin." Thus motivated by Satan, these vile creatures all around us are belching and vomiting out  their slanders upon the Word of God in five ways; to wit, by:  1) handling it deceitfully. 2 Cor. 4:2; 2) suppressing it. Rom. 1:18; 3) perverting it. Jer. 23:36;  4) corrupting it. 2 Cor. 2:17; and, 5) wresting it TO THEIR OWN DESTRUCTION. 2 Pet. 3:16.  Amen.  
