Sunday, September 2, 2007 pg.1  Sermon Outline  Gibeah ­ a City of Fags, in a State (Ben) of fag-enablers  U.S. Senator Larry Craig ­ a Fag ­ in, by, of and for a State (Idaho) of vile, hypocritical FagEnablers. We know those people very well. We have picketed fags in Idaho many times ­ and each time have been despised and rejected by the people of Idaho, who have always sided with the fags. Sen. Craig has lifted up his voice against WBC in the U.S. Senate, and he has cast his vote to deny the Constitutional rights of free religious exercise and freedom of speech to WBC. And now, ­ in answer to our prayers ­ and in fulfillment of God's many promises to avenge His own elect who cry to Him night and day against those who persecute them ­ God Almighty has ­ with one well-placed, dramatic stroke ­ utterly destroyed United States Sen. Larry Craig. Sen. Craig was caught lusting for anonymous fag fun time ­ with an undercover cop ­ in an airport restroom ­ in a fag cruisy area (aka, The Minneapolis Airport). (Of course, Minneapolis and Minnesota is one big Fag Cruisy Area. The Minneapolis Airport Restroom is a Fag Cruisy Area within a Fag Cruisy Area). Craig was arrested June 11, ­ in the Restroom ­ and kept the matter covered up until Aug. 8, when he quietly entered a guilty plea, hoping he could thereby make the whole thing ­ as he said ­ "just go away." But God Almighty ­ the Avenger of His people ­ had other plans. And so, last week, the whole sordid affair ­ including Craig's sick efforts to cover it all up ­ exploded all over the front pages and TV news lead stories ­ nationwide! ­ and even worldwide. Beloved. God has answered our prayers. U.S. Sen. Larry Craig is toast. Disgraced, Humiliated Toast! His sin has found him out. Num 32:23. "But if ye will not do so ­ (i.e., if ye will not treat WBC with the honor and respect due her members as messengers of God Almighty, sent to warn America of her sodomite sins) ­ if ye will not do so, ye have sinned against the Lord: and be sure your sin will find you out." Num. 32:23. A sovereign God chooses which man He will openly expose and disgrace for his fag sins and his fag-enabling sins ­ in this life ­ and which man He will await the Great Judgment Day to openly expose and disgrace. Hear the words in this verse: "Some men's sins are open beforehand, ­ (i.e., in this life ­ before the Great Day of Judgment) ­ going before to judgment; and some men they follow after. ­ (i.e., their sins follow them like bloodhounds, to be fully dealt with before The Great White Throne)." 1 Tim. 5:24; and Rev. 20:11. We have no doubt that many others in the Senate and in the House are as guilty as Sen. Craig. But a sovereign God chooses which ones to expose now, and which ones to expose later. Furthermore, the Fag-Enablers in the Senate and the House ­ as well as the Fag-Enablers in Idaho who voted Craig into Congress again and again for some 30 years, ­ despite knowing full well about his sodomite ways ­ are just as guilty ­ or guiltier! ­ than Sen. Craig. The people of Idaho are guilty of sending this fag beast to curse America and to persecute WBC ­ thereby bringing down the wrath of God upon this vile, Fag-Dominated Nation.  Sunday, September 2, 2007 pg.2  Sermon Outline  Remember, the title of this sermon is: "Gibeah ­ a City of Fags, in a State (i.e., the State of Benjamin ­ `Gibeah belongeth unto Benjamin' ­ Jdg. 20:4) of Fag-Enablers." We have said that U.S. Sen. Larry Craig is a Fag, in a State (Idaho) of Fag-Enablers. My computer spellcheck says there is no such word as, "Enablers." We are often asked, "What is a Fag-Enabler?" We answer, "Read the Bible."  More particularly, Read Judges Chapters 19,20, & 21. You'll see, pretty dramatically, what a Fag-Enabler is. Benjamin ­ (i.e., the Tribe; and the geographical territory; and the political State with its governing structure; and the population; also sometimes called Benjamites, and the Children of Benjamin) ­ I say, Benjamin was a Fag-Enabler ­ in spades! A Fag-Enabler is one who ­ against all logic, and against his own best interests for time and eternity ­ fanatically supports, condones and promotes the filthy fag agenda and lifestyle. Beloved, the Bible story of Gibeah and Benjamin is a blood-curdling definition of Fags and Fag-Enablers. The story of Gibeah and Benjamin will strip joy from all hearts, as in the words of the prophet Hosea when he was announcing the final doom of the Ten Northern Tribes; to wit: "Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy, as other people: for thou hast gone a whoring from thy God, thou hast loved a reward (i.e., the pay for lewd fag sex) upon every cornfloor... They have deeply (i.e., irreversibly) corrupted themselves, as in the days of Gibeah: therefore he (God) will remember their iniquity, he will visit their sins." Hosea 9:1,9.  The story of Gibeah goes like this: A very unremarkable, nondescript man was headed home with his whorish concubine and her servant and two donkeys, when darkness overtook them, and they were herded by divine Providence into the mean-spirited and demonic little fag town of Gibeah of Benjamin; to wit: "And they passed on and went their way; and the sun went down upon them when they were by Gibeah, which belongeth to Benjamin. And they turned aside thither, to go in and to lodge in Gibeah; and when he went in, he sat him down in a street of the city; for there was no man that took them into his house to lodging." Jdg. 19:14,15. This shows the mean spirit that characterized Gibeah; and remember that Gibeah was the home town of the wicked King Saul, where he hatched the early plots to destroy David, and where he gave orders to the evil Doeg to slaughter the holy Ahimelech and 85 of God's priests, for helping David. 1 Sam. 22:6,18. In fact, Gibeah later became so famous as the hometown of the disgraced King Saul, that Isaiah called it, "Gibeah of Saul." Isa. 10:29. It seems that Cities take on distinctive characters from their inhabitants in the aggregate, for which they are known in time and eternity; e.g.: "Woe unto thee, Chorazin! Woe unto thee, Bethsaida! And Capernaum...it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee." Mat. 11:20-24. Ergo: Woe unto thee, Gibeah! A City of Fags.  Sunday, September 2, 2007 pg.3  Sermon Outline  Back to our story of the Levite and his concubine in Gibeah: Eventually, an old man took them  into his house for the night, where the following atrocity was committed by the fag beasts of  Gibeah; to wit: "Now as they were making their hearts merry, behold, the men of the city,  certain sons of Belial, beset the house round about, and beat at the door, and spake to the  master of the house, the old man, saying, Bring forth the man that came into thine house,  that we may know him." Jdgs. 19:22. That is, Bring forth the man, that we may gang-rape  him to death up the rectum. We learn from God's Word the true nature of sodomites. The  modus operandi of these Gibeah fag beasts followed the pattern of the fag beasts of Sodom,  some 600 years earlier. Gen. 19:4,5. Don't talk to me about psychology and hate speech and  diversity. The Bible is primary source material on the subject of so-called homosexuals ­ that  trumps all other material whatsoever. The story of Gibeah decisively and definitively identifies  Fags and Fag-Enablers. All fags are filthy and lawless. 2 Pet. 2:7,8. The story of Gibeah is  bloody and frightening. It ought to scare the wits out of the fags and fag-enablers of today.  The Levite, to save his own hide, gave his concubine to the howling fag beasts surrounding the house; to wit: "So the man took his concubine, and brought her forth unto them; and they knew her, and abused her all the night until the morning; and when the day began to spring, they let her go. Then came the woman in the dawning of the day, and fell down at the door of the man's house where her lord was." Jdgs. 19:25,26. Dead, Beloved. Gang-raped ­ Sodomized ­ to death. Behold the true nature of fags. God has forever defined and identified fags ­ at Sodom in 2000 B.C., and at Gibeah in 1400 B.C. At their eternal peril does mankind reject God's Word on the subject, and undertake to re-define and tidy-up the image of fags and sodomy as merely a clean, innocent, alternate lifestyle ­ commanding our respect.  Now see God's definition/description of Fag-Enablers. The Levite took his dead concubine home, "And when he was come into his house, he took a knife and laid hold on his concubine, and divided her, together with her bones, into twelve pieces, and sent her into all the coasts of Israel. And it was so, that all that saw it said, There was no such deed done nor seen from the day that the children of Israel came up out of the land of Egypt unto this day; consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds." Jdgs. 19:29,30. All Israel rose up to punish the sons of Belial (the fags) in Gibeah who killed the concubine ­ "400,000 footmen that drew sword." EXCEPT the tribe of Benjamin; who, inexplicably, decided to support and defend the filthy, murdering, fags! Thereby branding themselves forever as Fag-Enablers; to wit: "And the tribes of Israel sent men through all the tribe of Benjamin, saying, What wickedness is this that is done among you? Now therefore, deliver us the men, the children of Belial, which are in Gibeah, that we may put them to death, and put away evil from Israel. BUT THE CHILDREN OF BENJAMIN WOULD NOT HEARKEN TO THE VOICE OF THEIR BRETHREN THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL. But the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together out of the cities unto Gibeah, to go out to battle against the children of Israel." Jdgs. 20:12-14.  Sunday, September 2, 2007 pg.4  Sermon Outline  Amazing! Remember, near the beginning of this sermon, I said, "Benjamin was a Fag-Enabler ­ in spades! A Fag-Enabler is one who ­ against all logic, and against his own best interests for time and eternity ­ fanatically supports, condones and promotes the filthy fag agenda and lifestyle." With that definition in mind, will you now, please, look at what the children of Benjamin did! They actually went to war against all the other tribes of Israel, rather than surrender a few murdering sons of Belial who were guilty as dogs! ­ the Fag Criminals of Gibeah! And see to what bloody lengths Benjamin was willing to go to defend guilty fags. With 20,000 troops they engaged Israel with 400,000 troops ­ and, in the first battle, Benjamin killed 22,000 of their brethren. Think of it! Benjamin killed 22,000 brave men, to avoid bringing a few guilty fags to justice. But there's more. In the second battle, Benjamin killed 18,000 more of their brethren ­ bringing the total to 40,000. In the third battle, things are changed; to wit: "And the Lord smote Benjamin before Israel; and the children of Israel destroyed of the Benjamites that day 25,100 men." Jdgs. 20:35. Thereupon, a rout ensued, with Israel chasing Benjamin throughout all their cities and countryside, burning every city, killing another 25,000 men that day, ­ and apparently all the women ("seeing the women are destroyed out of Benjamin," Jdgs. 21:16). "But 600 men ­ (all that remained of the entire Tribe of Benjamin) ­ turned and fled to the wilderness unto the rock Rimmon, and abode in the rock Rimmon four months." Jdgs. 20:47. In other words, the tribe of Benjamin was all but annihilated and swept from the face of the earth ­ because of their fanatical determination to defend and support guilty, murderous Fags in Gibeah. U.S. Sen. Larry Craig is a Fag, in a State (Idaho) of Fag-Enablers In this remarkable story of Gibeah ­ occupying 3 full chapters of Holy Writ (the last 3 chapters of the Book of Judges) ­ we have the definitive description of Fags and Fag-Enablers. Here is the plain Bible Doctrine; to wit: Gibeah is the Fag; and Benjamin is the Fag-Enabler. And here is the plain application of that Bible Doctrine to current events on the ground; to wit: Sen. Craig is the Fag; and Idaho is the Fag-Enabler ­ and/or, the U.S. Senate is the Fag-Enabler. In the end, some 40,000 Israelites and some 300,000+ Benjamites ­ (the whole Tribe except for 600 men hiding in a cave) ­ were slaughtered. Despite help from the other tribes, & after many generations, Benjamin never fully recovered. See Jdgs. 21. See here the true nature of all Fag-Enablers. What a fearful price the Benjamites were Hell-bent willing to pay for helping guilty sodomites. Is it not true today? Fag-Enablers have turned the country and maybe the world over to fags, incurring the hot wrath of Almighty God. A FagEnabler is one who ­ against all logic, and against his own best interests for time and eternity ­ fanatically supports, condones and defends the vile fag agenda and lifestyle. Amen.  
