Sunday, August 26, 2007 pg.1  Sermon Outline  God Spared Not the Old World, Bringing in the Flood John Bunyan (1628-1688) ­ died when he was yet 59 years old, still 3 months short of his 60th birthday. He was a dirt-poor, uneducated young Tinker (a mender of pots and pans) ­ who said that he and his wife "came together as poor as poor might be, not having so much household-stuff as a dish or spoon betwixt us both" ­ according to the Encyclopaedia Britannica, which took 4 full pages telling of the poor Tinker's life and accomplishments. His most famous work was The Pilgrim's Progress, such that Britannica said, as late as 1,900 A.D., "Bunyan, like the Bible, was to be found in every English home and was known to every ordinary reader;" adding: "But it was The Pilgrim's Progress which speedily found its way into every home and carried Bunyan's reputation to every part of the British Isles, to Europe and to America." I believe that we have everything Bunyan ever wrote for publication in our humble library ­ and I tell you it is massive. After Bunyan's death it was learned that he was working on an exhaustive commentary on every verse of the English Bible, but had only completed the first eleven chapters of Genesis when he died suddenly and unexpectedly. Mr. Charles Doe was the first to publish those papers in 1691 ­ three years after Bunyan's death ­ with this description in the preamble: "An unfinished commentary on the Bible, found among John Bunyan's papers after his death, in his own handwriting." It is available on the Web, and I urge you to download it and read it ­ it is a goldmine of pure nuggets and all manner of precious stones (jewels). For example ­ since my sermon today involves The Flood of Noah, I will use Bunyan's exposition of Gen. 7:20 to make this point; to wit: Bunyan wrote: "(At the time of The Flood): `Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail ­ (some 24 feet) ­ and the mountains were covered.' Gen. 7:20. The height of Goliath was but six cubits and a span ­ (some 10 feet) ­ (1 Sam. 17:4 ­ `And there went out a champion out of the camp of the Philistines, named Goliath, of Gath, whose height was six cubits and a span.'). Neither was Og's bedstead any more than nine cubits ­ (some 14 feet) ­ (Deut. 3:11 ­ `For only Og king of Bashan remained of the remnant of giants; behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron; nine cubits was the length thereof.'). Wherefore this flood prevailed far above the highest of those mighty ones; even fifteen cubits above the highest mountains." Bunyan's point is that when God Almighty warns of coming judgment taking vengeance on a whole world of creatures (both man and beast) by destroying "all flesh" ­ He means it, literally. Lest there be even one really tall guy left alive who by walking on tiptoe on the highest mountain, somewhere, somehow ­ could survive The Flood ­ God cuts that guy off at the pass, as they say, by making the waters of The Flood soar some 24 feet higher than the highest mountain on earth. Showing that God will overcompensate when the time comes to punish Mighty Babylon; to wit:  Sunday, August 26, 2007 pg.2  Sermon Outline  "And Great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath." (Rev. 16:19) In other words, God does not engage in hyperbole or exaggeration in the least degree; to wit: "And the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the earth; both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that I have made them." Gen. 6:7. And here is how Bunyan treats Gen. 7:21-23; to wit: "And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, and every man: All in whose nostrils was the breath of life, of all that was in the dry land, died. And every living substance was destroyed, which was upon the face of the ground, both man, and cattle, and the creeping things, and the fowls of the heaven; and they were destroyed from the earth, and Noah only remained alive, and they that were with him in the ark." Gen. 7:21-23. Bunyan says, "In these words you have the effects of the flood, which was punctually brought to pass, according to the judgment as threatened!" Beloved, hear these solemn words, and see this solemn scene! According to the judgment as threatened, indeed! Beloved! Listen! "Cast not away therefore your confidence, which hath great recompense of reward. For ye have need of patience, that, after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise. For yet a little while, and He that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. Now the just shall live by faith: but if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition; but of them that believe to the saving of the soul." Heb. 10:35-39. Beloved! Again, Listen! "And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you ­ (I, Jesus Christ, the Almighty Savior, the Son of the Almighty God ­ I tell you!) ­ that he will avenge them SPEEDILY. Nevertheless when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?" Lk. 18:7,8. Beloved. Listen: "And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands (i.e., literally, myriads) of his saints. To execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him." Jude 14,15. Beloved, this is Noah's greatgrandfather preaching! Think of it. I am a great-grandfather many times over. My greatgrandchildren have heard me preaching these same things that Noah and his greatgrandfather preached. Although the Lord took Enoch (i.e., translated him) before Noah was born, Noah's father Lamech doubtless heard Enoch, his grandfather, preach many times, and we may be sure that Lamech, Noah's father, and Methuselah, Noah's grandfather saw to it that Noah knew all about the holy Enoch and his thunderous message  Sunday, August 26, 2007 pg.3  Sermon Outline  of approaching doom for mankind. And remember, Noah himself is called a "preacher of righteousness." 2 Pet. 2:5. We may reasonably surmise that the moral and spiritual condition of mankind in the days of Enoch ­ (called the 7th from Adam) ­ was about as bad as it could get and getting worse, making things so dangerous for Enoch that God miraculously "took" him ­ and further, that three generations later ­ in the days of Noah (the 10th from Adam) ­ the moral and spiritual condition of mankind was infinitely worse, thus bringing on The Flood. To wit: "And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence through them; and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth." Gen. 6:13. To the God-blessed prophet Enoch, the end of all things was at hand, and it is likely that he clearly foresaw The Flood; and it is likely that he clearly foresaw the final Great Day of Judgment; and it is likely that he understood that the message God gave him to preach covered both The Flood and the final Great Day of Judgment: "Behold, the Lord cometh, with myriads of his saints, to execute judgment (i.e., vengeance) upon all." Jude 14,15. And that, Beloved, is our message. Recall Bunyan's exposition of Gen. 7:21-23; to wit: "In these words you have the effects of The Flood, which was punctually brought to pass, according to the judgment as threatened." And then Bunyan offers this further exposition; to wit: "But observe, I pray you, how the Holy Ghost, by repeating, doth amplify the matter. `All flesh,' `All in whose nostrils was the breath of life'; `All that was on the dry land,' `every living substance,' `every man'; and they were destroyed from off the earth: By which manner of language doubtless there is insinuated a threatening to them who should afterward live ungodly. And indeed the Holy Ghost affirmeth, that these judgments, with that of Sodom, are but examples set forth before our eyes, to show us that such sins begat such punishment. Making them an example, saith Peter, unto those that after should live ungodly" (2 Pet. 2:6). Nay, Jude saith, they are `set forth' in their overthrow, expressly for that very purpose!" I.e., "suffering the vengeance of eternal fire," FOR THAT VERY PURPOSE; to wit: ­ to be an example for us to see ­ consider well ­ and tremble. "Wherefore," he continues, "this careful repeating of this judgment of God, doth carry threatening in it, assuredly fore-showing the doom and downfall of those that shall continue to tread in their steps." See, again, the frightful words: "And (God) spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly." 2 Pet. 2:5. Beloved, see the words: There was a whole world ­ (called "the old world") ­ no doubt billions of souls ­ full of NOTHING BUT "UNGODLY PEOPLE." And is it not true ­ or very nearly so, at best ­ of THE WORLD THAT NOW IS? NOTHING BUT UNGODLY PEOPLE. And recall the words of Christ: "But of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of heaven, but my Father only. BUT, as the days of Noe (Noah) were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be." Matt. 24:36,37. Now, back to Peter's solemn words, "And (God) spared not the old world." 2 Pet. 2:5. Bunyan says, "Yea, mind how Peter hath it: For if God spared not the old world. (Thus) Secretly intimating, that those  Sunday, August 26, 2007 pg.4  Sermon Outline  that then lived, being the first of God's workmanship, and far surpassing in magnificence those that lived after the Flood, if God would have spared, He would have spared them; but seeing he so dreadfully swept them away, let no man be so bold to presume that wickedness shall now deliver him that is given to it." Do you take Bro. Bunyan's point here? If God spared not a world of people who were far superior to us in every conceivable way, it would be no big deal, as they say, for Almighty God to obliterate this sad, sick, diseased, world of vile and abominable mankind ­ as easily as one might smash a loathsome insect under foot, and with as much concern. "All nations (the whole of mankind) before him are as nothing; and they are counted to him less than nothing. To whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare unto him?" (Isa. 40:17,18) Just think, Beloved, of those people who lived before The Flood ­ just a few short years ago, in the grand sweep and scheme of eternity. They were possessed of sharp minds, powerful intellects, and strong, agile bodies in robust good health; blessed with a remarkably healthful climate and a salubrious (conducive to good health and well-being) atmosphere; and fertile, productive soil covering the entire globe, yielding plentiful crops of herbs, fruits and vegetables which, while growing, were well-watered by a worldwide natural sprinkling system emitting a regular mist in exactly the ideal quantity. Such that, before The Flood, people lived hundreds of years ­ not uncommonly approaching a thousand years ­ in vibrant good health; contrasted with the sickly lives of threescore years and ten which is now the sad lot of mankind since The Flood. See, Psa. 90:10; to wit: "The days of our years are threescore years and ten; and if by reason of strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow; for it is soon cut off, and we fly away." Psa. 90:10. Think of it, Beloved. Listen to this sentence of Rehwinkel: "Even after sin and death had come into this world, it was still a world vastly superior to the world which now is. It was, as Luther says, `a veritable paradise compared with the world that followed The Flood.'" And listen to Bro. Bunyan describe Noah and the members of Westboro Baptist Church; to wit: "`And Noah only remained alive, and they that were with him in the ark.' Noah was that man of God that had set himself against a world of ungodly men. The man that had hazarded life and limb for the word of God committed to him; he `only remained alive.' Hence note, That he was the man that outlived the world, that would for God venture his own life against all the world. Wherefore the saying in the gospel is true, He that will lose his life for my sake, shall save it unto life eternal. Thus did Noah, and passed the end, and went over the bounds, that God had appointed for every living thing. Behold! He was a man in both worlds, yea, the world then to come was given him for a possession." This is a description of Noah, AND, a description of WBC members. Notice Bunyan's words: "Noah was that man of God that set himself against a world of ungodly men...that would for God venture his own life against all the world." That is what the name, Antipas,  Sunday, August 26, 2007 pg.5  Sermon Outline  means: a man against all men. Rev. 2:13. "Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain among you, where Satan's seat is." Antipas ­ Noah's nickname. And of each WBC member; and all God's Elect. Jer. 15:10 ­ "Woe is me, my mother, that thou hast borne me a man of strife and a man of contention to the whole earth." Amen.  
