Sunday, October 30, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "He said furthermore unto me, Son of man, seest thou what they do? even the great abominations that the house of Israel committeth here, that I should go far off from my sanctuary? but turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see greater abominations." Ezek. 8:6.  (NOTE: It is very important that the preachers a/k/a prophets of God have full and accurate knowledge of the extreme sinfulness and total depravity and filthy abominations of every level of the society among whom God has providentially placed His servants ­ in order that they may intelligently and effectually obey Isaiah 58:1; to wit: "Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet; and show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins." Isa. 58:1.)  In this passage, the Lord God begins a blistering attack upon the remnant of the Jews left alive following the Babylonian Captivity of Jerusalem. Notwithstanding the grievous nature of the murderous treatment which the Jews received at the hands of Babylon, the stubborn Jews still refused to repent ­ an unprecedented situation recorded by Isaiah in his classical, inimical manner in the first chapter of the book of Isaiah; to wit: "Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evildoers, children that are corrupters; they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger, they are gone away backward." (Isa. 1:4)  Now get this, as to its application to modern America; to wit: Why should ye be stricken any more by the Hand of Almighty God? Beloved, does not this language pretty well describe the United States of America at this hour? To wit: "Why should ye be stricken any more? YE WILL REVOLT MORE AND MORE; The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint." Isa. 1:5. Wake up, America. Once more, Westboro Baptist Church is talking to you, warning you. Hitherto, you have ignored us. You do so at your peril. We warned you when the Towers in New York fell and 3000 died horrible deaths. Clearly, God was speaking to this evil nation. Clearly. Listen: "The Lord's voice crieth unto the city, and the man of wisdom shall see thy name; HEAR YE THE ROD, AND WHO HATH APPOINTED IT." (Micah 6:9)  Here, by a series of metaphors, God is speaking to the sons of men, from which we learn the following axiomatic matters of fact; to wit:  1) When the Towers fell 9/11, it was God speaking to the populations of New York and the United States of America;  2) When the Towers fell, the man of wisdom, a/k/a Westboro Baptist Church, immediately saw the Holy Name of the Lord our God written all over every facet of the entire situation ­ and how could we help but recognize it as such? because WE HAD BEEN PRAYING FOR JUST SUCH RELIEF FOR MANY MONTHS (!); 3) When the Towers fell, Westboro Baptist Church heard what the rod had to say ­ loud and clear; to wit: Indeed, by a metaphor the Rod swiftly took voice and reminded every man, woman, boy and girl that go to make up the population of the world, that for about the past 20 years, Westboro Baptist Church has been preaching to them, warning them, that their sins of the flesh had penetrated the nostrils of God, and that their doom was imminent; and that the Rod of God had this and more to say, including that the fall of the Towers was only a tiny adumbration of the final wrath of God to be poured out upon mankind at the end of the world ­ commonly known as the Great Judgment Day; and,  4) When the Towers fell, Westboro Baptist Church, by a figure of speech often employed by the Holy Ghost in Scripture, "heard" the Rod, and who hath appointed it. Again, the Rod came through loud and clear. Who appointed the Rod to bring down the Towers in one fell swoop? WHO (!) (?) You say. Who brought the Towers down? Who appointed the Rod to utterly destroy the Towers? God did. That's Who. And worse, and more of it is on the way.  Sunday, October 30, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  Every day, Westboro Baptist Church holds many prayer meetings. We believe we helped bring down  the Towers by our prayers; and so, every day, Westboro Baptist Church holds several Thanksgiving  Services, to give the Lord our heartfelt thanks for 9/11, and for our Mar. 2 victory in the U.S. Supreme  Court; and to pray for many more such victories. One day, we expect to see great buildings all over the  world tumble to dust, killing millions of impenitent sinners, and signaling the End of the World.  Beloved, I am so thankful for the beauty and power of Micah 6:9; to wit: "The Lord's voice crieth unto the city, and the man of wisdom shall see thy name;" ­ (The Holy Name of the Lord God, and a huge copy of this beautiful verse ­ Micah 6:9 ­ ought to be hoisted and posted where the Towers used to be; and the people ought to mourn and weep and pray and repent. It is the only hope of the arrogant, proud, United States of America) ­ "hear ye the rod, and who hath appointed it." Micah 6:9.  Beloved, we have substantial and good hope, and sound reason, to believe that we are included among the "messengers" of God sent to bear witness in the last days, just before the end of the World; and identified specifically as "the messengers of God," two times in two consecutive verses; to wit: 2 Chron. 36:15 & 16; to wit: "Moreover all the chief of the priests, and the people, transgressed very much after all the abominations of the heathen; and polluted the house of the Lord which he had hallowed in Jerusalem. And the Lord God of their fathers sent to them by His MESSENGERS, rising up betimes, and sending; because he had compassion on His people, and on his dwelling place. But they mocked the MESSENGERS of God, despised his words, and misused His prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against His people, till there was no remedy. Therefore He brought upon them the king of the Chaldees, who slew their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or maiden, old man, or him that stooped for age; he gave them all into his hand." 2 Chron. 36:14-17. (And thus, Beloved, began the so-called Babylonian Captivity of Jerusalem' ­ c. 585 - 605 B.C.)  We should not be surprised if the heathen Gentiles all around us are as stubborn and impenitent as the ancient Jews; because blindness in part has only happened to the Jews until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. Hence the stubbornness and other abominable traits of the Jews are now stamped on the hateful and contemptible Gentiles. The sad story is told in the eleventh chapter of Romans; to wit: "For I would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own conceits; that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in." (Rom. 11:25)  And so it is, that those passages of Holy Writ addressed to the backslidden Jews in warnings from an angry God, are equally applicable to the doomed Gentiles of America, in the midst of whom the saints of Westboro Baptist Church dwell and preach. For example, the following language of severe chastisement by the Old Testament prophet to the Jews of his day, applies with equal force and propriety to the Gentiles of our day; to wit: "From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in it; but wounds, and bruises, and putrifying sores; they have not been closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment." (Isa. 1:6) This is a classic ­ deftly comparing terminal physical illness with Jewish, Christ-rejecting Hell-bound moral and spiritual leprosy. The United States of America is a nation of incurable lepers (!), and each citizen ought to be made to yell out: Unclean! Unclean! whenever someone is approaching. That assumes that the poor leper ever passes anybody clean to yell it to!  Next comes a description of total desolation, which is the logical end of a country that has been battered to tatters by an unending series of God's earth-judgments, a/k/a, adumbrations of the Great Judgment Day to come; to wit: (Listen up, America!)  Sunday, October 30, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  "Your country is desolate, your cities are burned with fire; your land, strangers  devour it in your presence, and it is desolate, as overthrown by strangers. And the  daughter of Zion is left as a cottage in a vineyard, as a lodge in a garden of  cucumbers, as a besieged city." (Isa. 1:7,8)  These word-pictures speak of financial disaster ­ abject poverty ­ which, if long continued, brings on a multiplicity of painful plagues, ordered directly from the Throne of God. Then comes the underlying cause of all human grief ­ a thing so satanic and filthy as to cause the very land itself to vomit the inhabitants thereof out of it when engaged therein; to wit: "Defile not ye yourselves in any of these things..." i.e., 1) "Moreover, thou shalt not lie carnally with thy neighbor's wife, to defile thyself  with her." 2) "And thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through the fire to Molech, neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God; I am the Lord." 3) "Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is abomination." 4) "Neither shalt thou lie with any beast to defile thyself therewith." 5) "Neither shall any woman stand before a beast to lie down thereto; it is confusion." Lev.18:20-23.  "Defile not ye yourselves in any of these things: for in all these the nations are defiled which I cast out before you; And the land is defiled; therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and the land itself vomiteth out her inhabitants. Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments, and shall not commit any of these abominations; neither any of your own nation, nor any stranger that sojourneth among you. (For all these abominations have the men of the land done, which were before you, and the land is defiled;) That the land spue not you out also, when you defile it, as it spued out the nations that were before you. For whosoever shall commit any of these abominations, even the souls that commit them shall be cut off from among their people. Therefore shall ye keep mine ordinance, that ye commit not any one of these abominable customs, which were committed before you, and that ye defile not yourselves therein; I am the Lord your God." (Lev. 18:20-30) Indeed, the wrath of God "turneth a fruitful land into barrenness" ­ (i.e., saltness, as at ancient Sodom and Gomorrah) ­ "for the wickedness of them that dwell therein." Psa. 107:34. Isaiah concludes his first trumpet blast against reprobate Israel by comparing Israel to Sodom and Gomorrah;  to wit:  "Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah. Hear the word of the Lord, ye rulers of Sodom; give ear unto the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah." (Isa. 1:9,10)  And so it is, that when the subject of the doom and destruction of nations and empires arises, in serious and intellectual discussion, the subject of the annihilation of Sodom and Gomorrah in 1898 B.C. must also arise, and, very soon, dominate and dispose of the matter; or, it will soon degenerate into a sham discussion; and, the old Frenchman Voltaire will again be vindicated, who said: "History is nothing but a fable agreed upon."  Beloved, think how blessed we are at Westboro Baptist Church, who can pick up a Bible, King James, 1611 A.D. edition, and have every confidence that every word is truth ­ not fable; to wit: (and we have the dying Peter's eyewitness word for it) "For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty." 2 Pet. 1:16. Ergo. Ancient Egypt fell into total destruction under the Rod of God in the believing hand of Moses at the Red sea. It is well known that the ancient Egyptians were filthy practitioners of incest and sodomy, etc. ­ from the Pharaohs marrying their own sisters and assorted female family members ­ on down. And, Moses was brought up in Pharaoh's household as the son of Pharaoh's daughter; and, doubtless, Moses knew, from living 40 years in and about the royal  Sunday, October 30, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  household, of the Egyptian penchant (lust) for "strange flesh." Jude 7. More compelling, we learn of  extensive formal education which Moses took full advantage of in Egypt; to wit:  "And when he was cast out, Pharaoh's daughter took him up, and nourished him for her own son. And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in words and in deeds." (Acts 7:21,22)  Thus you see, Beloved, that later on when Moses sat penning the Pentateuch, he was fully equipped mentally, spiritually, and every other way ­ to do that job which the Lord God had called him to do. And, Beloved, let me say ­ on the authority of Scripture ­ SO ARE WE. Yes. SO ARE WE AT WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH. Let me say, most respectfully, the humble, contrite souls that go to make up the membership ­ identified as the foolish, weak, base, despised nobodies, who meet in Topeka, Kansas, USA, Planet Earth. Who are held in contempt when we meet to worship our Father God. And often we are held in such disrespect that ruffians are permitted to roar their motorcycles in large numbers just outside, and attempt to disrupt our services. Here is a more complete identification of our congregation; to wit: "For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called; But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty; And the base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are; That no flesh should glory in his presence. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption; That, according as it is written, He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord." (1 Cor. 1:26-30) Multibillionaire Steve Jobs was making a graduation speech to the arrogant young punks at Stanford just before he died, and they recorded it, fortuitously, and played the whole thing over cable network TV immediately, over and over, AFTER HE DIED. I heard some of it in the wee hours. He made fun of Heaven and all things religious ­ like the rich fool Jesus told about; to wit: "And he spake a parable unto them, saying, The ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully; and he thought within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits? And he said, This will I do. I will pull down my barns, and build greater; and there will I bestow all my fruits and my goods. And I will say to my soul; Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall those things be, which thou hast provided? So is he that layeth up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God." (Lk. 12:16-21) Beloved, Steve Jobs, the rich fool, was snatched suddenly from this world where he made many hard speeches against God (Jude 15) throughout his time on earth; and immediately and directly (and most unceremoniously), cast into Hell fire and brimstone ­ there to abide forever and ever in exquisite and ever-increasing pain. "Thus saith the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches; But let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I am the Lord which exercise lovingkindness, judgment, and righteousness, in the earth; for in these things I delight, saith the Lord." (Jer. 9:23,24)  I love you. Amen.  
