  December 15, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor     Jesus:Mediator of a Better Covenant 
 (pt.1)  (Hebrews 8:6-13)      But now He has obtained a more excellent ministry, by as much as Heis also the Mediator of a better covenant, which has been enacted onbetter promises. 7 For if that first covenant had been faultless,there would have been no occasion sought for a second. 8 For findingfault with them, He says, "Behold, days are coming, says the Lord,when I will effect a new covenant with the house of Israel and withthe house of Judah; 9 not like the covenant which I made with theirfathers on the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out ofthe land of Egypt; for they did not continue in my covenant, and Idid not care for them, says the Lord. 10 For this is the covenantthat I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says theLord: I will put my laws into their minds, and I will write them upontheir hearts. And I will be their God, and they shall be my people.11 And they shall not teach everyone his fellow citizen, and everyonehis brother, saying, 'Know the Lord,' for all shall know me, from theleast to the greatest of them. 12 For I will be merciful to theiriniquities, and I will remember their sins no more." 13 When He said,"A new covenant," He has made the first obsolete. But whatever isbecoming obsolete and growing old is ready to disappear.    Replacement of Shadows with theReality    Last week we saw that Christmasis the replacement of shadows with the Reality that casts the shadow.Remember from Hebrews 8:5 that the priests serve a    copy and a shadow    of heavenly things. The tabernacle andtemple were a shadow; the official priesthood was a shadow; theanimal sacrifices were a shadow; the feasts and dietary laws were ashadow. And when Christ came, the shadows began to fall away, becauseChrist himself is the Reality. He is our temple and tabernacle, ourfocus and place of worship. He is our High Priest and Mediator andIntercessor. He is our atoning sacrifice. He is our Passover feastand spiritual food. He is our purity and holiness that sets us offfrom other people.    And we saw last week thatthere's a reason why the worship and focus of the New Testament is soradically spiritual, rather than ritualistic and traditionalistic.The reason is that Christianity is a missionary faith. That is, themessage of the New Testament is meant to be preached to all peoples,and the radical worship of the New Testament is meant to beincarnated in all cultures. That was impossible in the Old Testament.The tabernacle, priesthood, sacrifices, feasts and dietary laws couldnot be transferred to other peoples and cultures. It was a come-seereligion. Christianity is a go-tell religion. That is whyChristianity is radically spiritual. Radically internal. Radicallypersonal. And we could add radically ethical, lest anyonemisunderstand "internal" to mean "private." It is meant for allpeoples, tribes, tongues and nations. So almost all the mandatedritualistic, formal, external aspects of worship life are gone. Whatremains is a radically spiritual, internal, personal joyfuldependence on all that God is for us in Jesus, and the outworking oflove and justice in community.    Now this week, the writer takesus down this same path a little further. He says that this radicallyspiritual, internal, personal way of relating to God is, in fact thefulfillment of the promised New Covenant. That's what today's text isabout. And we are going to spend two weeks on it.    Simply Replacing Shadows withthe Reality is not Enough    It wouldn't work if God simplytook away the shadows. It wouldn't work if God even set Christ beforeus as the great Reality and left us to ourselves to know him and lovehim. If that's all God did, our worship and our lives would notbecome radically spiritual and internal and personal. On thecontrary, we would construct as fast as possible a manageable,man-made, external religion. No, if God is going to take away theshadows of external, ritualistic, will-power religion, then he isgoing to have to do something powerful and dramatic    in    us and not just outside of us. Becauseas sinners we are wired to another way.    And what God promised to do,with the coming of Christ, was the New Covenant.    To see this, let's begin withverse 6:    But now He [Christ] hasobtained a more excellent ministry [that is, more excellent than theOld Testament priests who mediated God's grace through thesacrificial system], by as much as He is also the Mediator of abetter covenant, which has been enacted on better promises.    Better promises build a bettercovenant relationship between us and God and this relationship iswhat Christ obtains and takes care of as Mediator. What those betterpromises are we will see in a minute.    Verses 7-8:    For if that first covenant[this is a reference to the law with all of its shadows and, ingeneral, without divine spiritual enablement to keep it] -- if thatfirst covenant      had been faultless,there would have been no occasion sought for a second [which is whatJesus is now bringing]. (8) For finding fault with them, He says,"Behold, days are coming, says the Lord, when I will effect a newcovenant . . .    Now notice carefully where thefault lies in the first covenant. Verse 7 says that the firstcovenant was not faultless. But then verse 8 explains this by saying,"   For    in finding fault with    THEM    . . ." -- not "it" but "them." Thefault with the first covenant was with "them." Well, who was "them,"and what was their fault, and what was this covenant anyway. Allthose questions are answered in verses 8-9:    For finding fault with them, Hesays [now he quotes Jeremiah 31:31ff, the prophecy of the NewCovenant], "Behold, days are coming," says the Lord, "when I willeffect a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house ofJudah; (9) not like the covenant which I made with their fathers onthe day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land ofEgypt; for they did not continue in my covenant, and I did not carefor them," says the Lord.    So here you can see that theold covenant was made with the people of God (Israel); it was madewith them as they came out of Egypt, which I think means in thatgeneral time period, a few months later at Mount Sinai as Mosesreceived the law; and it was an arrangement of how God and man wereto relate that they failed to keep: "they did not continue in mycovenant;" and so God looked away from them and they sufferedjudgment again and again.    The faultiness of the firstcovenant -- the Mosaic law -- was not that God gave bad commands, butthat the people had bad hearts. There was divine forgiveness andpatience in the first covenant (Exodus 34:6-7). There was the callfor faith in the first covenant (Numbers 14:11; Hebrews 3:19; 4:6).There were promises of God's love in the first covenant (Exodus34:7). But, by and large, these things did not get into the people'shearts. It was mainly external rather than internal. Obedience bywill-power rather than by reliance on the Spirit; and ritualisticrather than personal.    What Was the Flaw in the OldCovenant?    What was wrong? What was theflaw? There are two ways to answer that question. From the human sideand from God's side. From the human side the problem was unbelief andhard-heartedness (Hebrews 3:8,15,19; 4:7). From God's side theproblem was that God withheld the sovereign enablement of hisSpirit.    Listen to Deuteronomy 29:4.Moses is speaking as he looks back over forty years of rebellion inthe wilderness: "To this day the LORD has not given you a heart toknow, nor eyes to see, nor ears to hear." That was the ultimatereason why the old covenant was inadequate. God had lessons he meantto teach in the Old Testament and they involved enduring generationsof stubbornness and rebellion and hard-heartedness until the time thenew covenant should come.    But now it comes with JesusChrist, the Mediator of a new covenant. Let's read the description ofit in verses 10 and 11 (and save verses 12-13 for next week):    For this is the covenant that Iwill make with the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord: Iwill put my laws into their minds, and I will write them upon theirhearts. And I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Andthey shall not teach everyone his fellow citizen, and everyone hisbrother, saying, "Know the Lord," for all shall know me, from theleast to the greatest of them.    He says three things about thisnew covenant: First, the will of God is going to be written not juston stone tablets or white Bible paper, but in the mind and on theheart. Second, the new covenant will establish a relationship ofownership of us by God: "I will be their God and they will be mypeople." And finally, the new covenant will be personal and intimate.When it is perfected we won't have to exhort each other to know theLord, because we will know him intimately and personally. "All shallknow me from the least to the greatest."    We Need God's Will Written onour Hearts    So you can see the new covenantis exactly what we need if God is going to replace shadows withReality. If God's will is that we be free from externalism andformalism and ritualism and traditionalism, so that our faith and ourcorporate worship and our life can be radically spiritual andpersonal and internal, then we need more than the blowing away of theshadows of the Old Testament. We need for God to write his will onour hearts. We need for him to assert himself powerfully in our livesas our God. We need for him to see to it not just that he isknowable, but that we know him.    And so my prayer for us thismorning and in this Advent season is that we would grasp thepreciousness of the new covenant as never before. Christ is theMediator of a new and better covenant for us. What's new about it isthat it does not leave us in our bondage to sin. It does not leave usin our so-called free will -- which is only a code word for slaveryto self and sin. The new covenant does not leave us in our vauntedself-determination and death. It sovereignly overcomes our rebellionand resistance and frees us to delight in God and in the will of Godwritten on our hearts.    Christ is the Mediator of thisnew covenant, according to Hebrews 8:6. What does that mean? It meansthat his blood -- the blood of the covenant (Luke 22:20; Hebrews13:20) -- purchased the fulfillment of these promises for us. Itmeans that God brings about this inner transformation by the Spiritof Christ. And it means that God works all this transformation in usthrough faith in all that God is for us in Christ. The new covenantis purchased by the blood of Christ, effected by the Spirit of Christand appropriated by faith in Christ.    The best place to see Christworking as the Mediator of the new covenant is in Hebrews 13:20-21:   Now the God of peace, who broughtup from the dead the great Shepherd of the sheep through the blood ofthe eternal covenant [this is the purchase of the new covenant],even       Jesus our Lord, equip you in every goodthing to do His will, working in us that which is pleasing in Hissight,    through JesusChrist     ,     to whom be       the glory forever and ever. Amen.    The words, "working in us thatwhich is pleasing in his sight," describe what happens when Godwrites the law on our hearts in the new covenant. And the words,"through Jesus Christ" describe Jesus as the Mediator of thisglorious work of sovereign grace.    So the meaning of Christmas isnot only that God replaces shadows with Reality, but also that hetakes the reality and makes it real to his people. He writes it onour hearts. He does not lay his Christmas gift of salvation andtransformation down for you to pick up in your own strength. He picksit up and puts in your heart and in your mind, and seals to you thatyou are a child of God.    COPYRIGHT 1996 John Piper    
