foLey’s BLood is on

oBama’s Hands

It was a cooling balm for the believers’ hearts to witness the execution of the American James Wright Foley as a retribution for the recent American aggression against the Muslims of Iraq.

At the same time, anger and hatred spewed from the mouths of the disbelievers and the hypocrites alike, whose media outlets wasted no time and immediately exerted themselves day and night in an attempt to mislead the American public and the rest of the world away from the real cause for James Foley’s execution. So who was James Foley? And who bears the ultimate responsibility for his death?

James Wright Foley was an American who spent a large part of his career travelling exclusively to war zones embedded with the American mil - itary at war with Muslims. He had entered Af - ghanistan and Iraq numerous times from 2008 to 2010, during the ongoing crusades. TG Tay - lor 1 and Mathew Gregory 2 were two of his mili - tary overseers as he covered the US military in Afghanistan.

His work entailed documenting the wars through the crusaders’ eyes, reporting all that which serves their foreign policy and agenda whilst withholding any news that could expose their evils. In the archive of photographs he had personally taken, there were images glorify - ing the American crusaders in Afghanistan and Iraq as well as the Iraqi Sahwah. There were also photos showing the capture of many poor Afghani and Iraqi Muslims at the hands of the crusaders. Alas for James, this archive was with him at the time of his arrest.

James traveled to Syria, taking many security precautions due to his prior knowledge and ex -

1 tg.taylor@afgan.swa.army.mil – tel: 0794342276

2 mathew.gregory@afgan.swa.army.mil – tel: 0797069916

perience as an American “journalist.” He knew that Americans were not welcome in Muslim lands because of their government ’s shameless and lengthy record of aggression against Mus - lims. Nevertheless, he entered Syria carrying along with him items used for espionage, which were also found on his possession at the time of his capture.

James

WrigHt

foLey

As for who is ultimately responsible for his execu - tion, then the Obama administration was aware of James’s detention as early as November 2013. In a message sent thereafter, the simple solution for his release was clearly stated to the Ameri - cans. All that Obama had to do was release our Muslim brothers and sisters from their prisons. From this point up until James’s execution, there were many attempts by the Islamic State to reach a solution concerning the fate of James Wright Foley, but the arrogant, foolish, and

37

-----------------------------------------------------Page 37-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
dabiq

steven

JoeL

sotLoff

defeated US government turned away from their citizen with apathy.

During this long 9-month period, as the Ameri - can government was dragging its feet, reluctant to take the necessary steps to save James’s life, negotiations were made by the governments of a number of European prisoners, which resulted in the release of a dozen of their prisoners, after the demands of the Islamic State were met. That left a number of British and American prisoners remaining in the cells of the Islamic State, only after their governments arrogantly refused to release our imprisoned brothers and our sister, Dr. Aafia Siddiqui.

To paraphrase James, the Obama administration ultimately hit the last nail in James’s coffin and killed him by bombing Iraq. A message was sent two days before James’s execution, warning of his demise as a result of the US airstrikes in Iraq. The solution was easy… Stop the airstrikes!

The arrogant US government paid no attention to the offer nor to the threats that accompa - nied it, so the question that every rational per - son needs to ask is what is the real reason behind the Obama administration’s refusal to comply with the demands put forward by

the Islamic State for the safe release of American citizens?

The answer is that Obama now blindly follows the example of “the war president ” Bush. He will continue to strengthen the ancient and histor - ical enemy of the West – Persia/Iran. He sends comforting signals to the agents of the Iranian government in Syria and Lebanon (al-Asad and Hezbollah). Through his decisions, he solidifies the Iranian puppet government in Iraq as well as the Iranian-backed Shiite militias allied to the puppet government.

He supports the Shiite allies of Iran in Afghan - istan. He strikes the mujāhidīn – the true ene - mies of the Shia in Yemen – and thus embold - ens the Houthi agents of Iran. He does all this more foolishly than Bush, for Iran is a key ally of Russia, another historical enemy of the West, currently battling Western allies in the Ukraine and elsewhere! And to achieve these goals, he sacrifices the welfare of the American public for the sake of “the chosen few” benefitting from Zionism and capitalism, as America faces crisis after crisis including earthquakes in California, protests in Missouri, and the potential deaths of American prisoners held by the Islamic State…

38

-----------------------------------------------------Page 38-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
speciaL

tHe compLete message

from James foLey

out having to face public embarrassment and openly oppose their practice of not negotiating with supposed terrorists.

This proved very successful in the negotiations for some of my fellow prisoners who were citi - zens of European countries that openly share a similar “zero tolerance” view on negotiating with supposed terrorists.

However, all said governments executed the de - mands for the release of their citizens while I and the other Americans hopelessly waited for selfish politicians who are void of any compassion to de - cide our fate.

My name is James Wright Foley and I am an American citizen. This is a message to the US government and people.

The purpose of this message is not to appeal for my freedom. This is because many chances were given to my government and family to ne - gotiate for my release, all resulting in failure on the part of my government and family.

My captors have made many efforts to ensure a successful arrangement. From amongst these efforts is that they made strict conditions on my family and loved ones not to go to the media with my case.

The reason for this condition was so that the US government could come to a quick and discreet arrangement and thus secure my release with -

My fellow inmates and I were not captured sim - ply to be killed or held inevitably for no reason. Just as many Muslims from Iraq, Afghanistan, So - malia, Yemen, Libya and other Muslim countries are currently prisoners of the US government with many cases being of questionable legality according to US law, we, the American people are also victims of our government ’s foreign policy. Our government, for the last 13 years has stretched our military around the Muslim world to interfere in their affairs. They have killed in the name of “preserving life,” tortured and raped in the name of “humanity,” destroyed in the name of “rebuilding,” and ruined the lives of millions of people. They have incurred a great debt of blood and wealth and it will be you and me, the average citizens, who will inevitably pay the price of their crimes.

Today our government is continuing its onslaught on the Muslim lands once again with its aerial bombardments on some of the largest cities of Iraq, killing and wounding many.

39

-----------------------------------------------------Page 39-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
dabiq

As I speak here before you, I call on you to wake up and take your lives and the lives of your chil - dren into your own hands. Do not allow your - selves to be pawns in the hands of politicians so they can decide whether you live or die!

And remember, it could very easily be you in my place tomorrow!

I call on my friends, family and loved ones to rise up against my real killers, the US government, for what will happen to me is only a result of their complacency and criminality.

My message to my beloved parents is, save me some dignity and do not accept any meager compensation for my death from the same peo - ple who effectively hit the last nail into my coffin with their recent aerial campaign in Iraq.

I call on my brother John, who is a part of the US air force, to think about what he’s doing and how his work destroys the lives of many people including that of his own family.

I call on you John, to think about whoever made the decision to bomb Iraq recently and kill those people, whoever they might have been. Think John. Who is it they really killed? And did they think about me, or you, or our family and how that decision is going to affect us?

I died on that day John. When your colleagues dropped those bombs, they signed my death certificate!

I wish I had more time. I wish I could have the hope of freedom and seeing my family once again. Unfortunately, that boat has sailed.

Now all I can say is that I wish I were from some other country whose government actually cares about its citizens.

I guess all in all, I just wish I wasn’t American.