 MY DESIGN ROOM
[if !supportEmptyParas]   [endif]
Every other day, the patients would be allowed to go into the arts and crafts room to paint, glue, and create little projects for recreation. This, in my mind, was just a ploy that the engineers of my world had concocted to get my genius mind working on a creative level. I wasn’t going to let them down.
The patients were allowed one hour in arts and crafts. I worked furiously and agitatedly the whole hour, not wasting one minute. The counselor that was in charge of this room and art-hour encouraged me with true interest and compliments. She was always amazed how much I accomplished in one hour, and after several sessions of this prolific drive that I had shown, she offered to let me come into the arts room anytime that I wanted. I accepted gratefully, and took her offer to mean that I must be pleasing the engineers, and Amelia. During the first solitary session in the room, I painted a small rectangular piece of wood with the scene of a Holstein cow jumping over a full moon, with large child-like stars above. It was an inside joke at the engineers to make them try and figure out that the stars spelled Amelia. I waited for the right moment to release this secret. The counselor saw
                the painting after I had finished, and adored it. She asked if I thought I could paint one exactly like it for her sometime. I agreed that I could indeed. Instantly, I assumed that she didn’t actually want the painting for herself. Somewhere, on the real outside world, I had touched Amelia’s heart with the painting, and she wanted one for herself. I told her that I would in the next session. The next day, when I came in the arts room, there was a new counselor helping. It was Brian Setzer, one of my favorite guitarists. I finished the second copy of the cow—over—the—moon painting in record—time, and sat it on the counter to dry. The two counselors regarded
the painting for close study, and Mr. Setzer looked over at me as I rested, waiting for the last minutes of extra time of the arts hour to finish. “You really are talented, you know that?” he asked. I thanked him and replied that I thought that he was a lot more talented than myself. He looked amused and said thanks. “I did the painting for my wife that is waiting for me.” I said. He smiled. “The stars spell her name.” I added. His eyes seemed to widen, and he darted his gaze at the painting to see if he could discern the name. When he turned back around to meet my smiling gaze, I believed his eyes were teary. “That is so cool, man.” he said, “No man, you are the one who’s cool.” I replied. The woman counselor that I did the painting for bowed her head and didn’t speak for the rest of the hour. I think she knew that I didn’t have a wife.
