  2008-11-02 Spiritual Practice.doc  MLB 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

on the Sunday that serves as a gate 

to the winter holiday season, 

to worship, to celebrate life 

and cultivate gratitude, hope and love 

even though times are tough. 

 
And so, though our ways of thinking and feeling abo
ut the meaning of our days may 
differ, we agree to journey together, side by side,
 face to face. Within this circle of 
strong spirit, mutual care, and ethical vision, may
 we ourselves remain open to 
being transformed by a welcoming heart and emerging
 justice. 
 
Sequence: 

 
Light that no eye saw, 

bursting in the dark, 

casting the sparks of a thousand galaxies 

into the abyss. 

Light that slowly pushed its way through dust to sh
ine off the waters of a freshly rounded 
earth. 

Light that shimmered on the arching back 

of tiny stretching cells, 

on the xylophone bodies of ancient sea creatures 

and in the new soft round eyes of fish. 

Light that crossed a thousand million years 

to reflect on the tail of an amphibian, 

or on the teeth of a tyrannosaur. 

Light, now obscured by clouds, 

now shining past 
all 
clouds, 
and coming to rest on the tusks of mammoths. 

Light pulsing in our ancestors™ pupils, 

leaping off campfires and pictures in the sky. 

Light rolling off the tongues of Chinese poets 

and Jewish teachers and Greek scholars, 

finding a thousand ways, despite the violence that 
sullies the earth and our spirits, to 
remind us that we are all and each children of that
 first light, not self-derived, but lamps 
and candles and lenses that take it upon themselves
 to transmute that light into love, and 
love into gratitude, and gratitude into this healin
g, healing silence–. 
 
silence 

 
  Light shining in our memories, in the eyes of child
ren we once were; and shining in the 
ligaments of loyalty and kindness that bind us to e
ach other and even to people we 
sometimes would rather turn from. Light in our love
 and radiating from our painful 
losses; light in our naming of those we love in sac
red silence or sacred pronunciation. 
Light in our memory and hope made plain before us b
y naming: 
 
naming 

 
Light in the silence between the notes; light in th
e notes that exist not on the page but 
between us, extended like hands; light in the music
ian™s heart and vibration of  
instrument.  Light in the pleasure of what we recei
ve–
  
Readings 

 
The First Reading 
The virtue of this first reading will be that many 
of you in this room 
will be able to hear as if the author read it, sinc
e Meg was here in October both 
preaching and offering us a joyful concert. This is
 an essay from her book Waking Up the 
Karma Fairy
. 
 
Let me explain to you something about me and spirit
ual practice. I stink at it. There is 
nothing I do serenely day after day, glowing from w
ithin, filled with light and peace. The 
practice of mindfulness, for example, makes me so i
rritable that I have to quit after a 
minute or two. My mind and body are doing five thin
gs at once. I have to find a practice 
that suits me. Gratitude is one thing that has been
 working well so far. 
 
I was on my way down from the mountains on Intersta
te 26 when, a mile before Saluda, 
my car™s engine turned off. I was going downhill, a
nd for some reason, my spiritual 
practice of gratitude kicked in. ?Thank you that I 
am going downhill.? I came to a stop at 
the bottom of the hill. After trying to start the c
ar two times, I gave up, got out and stood 
facing traffic (to flag down someone with a car pho
ne). ?Thank you that it™s not too hot,? 
I said. ?Thank you that so many people have car pho
nes now. Thank you that I am not in 
my pajamas. Thank you that it™s not raining. Thank 
you that I have shoes I can walk on.?  
 
Soon, a huge black truck was barreling right at (me
).  It screeched to a dynamic stop.   
 
It was a tow truck.  

 
?I heard calls about you being broke down, and I wa
s on my way to a road right north of 
here, so I thought I™d come get you first.? 

 
I™m the luckiest person I know. Or maybe I have hit
 upon a spiritual practice with instant 
results. Either way, I™ll take it. 

 
The Second Reading 
comes from the late zany poet, James Broughton, fro
m the West 
Coast, both California and Washington State. This i
s called Notes for a Keynote Address 
at the San Francisco Art Institute on Becoming a Do
ctor of Fine Arts. (in part) 

   
A teacher™s pleasure is to give good advice. 

A student™s pleasure is to ignore it. 

Therefore, by all means, try all means–
  Esthetics is for the artist 

like ornithology is for the birds. 

Hardening of the categories causes art disease. 

–there is a lot of nothing  

in the eye of the beholder. 

Don™t trip on the leaps of your life–jump! 

Where is the view livelier  

than out on a limb? 

Adventure, not predicament. 

Only the nonsensical is at ease with the absolute. 

Embrace the energies that agitate the sea, 

fecundate the animals, cause trees 

to flower and stars to shine.  

 
The Sermon: Gratitude as Spiritual Practice 

 
The Great Thanksgiving Weekend! Families and friend
s criss-crossing the country, the 
city, the neighborhood. Foods both familiar and new
, fancy and home-spun. All the 
complex feelings that pulse in and out of these day
s, year after year. A rich time for most, 
even for some of the homeless in town, who often ge
t fed pretty well at least on 
Thanksgiving Day itself. 

 
But this year, as we ate the sweet-potatoes, fiery 
new violence echoed in our ears: the 
airport in Bangkok closed down; there was horrific 
terror punctuated by the crack of 
gunshots in Mumbai; and there was the daily agitati
on of just about everyone I can think 
of trying to put some comforting spin on the econom
ic debacle that has the whole world 
anxious even beyond the violence. 

 
Now my point this morning is simple and clear. I™m 
saying that not one of us has any 
control over any of these large, complex and deeply
 painful events. They are beyond our 
capacity to do anything about them. We cannot wish 
away the gunshots. We cannot 
resuscitate the dead. We cannot pray they never hap
pened. They did. We can only 
respond to them emotionally, whether by outrage, or
 denial, or bewilderment, or by some 
other feeling or knot of emotions. 
But they are totally beyond our control. 
 
As I once preached in a sermon, I once led a worksh
op which asked about 200 Unitarian 
Universalists there to define the word ?spiritualit
y.? I came away with 13 mutually 
exclusive definitions of the word. Everyone there w
as cross-eyed with surprise. They all 
thought their own definition was the universal one.
 No wonder some people recoil from 
the subject. 

 
  But no matter how else people describe it for thems
elves, I have to live inside my own 
skin, not theirs, so I have created a definition th
at works for me in my day-to-day life. 
 
For me, the word ?spirituality? names that which he
lps us to respond to terrible things 
without paralyzing panic, without simple knee-jerk 
reactions, and without letting 
unconscious prejudices and systems of categorizatio
n make decisions for us. Spiritual 
practices, I think, are the exercises which strengt
hen our spirituality, in the same way that 
a gym workout might strengthen our muscles.  And al
l of the helpful spiritual practices I 
can think of are based on this notion that we canno
t control horrible events, but we have 
to find a way to live with them and not be undone b
y them or defined by them.  
 
This whole notion of control is the hub of the whee
l of spiritual practice. I can™t control 
violence in Mumbai, but I 
can
 refuse to panic that I cannot control such things,
 and 
breathe calmly instead of furtively. I can focus on
 something small and local, my breath, 
instead of focusing on something far away and beyon
d my grasp. In the same way, I 
cannot make the economy come to life by snapping my
 fingers, but I can refuse to panic 
that there are no magic wands in my hand. I can bre
athe calmly instead of shallowly. In 
brief, I can respond instead of react.  I can breat
he instead of choke. 
  

And the word for breath, of course, in one of our r
oot languages is ?spiritus,? thus our 
words 
spirituality
 and 
spiritual practice
. You could just as easily say 
breatheality
 and 
breathing practice
 if you would like. And practice? Practice is just 
a word from the 
ancient Greek that means quite simply, ?to do somet
hing, especially again and again.? So 
in some ways, the idea of practice is not far remov
ed from any of us. 
 
People who play the piano know something about prac
tice. They spend hours on the 
keyboard, playing small exercises which serve as bu
ilding blocks for playing concerti one 
day. People who play harmoniums too, like Steve, an
d marimbas, like my friend Tom 
Ace, also have experiences to help them understand 
this concept. They do something 
again and again. They practice.  

 
People who paint watercolors know something about p
ractice. And people who play 
baseball, or who swim the butterfly. Or who practic
e magic, or write poems, or design 
railway lines, or bridges, or write up resumes and 
business plans.  Clergy, lawyers, 
doctors–they all practice their crafts. They all pr
actice. Doctors and lawyers even call 
their offices ?practices.? They all do things over 
and over again, ?trial by error? being the 
governing phrase.  

 
I know about practice too, even though I can™t play
 a single musical instrument, and was 
always pretty lousy at baseball. This is what I can
 do: I can move my fingers along my 
computer keyboard lickety-split without looking dow
n to watch them. I really can type 
fast. And correct my mistakes fast. Why? Because of
 practice. And that began long ago, 
in typing class at Notre Dame High School in Harper
 Woods, Michigan. With Mr. Fahey. 
From Boston. Complete with an accent. We would sit 
at our manual typewriters 
(computer keyboards weren™t even a dream yet back i
n 1966, and electric typewriters 
were still a novelty) and type the drills: k, comme
r, k space, k, commer, k, space, k 

  commer k space. (We tried to tell him that comma do
esn™t have an ?r? in it, but to no 
avail.)   Today, wouldn™t you know it–and we told h
im this every day–I 
never
 type that 
particular sequence of keys, k, followed by a comma
, followed by a k, followed by a 
space.  

 
But because I 
did 
those exercises every day for a year, I can type fa
st and efficiently, and 
every time I type up a sermon or a prayer, I am sti
ll practicing and maintaining my skills 
at a high level. So the word practice is pretty cle
ar, I™d say. 
 
But when you wed it to the word spiritual, you get 
a new phrase. You do something again 
and again, yes, but what is it that you do? Good qu
estion. I now believe that there is at 
least one reason that I found so many diverse defin
itions of the word ?spiritual? at that 
workshop. It™s this business of thinking that one s
ize fits all, and that spirituality has a 
universal character about it. It doesn™t. And I als
o have observed that many people are 
competitive about spirituality, thinking there is s
ome easier, better way to ?be spiritual.? 
Or that spirituality always requires steel-trap dis
cipline, and Marine Sergeant fortitude 
and crispness. And that since they are neither cris
p nor well-disciplined, they must be 
lacking something.  They sometimes assume their fri
ends are floating off the ground 
when they are not looking, glowing in the dark. 

 
For instance, Meg Barnhouse thinks she ?stinks? at 
spiritual practice, and she says so 
plainly in her trademark unmistakable way. ?There i
s nothing I do serenely day after day, 
glowing from within, filled with light and peace. T
he practice of mindfulness, for 
example, makes me so irritable that I have to quit 
after a minute or two. My mind and 
body are doing five things at once.? 

 
Well she and I have a lot in common, I guess. I too
 used to think that I was terrible at 
spiritual practice. When I read books about it, I a
lways feel I don™t come up to par. I tried 
yoga in high school, for example, and I damaged my 
knees and had to go to the doctor 
who yelled at me to stop doing it. I tried meditati
on in seminary, but had the exact same 
experience that Meg did–
 six months of practice and I was living in more pa
nic, not less. 
There was no peace and light, just ?five things at 
once? like marbles rolling around in the 
barrel of my mind without ceasing. I still have col
leagues and friends who meditate daily 
for an hour; others that run until they reach somet
hing called ?that state,? and still others 
who pray contemplatively for great lengths of time,
 and who seem to glow from within 
when I talk with them. But not me. 

 
I always felt I wasn™t cut out for spiritual practi
ce. I felt quite inadequate and inferior 
until I recognized that I had let other people defi
ne the word for me. This, I came to 
realize, is not the most sensible thing to do, sinc
e I have to live 
my
 life, not someone 
else™s life. 

 
So I took the only real control I have, small and h
omely, and used that. I defined spiritual 
practice as not what other people do, but what I do
. I am glad that other people can pray 
and meditate and do yoga and run so well, really. I
 just gave up comparing myself to 
them, to my detriment. I paid attention and came to
 realize I do do something every day. 

  Something that tends to keep me from panicking. Som
ething that reminds me of my 
breath, sure and steady. I just don™t do it at the 
same time every day.  
 
But every day I 
do 
do this. 
 
What do I do?  I give thanks for being alive. Kind 
of like that wonderful young Religious 
Education student in our video this morning. I do i
t in the middle of the night, when I 
wake up with a start because of a dream. I do it so
metimes in the middle of the afternoon 
at the office, when all of a sudden the sun warms t
he back of my neck. I do it in the 
morning when I am surprised that not only do I live
, but that there is a whole wonderful 
universe out there beyond my skin. And I™ll do it w
hen, later this week, I will look up at 
the rare conjunction of planets creating a lovely n
ew and temporary constellation in the 
sky. I am thankful to be able to breathe with every
 breath. I am thankful that my head is 
crowned with stars at night, and is ringed with sun
light come noon. I am grateful for the 
people in my life, not just on holidays, when I see
 them face-to-face, but on Tuesday 
afternoons when I simply hear their laughter inside
 the treasure-chamber of my memory.  
I am grateful often when I write prayers for servic
es too, as I stretch out my imagination 
to embrace a much larger world than my own little l
ife.  
 
And this sense of stretching brings me to the supre
mely joyful poem of Mr. Broughton.  
A teacher™s pleasure is to give good advice. 

A student™s pleasure is to ignore it. 

Therefore, by all means, try all means– 

  

Indeed. Most of you know how much I adored my mento
r Harry Scholefield. I learned so 
much from him. But I was never able to meditate in 
the way he did. Early morning rising. 
The meditation. The reading of poems until they wer
e memorized. I tried. Oh, how I 
tried. Time and time again. But he and I were at di
fferent stages in our lives. He was 
retired, and had been for  decades. I had my nose t
o the parish grindstone. He and I had 
different temperaments. We used to talk about such 
things all the time.   
 
And it was he who helped me to come to the conclusi
on that my work was not to take his 
advice and practice spiritually like he did. My job
 was to ignore his advice and to find my 
own means of spiritual practice. It was as if he wa
s reminding me of Broughton™s wise 
words: 

 Don™t trip on the leaps of your life–jump! 
Where is the view livelier  

than out on a limb?Adventure, not predicament. 

 
And so now I don™t spend all day dumping on myself,
 telling myself that I need to live 
out my spiritual life in some other way, one, in fa
ct, that does not work for me. I don™t 
have to bow to people who lecture me, saying ?You d
idn™t try hard enough!? or ?I could 
teach you yoga so that it wouldn™t hurt.? No, I 
know
 what I experienced, and it™s not for 
me. I am, however, immensely glad it™s for you. Bec
ause there is no ?one size fits all? for 
this stuff. Otherwise, it™s a waste of time to ever
 use the world 
diversity
 again. Either our 
differences are real, or we are fooling ourselves t
erribly. I, for one, think they are real. 

   
And thus, if my friend Babar uses his prayer beads,
 this is good. He is reflecting on his 
life, his path, his thankfulness and his sorrows, o
ne bead at a time. He is facing what he 
can control and what he can™t control. If my friend
 Kevin watercolors out at Lake Merritt 
in Oakland, he too is reflecting on what he can con
trol and what he can™t control, because 
the water in water-coloring often has a mind of its
 own. So I see his water-coloring as 
spiritual practice. If my friend Mario runs miles t
hrough the desert, as he will this week, 
and comes into the presence of his deepest inner qu
estions, that too reflects a spiritual 
practice, for in no way must the word spirit ever b
e severed from the word body. 
 
Spiritual practice can be rooted in a religious cul
ture or a secular one–it makes little 
difference. Spirit™s basic meaning is 
breath
, remember. The breath of a minister, is, after 
all, no different than the breath of someone who ne
ver enters a church. Neither a religious 
person nor a non-religious person has any more cont
rol over life than the other. 
 
And, of course, by saying that there are thousand d
ifferent ways to cope with the 
difficulties of life beyond our control, a thousand
 different ways to practice breathing 
with un-panicked steadiness, a thousand ways to giv
e up knee-jerk reactions, does not 
mean all spiritual practice is equal in dignity. Hu
man beings are equal in inherent dignity, 
yes, but I, for one, do not think that sitting in s
ilence for an hour,  can in any way be 
equated with the spiritual practice of frightening 
children about everlasting hellfire. I, for 
one, do not think that my grandmother telling her b
eads is the same thing as a television 
minister making prayer into a species of entitlemen
t–I deserve to get this, that or the 
other reward because I am pleasing God, as if God w
ere an economist or Santa Claus 
with lists. I also don™t think the spiritual practi
ce of our children–giving thanks for 
life–is at all equivalent to the spiritual practice
 of demanding automatic fairness of the 
universe and asking ?Why me?? whenever there is tro
uble or mayhem. ?Why not you?? 
seems more the kind of spiritual question which, in
 the monk David Steindl-Rast™s 
words, doesn™t mean ?taking everything for granted.
? 
 
I do think that most everyone has a spiritual pract
ice, whether they call it that or not. I 
just don™t think that all of them offer the kind of
 health which Katherine Mansfield 
expresses so beautifully.  ?By health, I mean the p
ower to live a full, adult, breathing life 
in close contact with what I love–the earth, its wo
nders, the sea, the sun. I want to enter 
it, be part of it, to lose all that is superficial 
and acquired in me and to be a direct and 
conscious human being.? 

 
The gunshots in Mumbai will echo in our ears for a 
time. Voices which know nothing of 
the history of Islam in India and its divergent sch
ools of thought will hold forth as if they 
know something, and start to point fingers. They do
n™t know anything. The grating sound 
of pundits holding forth about something they know 
precious little about–the 
economy–will reverberate for a long while. They are
 looking, I suppose, for someone to 
blame, someone convenient and with a target clearly
 painted on.  They™ll never find one. 
 
Look, if you see someone about to be hit by a car, 
it™s ok to react and leap to push them 
out of the way. But those times are rare. The sound
 of gunshots come often, these days, 

  however; the difficulties of life show up with cloc
kwork frequency. Which is why we are 
called to practice spiritually, remembering that we
 control very little, that our responses 
to life are better when measured and non-anxious th
an when panicked. Is giving thanks a 
spiritual practice? Sure. So is painting by the lak
e, running through the desert, sitting still 
for a day, praying on beads like my grandma or my f
riend Babar, gazing at constellations, 
writing poetry when the iron is hot, playing mindfu
l golf, engaging in morning worship, 
reading with attention and questions, and practicin
g mindfulness. And this: Thanks, 
thanks, thanks for this, my next breath. 

 
Offering 

 
Psalm for This Very Time 

 
Stars for my cap. 

Earth for my shoes. 

Mountains for my pulpit. 

Oceans for my baptismal font. 

Birds for my angels and messengers. 

Bears, sparrows and horses  

for my cousins and kin. 

The prairie for my thanksgiving table. 

Morning sun for a cup that brims to the top. 

Noon silence for a good hymnbook. 

Evening sun for gorgeous vestment. 

The stars of night for a wise scripture text. 

The people of earth for diverse congregation. 

Thanks, Love, thanks for making all this 

as clear as when I next breathe in 

and as obvious as when I next breathe out.  

For the earth, forever turning, this my psalm  

of thanks and peace. Amen. 

 
 
 
