
tion, whereas some frivolous thoughts are dissipating. The mind is either attracted or  repelled  by  these diverse thoughts in the mental environment. It is advisable to avoid altogether the influence of these variegated thoughts in  order  to  get  established  in one's own ideal of thought. And for this  purpose  solitude has an immense possibility. Solitude means economy of psychic energy and increased power of concentration. Having  nothing  extraneous  to  attract  or repel the mind you are drawn inwards and learn the art of opening yourself to the higher  atmos-­‐

pheric currents which have the potency of giving you strength, bliss and peaceful expansiveness.
While meditation on the personal and impersonal aspects of God requires withdrawal of consciousness into the  sanctuary of  one's  own heart, concentration
 
on the universal aspect of God is best achieved through the selfless service of humanity. When  the  soul is  completely
 
absorbed in the service of humanity, it is completely oblivious of its own body or mind or their functions as in meditation, and, therefore, new  sanskaras are not formed. Further the old sanskaras which bind the mind are shattered and dispersed. Since the soul is now centring its attention and interest not upon its own goo but upon the goo of others, the nucleus of  the ego is deprived of its nourishing energy. Selfless service is, therefore, one of the best methods of diverting and sublimating the energy locked up in the binding sanskaras.
Selfless service is accomplished when there is not the slightest thought of reward or result, an when there is complete disregard of one's own comfort or
 
 
convenience or the possibility of being misunderstood. When you are wholly occupied with the wel-­‐ fare   of   others,   you   can  hardly
 
think of yourself. You are not concerned with your comfort and convenience, or your health  and  happiness. On the contrary you are willing to sacrifice everything for their well-­‐being.  Their  com-­‐

fort is your convenience, their health is your delight, and their happiness is your joy. You find your life in losing it in theirs. You live in their hearts, and your heart becomes their shelter. When there is true union of hearts, you completely identify yourself with the other person. Your act of help or word of comfort supply to others whatever might be lacking in them, and through their thoughts of gratitude and good will you actually receive more than what you give.
Thus through living for others your own life finds its amplification and expansion. The person who leads  a  life  of  selfless  service  is,  therefore,  hardly
 
conscious of serving. He does not make those whom he serves feel that they are in any way under his obligation. On the contrary, he himself   feels   obliged   for   being
 
given a chance of making them happy. Neither for show nor for name and fame does he serve them. Selfless service is completely achieved only when in serving others a man derives the happiness of himself being served. The ideal of selfless service frees him from the sanskaras of the craving for power and possession, or self-­‐pity and jealousy, or the evil deeds actuated through selfishness.
Selfless service as well as meditation are both spontaneous when they are inspired by love. Love is, therefore,  rightly  regarded as being the most   impor-­‐
 
tant avenue leading to the reali-­‐ zation of  the  Highest.  In  love  the soul is completely absorbed   in

the Beloved, and is, therefore, detached from  the  actions of the body or mind. This,  therefore,  puts  an end to the formation  of  new  sanskaras  and  also  results in the undoing of old sanskaras by giving to life an entirely new direction. Nowhere does self-­‐ forgetfulness come so naturally  and  completely  as  in  the intensity of love. I has, therefore, been given the foremost place among the methods which secure  release of consciousness from the bondage  of  sanskaras.
Love comprehends in itself the different advan-­‐ tages belonging to the other paths leading to emancipation,      and is in itself the most   distinguished
and effective Path. It is at once characterised by self-­‐sacrifice and happiness. Its  uniqueness  lies     in     the     fact     that     it   is
 
accompanied by an exclusive and whole-­‐hearted offering to the Beloved without admitting the claims of any other object. So there is no room for the diversion of psychic energy, and concentration is complete. In love the physical, vital and mental energies of men are all gathered up and made available for the cause of the Beloved, with the result that it becomes a dynamic power. The tension of true love is so great that any foreign feeling which might intervene is at once thrown out. S the expulsive and purifying efficacy of life is unparallelled.
There is nothing unnatural or artificial about love. I subsists from the  very  beginning  o evolution. At the organic stage it is crudely expressed in the form of cohesion or attraction. I  is the natural affinity
which keeps things together and draws  them  to each other.  The  gravitational  pull   exercised  by the
 
heavenly bodies upon each other is an expression of this type of love. At the organic stage   love   becomes   self-­‐illu-­‐
 
mined and self-­‐appreciative, and plays an important part from the lowest forms like the  amoeba  to  the  most evolved form of human beings. When love is self-­‐illumined its value is intensified by its conscious sacrifice.
The sacrifice of love is so complete and  ungrudg-­‐ ing that it has all to give and nothing to  expect. The  more   it gives the more it wants to   give, and   the   less  it
feels for having given. Ever increasing and never failing is the stream of true love. Its simple expressio is its simple giving  over.  The complexities
 
of the Beloved are concern of its best attention and care. Endlessly and remorselessly it seeks to please the Beloved by a thousand ways. It falters not to welcome suffering in order to satisfy but one wish of the Beloved or to relieve the Beloved of the slightest pain of neglect or indifference. It would gladly pine and perish for the sake of the Beloved. Careworn and tormented it waits not to attend to the very body which houses and nourishes it. It brooks no com-­‐ promise, and the Beloved is a concern of its lifetime. The tabernacle of love bursts under unmanageable restlessness, and gives a birth to the streams of love and supreme sweetness, until the

lover breaks through his limitations and loses himself in the being of the Beloved.
When love is deep and intense, it is called Bhakti  or devotion. In its initial stages devotion is expressed through    symbol   worship,   application   before  the
 
deities and reverence and allegiance to the revealed scriptures or the pursuit of the Highest       through      abstract
 
thinking. In its more advanced stages, devotion expresses itself as interest in human welfare and the service of humanity, love and reverence for saints and allegiance and obedience  to  the  Spiritual  Master.  These stages have their relative values and relative results. Love for a living Master is a unique stage of devotion, for it eventually gets transformed into Para-­‐ bhakti  or  divine love.
Para-­‐bhakti   is   not   merely   intensified   Bhakti.   It begins where Bhakti ends. At the stage of Para-­‐bhakti, devotion  is  not  only  single-­‐minded  but  is  accomp-­‐
anied by extreme restlessness of the heart and	ceaseless longing to
 
unite with the Beloved. This is followed by lack of interest in one's own body and its care, isolation from one's own surroundings and utter disregard for appearance or criticism, while the divine impulses of attraction to the Beloved become mor frequent than ever. This highest phase of love is most fruitful, because it has as its object a person who is love incarnate and who can, as the Supreme Beloved, respond to
 
THE REMOVAL OF SANSKARAS

the lover most completely. The purity, sweetness and efficacy of the love which the lover receives from the Master contributes to the insuperable spiritual value of this highest phase of love.

