  
  
Animals 
February 22, 2009 
Mark Belletini 
 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

as the cold flurries of winter fly once again 

to worship, to celebrate our deep bond 

to all things living, and, as well, 

to respond to the call of both past and future 

in the present moment of love and wisdom. 

 
And so, though our ways of thinking and feeling abo
ut the meaning of our days may 
differ, we agree to journey together, side by side,
 face to face. Within this circle of 
strong spirit, mutual care, and ethical vision, may
 we ourselves remain open to 
being transformed by a welcoming heart and emerging
 justice. 
 
Sequence
  
The Sequence today is something I did not write, bu
t comes from the works of 
Sri Chimnoy, the late Bangladeshi spiritual teacher
 in the Hindu traditions. I ran across 
it by accident (although the psychologist Jung woul
d probably say it was sheer 
synchronicity), and it was simply too wonderful not
 to use at this place in the order. 
 
Once there lived a pious man in Bangladesh.  Every 
day a great scholar would come to 
his house and read aloud from the scriptures: the U
panishads 
and
 the Vedas.  The master 
of the house listened devotedly to these readings, 
and the scholar™s commentary.  Now 
the family had a bird called Krishna.  It was kept 
in a cage in the room where the scholar 
gave the talks, and the pious man heard them. 

 One day the bird spoke to its master and said, ?Co
uld you please tell me what 
benefit you derive from these spiritual talks?? 

 The master answered, ?Krishna, you don™t seem to u
nderstand that these spiritual 
talks will liberate me, free me from bondage!? 

 The bird said, ?You have been listening to these t
alks for the last few years, but I 
don™t see any changes in you.  Would you kindly ask
 your teacher what will actually 
happen to you?? 

 On the following day the master of the house said 
to his teacher, ?Guru, I have 
been listening to your spiritual talks for the last
 ten years.  Is it true that I will get 
liberation and freedom?? 

 The teacher was still.  He scratched his head, pon
dered the question, but found no 
reply.  He remained silent for about an hour and th
en left the house. 
 The master of the house was stunned.  His teacher 
could not give an answer to the 
bird™s question. But the bird found an answer.   

 From that day on, the bird stopped eating.  It sto
pped singing.  It became 
absolutely silent.  The master and his family place
d food inside the cage every day, but 
the bird would not touch anything. 

  
  
 One day the master looked at the bird and, seeing 
no sign of life in it, took it 
gently out of the cage.  With a sad heart, he place
d his Krishna on the floor.  In a 
twinkling, the bird flew away into the infinite fre
edom of the sky! 
 The bird taught.  Its master and his teacher learn
ed:  silence can liberate. 
 
silence 

 
Liberation is not always flying away. 

Sometimes it™s turning and facing 

without flying away. 

And so, in liberty, we turn our mind™s 

inner eye toward those we love and 

those we miss, and those we find  

harder to love; we see their faces within,  

say their names into the liberating silence,  

or keep then safeguarded in our heart of hearts. 

 
naming 

 
Love™s philosophy is broad and wide. 

From the tiny cricket to the mighty blue whale, 

from the prickly cactus to the bobbing quail, 

from each to each, love sings. 

 
 
Readings
  
The First Reading
 comes from the Scroll of Bemidbar, the fourth book 
in the Hebrew 
Torah, which was set down in final written form aft
er centuries of oral recitation around 
2500 years ago. In the Greek/English scripture, it™
s called 
the Book of Numbers. 

 
The Moavite people were afraid. The Moavite elders 
said to each other, ?Here comes that 
hoard of Israelites who will lick clean all our who
le land. They hide the plains from view, 
they are so numerous. So the king of Moab called on
 Balaam, a fellow from the 
Euphrates area well-versed in divination and curses
, and they hired him to place a curse 
on the Israelite settlers.  

 
In the morning, Balaam saddled his donkey, and took
 off to do the bidding of the elders 
of Moav. As he was riding along, the donkey caught 
sight of a messenger from the 
Eternal standing in the road with a sword, blocking
 the way. So the donkey took off 
sideways and trotted into the fields. Balaam beat t
he donkey hard with a stick to try and 
get it to go the right way. 

 
So the Eternal™s messenger came into the field and 
stood blocking the donkey™s path, 
down there by the walls of the local vineyard. Agai
n Balaam took the stick to the donkey. 

  
  
This time the donkey went off toward the stone wall
, and scraped Balaam™s foot against 
the stones. Balaam was angry and struck the donkey 
with force. Finally, the messenger 
blocked the Balaam and his donkey completely, on a 
narrow path, so there was no way to 
go either right or left. At this point, the donkey 
just lay down under Balaam and refused 
to budge. Then the Eternal opened the donkey™s mout
h, and it said to Balaam, ?What 
have I done to you that you have beaten me so hard 
three times??   
 
?You have made a fool of me. If I had a sword I wou
ld kill you!? said Balaam to the 
donkey. And the donkey said, ?You have been riding 
me all of my life, and have I ever 
done any of these things before?? And he answered ?
No.?  And at that point, the 
messenger became visible to Balaam, and asked him, 
?Why have you treated this animal 
so? If this animal had not shied away from me as it
 did, I would have taken your life, 
because what you are doing is obnoxious to me.? 

 
The Second Reading
 is a remarkable poem by the New Zealand born Englis
h poet Fleur 
Adcock. It™s called For a Five-Year-Old 

 
A snail is climbing up the window-sill 

into your room, after a night of rain. You call me 
in to see, and I explain that it would be 
unkind to leave it there: it might crawl to the flo
or; we must take care that no one 
squashes it.  You understand, and carry it outside,
 with careful hand, to eat a daffodil. 
 
I see, then, that a kind of faith prevails: your ge
ntleness is molded still by words from me, 
who have trapped mice and shot wild birds, from me,
 who drowned your kittens, who 
betrayed your closest relatives, and who purveyed t
he harshest kind of truth to many 
another. But that is how things are:  I am your mot
her, and we are kind to snails. 
 
Sermon 

 
I saw this week that the Columbus Zoo was just vote
d the best in the nation. Even the 
venerable San Diego zoo is not as honored. 

 
I™m not sure what criteria were used to establish t
his honor. Jack Hanna certainly gets a 
lot of credit, and they bring up the water park, th
e golf course and other local features, but 
those don™t really have anything to do with animals
 as far as I can tell. I know there are 
7000 animals in the zoo and aquarium, but again, I 
am not sure if that counts ALL the 
fish, or all the insects.  

 
My friend Tom Ace had a friend who was the chief ve
terinarian for another zoo, one that 
didn™t even make the list, the San Francisco zoo. B
ut, this fellow got us in behind the 
scenes some years ago, and so I was actually able t
o see a zoo from a different 
perspective. I got to feed some of the animals–a ko
ala, a rhino and a giraffe.  We offered 
the giraffe leafy acacia branches. The giraffe bent
 its long neck, and then wrapped its 
tongue around the branches almost like a tentacle, 
stripping the leaves off as neat as can 
be. The thing that amazed me more than anything, ho
wever, was the color of the giraffe™s 

  
  
tongue. It was blue. I mean blue. I don™t mean blui
sh, or almost blue. I mean blue. Blue 
as distant mountains on a sunny afternoon. Blue as 
some stained glass is blue.  
 
It seemed so alien, so unexpected. I remembered mys
elf feeling startled by this totally 
alien creature up close, so wondrously tall and pat
terned, but so different from the dogs 
and cats I experience with greater familiarity. 

 
And then there was the time I first milked a cow. M
e. A city-boy from Motown, who 
thought milk came from cartons. I was in Chile on m
y second sabbatical. I volunteered to 
make a festive welcoming dish of home-made ravioli 
for some family guests, who were 
flying all the way in from Africa that weekend.  

 
I gathered the wheat from the field and took it to 
the mill to make flour. But then I needed 
cheese. I needed butter. When you are on a farm in 
the middle of a rather effective 
nowhere, and the nearest store is an hour and half 
away, you make your own cheese, your 
own butter. Beginning of course, by milking your ow
n cow.  
 
Now the very idea of city-boy milking a cow caused 
a great deal of amusement among 
the farmhands. They placed bets on whether or not I
 could do it, I found out later.  But 
once in the barn, I watched the calf come and grab 
one of the teats on the udder of the 
cow with strength, and yank very hard indeed. They 
called this priming the pump. I 
noticed that the calf was not gentle. I noticed the
 cow was apparently no delicate thing. 
So when they sat me down on the stool, and placed t
he bucket under the udder, I knew I 
had to use common sense even though it chafed again
st my intuition. Thus, I grabbed 
hold and used the same rough strength as the calf, 
and lo and behold. fresh warm milk.  
 
I tell you truly, if anyone tugged at my arm the wa
y I yanked at the teats on that udder, I 
would reactively belt you one so hard I™d send you 
flying. But the cow just stood there, 
content as could be. 

 
But both the giraffe and the cow taught me somethin
g. Although I know that I too am an 
animal on this earth, a mammal among mammals, a pri
mate, I really experienced myself 
as 
very, very
 different from those animals I got to know up clos
e. That blue tongue, like a 
Martian tentacle. The different sensitivity to what
 I imagined 
had 
to be pain. And, ever 
see a spider up close? Or a lobster? Truly alien. 

 
The various species on the earth are different from
 us a lot on the surface. Different 
colors, different numbers of limbs, different ways 
of locomotion, different ways of 
seeing, different diets, different ways of protecti
on, relating, and aggression. 
 
And yet–.and yet–.they speak. Many species of anima
ls do communicate with others in 
their species. Take birds, for example. They do spe
ak–and I am not talking about the 
mimicry of parrots here, or mynahs. But I am talkin
g crows, and gulls, birds like that. 
They actually speak. Maybe not in English or Bangla
deshi. But they have distinct 
languages. In fact, French gulls cannot understand 
the language of North American gulls. 
Yet some ocean birds close to France can understand
 them, and their dialects. Bird 

  
  
language, which we often call birdsong, even enable
s certain birds, canary hens, for 
example, to build their nests with speed. Canary bi
rds deprived of hearing take three 
times as long to figure out the complex structures 
of their nests as do those who can hear 
the chirping nest-building poem. Birds warn each ot
her, teach each other, assemble each 
other, all with a variety of languages. Even chicke
ns, who are not known for their 
brilliance, have over 30 distinct arrangements of c
lucks to communicate a sophisticated 
collection of orders and warnings. 

 
Bees communicate. Ants too, using chemical language
s. Some spiders use visual 
communication, via their webs. And like us, spiders
 can suffer from chemical changes in 
the brain introduced by ingested substances. Under 
the influence of caffeine, the same 
caffeine in our coffee, for instance, spiders produ
ce jagged webs without beauty or 
symmetry. Even earth-worms speak to one another in 
small high pitched voices which we 
cannot hear except with remarkable equipment. And t
here are over ten thousand species 
of singing insects who use leg vibrations and such 
to communicate clear messages across 
the air. 

 
Now, of course, when you heard the story of Balaam™
s donkey this morning, you heard a 
story of an animal speaking in a 
human 
language. This ancient folktale is not to be taken 
literally, as, in fact, no part of the scripture ca
n honestly be taken literally without giving 
up 

the critical approach we use for everything else im
portant in our lives. Like an Aesop™s 
fable, which also uses animals to make a point, the
 story of the talking donkey makes two 
assertions–animals are often more sensitive to what
™s going on around them than angry, 
over-confident human beings, like Balaam; and two, 
animals suffer at the hands of 
human beings. ?What have I done to you that you hav
e beaten me so hard three times?? 
says the donkey with clarity. What may not be appar
ent is that the messenger seen by the 
donkey may have also appeared as a sort of animal. 
Human beings, who often seem to 
think they are the center of the universe, have his
torically depicted the divine messengers 
found in Bible stories, angels or cherubim, as huma
n beings like themselves, albeit with 
wings and a halo. But on the cover of your orders, 
you will see what a cherub actually 
is–not some cute little child with wings and rosy c
heeks, as in most western illustrations, 
or a robed blond, but a sphinx, a creature combinin
g the wings of the bird, the torso of a 
lion, a hu-man head, but often showing a snake for 
a tail.  
 
The ancient world often combined animal and human c
haracteristics in their spiritual art, 
perhaps as a way of saying what we say in fancy Eng
lish when we talk about the ?inter-
dependence? of all living things. Egyptian gods and
 goddesses with the heads of hippos 
and birds, the winged Greek sphinx talking to Oedip
us while crouching like a lion, the 
animal visions of the Hebrew prophet Ezekiel–all of
 these seem to understand that 
human animals and the non-human animals are 
inextricably
 bound up with each other. 
 
In the famous story of Noah™s Ark, the animals are 
necessary to human salvation–all of 
them. The famous Ark of the Covenant had two sphinx
es on its lid, and was placed in the 
temple between two giant sphinxes with lion bodies 
and eagle wings. Similar sphinxes 
made up of combined human and non-human animal feat
ures, guarded the gates of great 

  
  
Babylon, Nineveh, Hattusas and other famous cities.
 Even in Rome, you would 
immediately be greeted, in ancient times, as now, w
ith the image of a mother wolf giving 
suck to the founders of the city, the children Remu
s and Romulus. Animals in ancient 
times, it would appear, were not only caught up wit
h human culture, but with the very 
idea of the sacred. The original natives of this la
nd often expressed their idea of the 
sacred– with animals: the wolf, the eagle, even the
 mouse serving as holy symbols to the 
Lakota and other nations. 

 
And in our own era, the Jain religion in India so r
espects the lives of animals that, not 
only do they practice a vegan diet, the most devout
 among them famously sweep the 
streets where they walk to avoid stepping on insect
s, and wear cloth over their mouths to 
avoid the accidental inhalation of a gnat. 

 
At the other pole of such devotion to animal welfar
e, we have folks in the United States 
ridiculing certain cultures in India for revering c
ows, or making fun of vegetarians or 
vegans, or even turning up their noses at the peasa
nt and rural poverty cultures around the 
world– Chinese, Italian, Native American, Polish, M
exican, African–who, when they 
kill an animal for food, use every single bit of th
e animal– including inner organs, skin 
and the blood, so as not to waste one molecule of t
his precious creature whose life has 
been taken.  

 
But most of us, I™d like to suggest this morning, a
re more like the mother in Fleur 
Adcock™s poem. We are somewhere in between the two 
poles. We understand her lovely 
response to her son, hunching over him tenderly to 
protect the snail from harm, feeling 
moved by his faith in her ability to love; but, she
 reminds us, she has drowned kittens, 
trapped mice, and she even claims to have shot smal
l birds. 
 
She has a capacity for tenderness thriving side by 
side her capacity to take the lives of 
creatures. And in this culture too, most of us can 
show tenderness to pets, who sometimes 
are clearly precious members of our family, and yet
 can eat pepperoni on a pizza the very 
next minute.  A vegetarian might swat a mosquito wi
thout a thought. A man who prefers 
elk steaks from an animal he shot in South Dakota m
ay be the most loving friend 
imaginable to his hunting dogs. A woman in the Peac
e Corps who has been a vegetarian 
for twenty years may eat a handful of suckling pig 
to honor the culture of her host family 
at a wedding, believing that honoring culture trump
s her vegetarianism now and then. 
And even the most devout Jain might accidentally pl
ace his elbow down on a gnat that 
didn™t get out of the way fast enough. 

 
Like the mother in the poem, we may be aware of the
 inconsistencies in our lives 
surrounding our attitude toward animals.  Or we may
 not be, since lack of awareness 
about inconsistency is one of the hallmarks of most
 human cultures, as far as I can tell. 
 
But our Unitarian Universalist living tradition, in
 every other instance, reminds us that 
mindfulness about how we 
express
 our love is one of the spiritual practices that si
gnify 
our way of life. And in particular, our Universalis
t side has reminded us for centuries that 
love can always trump indifference, love can always
 trump fear, love can always trump 

  
  
convenience and love always has the power to trump 
our need to resist, to deny or to 
avoid. Our religious ancestors thought love was so 
central, in fact, that they abolished the 
wicked and arrogant idea of hellfire 
after
 death, and worked for abolition, women™s and 
other human rights 
before 
death. 
  

How our capacity to love relates to the other anima
ls with which we share our world may 
very well be the place where Universalism will show
 its power today. I am not suggesting 
that we all become like the Jains, by any means, or
 some Buddhists. Even Buddhists 
disagree as to whether Siddartha™s final meal was t
ruffle stew or wild boar stew. I am not 
even saying that I think everyone ?should? become v
egan or even vegetarian–although 
deliberately eating 
less
 meat at least would demonstrably improve both our 
own health 
and the health for the planet. And I do applaud fol
ks who maintain vegan and vegetarian 
lives, though I personally find such a diet difficu
lt to maintain.  
 
I am mostly just asking this morning that we each g
et clear on what our 
own
 attitudes 
toward animals actually are, and that we then act o
n that in our lives.  
 
But I do think that if we allowed ourselves to be a
ware that the animals of earth–with 
two legs, four legs, six legs, eight legs, no legs,
 fins, wings, or nothing notable at all, like 
the lowly tunicate, 
can
 suffer, we will begin to be truer stewards of our 
religious 
tradition.  And if we can grow more mindful that th
eir sometimes alien appearance–blue 
tongues at the zoo, different sensitivities on the 
farm– does not mean they are unrelated 
to us and our own joys and suffering, then we may v
ery well write a new chapter in the 
book of Universalism. Frog Girl in the story this m
orning recognized that frogs have 
families too. The Italian genius Giovanni Bernardon
e, whom we know today as Francis 
of Assisi, called the birds and wolves in his neigh
borhood ?brothers and sisters.? Maybe 
those metaphors won™t work for everyone. But at lea
st Frog Girl and Francis knew what 
metaphors worked for them, and they lived by those 
metaphors. What I ask this morning 
is that we each spend some time in the coming weeks
 thinking what metaphors, ideas, 
feelings and images work for us when we describe ou
r relationship to the other animals 
on earth. After all, love, whatever healthy form it
 takes, can never be a mistake. 
 
Offering 

 
We set aside this time for members and friends to o
ffer gifts in support of the work of this 
community. Thank you, whether you give today in the
 basket, or whether you give by 
mail or by computer. We thank you. We cannot do thi
s work without your support. And 
by the way,  in a congregation like this, 
we
 and 
you
 mean the same thing. We support 
ourselves. We make it happen. The ushers will now c
ome forward 
 
Ceremony of Installation 

 
New Pastoral Team Members  Claire Hagan Bauza, Davi
d Carr, Susan Carr, Donna 
Jarrell, Bill Mills, Sharon Oliver, Nancy van Deuse
n, Barbara Warner, Jack Wisniewski 
 
Mark introduces, mentions pamphlet, origins 

  
  
 
Eric 

 
  In the life of a liberal religious congregation, 
we put people before beliefs, and persons 
before ceremonies. Being present to each other in b
oth joy and sorrow, rejoicing and 
suffering is a mark of our religious practice. 

 
  The ordained ministers of this church including t
he Minister Emerita, and our Chaplain, 
Dick Dawson, embrace among their ministries the pas
toral or caring services. In this we 
are supported and helped by the Caring Committee an
d the Neighborhood Network, 
which helps people in time of trouble with meals an
d rides to and from medical 
appointments, among many other things. 

 
Mark 

 
  To these ministries, the congregation has added t
he Pastoral Team. The first team was 
installed seven years ago. Today, we hereby install
 the new members of our team. 
 
  Pastoral Team members extend the care of this con
gregation to those going through a 
time of prolonged hardship, grief, hospitalization 
or loss of work. Know that they each 
understand confidentiality, promising to keep the s
acred stories of every human life safe. 
They have been trained to do this work, and Eric, D
ick and I hereby acknowledge them 
as persons of character, compassion and commitment,
 worthy of trust. 
 
Dick 

  With Eric and Mark, and on behalf of the members 
of this congregation and its leaders, I 
hereby install you as members of the Pastoral Team 
of First Unitarian Universalist 
Church. Working with the ministers and the Caring C
ommittee and Neighborhood 
Network to live out our values of compassion and se
rvice one-on-one, I commend you to 
the congregation as servants of the heart. 

  

  

  

