
Ceremonial Speeches 
(Delivered on the occasion of Foundation-Laying of the Meher Baba Universal Spiritual Centre) 
I 
MR. C. V. SAMPATH AIYAN≠GAR, Retired Judge, Madras Judicial Service, spoke as follows: 
MY DEAR MASTER, 
At a time when this beautiful world is torn by sin-thoughts, fear-thoughts and worry-thoughts, your all-embracing Love to humanity will soon bring into existence a Spiritual Centre, a unique Spiritual Centre, which will be the house of spiritual beauty, justice and Love. Humble I, with all the emphasis of one who has been your faithful disciple for thirteen years and more, who has no axe to grind, say so without any fear of contra≠diction. I have weathered many a spiritual storm, and to the sceptics in this land of religious tolerance, would on bended knees appealó Please wait patiently and see: live and let live: Suum cuique (let each have his own). 
To-day, in the presence of a great, far-seeing bold statesmanó Dewan of this model, most fortunate State of Mysore, where various religions have been flourishing from time immemorial side by side, humble I, on behalf of the suffering humanity, request you, the great Master of Peace and Good-will, who has come to awaken, to lay the foundation of this Universal Spiritual Centre, where earnest spiritual aspirants will benefit, in your blessed, mothering Presence. I have no doubt that in them you will lay the foundation of head and heart, on which, in course of time, will rise the beautiful edifice of self-realization, the summum bonum of a true spiritual life. 
Dear Master, I once more humbly request you to perform the ceremony. 

II 
MRS. V. T. LAKSHMI, M.A., L.T., F.R.ECON.S., M.R.A.S., Pro≠vincial Woman Welfare Worker and Superintendent, Central Res≠cue Home, Madras Vigilance Association, then recounted the circumstances of her contact with Shri Meher Baba and the resultant reaction, feelings and experiences connected therewith. During her talk the speaker remarked as follows: 
"My Master's mission is not to found a new religion. He has come to awaken people from their spiritual lethargy and idle dreams and to remind them to take to incessant selfless service to win the freedom which is the fruit, not of conquest over others or other countries, but the glorious con≠quest of one's own self. Shri Baba does not condemn any religion. To him all the religions alike, from the lowest fetishism to the highest absolutism, are only so many attempts of the human beings to grasp and realise the Infinite. Hence, among his followers, you see the protagonists of all religions, castes and colours. 
The world, at present, is in a state of transition. We are either indolent or selfish. We do not understand the true significance of the term 'religion', nor are we sufficiently tolerant of religions, other than our own. Bigotry and sectarianism have long retarded our progress. They have hurled us into violence and antagonism. They have given rise to the dismal inequality of man and man and predominance of man over woman. All these are the ultimate results of our ignorance, selfishness and narrow-mindedness. Time has luckily come, when the deliver≠ance of the world from these evils might be expected. And we strongly believe that Shri Baba would give the necessary spiritual push to it. 
Shri Baba's unique teachings are based upon universal Love and he impresses upon us that the idea of sin is the greatest human curse. He is doubtless for those, whose feet are weak and whose hearts are faint. He infuses new life even in the so-called worst materialist or sinner by saying: 'You are always good; but try to be better, and I will help you spiritually.' 
According to Shri Baba, to go on the Path, every spiritual aspirant must start with selfless service. This service to others develops love, which takes the aspirant nearer and nearer to God, Who is the embodiment of Universal Love. By personal contact with a Master, that is by our love for and service to Him, such realization becomes not only possible, but definitely easy. 

We believe that the Universal Spiritual Centre is founded in the Mysore State, in order to help the  spiritual aspirants, from all over the world, to practise under the personal supervision of Shri Baba, all the ethical, moral and spiritual principles necessary for their spiritual uplift. We have no doubt that by this instrumentality, my beloved Master will effect the spiritual regeneration of humanity. 
This is, our beloved Master, Shri Meher Baba the God-man, whose self has expanded into the self of the world and from whom love and hope flow towards each and all, as naturally as the light radiates from the sun. Let us learn to love him and be blessed.'' 
III ACHARYA M. CHAKRAVARTHY, 
M.A. (HONS.), the great exponent of Vedanta, spoke as follows: 
ìSHRI SADGURU MAHARAJ, BELOVED DEWAN SAHEB, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN: 
Whoever has studied the Vedas and whoever has brought the great truths of the Upanishads into practice in his own life, cannot but remember one of the greatest realistic verities of practical life in connection with to-day's function. There is a quotation in the Upanishads which means to say that wherever there is a spiritual power working in harmonious combination with the temporal power there are all kinds of prosperity in the world. Now Shri Sadguru Maharaj representing the spiritual power of the modern world and Sir Mirza Ismail the executive head of His Highness the Maharaja's Government repre≠senting the temporal power of the Model State of Mysore, I see in this harmonious combination the great nucleus of the greatest prosperity not only of the State but of the real, spiritual uplift of humanity through Mysore. 

History has repeatedly proved the significance of the great statement. Shankara and Sudhanva, Ramanuja and Vishnuvardhana (whose state is now being presided over by our illustrious Maharaja Saheb), Madhwa and Jayasena were examples of this harmonious combination of the spiritual and temporal powers of those respec≠tive times. Even recently in the kingdom of Vijayanagar we find the great Madhavacharya, who later became Sri Vidyaranya, working harmoniously with Maha≠raja Hukka and the result is the never-to-be-forgotten Vijayanagar empire. In Maharashtra, we see again Ramdas and Shivaji working together for the Maratha empire. Now to answer the needs of the present-day international situation, if under the Divine Dispensation, the spiritual auth≠ority of Shri Meher Baba were to harmoniously work with the temporal authority of this most efficient, most ordered Government, of the most efficient Model State of Mysore we can never doubt that the future Mysore must certainly become the spiritual capital of the world. 
Mysore has always been fam≠ous for her hospitality, charitable temperament, decent behaviour, excellent characteristics of the State and her people and such a State should always see both sides of the question and embrace without hesitation whatever is good for the good of the world and eschew whatever is bad for the world and therefore I request that all my friends, the rulers and the ruled, shall always evaluate things on their own merits. With these few words I have the greatest satisfaction to say that my life's dream of the spiritual uplift of humanity has seen the dawn of a glorious and effulgent Light under the Êgis of Shri Meher Baba and Dewan Sir Mirza Ismail. 

