THEY DEVOTED THEMSELVESActs 2:42-47INTRO.- ILL.- A Methodist church tried to get a man to attend, but he never did. "Why don?t you come?" the minister asked, and the man finally admitted it was because he didn?t have proper clothes. So a member of the congregation took him to a clothing store and got him a nice suit, shirt, tie, and shoes. But on the following Sunday, he still did not show up. So the minister visited him again and asked him why he didn?t come. "When I got dressed up in my new suit," the man explained, "I looked so good I decided to go to the Episcopal church instead."What is the purpose of the church? Do we come to show off our Sunday duds? Of course not! We all know this. We certainly know this in our church.Most people realize that the reason we come to church is not to show off our clothing or to see what other people are wearing. Why then do we come to church? For what purpose?ILL.- Last Tuesday I went back to Joplin, MO, to see my mother at the National Healthcare nursing home. Early Wednesday morning, about 6 a.m. in fact, mom and I were sitting in the dining hall, eating some maple bars. Hmmm good! Afterward, I decided to survey some of the residents and people who worked there. I went from table to table, asking, "If the size of a church is not important, what is important?"Here are some of the answers they gave me:"The attitude of the people.""The friendliness of the people.""The closeness of the people.""The feeling you get in church.""Caring people.""Being made to feel welcome.""Salvation of souls.""Sincerity of the people."And one dear lady said, "To hear a good sermon." And I said, "Right on, lady! Amen! Amen! You got it. That?s the right answer!" NO, I DIDN?T SAY THAT, but that is a good answer. She was thinking about hearing a message from the Lord.Brothers and sisters, the majority of the people said that the most important thing about the church was the people. PEOPLE DRAW PEOPLE! People go to church because of the people who attend that church! Because they like the people. Because they feel that the people are very friendly, etc. SURELY, THIS OUGHT TO TELL US SOMETHING ABOUT THE CHURCH! The early church had something going for it. On the day of Pentecost (Acts chapter 2) about 3,000 people repented and were baptized and the Lord added them to His church. (V. 41)Acts 2:47 "And the Lord added to their number daily those who were being saved."Acts 4:4 "Many who heard the message believed, and the number of men grew to about five thousand."Acts 6:7 "So the Word of God spread. The number of disciples in Jerusalem increased rapidly...."The early church grew rapidly. 3000, 5000 and more! Why? What was happening? Did they have a great Senior Minister? No, there were no such critters back then. Did they have great greeters at the door of the church house? No, they didn?t have even a church building. What about their youth program? Their bus program? Their athletic activities? Their "Spring Fling"?They didn?t have half of what we have today, but they certainly had something that caused the church to grow. They had an intense devotion to the Lord! Could this be the difference? PROP.- Our text in Acts 2 tells us about their devotion and how it caused the church to grow. They devoted themselves to the following:1- The truth that exalts2- The tie that binds3- The table that humbles4- The throne that blessesI. THE TRUTH THAT EXALTSActs 2:42 "The devoted themselves to the apostles? teaching...."For us today, the apostles? teaching would be the Word of God, the Bible. The apostles taught the inspired Word from God. We now have it contained in what we call the Bible. Can it help us? Will it do anything for us?ILL.- When the preacher?s car broke down on a country road, he walked to a nearby roadhouse to use the phone. After calling for a tow truck, he spotted his old friend, Frank, drunk and shabbily dressed at the bar. "What happened to you, Frank?" asked the preacher. "You used to be rich." Frank told a sad tale of bad investments that had led to his downfall. "Go home," the preacher said. "Open your Bible at random, stick your finger on the page and there will be God?s answer." Some time later, the preacher bumped into Frank, who was wearing a Gucci suit, sporting a Rolex watch and had just stepped our of a Mercedes. "Frank." said the preacher, "I am glad to see things really turned around for you." "Yes, preacher, and I owe it all to you," said Frank. "I opened my Bible, put my finger down on the page and there was the answer -- Chapter 11." Brothers and sisters, the truth is this: The Bible can help us because it is the Word of God. I believe that most of life?s problems can be answered in Scripture. God gives us the right answers in His Word. It could be found in chapter 11 of some book or it could be found in some other chapter.Scripture is from God and it is powerful! It is the truth! It is not "a" truth. IT IS "THE" TRUTH. Scripture is always right, because it is from God. It is always right to go by the Bible!Some books contain certain truths, but the Word of God contains "all" truth, which can be applied to our lives. And when applied, it will work!ILL.- Someone wrote, "This Book contains the mind of God, the state of man, the way of salvation, the doom of sinners, and the happiness of believers. Its doctrines are holy, its precepts are binding; its histories are true, and its decisions are immutable. "Read it to be wise, believe it to be safe, practice it to be holy. It contains light to direct you, food to support you, and comfort to cheer you. It is the traveler?s map, the pilgrim?s staff, the pilot?s compass, the soldier?s sword, and the Christian?s character. Here paradise is restored, heaven opened, and the gates of hell disclosed. "Christ is its grand subject, our good its design, and the glory of God its end. It should fill the memory, rule the heart, and guide the feet. Read it slowly, frequently, prayerfully. It is a mine of wealth, a paradise of glory, and a river of pleasure. Follow its precepts and it will lead you to Calvary, to the empty tomb, to a resurrected life in Christ; yes, to glory itself, for eternity." The early church devoted themselves to the study of God?s Word. It is the truth that exalts! Exalts what? IT IS THE TRUTH THAT EXALTS GOD AS GOD AND CHRIST AS THE SAVIOR! This is one message that comes through very clearly in the Bible!Some books do not exalt God as God nor Christ as the Savior. In fact, some of them are "put downs" in regard to our all-powerful Creator and our all-loving Savior. Just read any literature and you will see. Most books, paperbacks, magazines, and newspapers have nothing positive nor productive to say about God.Come on now, be honest! If you are a reader of any kind of book, have you ever read any secular books that said anything good at all about God and Christ? THERE ARE NOT MANY, I THINK. WE BELIEVE IN THE BOOK! We read the Bible because we know that it can be trusted to tell us the truth about life. And exalt God as the only true God there is and exalt Christ as the only Savior there is! And when we exalt God as God and Christ as the Savior, the church will grow! God will bless.II. THE TIE THAT BINDSActs 2:42 "They devoted themselves to the apostles? teaching and to the fellowship..."The early church devoted themselves to the tie that binds. To me, that is Christian fellowship. Remember the song? "Blest be the tie that binds our hearts in Christian love. The fellowship of kindred minds is like to that above." Or should be.ILL.- Several churches in the South decided to hold union services. One united revival service. The leader was a Baptist and proud of his denomination. "How many Baptists are here?" he asked on the first night of the revival. All except one lady raised their hands. "Lady, what are you?" he asked.She replied, "I?m a Methodist." "Why are you a Methodist?" asked the leader. "Well," replied the lady, "my grandparents were Methodists, my mother was a Methodist, and my late husband was a Methodist.""Well," responded the leader, "Just suppose all your relatives had been morons, what would that have made you?" "Oh, I see," she said, "A BAPTIST, I SUPPOSE."Brothers and sisters, that?s the pride that divides! The early church had its problems, but there were no divisions over denominations, because there were none! It is a shame that people who believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God, are divided in certain ways. Sad, but it will probably always be this way to some degree. The important thing, however, is that we all fall down before the Christ and that we recognize others who follow Christ!ILL.- John Wesley once said, "Would to God that all party names and unscriptural phrases and forms which have divided the Christian world were forgotten, and that we, as humble, loving disciples, might sit down at the Master?s feet, read His Holy Word, imbibe His Spirit, and transcribe His life into our own.With regard to the name Christian, I would say, there is none like it! Give it to me, and in life and death, I will glorify God in this name."I believe that John Wesley had the right idea. We who follow Jesus as the Christ need to put aside division and divisiveness.I don?t believe that any church has a corner on righteousness and "rightness." I think we have a lot of "rightness" about what we do and practice in our church, but we don?t do everything right. NO ONE DOES. NO CHURCH DOES.Consequently, we need to recognize others who follow Jesus as the Christ and encourage their faith and devotion to Him! Most of us are at different levels in our Christian experience or growth and we can?t expect everybody to think exactly like we do! WE SHOULD ENCOURAGE PEOPLE IN THEIR FAITH IN CHRIST!And in regard to the spirit in our own church, we need to do the best we can to promote peace and productiveness! Edification and encouragement! ILL.- A preacher friend of mine ministered in a church one time where one of his deacons was a judo instructor. Another friend of mine went to this judo instructor to learn the art of self defense. He invited me and I went.When I walked in the door, my friend introduced me to his instructor. And immediately the instructor poked me with his finger in my forehead. I stood there, somewhat stunned, but not floored. Not knocked out nor knocked down. But I could hardly believe what he did. I suppose his reasoning was to test my reaction. WANT TO KNOW MY REACTION? I NEVER WENT BACK.That same deacon was at a church board some time later where my other friend was the preacher. That deacon got into an argument with another deacon and challenged him to go outside and fight. I DON?T KNOW WHAT HAPPENED, BUT I DON?T THINK THE OTHER DEACON TOOK HIM UP ON HIS OFFER.Brothers and sisters, instead of going around poking at one another, we should go around blessing one another! We should do things that build up one another, not tear down one another. We should watch our mouths. Make sure they speak well, smile, and laugh a lot. Doing these things and many more will go a long way to bless the tie that should bind us together. As we work at blessing one another, instead of blistering one another, the church will grow and God will be praised.III. THE TABLE THAT HUMBLESActs 2:42 "They devoted themselves to the apostles? teaching, to the fellowship, to the breaking of bread..."While many people are devoted to the table that fills, we should be devoted to the table that humbles. By this, I mean the Lord?s Table. The Lord?s Supper. Communion.ILL.- A collector of rare books ran into a friend one day who had just thrown away an old Bible that had been in his family for generations. He just happened to mention that someone named "Guten..." something had printed it. "Not Gutenburg?" gasped the book collector."Yes, I believe that was his name," said the man. "You idiot! You?ve just thrown away one of the first books ever printed. A copy like that one recently sold at an auction for around $400,000.""Mine wouldn?t have been worth much," replied the man. "SOME CLOWN BY THE NAME OF MARTIN LUTHER HAD SCRIBBLED ALL OVER IT."Brothers and sisters, we often overlook the value of certain things in life. One of these is the Lord?s Supper. The Lord?s Table. Many times we either miss partaking of the Lord?s Supper because we are absent, or when we do take it, we miss it?s spiritual significance and blessing.I Cor. 11:23-28 "For I received from the Lord what I also passed on to you. The Lord Jesus, on the night he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given thanks, he broke it and said, ?This is my body, which is for you; do this in remembrance of me.? In the same way, after supper he took the cup, saying, ?This cup is the new covenant in my blood, do this, whenever you drink it, in remembrance of me.? For whenever you eat this bread and drink this cup, you proclaim the Lord?s death until he comes. Therefore, whoever eats the bread or drinks the cup of the Lord in an unworthy manner will be guilty of sinning against the body and blood of the Lord. A man ought to examine himself before he eats of the bread and drinks of the cup."The Lord?s table is the table that humble us. How can it not humble us, realizing what Christ did for us on the cross? ILL.- Joseph Beahm decided to get a tattoo. On August 7, 1999, Beahm paid $100 to have a New Jersey Boardwalk tattoo artist do the work. What was supposed to read "Why Not, Everyone Else Does" turned out "Why Not, Everyone Elese Does." A hasty decision which turned soured. This is similar to some of the other things we human beings do. We see something trendy, decide to go with the flow, and wind up wishing we had been smarter. For example, many people who took their first puff, first swallow, or first pop on a dare ? now have to fight and claw every day to break their addiction to tobacco, alcohol, or some illegal drug. The foolish decision quickly becomes an embarrassing act. Then you realize it has left a mark that won?t wash off. It?s there for all the world to see. Some time later a dermatology center offered to remove the misspelled word from Beahm?s back. The center?s customary fee of $2,100 was waived. As it turned out, erasing the embarrassing signature won?t cost Beahm anything.This is similar to God?s offer of salvation by grace.Isaiah 1:18 "Though your sins are like scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they are red as crimson, they shall be like wool."The God who loves us is able to remove the offending mark, bleach out the stain, laser-beam the embarrassing sin. He does this with the blood of Christ on the cross. Every time we come to His Table we are reminded of His grace and graciousness. How can we not be humbled? Christ was right, but became wrong for us on the cross! HE WAS SINLESS, BUT BECAME SIN FOR US! HE WAS CLOSE TO GOD, BUT WAS SEPARATED FOR US! HE LIVED, BUT DIED FOR US!Humbled is good. The way up is down. When we deliberately humble ourselves, God will pick us up and bless us. A humbled church will be a growing church.IV. THE THRONE THAT BLESSESActs 2:42 "They devoted themselves to the apostles? teaching and to the fellowship, to the breaking of bread and to prayer."The early church devoted themselves to the throne that blesses. The throne of God that blesses.ILL.- The frugal housewife was serving leftovers for the third night in a row. Her husband said, "Honey, don?t forget to bless the food.""Darling," she answered, "I?ll be happy to bless this food if you can show me one morsel that hasn?t already been blessed at least twice."Brothers and sisters, I believe that we should always "bless" our food. We do this by asking God to bless our food. And from the looks of most of us, I believe He has!ILL.- Little Mary, who was the daughter of a radio announcer, was invited to a friend?s house for dinner. The hostess asked Mary if should was honor them by saying grace.Delighted, little Mary cleared her throat and said, "Friends, this food is coming to you through the courtesy of Almighty God."The truth is: the food that we have is a gift from Almighty God. He is the giver of every good and perfect gift! And most of us, delight in our food. WE NEED TO BE AWARE OF GOD?S GOOD BLESSINGS ON US!And the more we pray, the more He blesses us! The throne that blesses is the throne of God. Every time we come into God?s presence in prayer, He blesses. He may not bless us exactly as we want or as we ask, but He blesses us!ILL.- Nancy?s four-year-old brother, Charles, had been tormenting his sister all afternoon. That night while praying, Nancy asked God to bless her brother Charles and to keep him from tormenting her in the future.When she finished praying, she remembered that she had asked God about this problem before so she added the following words to her prayer. "And by the way, Dear God, I?ve mentioned this to You several times before."I believe that our Heavenly Father is in the blessing business! And the more we pray, the more He blesses. He may not always bless us immediately or just like we ask Him to, but He will bless us!Matthew 7:11 "If you, then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good gifts to those who ask him!"Our Heavenly Father is in the business of giving us good things. We humans are basically evil people and yet, we give good things to our children. BUT GOD OUR HEAVENLY FATHER IS COMPLETELY GOOD. There is not a speck of evil in Him. Why then would He not give us good things when we ask of Him?ILL.- A man was trying to teach his six-year-old boy how to shoot a basketball. The boy would take the ball and shove it as hard as he could toward the goal, but it always fell short. The father would then take the ball and shoot it, saying, "Do it like this, son."The boy would try again and miss, again. The father would show him how to shoot again and challenge him to shoot the ball even harder. After several minutes and many misses, the little boy said, "Yeah, but it?s easy for you up there. YOU DON?T KNOW HOW HARD IT IS FROM DOWN HERE."Sometimes we think this way when it comes to life?s difficulties. We tend to want to say to God, "It?s easy for you up there. You don?t know how hard it is from down here." AH HA, BUT GOD DOES KNOW HOW HARD IT IS FOR US DOWN HERE!Heb. 4:15-16 "For we do not have a high priest who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses, but we have one who has been tempted in every way, just as we are....Let us then approach the throne of grace with confidence, so that we may receive mercy and find grace to help us in our time of need."Jesus was tempted in every way, just like us. HE KNOWS HOW HARD IT IS FOR US DOWN HERE. And this is why we can pray with confidence, knowing that He will sympathize with us and help us.When we devote ourselves to the throne, He will bless.CONCLUSION----------------------------------------ILL.- When I was about 18 years old I dated a very pretty girl who smoked. I liked the girl and she was a great kisser, but I didn?t like her smoking. However, after a short time I started to smoke too. I WAS TAKEN BY THAT GIRL, BUT SOON FOUND THAT I GOT "TOOK." Smoking was very detrimental to me. I only did it for about six months. I?m glad, however, that I kicked that habit. Not all investments are good, are they? Not everything we do in life pays off in a good way!Matthew 6:33 Jesus said, "Seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness...."Matthew 11:27 "Come to me, all you who are weary and burdened, and I will give you rest."Christ is a good investment. The church is a good investment. You will find that if you invest your life in Christ and the church you will receive many dividends! MANY GOOD THINGS WILL COME INTO YOUR LIFE AS A RESULT OF DEVOTING YOURSELF TO CHRIST AND THE CHURCH!Your faith will grow. Your family will benefit. And your church family will be blessed. IT?S A WIN, WIN SITUATION. Why not choose Christ and His church?Living for Jesus is the life that pays!                       