
Ustad Numan Ali Khan on Sura Nahal A transcript (unofficial ... by a student) The way a Muslim  thinks is different from everybody else...  the reason the because   Allah  shapes his thinking. In Surah Al- Mulk the people are  entering hell fire and as they are entering they respond   وَقَالُوا لَوْ كُنَّا نَسْمَعُ أَوْ نَعْقِلُ مَا كُنَّا فِي أَصْحَابِ السَّعِيرِ     67.10.  اور کہیں گے کہ اگر ہم سنتے ہوتے یا عقل رکھتے ہوتے تو دوزخیوں میں (شریک) نہ ہوتے If only we had been the people who listened to what the revelation, the reminder, advise, that part  everybody knows but then the ayat says أَوْ نَعْقِلُor  had we listened, or we thought,  and the implication is, had we listened and at least thought... The purpose of putting it this way is very powerful .On the one hand a Muslim  will learn something,  when he or she listens,  we listen to a khutaba, a reminder you  read something you  will learn,  take advise from there, and change yourself for the good, because  listening to good advice and not changing is one of the reasons these people have ended here . They refused to listen. Listening has two dimensions on the one hand it  is something just going into your ear and the  other is applying. This is true of your language.  when you say, "I Tried to tell him, did not listen to me."  It doesn't mean he didn't hear me but he didn't obey me, he didn't  comply with me.لَوْ كُنَّا نَسْمَعُ أَوْ نَعْقِلُOr we had only thought or we had only applied our intellect. Allah is trying to tell us in this ayah and many other ayahs that a Muslim  is supposed to be constantly thinking and they have plenty of reason to think,  even if they are not sitting there listening to a sheikh teach them something. and what makes us think are the ayahs.... the purpose of the ayats ۔۔۔So they can think deeply on the ayah.... they can reflect on the ayats, not only of Quran  but the creations all around us. When you  look at the sky you  are supposed to think about something you  look at a tree you  think... this is what a Muslim  does,  he thinks differently  at the same things that everybody does. How? We see and we reflect.Allah wants  us to think about in hits ayah ... and it is different  when we just read the Quran  and move. We are supposed to  stop and think what Allah is saying   وَأَوْحَىٰ رَبُّكَ إِلَى النَّحْلِ أَنِ اتَّخِذِي مِنَ الْجِبَالِ بُيُوتًا وَمِنَ الشَّجَرِ وَمِمَّا يَعْرِشُونَ     16.68.  آپ کے رب نے شہد کی مکھی کے دل میں یہ بات (١) ڈال دی کہ پہاڑوں میں درختوں اور لوگوں کی بنائی ہوئی اونچی اونچی ٹٹیوں میں اپنے گھر (چھتے) بنا۔Your Master revealed the . kalam to the Prophet (saw)  He revealed the revelation... but Allah in this particular ayah is saying I am not talking to you Oh Prophet ... I am talking to the bee... the same Master that revealed the Quran  to you  revealed something to the honey bee. Let's think about it for a second. A honey bee is insignificant to most of us it is not something we see every day. We are scared of it... We are more disconnected from nature all around us..... The one creation we cannot escape is he sky... but most people live in a busy city they have no time to look up... so what are we going to reflect on.. we don't even get time to think for ourselves... we would overlook entirely a beeIn this ayah .. . First of all Allah told His messenger that there is a kind of wahi that I didn't give to you  that I am giving to bee so I want to   think about this because  everything Allah  tells us is for our guidance. So now I have a new respect for this small creature because Allah  describes is as something that received a wahi. He didn't say that about the cow, about the camel, the bird. he mentions lots of animals in the Quran  but this wahi thing there is something special about this creature that Allah  wants us  to pay attention. and this is a matter of thought . Watch a documentary on a bee. just what is does is inspired by wahi. and there are lessons to be learnt. and then it becomes a study of Quran,  because  that is what Allah  wants us to think about. we have to have a broad prospective of how to approach knowledge and wisdom when He has given us this grand book. أَنِ اتَّخِذِي مِنَ الْجِبَالِ بُيُوتًا وَمِنَ الشَّجَرِ وَمِمَّا يَعْرِشُونَ     He revealed to   the bee....  a command directly to it.. أَنِ اتَّخِذِي He speaks directed to the bee it ta ke zee where it should build its home.. incredible product honey.. massive industry not only hones but most of the farming for miles and miles  off flowers only for the honey bee to extract the pollen from it...  they farm them. You  can make your home in the mountains in the tree but if Allah had said only mountains or on the trees only ...... then we would never be able to farm them but he said وَمِمَّا يَعْرِشُونَAllah giving it permission so we can farm them. just think on that . it makes us reflect that all that we enjoy of Allah's  creations is because  He explicitly commands this creation....  in this particular case the bee ... to be of our service so that they built we take it as a home. use that is a home.There is something so incredible...  a hadith. The Prophet (saw) said..  I swear by the one who has my life in his hands the example  of a believer is just like that of the bee . .. he could have said anything without swearing but he swears first... because subhanAllah. First Allah reveals to us the example  of a bee then The Prophet (saw) says that if you  want to be a momin you  must like the bee.   how/ what is the bee going to teach me about iman .. about how I behave to my neighbors... it is so serious that The Prophet (saw) 1st swears by  before saying it. seriousHe says it eats well .. good and pure.When a bee goes to a flower it doesn't go to a flower that is immature, it doesn't go to a flower that has gone bad.. it doesn't even go to a flower it smells some other has some other hive has gone on it. it goes to a fresh clean pure flower, The first lesson the rizq we peruse not only the food the job the business... end up with the food y eat look for the pure thing. look for the best. the bee doesn't settle for less.. t keeps looking till it finds the best. this means that every aamal we do... we should perfect it do to the best... then the second,   it eats well... the way it sits is very important .... it can only be observed if we study a bee... they take pollen from one flower to anothe flower... they are going to eat from the flower but before they do that they will give to the flower more than they take. they will give it life. Just like a bee has a relationship every one of us has a relationship. and in everyone one single relationship you get something and  you give something. In your marriage, in your family...your  parent give everything and get something. Your teachers your employees, always give and take. but a bee gives more than it takes.... and what it gives makes the life of the recipient better.... and what it takes doesn't harm the recipient. the flower.The way it sits, it sits at the most delicate part of a flower, and the bee is a heavy creature relatively to the flower, so if it puts its weight on the  the petals from which it is going to extract,  it  is really going to break it ,  so it keeps hovering, so that it does not put its entire weight on it.... it wings keeps flipping.What are we learning ... you  have a relationship but you  keep demanding and demanding until the people who love you ,  your friends , your family , your spouse they break. You want  something.... sure but be  easy... don't put so much pressure that they break... and if you  want something,  give something first ... then demand, and when you  demand ... demand just enough... little And when it sees another bee eating from a flower it doesn't say let  me go and mess up... if two different  bees sit on the flower ,  that flower is not going to pollinate,  it is going to die. So the bee sees it , and recognizes this  flower has a relationship with another bee it goes and finds another flower .Someone opens a shop and you see him doing good business so you  open the same shop just opposite him,  and take all of his customers. There are plenty of places I can goAllah's  risq is vast, I don't have to take his .. the food out of his plate and put  it on my plate.  People are so stingy they are earning  good money, there is a vacancy in the office,  a fresh student asks you to recommend him but you don't because because  5 yrs down he is going to make more money than you and  I don't like that. The attitude of a bee  is this one is earning his risq I should not cut him down...  it is not a cut throat attitude... sits but it doesn't break he flower , what a great way to eat, what a great way to live. The bee in all our relationships , the Prophet (saw)  is talking so much effort to make us understand ... so I have to understand am I putting too much pressure on my children,  am I demanding too much from my parents, friend, too hard on my teachers, my employees ... ask these questions  if what to be like the bee. 3rd ...  they don't cause corruption. They go very far from their hives to collect pollen, in their neighborhood there are so many  hives so Allah  taught them to do a particular dance the hovering of the bee in the air.. which tells the other bee the importance  of the flowers .. look I just collected rizq fro myself but you  will benefit from this too I will point you  to it. It actually gives them navigation.. it is called the bee dance,  so they can go and eat too and they can build their hives too. So when you  benefit  someone,  we are all benefiting. All of us have to do well. What happens in a Muslim  community when someone is doing well... we get jealous.... and we are also  doing very well but we are not going to tell anybody how we got there. So when someone asks ,  how do you  write your resume , show me. Your reply is ,  no I lost the file. You  don't want to help anybody else .. there is a competition. Down to the path it takes Allah  calls it فَاسْلُكِي سُبُلَ رَبِّكِthe zig zac  it takes . Allah  says every turn it takes is the pathway of its Master, and it also moves with ذُلُلًاwith humility. Allah  describes that the bee moves with humility, it has a job, an important  mission, that doesn't mean it is arrogant... When people become busy they become arrogant. I have no time for you  call me later .. no time to call your mother . The bee even it is working.... it is with humility .One last thing this bee is benefitting itself and the community, the environment. It built a hive and makes honey and all those who befit is  way beyond these bee can think off .شِفَاءٌ لِّلنَّاسِThere is a cure in it for humanity from that little effort... if you  have to  وَقَالُوا لَوْ كُنَّا نَسْمَعُ أَوْ نَعْقِلُ مَا كُنَّا فِي أَصْحَابِ السَّعِيرِ     67.10.  اور کہیں گے کہ اگر ہم سنتے ہوتے یا عقل رکھتے ہوتے تو دوزخیوں میں (شریک) نہ ہوتےbecoming a believing community, and benefit each other and live alongside and give to our relations and take in moderation ... then what we are learning is we become a healing community.. mankind is sick, everyone  is greedy eating for themselves .We are eating this planet .. and one the greatest disadvantages of this are that the honey bee are disappearing the ayahs  are disappearing. And Allah  says the way it eats it produces more life .. the way we do businesses on the earth, the way the factories work we create more pollution, more than on the earth, in toxins, social waste, economic waste... we create fasad. so don't create fasad. make the better world better .  You can have yours but it dent mean it has to cost the next generation something .This profound religion if you think about it you  are something else but if you don't then you are something else....  a people  of reflection 
