Ustad Nouman Ali Khan answers: How to improve my character?Number one stop doing Haram. Stop doing bad things. Don’t talk adding goods until we get rid of bad deeds. U can’t talk about giving a medicine until you stop bleeding. Doesn't make any sense. So gotta stop the entertainment addiction. You gotta stop watching the film. You gotta start lowering your gaze when walking on the street; because you become less of a human every time you stare at a woman. As you Stare as she is a piece of meal, as if she is an animal, that just means you've lost respect of a fellow human being. You are looking at her, just as an ape looks at a female ape. Just like a dog looks at a female dog. That’s all, you've turned into an animal. So gain your humanity first, and then embellish and beautify your life with good deeds. Those simple small things, that perfect your prayer, memorize the few supplications, try to be honest in the work place, be kind to your mother these are not complicated things. This is what the creator ask from us. Someone says, why does HE want this from me? Does it benefiting HIM?it’s a good question. One of HIS name is Al-Ghani. Ghani means one who doesn't need anything. In an ayah in which HE told us to do certain things, HE told he is Ghani, he is free of need. You are the one’s that are bankrupt. He doesn't need anything, and we need everything cause we are the bankrupt. And then he told us to do few good things. And if you do a few good deeds, HE will make you Ghani, He will make you free of need. He will give you shower of huge blessings. Not only a good deeds is beneficial to us, because they are themselves like medicines; but they bring with them bonuses in this world and the next world. For example, You've been looking for a job and you are also mean to your mother, you start being kind to your mother and mysteriously they call you back. 'Want you to come in for an interview'. The blessings of being kind to your mother. One good deed will open up other doors for you. That’s what Allah does in this world. Whoever becomes conscious of Allah, He starts making doors the open for them, making a way out for them. HE will provide him in a way he couldn't have even imagined. All because this person has become conscious about Allah. That’s all Allah is asking us of. And HE is asking us to ask to make our lives better.People says, what does God want? That’s really fundamental question what does god want? There are few Ayahs that tell us the answer. One of them is “Allah wants to lighten your burdens, for man was created weak”. (Surah an-Nisaa 4: 28) . You think you are making your life easier by partying! You are making it harder. Allah wants ease for you. Allah wants to take the burden off. You just don’t understand cause you are too weak. SubhaanAllah!!