 1 2007-11-11 SpiritualClaustrophobia 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

on a Sunday morning in the middle of autumn
, 
only the seventh such season in this century, 

to worship.  Now, we pause to remember 

that we too are subject to the seasons, 

seasons of both the earth and the human spirit 

for everything that lives, moves. So we say: 

 
Mindful that a growing vision of a just world calls
 us together, that a community of  
commitment, courage and care sustains us, and that 
a life transformed by depth of spirit may 
illumine our way, we have kindled this light as the
 sign of our circle of life and love.
  
Sequence 

 
Leaves fall now. 

They fall from me as well as from the trees. 

So let me set free the dreams I once had 

that didn™t stay green but grew brittle. 

Let me set adrift all the unfulfilled hopes. 

Let the wind take them away. 

Let me too stretch out bare branches for a time. 

 
Leaves fall now. 

Red and yellow, light itself made tangible. 

They carpet the road I take homeward, 

and light up the path I walk. 

Whether the road outside me, 

or the road inside me,  

the tangible light is there–
 bright leaves on the one, 

the great seers and teachers and lovers 

on the other, more inward road. 

Somehow, trudging through all that light 

makes the journey itself  

feel like the very home which calls me. 

 
Leaves fall now, fragile, crisp, easily shattered. 

Let me drop all that is dried up in me, 

all that is easy to crack and crumble. 

Let those pieces fall in silence, with no regret. 

And let them too lay there  

in silence on the ground. 

And let that ground of being itself welcome my sile
nce.     
silence 
 
Leaves fall now. The sun slants just so. Memories c
all from autumns past. 

 2 There are many roads. Some we have taken, 

some we have not taken for long.  

Remembering those we have met on all 

of our roads, we call to mind the faces of those 

we love, those we wish we could love better, 

those who have loved us, those we miss, 

and those whom our society pushes away. 

We imagine them, or speak their names quietly, 

that we might reach out as we can.   
naming 
 
Leaves fall now. Songs are sung. Journeys are begun
. Tell me, where is the road I can call my own? 
For there is no such beauty as where I belong–rise 
up now, singers, and lead us home. 
choir 
 
The First Reading
 comes from the late sage Anthony de Mello, from his
 little book 
One Minute Wisdom: 

 
To a visitor who described himself as a seeker afte
r Truth, the teacher said:  ?If what you seek is Tr
uth, 
there is one thing you must have above all else.?  
?I know,? answered the student, ?an overwhelming 
passion for it.?  ?No,? said the teacher, ?an unrem
itting readiness to admit you may be wrong.? 
 
The Second Reading
 comes from a brand new book written by a friend of 
mine from college, 
Mary Jo Firth Gillett. She and her family and I and
 some other friends from university days always 
share a meal just before New Year™s, something we h
ave done for the last 35 years. 
The book is Soluble Fish, and the poem is called 

A Note to the Skeptics. I am only giving you an exc
erpt this morning. 
 
Wedded to life, what else is there 

but an oddball wacko longshot, a ?take? 

on the moment as I pass it? 

 
So, don™t tell me it™s nothing  

Œ-the sublime slant of this 

extraordinary light hitting the trilobite  

I keep on my desk to remind me, 

take it in before it™s gone. 

 
Don™t tell me happiness is irrelevant Œ  

because there is death in the Dead Sea, 

there is no beauty, no life in Yosemite? 

There 
was
 the Spanish Inquisition, 
 
there 
is
 whimsy Œ an armada of piñatas 
without which I™m a curled armadillo, 

a snail within its shell.  What is there 

but to be lashed to the mast, to take  

my chances with the sirens? 

 
 
 
 3 Sermon 

 
In the last three months, I have had brief conversa
tions with five different Unitarian Universalists. 
About theology. And how, in each of their cases, th
ey felt somehow out of touch, or inadequate, 
because they didn™t seem to be able to, or want to,
 articulate their theology. Their world view. They 
were not even sure they had one. I want to address 
that issue this morning in a general sort of way. 
 
I was clearly raised within a religious tradition. 
Some of my earliest memories as a child have to do 
with that tradition. The paintedstatue of the gentl
e woman in a blue mantle. The scent of beeswax, 
which gave off a warm hint of honey, very subtle. I
 remember the haunting rhythm of the Latin 
psalms, many of which I could recite from memory ev
en as a five-year-old child: 
Et introibo ad altare 
Dei, ad Deum qui laetificat iuventutem meum.
 Sort of like singing a regular song like 
Spirit of Life
 from memory, which many here did.   

 
As I got older, the sensual side of my religion, th
e sounds and scents, gave way to strict theology, t
he 
basics of which were very, very clear: God was invi
sible and everywhere. God was not a man, nor did 
God have a beard, and it was not wise to think so, 
no matter what the paintings suggested. God was a 
mystery: God was really three, yet God was really o
ne. A woman named Mary was a virgin, a word 
which, I have to admit, had simply no meaning to me
. The bread we ate was not bread, but something 
more. The story of Adam and Eve was not to be taken
 literally–only silly people did that, the nuns 
said. But the story was still true in a ?spiritual?
 sense, and each of us had to baptized in order to 
take 
away the sin that came down to us all the way from 
the Garden of Eden. Clear theology. 
 
Move ahead ten years. That™s when I can remember a 
day when all of that clarity, 
all of those sharp edges, quite simply dissolved. I
 was in high school. It was late afternoon. Classes
 
were over, and I was walking down the long glass ha
llway toward the front door where I™d begin my 
two-mile walk home.  

 
The sunlight was slanting through the windows in fr
ont of me. Dust motes rising from the floor were 
kindled in that light, so that for a  moment they l
ooked almost like stars scattered across the abyss.
  At 
that moment, and for a few moments afterward, I fel
t something I can™t really describe very well. All 
I 
can do, really, is offer you words and phrases like
 ?warmth? and ?a sense of deep communion? and 
?direct experience of the mysterious? and ?absolute
 acceptance and belonging.? All the words of the 
creed I recited melted in that wordless warmth. The
 idea then of either affirming God, or denying God,
 
or getting all worked up about 
any
 theological word seemed beyond my capacity.  All I
 know is that 
from that day forward, the theology I had learned s
ince childhood had to relate somehow to my 
experience in the hallway. My experience in the hal
lway did 
not
 have to relate to the theology of my 
childhood. 

 
Here™s why. The experience in the hallway seemed sp
acious to me. Wide open. But the theology, with 
which I was both familiar and delighted, felt more 
and more claustrophobic. There was not enough 
room in the theological box I was handed as a child
 in which to move, or be moved. For me, I mean.  
 
So one by one, over another seven years, I personal
ly stopped using those words in the old way. Some 
people would probably say that I stopped ?believing
? that certain things were true. But to contrast 
belief with unbelief still reminds me of a kind of 
dualism, a split-level view of the world. And duali
sm 
also seems to cause my claustrophobia to rear up, s
o I don™t often speak of ?not believing.?  But 
metaphorically speaking, I can say this: the meanin
g of most of the theological words I was taught 
simply evaporated. They no longer worked for me, li
ke sails falling flat on a windless day. But, the 

 4 vividness of that experience in the hallway never l
eft, even though it has been hard to describe to 
others, including now, in this sermon.  

 
And please, I beg you, do NOT interpret my talk thi
s morning as one that ?disses? the theology I grew 
up with, or the people who find it spiritually rich
 and challenging to this day. I am not doing that i
n any 
way, and I find myself getting angry at people who 
do such things. I can only speak of my life and my 
personal experiences, not anyone else™s.  Theology,
 as I have said many times before, is probably a lo
t 
more like a form of autobiography than it is about 
some strict philosophy of what™s holy. 
 
But, my hallway experience of ?absolute acceptance 
and belonging,? of ?communion with all things? 
spilled over into other aspects of my life.  When t
he press and popular culture in the sixties tried t
o 
portray the Vietnamese communists as monsters worth
y of our warring ways and napalm, I could not 
agree, as young and as unworldly as I was (especial
ly since my grandfather, I had learned, was also 
something of a communist).  Was I to think that the
 Vietnamese people as a whole did not 
belong
 to 
the world, and that the same dust-mote stars didn™t
 shine in their eyes as much as in my own?  My 
hallway experience helped me to see that the far aw
ay Vietnamese, no matter what their politics, were 
human beings with the same innate dignity I had. Wh
en I saw Vietnam war veterans coming ?home? 
and yet ending up homeless on the street, often dru
gged with alcohol, or half-deranged from holding 
hands with violent death, I wondered why all the th
eology of compassion I learned about didn™t seem 
to apply to them. Did they not belong either? Was t
here no 
acceptance
 for them and 
their
 experience? 
Did the stars turn from them? My hallway experience
, instead, convinced me they were my own 
brothers. 

 
And when, at the end of my high school life, I expe
rienced the great uprising, or riots, in Detroit, w
ith 
smoke, soldiers and gunshots all around me, it was 
my hallway experience of almost visceral 
communion with all things which prompted my sympath
ies with those who rioted.  The memorial 
communion, symbolized by the wafer I took each Sund
ay, did not do that, even though it famously 
dated back to a dignified and moving supper some 19
00 years earlier. 
 
I slowly began to realize that for me, any theology
 rooted only in the authority of long past events, 
theology which did not make room for my own present
 experience of the mysterious, did not offer me 
what I needed to respond to the hard realities of t
he world. My theological and sensual past was 
formative, sure, but it was no longer real for me. 
I, however, am alive now. 
 
In the Book of Qoholeth, or Ekklesiastes (a book in
 the Hebrew Bible found among the Kethuvim, or 
Wisdom Writings) you will find this amazing passage
, in chapter 7, verse 10: ?And don™t go around 
complaining that the good old days were better than
 now. For there is no wisdom to be found in 
grumbling about such things.? 

 
The good old days. The familiar comforts of the pas
t. The culture–theological 
or
 non-religious, in 
which we were stewed when we were younger. That cul
ture which WAS the whole world to us. A 
Catholic world. A Baptist world. An Agnostic world.
 A Jewish world. A Muslim world. A Bolshevik 
world. A Hindu or a Buddhist world. A Unitarian Uni
versalist world. Even a Consumerist world. 
 
But my particular good old days did not last. Neith
er for me, or for anyone else raised in the religio
n of 
my youth. Our old world gave way to the present wor
ld. Why? Because of a forward-looking Pope 
named John XXIII?  No, not so much that, I™d say, a
s ?How Else Could It Really Be?? My 
observations seem confirmed about this idea every d
ay. Everything ALWAYS changes. Everything 
ALWAYS moves. The past ALWAYS gives way to the pres
ent. Without any exceptions I can think of. 

 5 And so I didn™t just lose my childhood theology, I 
lost the whole world of my childhood religious 
culture. No more chant. No more Latin. No more bees
wax candles. Worship changed drastically my 
former faith. 

 
But please, among Unitarians and Universalists, 
things were not much different.
 Whole worlds were 
perishing there too. Worship in Ralph Waldo Emerson
™s time, say 1830, was 
not at all
 like worship in 
1930. The music was different. The words were utter
ly different. Even the architecture was different. 
And Humanistic worship in 1930 was different from w
orship in mid-century, when the Universalist 
Humanist Ken Patton tried to enrich the Sunday morn
ing experience with liturgical complexity that left
 
some of the 1930 vintage folks reeling with dismay.
 And today, in the year 2007, you™ll find a lot mor
e 
singing than there used to be in our congregations.
 Periods of silence, too. Children™s stories every 
Sunday?  I doubt that Emerson could ever have fores
een such a thing. Nor any of the great Humanist 
preachers. 

 
No, everything changes. Everything. All the time. I
t seems to be the nature of things. If you are real
ly 
having trouble understanding what I mean by that, j
ust look at your own picture in your high school 
yearbook when you get home. You™ll get it. 

 
Yet somehow, despite all this change, we are all st
ill part of a congregation which is undeniably root
ed 
in both the mystical world of Emerson 
and
 of the Humanist controversy of the 1930s. And in t
he 
liturgical world of Ken Patton. Change, you see, do
es not necessarily erase identity, as most of you 
will have thankfully figured out once you get over 
the shock of looking at your high school yearbook. 
More often, change 
enriches
 identity. 
 
Yet even though most folk are aware of the constanc
y and inevitability of change, they still worry 
about it. And often complain about it. Maybe they f
ear a loss of identity anyway. But the author of 
Qoholeth retorts back, ?Fine, grumble away. But to 
what end? To grumble under our breath that things 
are different now simply is a waste of your time. 
Of course 
things are different now. The flux and flow 
of reality 
guarantees
 that this will be so. In fact, that™s the only gua
rantee we have.? Even if the king, 
as in our children™s story this morning, wants ever
ything to stay the same, the next generation will 
eventually see to it that any illusion of changeles
sness is shattered. No, all religious forms and all
 
styles of spirituality change over the years. And w
hat 
is
 a spiritual path, asks David Richo, unless it™s 
the continual shedding of illusions? 

 
Which is why our movement has always 
blessed 
the idea of theological diversity and spiritual gro
wth. 
It™s ok to reshape, reinterpret or even change beli
efs. It™s ok to be open to new ideas, even if you d
on™t 
understand them right off the bat, or have a hard t
ime articulating them. In fact, you can still be a 
Unitarian Universalist ?in good standing? even if y
ou don™t have a list of beliefs at all. Our princip
les 
support this amazing radical idea in this way:  ?Ou
r living tradition which we share draws from many 
sources–? And the first of these sources is the per
sonal ?Direct experience of that transcending 
mystery and wonder, affirmed in all cultures, which
 moves us to a renewal of the spirit and an 
openness to the forces that create and uphold life.
?   
 
An ?openness? is the word which first speaks to me.
 And this ?openness,? in the words of 
Anthony di Mello, is ?an 
unremitting
 willingness to admit you may be wrong.?  The seeke
r after Truth 
does not need passion, insists the seer, as much as
 openness, a willingness to be wrong. Or to say it 
in a 
more positive way, a willingness to go on another p
ath. Take the alternate road. Change directions. 
 
 6 The second words that grab me are these: ?Direct ex
perience of that transcending mystery–
?  Ah. 
Mystery. A word from my childhood theology. A good 
word. One I didn™t let evaporate. And ?direct 
experience??  Isn™t that a good way of describing m
y experience in that high school in the hallway? 
Not some teacher telling me about a great saint add
ressed by an angel five hundred years ago, but my 
own present experience of wonder itself, trans-form
ing me and so renewing my spirit that I could 
allow myself to admit that I had been wrong. Wrong 
to think that my spiritual life could be 
claustrophobically confined to a simple and certain
 creed which I once claimed I 
knew
 to be true. 
I was 
wrong about being right. 
After all, when I know something for sure, and I re
fuse to accept any more 
evidence or contradictory experience, I cannot admi
t I™m wrong. I have to be right. I have to be on to
p. 
I have to be better than everyone else.   

 
But if I am open, as our tradition and heritage sug
gests, I might change and grow and deepen and shed 
illusion after illusion on my free and responsible 
search for truth. I might even companion you in my 
uncertainty, instead of rule over you with my certa
inty. 
 
But Mark, aren™t you confusing some chemicals in yo
ur brain with a direct experience of the 
transcendent? Many psychologists, like Abraham Masl
ow, for example, view your experience in the 
hallway as a rather common affair. What he called a
 ?peak experience.? Sure. We™ll admit that. But it™
s 
just chemicals in your brain, that™s all. Your sens
e of connection to all living things, your brief sp
asm 
of happiness and communion were themselves an illus
ion, and if you mean what you say about 
spiritual growth being the shedding of illusions, t
hen isn™t it best you shed the illusion that you ev
er 
really
 experienced any transcending mystery and wonder? 
 
Here is where I need to call on my friend Mary Jo t
o address these skeptical assertions very forcefull
y. 
Which, thankfully, is exactly what she does in her 
poem. She asks, 
Wedded to life, what else is there 
but an oddball wacko longshot, a ?take? on the mome
nt as I pass it? 
 
In other words, what can we really know for sure?  
Do you think you are downgrading experience by 
saying it™s mere chemistry? Is chemistry really ?me
re??  We are ?wedded? to life, she insists plainly.
 
That is, 
all
 of our experience is in this world, in our brain a
nd senses and bodies– is in this world. 
What else is there?
 she asks the skeptical questioner. Are you actuall
y holding out for something that is 
not chemical, that is more real, more authentic? Ap
prehended by what? That doesn™t make any sense to 
me, she says. We work with what we have and, as the
 moment passes, we get a ?take? on it. Call it 
oddball if you like. So what? It™s my take, not you
rs. So first off, kindly stop telling me I™m a fool
.  
 
Then, secondly, she describes her own direct experi
ence– 
So, don™t tell me it™s nothing -the sublime 
slant of this extraordinary light hitting the trilo
bite I keep on my desk to remind me, take it in bef
ore 
it™s gone. 

 
I was surprised how much her experience seemed very
 similar to my own. Even the slanting light. But 
the phrase ?take it in before it™s gone?? Take 
what 
in? Just the pretty leaves of fall and the light on
 
fossilized creatures on your desk? No, 
all of it: 
Iraq War veterans homeless on our streets, children
 
dying of HIV in Africa, the abject poverty in neigh
borhoods of Mumbai or Mexico City–or 
Columbus. Take it in. Don™t deny your experiences. 
Feel them, even if they ache. Yes, dance when the 
leaves fall, too, and when your children laugh as t
hey jump into a raked pile. But, 
Don™t tell me 
happiness is irrelevant -,
 she writes,
 because there is death in the Dead Sea, there is n
o beauty, no life 
in Yosemite? There 
was
 the Spanish Inquisition
, she agrees. And it was terrible. But there is also 
whimsy, 
she remembers. 
Pinatas!
 The terrible does not cancel the sublime. Cruelty 
doesn™t define the 
whole of humanity. 
 She freely acknowledges both the good and evil in t
he world–she™s hardly the 

 7 escapist her skeptical friends try to paint her. No
. She actually turns 
to face
 the reality of the world, the 
heartbreaking mixture of its experiences.  She even
 refers to the famous story in Homer™s Odyssey 
when he wants to experience what he has been warned
 will hurt him. So he has himself bound to his 
ship™s mast, so as to experience, directly, what he
retofore was only a doctrine–the seductive song of 
the sirens. She only wants to be open to that exper
ience. She does not need to make strict theology of
 
it, a list of beliefs and disbeliefs. She does not 
need a creed, or an elegant philosophy, crafted in 
spun 
gold. She insists on keeping her heart open. And, t
hus, guarding her precious right to be wrong.
  
Let me conclude with a true story, which I hope can
 make at least some of what I have said clearer.   
 
At my former church, there was a woman named Phylli
s. She was a cultural Jew, raised a Bolshevik 
and an atheist. She was married to an even stronger
 atheist, himself an avid member of the Communist 
Party. They had no truck with ordinary religion, wh
ich they considered, with Mr. Marx, an opiate, a 
drug–?mere chemistry,? you might say.  

 
Phyllis contracted cancer, and died after a long, p
ainful time of it. She was in a coma of some sort 
when I left for my vacation that year. She died whi
le I was gone. Gladly, they waited for me to come 
home to do the memorial service.  Her three childre
n told me that, on the day before she died, she had
 
called each of them on the phone. She was totally a
wake, totally energetic, when she called.  ?I™m 
going to die tomorrow,? she said to each of them. ?
The angel told me everything would be fine. So I 
am calling to tell you that I love you, and that ev
erything will be OK. Goodbye, my darling.?  Then sh
e 
hung up.  The nurse saw her make the calls, and sai
d that, after the third one, she slumped back down 
into her hospital bed, and returned to her coma. Sh
e died the next day, as she had said. The children 
each told the same story to me, though they had not
 told each other. They were too embarrassed. I 
don™t think they ever told their father. 

 
Now, do I ?believe? that there were creatures calle
d angels who spoke to her? No.  Do I have a clear 
idea about what happens to any of us after death? N
o. Am I open to the transforming power of this 
story? Yes. Because I don™t have to cram this story
 into the claustrophobic box of some particular 
theology of unbelief any more than I need to interp
ret it by a clear belief system. I only have to rem
ain 
open to the direct experience she reported of somet
hing wondrous, however strange it might have 
been.  

 
Now mind you, this kind of story is frequently expe
rienced by clergy, including Unitarian Universalist
 
clergy. We often talk about it. It amazes us. And s
ure. Was Phyllis having a chemical experience in he
r 
brain that she vocalized as having to do with an an
gel, and her coming death? Sure. Probably. But was 
what she did with it beautiful and significant to h
er non-religious children? Oh yes. They told me so.
 
They were deeply moved. It meant everything. Does t
his experience make me want to believe in one 
sort of theology over another? No. It does not. I s
imply bow to the mystery and say, as I have been 
saying a lot lately, ?I know less today than yester
day.? 
 
What matters is not the purity or elegance of your 
theology. You don™t have to have any theology that 
you have to articulate in some compelling, literate
 way. But what 
does 
matter is articulating, by one™s 
actions, deeper compassion for the bullied, the dis
enfranchised, the denied. What matters is not 
whether we celebrate the Virgin Mary or not, worshi
p God or not, but that we can flow with change 
and growth without panicking, or spending all our t
ime bitter and resentful that the former days are 
gone for good. What matters is whatever keeps me op
en, not closed; welcoming, not entrenched; and 
thankful, not defensive. What matters is anything t
hat lessens spiritual claustrophobia, and invites u
s to 
live in the land if Is, not Was. 

 8  
Offering 

 
The church is independent of any voice from 

somewhere else telling us how to do things. 

We are an assembly of free people who choose to do 
what we do. 
The church IS dependent on those who 

make up the congregation, however. 

Thus we set aside this time for receiving and 

giving the offering of our pledges and gifts. The u
shers will now come forward. 
 
Less Light Litany 

 
There is less light now. (sung, call and response
) 
 
What light is left shines on fewer things. Narrows 
its focus. Allows me to see what it spotlights all 
the 
more than summer allows. 

 
There is less light now. 

 
What light is left seems brighter, and the darkness
 which embraces us no longer seems to hide things 
so much as it becomes a strong shoulder on which to
 lay my tired head. 
 
There is less light now. 

 
Less heat too, but no less love in my heart, o Spir
it of Life, no less commitment to justice and peace
. 
Darkness of the season, come. We welcome you now. S
low us down. And help us find gladness that 
you shelter us these days from the glare of too muc
h. 

