 March 15, 2012 Hoo is Destroying the Sharks? Statement from Captain Paul Watson Shark fins drying on the sidewalk in Hong Kong. Photo: Gary Stokes/Sea Shepherd Corruption is a primary reason for the continuing destruction of our ocean and our planet. For decades we have struggled to combat the corruption disease that infects government, corporations, organizations and individuals the world over. Bribery, graft, conflict of interest, nepotism, arrogance, ignorance and greed are the reasons we are losing the war to save marine wildlife. In the selfish pursuit of profits at any cost, species are being driven into extinction and habitats are being destroyed. Future generations are being robbed and the very survival of humanity is being jeopardized because of the incredible greed and dishonesty of corrupt officials and regulators. Thanks to journalist Frank Pope one of these insidious individuals was exposed today in the London Times. Giam Choo Hoo is a member of the committee that provides a scientific evaluation of the threats to species covered by the UN?s Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species. He is a prominent and highly influential member of a United Nations body that helps to regulate the trade in endangered animals.  He is also a representative of the shark-fin industry, which is driving some species of shark towards extinction. A member of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons in London, Dr Giam dismissed concerns about his business interests. ?To me it?s irrelevant. You judge me by what I say, not by whether or not I have ties to the fin industry,? he said. No Dr. Giam, we judge you by what you do and what your ties are to the industry. Having you in a position to determine the listing of sharks is like having Rush Limbaugh sitting on a panel to regulate the illegal used of prescription drugs.  It?s a conflict of interest. You can?t make money from shark fins and at the same time block regulations protecting sharks and then tell us you?re objective, so stop pissing on our legs and telling us it?s raining. Giam Choo Hoo is dirty and he needs to be tossed out of CITES. We need objective scientists who do not profit personally from destroying life in our oceans. Until Giam Choo Hoo is gone, CITES will continue to have zero credibility. Our oceans are dying and the executioners are in charge of enforcement. Giam Choo Hoo is an ecological criminal and an eco-terrorist and his victims are endangered species and generations unborn. Visit Frank Pope's blog for more details about this story Here is the petition to ask CITES to remove Dr. Giam 