 March 19, 2012 No Protection ? No Hope Commentary By Gary Stokes ? Sea Shepherd Hong Kong photo: Gary Stokes I never knew who Dr Giam Choo Hoo was until a few months ago when I read about him in a report we obtained. Since then I have come to know Dr Giam fairly well, for someone I have never met! I have often wondered about the madness behind organisations such as CITES, and conspiracy theories have run abound. Upon reading this 50-page report, they are no longer just conspiracy theories, but actual fact. The report highlights a major ?Conflict of Interest? case where the main culprit, Dr Giam Choo Hoo uses his position of power to influence and lobby those within CITES against any protection of shark species. With 100 million sharks being killed every year, and every scientist and NGO calling for protection of many of the shark species, even my four year old can see that this is un-sustainable and must be stopped. Yet CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species, Flora and Fauna) the United Nations body empowered to monitor trade and ban trade in (if necessary) remains impotent and flaccid when it comes to sharks. thresher shark - photo: Gary Stokes The report itself could be made into an international best seller, with the key character being an evil doctor, intent on the slaughter and annihilation of the world?s sharks. Other characters lurk within it?s pages as well, from the kingpins of the shark industry meeting in closed offices, international authors, a former CITES chairman and even a special guest appearance by a certain Mr Glenn Inwood just to add extra flavour and to spice up the story further. Glenn is most famous for his role as the PR puppet for the Japanese Whalers, but also has been busy helping out the shark fin industry and the doctor in their anti-anti-shark fin campaigns! Without the removal of Dr Giam and the introduction of ?Conflict of Interest? provisos to CITES, NOTHING will ever be protected and the bio-diversity of life on OUR planet will lie in the hands of those whose only wish is to exploit for their own personal greed. The time has come for ACTION?..!!! Sign and share the petition Read the blog by Frank Pope: In conversation with the Shark Fin Godfather Read the transcript of Frank Pope's interview with Dr. Giam . Read the full report on Dr. Giam's involvement and conflict of interest with his position in CITES shark being finned - photo: Gary Stokes street of shark fins - photo: Gary Stokes 