 December 27, 2010 South American Sea Lions are in Great Peril En Espa?ol Commentary by Sea Shepherd Chile Coordinator Francisco Henriquez Sea Shepherd Conservation Society?s Chilean chapter has quickly grown under the care of Coordinator Francisco Henriquez. This chapter is now a strong and effective supporter of Sea Shepherd's international conservation missions. Unfortunately, Chile faces many environmental problems of its own and one of the biggest marine issues it faces now is the slaughter of South American Sea Lions. In this article, Henriquez shares details about the increased killings of local sea lions and the expiring law currently protecting them and asks for your help in safeguarding their future. South American Sea Lions in Chile neared the brink of extinction during the mid-nineteenth century.  Although their population gradually recovered over the course of following decades, these sea lions are once again in serious danger due to the increasing illegal trade of sea lion-based products as well as people taking over their natural habitat, leading to a scarcity of food and shelter for their community. It is well known that sea lions are an integral part of the natural ecosystem along the Chilean coast. Unfortunately, the growing confrontation between sea lions and fishermen is quickly destroying this delicate balance. Fishermen claim that sea lions not only diminish the fish supply but also interfere with their fishing techniques. Sea lions are legally protected in Chile from being hunted up to the year of 2012, but the Chilean government is looking to legalize the sea lion hunt when this law expires.  In order to convince the community to accept such measures, the government has fabricated lies that sea lions are overpopulated along the Chilean coast and are to blame for the diminishing local fish stocks. In addition to the hunting and killing of sea lions, authorities want to institute other regulatory measures to control the population including selling these animals to international aquatic parks. Now this all sounds very familiar to Sea Shepherd?s dolphin campaign in Taiji, Japan, you may have heard of it? There is a great deal of misinformation about the impact that sea lions have on the Austral hake population. Officials argue that the sea lions are making a large impact on the commercial fishing industry by suggesting that ?sea lions are stealing 80% of the fishes.?  Yet an independent study conducted by the Marine Science Ices Diary led by Spanish scientist Ana de La Torriente in October of 2009 showed that sea lions on the Chilean coast were only responsible for only ?2% of the total predation of Austral hake.? (l to r) Sea Shepherd Chile: Pietro Rissetti, Paola Herrera, Marco Garcia, Macarena Quezada, Francisco Henriquez Sea lions are a vital part of the natural ecosystem.  Not only do they prey on the sick and weak fish, but they also hunt for salmon escapees from fish farms that threaten the native fish species along the Chilean coast. The worst part of it all is that fishermen are already taking matters into their own hands by killing sea lions illegally at their discretion.  Salmon farmers are also shooting sea lions to prevent them from interfering with salmon fishery nets.  Aside from the threats they face locally, they are also desired by the international Asian market, which buys their flesh on the black market as aphrodisiacs. Asian markets pay top dollar for sea lion reproductive organs, and Chile continues to deliver these harvested organs right into their hands.  Even if the existing laws protecting sea lions are ratified again in 2012, the illegal sale of these products on the black market will not cease to persist. Unfortunately, as in the case of most threatened animals, history shows that humans only choose to take action when the situation is most dire.  When sea lions in Chile were about to become extinct two hundred years ago, measures were taken to ban the hunt and sale of sea lions.  Now in 2010, we see the government working in direct conflict with those laws just to turn a profit with no disregard for the wildlife and precious ecosystem.  The sea lions need our help, please take action to spread the word about this atrocity taking place in our own country and take a stand for these incredible creatures. What you can do: Please help safeguard the future of the sea lions in Chile writing to oirs@subpesca.cl and Pablo Galilea of Subsecretar?a Nacional de Pesca (Chilean?s National Fishing Subsecretary) and asking for their support in protection of Chile?s sea lions and fisheries before it?s too late. You can also follow Sea Shepherd Chile on Facebook To join Sea Shepherd Chile as a volunteer, write to chile@seashepherd.org Lobos Marinos de Sudam?rica en gran peligro Comentario del Coordinador de Sea Shepherd Chile, Francisco Henr?quez. La sede chilena de Sea Shepherd Conservation Society ha, r?pidamente, crecido gracias a todo el trabajo del Coordinador Francisco Henr?quez. Esta sede es, hoy en d?a, muy fuerte y efectiva como apoyo de todas las misiones internacionales que Sea Shepherd realiza. Desafortunadamente, Chile enfrenta muchos problemas medioambientales propios y una de las problem?ticas marinas m?s importantes guarda relaci?n con las matanzas de lobos marinos sudamericanos. En este art?culo, Henr?quez comparte detalles acerca de c?mo han aumentado las matanzas locales de lobos marinos y la actual expiraci?n de la ley que les protege, pidi?ndoles a todos que se sumen a ayudar a cuidar la vida de estas especies y su futuro. Los lobos marinos casi se extinguieron en Chile durante mediados del Siglo 19. Aun cuando la poblaci?n se fue recuperando gradualmente durante el curso de las d?cadas, los lobos marinos est?n en serio peligro porque el ser humano est? invadiendo su h?bitat natural, llevando a la escasez sus fuentes alimenticias y adem?s comercializando productos ilegales de lobos marinos. A lo largo de la costa chilena es conocido que los lobos son parte integral del ecosistema. Desafortunadamente la creciente confrontaci?n entre lobos marinos y pescadores est? destruyendo este delicado equilibrio. Los pescadores reclaman que los lobos no solo disminuyen su provisi?n de pesca sino que interfieren con sus t?cnicas de pesca. Los lobos marinos en Chile est?n legalmente protegidos de la caza hasta el a?o 2012. Pero el gobierno de Chile quiere legalizar la caza de lobos marinos cuando la ley expire. Para convencer a la comunidad que acepte estas medidas, el gobierno ha perpetuado mentiras tales como que los lobos marinos est?n sobrepoblados a lo largo de la costa chilena y que es la raz?n por la cual las reservas de peces est?n disminuyendo. Adem?s de la caza y matanza de lobos marinos, las autoridades quieren instituir otras medidas reglamentarias para controlar la poblaci?n, incluyendo la venta de estos animales a los parques acu?ticos internacionales; esto suena muy familiar a otra de nuestras campa?as en Taiji??no? Hay mucha desinformaci?n sobre el impacto que tienen los lobos marinos sobre la poblaci?n de la merluza austral. Los pescadores alegan que los lobos marinos est?n teniendo un fuerte impacto en la pesca comercial y sugieren que los ?lobos marinos est?n robando el 80% de los peces?. Un estudio de octubre de 2009 de Marine Science Ices Diary conducido por la cientista espa?ola Ana De la Torriente, demostr? que los lobos marinos en la costa chilena eran responsables por solo el 2% de depredaci?n de la merluza austral. (l to r) Sea Shepherd Chile: Pietro Rissetti, Paola Herrera, Marco Garcia, Macarena Quezada, Francisco Henriquez Los lobos marinos son una parte importante del ecosistema. No solo depredan los peces d?biles y enfermos sino que tambi?n depredan el salm?n que escapan de las granjas de peces y amenazan a las especies nativas de la costa chilena. Los pescadores ya est?n matando ilegalmente a los lobos marinos. Los salmoneros tambi?n les est?n disparando para impedirles que interfieran en las balsas jaula. Pero los lobos marinos tambi?n enfrentan el deseo de los mercados asi?ticos por la carne vendida en el mercado negro como afrodis?aco. Los mercados asi?ticos pagan altas sumas por los ?rganos reproductivos de los lobos marinos y Chile contin?a entregando estos ?rganos de manera ilegal. Incluso si las leyes existentes que protegen al lobo marino son ratificadas nuevamente en el 2012, la venta ilegal de estos productos en el mercado negro persistir?. Desafortunadamente para la mayor?a de los animales amenazados, los humanos eligen actuar solo cuando la situaci?n es m?s extrema. Cuando los lobos marinos en Chile estuvieron a punto de extinguirse doscientos a?os atr?s, se tomaron  medidas para prohibir la caza de lobos marinos. Ahora en el 2010 vemos al gobierno trabajando en conflicto directo con aquellas leyes solo para obtener un beneficio. Los lobos marinos necesitan de nuestra ayuda. Qu? puedes hacer: Escribe a oirs@subpesca.cl y dile, respetuosamente, a Pablo Galilea de la Subsecretar?a Nacional de Pesca, que el Lobo Marino chileno y poblaciones de peces deben ser protegidas, antes de que sea demasiado tarde. Tambi?n puedes unirte al grupo en Facebook de Sea Shepherd Chile y tambi?n unirte como voluntario escribiendo a chile@seashepherd.org 