 July 30, 2009 Confronting Senseless Slaughter: Taking a Stand for a Whale-Loving Nation?s Kangaroos Commentary by Captain Paul Watson The forces of kindness are rallying. Thanks to the European Parliament the Canadian harp seal hunt, the largest slaughter of a marine mammal species on the planet, has been brought to its knees and the market for seal pelts virtually abolished. We now must focus our attention and our efforts to have economic pressure brought to bear on the largest slaughter of mammals on the planet - the merciless and cruel slaughter of the kangaroos in Australia. These wonderful animals, that have inhabited Australia for tens of thousands of years before the arrival of their ruthless killers, are sentient social creatures that have a right to survive unmolested by the cruelty of humankind. Thirty years ago, Australia was a whaling nations and the blood of the whales stained the sand and the water of Australian beaches. Three decades later, Australia is one of the most powerful voices in the world condemning whaling. Society changes and Australian society evolved from killing whales to defending whales. We need to push this social evolution up another notch and we need to convince the Australian government that kangaroos must be treated with respect and kindness. What other nation slaughters its national symbol with such ruthlessness and indifference? Is the kangaroo on the Australian Coat of Arms a symbol for cruelty or is it a symbol for respect? Australians must decide. Will Australia continue to allow the Japanese whalers to scoff hypocritically at Australia's opposition to whaling while condoning the mass slaughter of the kangaroos? And will Australia be subjected to the humiliation of having other nations condemn the slaughter and embargo the products? Australians are a caring nation. Time and again Australian have proven that they live in a nation that believes in ecological responsibility and kindness towards our fellow creatures. Unfortunately, this otherwise exemplary image is tarnished ignobly by the on-going slaughter of the kangaroos. Sea Shepherd Campaign Named In Honor Of These Caring Australians The cruel slaughter of both the whales and the kangaroos must end. Sea Shepherd Conservation Society supports Australian Wildlife Protection Council's initiative to fight for a ban on the importation of kangaroo meat, leather and products into the EU. Please continue to support our efforts to save the whale and learn more about the plight of the Aussies? beloved ?roos.? Learn More 