
  And so the great Joseph died, and all of his family, and their generations.
  A new king, who did not know of the story of how Joseph saved Egypt, was
  crowned in Egypt.
  
  He said to the people: "Look at how many immigrants there are these days!
  Far too many! And see how their influence grows! We must handle this situation
  well, lest their numbers grow so much they take sides with our enemies in
  some war, revolt against us, and then escape." So from that day he put the
  Israelites under order to report to labor gangs. This was to crush them down
  with heavy labor. They built the treasure-towns of Pi Thom and Rameses for
  the king. But the more they were oppressed, the more they multiplied, until
  the Egyptians came to resent the Israelites deeply.
  
  Then the Egyptian King called two midwives to court, midwives often used
  by slaves. One was named Shifra, the other, P'ua. He said to them: When you
  are delivering a Hebrew mother as she sits on the birthing stool, note right
  away if it's a boy or a girl. If it's a boy, kill it. Let the girls live.
  But the midwives held God in awe, and they disobeyed the king, and saved
  the male children. The king called them back to court.
  
  "What is it I hear?" he cried.
  
  "You have let the male children live."
  
  "You don't understand," Shifra and P'ua said. "Unlike Egyptian women, the
  Hebrew women are very lively, and their labor is over so fast they have delivered
  before we even show up!"
  
  So it was that the Hebrew population thickened across the land, and the midwives
  themselves thickened with pregnancies of their own, since they held G-d in
  higher regard than the king.

  It is of enormous significance that for centuries, countless African American
  Christians have affirmed "Salvation" as vitally connected with spaciousness,
  deliverance, rescue, liberation or freedom, consistent with the original
  Hebrew understanding of Yashua. In the African American experience, the nature
  of salvation is to provide space - physical and spiritual - in which to function
  as a free being.
  
  For theologian Howard Thurman, the mark of a free being was the unshakable
  belief that "no experience, no event at any particular moment in time or
  space exhausts what life is trying to do," there ought not be the sinking
  down of "our hopes and our dreams and our yearnings to the level of the events
  of our lives." Salvation challenges each believer to assume responsibility
  for self and nurture within the society. Living one's faith and transmitting
  the message of salvation are part and parcel of recognizing one's responsibility
  for human nurture.
  
  Such salvation includes three critical elements. First, salvation is a
  revolutionary spaciousness and freedom through the assertion of inner authority,
  breaking bonds of confinement and invalidating the reality of dead-ends.
  To have salvation is to know through experience and faith that, in Martin
  Luther King's words, "God will make a way out of no way."
  
  Second, to be saved is to have engaged in dissent and resistance. Having
  salvation is to transpose terrors, absurdities, angst, depression, and all
  manner of external and mental demons into a new harmonious song.
  
  Third, to be saved is to live acknowledging the reality of infinite creative
  possibilities, the inexhaustibility of hope, and a divine invitation for
  all persons - regardless of race, class or sex - to experience life.
