Shri Meher Baba has remained in Meherabad, Ahmednagar, since the 25th of May 1939, although his arrival is anxiously awaited by an expectant group of his disciples and devotees especially around this part of the country. It is quite likely that the Master may pay a short visit to places like Bombay and Poona during this month before leaving for Jubbulpore. 
THE UNIVERSAL ASHRAM Immediately on his return from his long tour, a meeting of the mandali at Meherabad was convened to discuss the question of the Universal Ashram proposed to be established on the lands gifted to the Master at Mandla, near Jubbulpore. Although the pros­pect of Baba going too far away from this section—where he lived and contacted thousands of persons for years—was startling to all of his group of disciples and devotees on this side, the changed conditions and the wider scope of his external activities that necessitated the establishment of such a centre were more important than any other consi­derations of a personal nature, and the mandali welcomed this proposal. The Master planned that he would stay at Mandla for a good portion in a year, and Meherabad would also be continued. For the making of prelim­inary preparations for this new Centre, the outline of which has been described in the June issue under the heading, "Scheme of Universal Ashram", Baba intends to make a move towards that side—Jubbulpore —probably in the beginning of August. 
Baba's special work with the masts of the Mast Ashram at Meherabad continues as usual. The joy of seeing the Master once again amongst them was clearly visible on the faces and expressions of even those mentally-unbalanced, and in their ecstatic outburst, they danced in glee. 
THE MASTS One evening Baba came from the Ashram on the hill 

unexpectedly, and, taking some of the Meherabad mandali and visitors, went to the Mast Ashram. None amongst those who accompanied him knew what it was for that he took them all there that evening, though all expected to see something unusual! With the advent of the Master in the Ashram, the central hall where the masts remain during the day, rang with the sounds of music, drum­beating and bhajan by the masts— "Jay-jay Guru rai Meher Baba"— meaning "Hail, hail, Beloved Lord Meher Baba"! It continued for minutes with perfect rhythm of music, drum, singing and dancing all around the hall with perfect timing and steps, which made one quite forget that these were the mad inmates of a Mast Ashram who were performing this bhajan. It was a sight to witness these masts dance with ecstatic expression on their faces, and enjoy it all in their childlike glee. Two of these became leaders, while the others followed in perfect harmony! 
LAKHAN SHAH One of the ardent devotees of Baba, Mr. K.. of Bombay, 
came to see Baba and stay with him for a few days. Baba gave him a special duty, and sent him to Ajmer to fetch this mast—Lakhan Shah. Strange are the ways of' Masters. Here is a typical example of a devotee coming to spend his well earned leave in company with the Master, and he is entrusted with this hazardous task of fetching a mast from a distance of over 500 miles! Mr. K.. hadn't seen the mast, nor did he know where he could be found. But he had to try and find it all from the signs and directions given—not an easy joh to be sure. But everything is possible where love is the driving force. He went there and got hold of the mast in an amazing way. To go to a big city like Ajmer and trace a mast out of the peculiar crowd in a particular locality by one who had never been there, and to bring such a type of person to all this distance of over 500 miles from Ajmer to Meherabad, is indeed no easy job. But Baba's inner guidance always helps those who offer to participate in the work entrusted. Instead of Mr. K.. going to the mast and finding him, strangely enough, 

the mast was brought to him. That tongawala (cabman) of Ajmer, who helped Baba’s party during their stay there in finding a number of these masts, came miraculously to his aid, and marvellously did they both manage to bring this mast out of Ajmer from the clutches of those who surround these in search of material gains. 
He wore that same kafni (robe) which was given to him by Baba in Ajmer, in February last. He had grown a beard that changed his features so considerably that he couldn't be really recognized. But that typically ecstatic smile of his was always there! 
When brought face to face with Baba, Lakhan Shah stared at him fixedly for minutes, then smiled and murmured something in his language which was not audible. Baba gave him a loving embrace, and held him in his arms, while Lakhan Shah kept looking at the Master with that typical expression of his which is a joy to behold! He was immediately given a bath by Baba; a new kafni (robe) was put on; Baba personally fed him; and then he was placed in a special room in the Mast Ashram with Mr. K.. on special duty to look to his needs. He was kept there for a month, and when his work was done 
(i.e. the object for which the Master wanted him in his presence for a personal touch and spiritual push was fulfilled), he was sent back to Ajmer with Mr. K... What benefit he derived and what inner push he was given during his stay here for a month is a matter known best to the Master. 
THE GUJRATHI EDITION OF 
THE MEHER BABA JOURNAL 
The interest and enthusiasm with which the Mehe« Baba Journal in English was welcomed by the disciples and devotees and other aspirants in the West and in the East, naturally created a demand for vernacular versions of the English issue, and we have the pleasure to announce to our Gujrathi speaking friends and to the general public that the Meher Baba Journal in Gujrathi will be published shortly every month commencing November 1939—exactly on the first birthday of this "parent publication". It will contain many interesting items 

—new material unpublished as well as specially selected articles from the English Journal translated into Gujrathi, and will be run on the same lines and general standard. Further particulars will be announced later. 
Dr. and Mrs. Deshmukh of Nagpur came to Meherabad to stay with the Master for a few days during the summer vacation. It was a pleasure to have this learned and loving couple in our midst, and it was their delight to be with the Master and his group here. Dr. Deshmukh had interesting interviews with Baba on many subjects, when Baba explained many important points. 
PUBLIC LECTURES 
Before coming over here, Dr. Deshmukh went round the Central Provinces, visiting places on a lecture tour, and delivered interesting and inspiring lectures on the subject of "The Present Spiritual Crisis and the Need of an Awakener". 
Special lectures were also arranged at two important places on this side —Poona and Bombay—where two of Baba's Western lady disciples— Countess Nadine Tolstoy and 
Princess Norina Matchabelli— accompanied Dr. Deshmukh, and spoke on the same subject from their own angle and personal experience. 
The coincidence of India's greatest sons and leaders speaking to the Bombay public simultaneously on the present "National Crisis and the Need of Awakening" to the new ideals of national move, and the lecture of these three closer disciples of Baba who spoke for the first time to the Bombay public on the present "Spiritual Crisis and the Need of an Awakener" for the ideal of a Uni­versal Brotherhood of humanity based on the living example and inspiration of a Perfect Master, is most significant. Even if the Master himself observes silence for years, and still maintains it for his own reasons, he uses as one of many mediums of expression the vocal chords of his disciples to declare what he wishes to say to the world outside. For, after explaining the subject matter of the lecture on the present spiritual crisis and the need of an Awakener, which was but an introduction, it was all about the Master that they spoke, 

and wanted the public to know in most impressive and inspiring words, based on personal close contact and direct firsthand experience they had with the Master for years. The ladies are personalities in the international world, having renounced everything for the Master's cause, and Professor Deshmukh is Doctor and lecturer of philosophy, at Morris College, Nagpur. It is always the direct contact and personal experience that counts and carries weight, rather than speeches based on mere philosophical reading or hearsay. It was this factor that touched the hearts of the hearers most. Meher Baba's only mission in life is not of establishing any new creed, neither interfering with any already existing, but of awakening the divine within, enabling everyone to realize the true aim and goal of life, and towards that end striving hard under the direct guidance and help of the Master. 
The other important announcement of the establishment of the Universal Ashram with external international connections and importance, 
based on the ideals of a universal brotherhood of humanity and bringing these ideals into .actual practice, is a step forward in this direction towards which the Master wishes to lead humanity. The time now seems to be ripe, and the plans are drawn up for the establishment of one of these unique Ashrams—the first of its kind —to be established at Mandia (Central Provinces). Many other centres of the type may be established in different parts of the world, both in the East as well as in the West, at their proper times, according to the needs and developments at different places as seen by the Master. These insti­tutions are meant to be the unique "Schools of Life" for young and old alike, of all classes, creeds and nationalities and of all denominations in life. The qualification for an en­trance to this Ashram will be a thirst or longing for the life spiritual; and the Master alone who sees through the depth of the soul of each individual approaching him will be the supreme judge. Earnest seekers, eager to join the Master, have already been anxiously awaiting a call from the 

Master. They will come, hundreds even from the West, and many are already on the waiting list. Prepara­tions for the establishment for the first of these unique institutions at Mandla are going ahead. 
At this time when there is a nation­wide urge in India for establishing our birthright and recognition of our nationality amongst other civilized nations of the world, and the tussel between the Imperial Government and the Indian people has reached its climax, from different directions and on different lines, the call of the Master to all the nations of the world to unite in one human brotherhood, and his personal activities to help humanity achieve and establish that, will not only eliminate the innate hatred between the classes and nationalities of people, specially between the rulers and the petty prejudices and pet beliefs that divide rather than unite people of different religions, but it will be the call of the Divine—the essence which is latent within all, but which needs a spark of the divine touch by a divine being to awaken it. Baba has touched the tender chords of 
thousands who have come in his contact all these years. The call to all earnest seekers will now spread the world over with the march of time and with all the force of the inner working from the Master. 
Shri Meher Baba dislikes and discourages mere "talks" and discourses. He advocates work— actions of putting ideals and high principles of life into actual practice. "The world talks too much," he says, "and it is the proper action that is greatly needed." And Baba doesn't merely say it, he puts it into practice. If example is anywhere better than precept, it is indeed with him. He is the most practical of Masters. He would not be himself without work, nor would he allow anyone under him to be idle and without work— "inner" or "outer" work—all being given duties that keep them busy any time of the day. An Avatar is said to be at once the Lord and Servant of humanity. Baba prefers more to be a "Servant" of humanity rather than its Lord. It is with his own personal example of hard work and service to humanity that all around him are deeply 

impressed and inspired to act likewise in humble, loving and selfless service whatever is assigned to them by Baba. Those who have seen him work ceaselessly since early morning till late at night, attending to the minutest details of each individual staying with him, both materially and spiritually, and answering to a thousand and one other questions from people outside seeking his advice and guidance, verbally or by correspondence, or even by cables, advising all, in every matter concerning the life on earth and the life everlasting, are all amazed at the infinite amount of energy he possesses and exerts in meeting these usual unusual demands from one and all, every day. One would be simply confounded just to think of the numerous problems presented to him from one quarter or another daily, let alone to advise their solution. That in fact is utterly impos­sible for any human being. It is his perfect mastery over elements, and the infinite knowledge and power of his super-conscious state that enables him to manage all in a way Masters alone can. He always rejoices in it. One so infinitely vital and energetic could hardly ever be found, ready to serve all, so lovingly, so spontan­eously, and irrespective of even ungrateful remarks and behaviours of many. “It is not the work," Baba says, "but the ignorance of the people and their unyielding indifference towards things of a higher life, truly worth living for, that makes me suffer." It is the right spirit of disinclination and resistance to face situations and stand trials that gives him pain and makes him suffer more than anything else. Complications thus created require infinite patience for their removal. Solving these riddles needs infinite knowledge of human nature, its likes and dislikes, its tendencies and inclinations, and supreme tact to find a way to solve this greatest of the human problems of bringing about in actual life a reconciliation of matter with spirit, or a life of the world with the life eternal. It needs a Master, with infinite knowledge to piece it all together, infinite power to bend them to the desired mould, 

thus guiding the destinies of mankind towards its goal. MASTERS' SUFFERINGS AND BLISS—BOTH INFINITE 
While thus working in the world for the spiritual upliftment of hum­anity, Masters have to incur upon themselves the infinite burden of "worries" of the entire suffering world, clamouring for its deliverance. This suffering of the world, steeped in the darkness of ignorance, becomes their suffering. This is their crucifixion. An Avatar's life on earth particularly becomes a crucifixion every moment. But with this infinite suffering that they have to take upon themselves, they also have the Infinite Bliss of the Perfect State which they eternally experience. Otherwise, it would be utterly impossible, and one would literally be crushed under the burden of such suffering from all around. An imperfect human being, however great, or even a genius, would be mentally unbalanced even to think of a thousandth part of the world's suffering that the Avataras have to solve. 
Referring to a particular case brought to him one day, 
and the peculiar problem it presented, Baba remarked that: 
He would bear the burden of many a case like this particular one brougltt to him that day, and much more. But in dealing with such peculiar cases, he has to adopt peculiar methods which people do not understand, rather they mis­understand, suffer themselves and add to his suffering. And he has to redeem it all over again. 
Not an easy task indeed! He takes it all easily in a matter-of-course manner as an ordinary everyday incident in life. The amazing way in which Baba explains it speaks of his infinite power, patience, suffering and understanding. 
"Suppose one is bitten by a big scorpion. It causes terrible agony. The person suffers and even cries. While he is thus suffering under this pain of a scorpion bite, if a small ant also gives him a bite elsewhere, what effect would that bite of an ant have under the agony of a scorpion bite? None. Too trivial for thought! 
Thus, tackling these individual problems presented to me, however difficult or delicate, is like small, insignificant 

ant bites when compared to the burden of suffering of the entire humanity which it is my life mission to remove." 

Explaining, another time, the differ­ence between a "Majzoob" and a“Salik” (Master), Baba pointed out that: 
"After God-realization, those who do not come down from the highest state of superconsciousness, enjoy eternal bliss, but have no duty. Those who come down from the highest to the lowest state of normal human consciousness, take it on themselves to uplift all humanity. They enjoy eternal bliss, as well as suffer. They enjoy bliss in the Infinite State, and suffer with universal suffering of humanity. They are externally seen like ordinary human beings, but internally they cannot be understood. That is Baba's state." 



