  October 5, 1986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchMorningPastor John PiperCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper    DON'T STEAL, WORK AND GIVE!  Ephesians 4:28 Let the thief no longer steal, but rather let him labor, doing good withhis own hands, so that he may be able to give to those in need. One of the points that I made to the people who came to Missions in the ManseFriday night was that the great commission cannot be fulfilled by peoplewho do not know Biblical doctrine. One of my reasons for saying this wentlike this: the great commission says, ". . . teaching them to observe whateverI commanded you. . ." In other words, we fulfill the great commission whenwe teach the peoples of the earth to obey the commandments of Jesus. But not just any kind of obedience will do. It must be free, evangelicalobedience that flows from a transformed mind. And the only way to produceevangelical obedience is to teach evangelical doctrine. If you try to getpeople to obey new commandments without showing them a new view of the holinessof God and the bondage of sin and cross of Christ and the necessity of faith,all you will produce is legalism, not true obedience. So if you want a people to stop stealing from each other, you can say, "Don'tsteal any more!" And if they say, "Why not?" you may say, "Because God commanded,"Thou shalt not steal!" (Ex. 20:15). And they might stop stealing. But arethey observing what Jesus commanded? Is this evangelical obedience? Maybe they are obeying the command because they are afraid they will be caughtand punished. Maybe they don't see goodness and wisdom and beauty of thecommand at all. Maybe inside they are as covetous as ever, and the commandhas only put a cork on the ferment of their inner greed. That is not freeevangelical obedience. So the great commission is not fulfilled in such cases. Why? Because thecommands of Jesus were not taught as the fruit of evangelical doctrine. Thepeople were not told what the command not to steal has to do with the characterof God and the sinful nature of man and the sufficiency of the cross andthe desperate need for regeneration and the divine command to walk by faith.How can we produce anything but legalists if we command people to bear thefruit of obedience but we never plant the tree of faith in the soil of Biblicaldoctrine? How then shall we teach a people not to steal? Let us follow Paul's examplehere in Ephesians 4. In fact I think all of Paul's letters are examples ofhow to fulfil the second half of the great commission, namely, to teach convertsto obey what Jesus commanded. How does he do it? He teaches three chapters of deep and God-centered doctrineto start with. Then here in our text he builds a theological model for allobedience (4:22-24). Then he gives illustrations of practical acts of obediencein verses 25ff. In verse 25 he says, "Don't lie; speak truth." In verses26-27 he says, "Don't hold an angry grudge." In verse 28 he says, "Don'tsteal; work and give." And so on. What we need to remember when we read and teach these commandments is thatthey must be seen in relation to the original model in verses 22-24. Themodel said this: obeying the commands of Jesus is like taking off an oldself and putting on a new self. The old self is corrupt because of bad desiresthat come from deceit. The new self is created after the likeness of Godin righteousness and holiness that come from truth. So becoming a true Christian means that a miracle happens -- something likethe first creation of man happens all over again. Evangelical obedience isnot just turning over a new leaf by dint of will power in order to pleasea new deity. Evangelical obedience is the creation of God. It is the fruitof the Spirit, not the work of the flesh. What is the key to this new evangelical obedience? Verse 23 says, "Be renewedin the spirit of your mind." A deep inner renewal must take place, beforethere can be true evangelical obedience. If we try to teach obedience toJesus without this inner renovation, all we will get is pharisaism. And where does this renewed mind come from? It comes from God! Accordingto verse 24 the new self is created! Ephesians 2:10 says, "We are hisworkmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works." The renewed mind isthe creation of God, not man. But how does God renew the spirit of the mind? He does it by overcoming thedeceit of verse 22 and by applying the truth mentioned in verse 24. Thisis what I meant when I said, the only way to produce evangelical obedienceis to teach evangelical doctrine (truth). Evangelical obedience is free andglad obedience that comes from a transformed mind that sees the goodnessand beauty of God's ways and wants to be holy as he is holy. And the evangelicaldoctrine that God uses to produce this fruit is the truth that God lovessinners and Christ died for sinners, and the Holy Spirit regenerates sinnersand it is all of grace and received by faith. And if one should ask, "How then should I not lie?" the evangelical answeris, "By FAITH!" Or: "How shall I be free from my angry grudges?" "By FAITH!"Or: "How shall I not steal?" "By FAITH!" Evangelical obedience says, "I amcrucified with Christ. It is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives inme. And the life I now live in the flesh, I live BY FAITH in the Son of Godwho loved me and gave himself for me" (Galatians 2:20). The point of all this is that when we come to verse 28 we must not forgetverses 22-24. And when we go to the mission field we must not forget ourdoctrine. Without verses 22-24 all we will get out of verse 28 is legalisticcapitalism. And without biblical doctrine all we will get on the missionfield is legalistic sycretism. That is not what we want. So let's go to verse 28 and take with us the modelof verses 22-24 and see what we find for our lives this morning and for ourteaching. There is more here than you at first would think. To begin, notice that the verse really has three commands. First, "Let thethief no longer steal." Second, "But rather let him labor, performing withhis hands what is good." Third, let the aim of this labor be that he maybe able to give to those in need. There is a progression here from an inferior to superior way of life. First,you can steal in order to have. Second, you can work in order to have. Third,you can work in order to give. The first two ways of life describe an illegaland a legal way of stisfying the drive of covetousness and greed. You canbe driven by greed to steal and you can be driven by greed to work. One isillegal, the other is legal. Both are sinful. That is why Paul doesn't stop there. Working in order to have is perhapsan American ideal -- if you earned it you should have it. But it is NOT aChristian ideal. The most radical thing about this text is that we are commandedto do all our secular work with a view to meeting the needs of others. Youcan live to HAVE, either legally or illegally. Or you can become a Christianand live to give. This is a thrilling teaching! I think it has the potentialof changing your whole life. But let's take the three commands as they come and then close with thisrevolutionizing thought that all the money you earn at your secular job ismeant by God to enable you to share with others in need. First, the text simply repeats the eighth commandment: "Thou shalt not steal!"-- "Let the thief no longer steal!" Now in view of the model in verses 22-24what can we say about stealing and the Christian? Three things. 1. Stealing is part of the old self that we are to strip off (v. 22). Stealingis part of the corruption that comes from deceitful desires. Stealing comesfrom being deceived about what is truly desirable. Satan came to Jesus in the wilderness and tempted him to turn stones intobread and to short-circuit the way of the cross. "Don't go the way ofself-denial; use the powers at your disposal to get what you really wantin the easiest way, not the painful way." And so Satan comes to us and temptsus to steal -- to steal from our employees with unjust wages, or from ouremployers with shoddy work and extended breaks, or from the store by shoplifting,or from the government on our tax returns. He tempts us to steal andshort-circuit the way of justice and hard work. And he lies and says thatthe fleeting pleasure of possession is better than a hard day's work, anda clear conscience, and a love for other people. And those who are deceivedsteal. Jesus says in Matthew 15:19, "Out of the heart come evil thoughts, murder,adultery, fornication, theft. . . " Where does stealing come from? It comesfrom the heart -- a heart that is corrupt with desires born out of deceit.That is the first thing to say about stealing and the Christian. It is partof the old corrupt nature. It should be stripped off and thrown away. 2. The second thing to say is that stealing can be forgiven. Verse 28 says,"Let the thief (literally: him who steals) no longer steal." Here is a personwho has been a thief, a person who used to steal all the time -- a personwho ripped off a hundred cars or stereos; a person who lifted a pack of gumevery time he went through the checkout counter; a self-employed person whohas never reported honorariums or trade agreements on his tax returns. And Paul says there is hope for this thief. He can be forgiven. He can bechanged and stop stealing and have a new future in righteousness and holiness.And if he thinks it is too late what shall we say to him? We shall remindhim of Luke 23:43 where the life-long thief in the hour of his death criedout, "Jesus, remember me when you come in you kingly power." And Jesus said,"Truly, I say to you, today you will be with me in Paradise." So great isthe power of the cross to forgive sinners. That is the second thing we can say about stealing. it can be forgiven. Itis not too late for any who is willing to repent and turn to Christ for cleansingand for power to steal no more. 3. The third thing to say about stealing is that it must be overcome by faith.Any other way of overcoming stealing may be a short-term benefit to societyand keep a man out of jail. But it won't keep him out of hell, and thereforeon the scale of eternity is not very much help and not very deep love. If the thief's obedience is to be evangelical obedience -- the internal obedienceof the saved (Heb. 5:9; John 3:36) and not the external obedience of thelost (Matt. 23:25-28) -- then the spirit of his mind has to be renewed bythe application of evangelical doctrine in the power of the Holy Spirit.Verse 24 says that the new self that no longer steals is the creation ofGod in righteousness and holiness, and that the instrument of his creationis the truth. You shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free!(John 8:32). What truth does God use to free the thief from the compulsion to steal? Thereare dozens of answers in Scripture. For example, Hebrews 13:5-6, Keep your life free from love of money, and be content with what you have;for he has said, "I will never fail you nor forsake you." Hence we canconfidently say, "The Lord is my helper, I will not be afraid; what can mando to me?" What this teaches is that the craving for things which drive us to stealis owing to unbelief in the promises of God. The Lord who owns all the cattleon a thousand hills, who has the wisdom to design the DNA and the Milky Way,who rules the world down to the death of little birds in Bangledesh, andwho did not spare his own Son -- that Lord of lords and King of kings haspromised his people, "I will never leave you nor forsake you!" I ask you, can you believe this and yet steal just to add a little to yoursecurity or your pleasure? "In HIS presence is fullness of joy, at HIS righthand are pleasures for evermore" (Psalm 16:11). That is the third thing wecan say about stealing: it must be overcome BY FAITH. Let me give you an illustration of how I fought that fight of faith lastweek. Mid way through September I got my water and sewer bill. It was $84.20.At the bottom in a little box it said, Pay gross after September 30, $88.41. I set the bill aside in a pile of mail and forgot about it until Friday.Friday was October 3rd. I thought to myself -- or was it really just me thinkingto myself? -- I have always paid my bills on time; I am a good citizen; Iam only three days late; I could date the check Sept. 30 and they would probablylet it go; then I wouldn't waste four dollars. But then another "me" began to speak: it is your fault for not sending itin on time; it is not unjust for them to charge more for delinquent payements;the Spirit of Christ is submissive to the ruling authorities where it doesn'trequire compromise with sin; a clear conscience is more valuable than fourdollars; my master has bidden me not to steal; and he has promised neverto leave me nor forsake me; if it would be good for me, he can heal a cavityin my tooth and make up this four dollar loss with a forty dollar savingson the dentist bill. The Lord reigns! And so I believed the promise of Godand put to death the old deceived self and put on the new self and wrotea check for $88.41. That is the first command of our text (Eph. 4:28) is, "Don't steal! Liveby faith! Believe in the promises of God!" I want to hasten on to the third command, but let me make a brief commentabout the second in passing. The second command of verse 28 is, ". . . butrather let him labor, performing with his hands what is good." Two simpleobservations: One is that God has ordained work, not stealing, as the way of getting whatwe need. Work is not a curse. Adam was put in the garden to tend it beforethe fall. Boredom and frustration and futility in work -- these are the curseof our fallen age. But work itself is a good gift of God. How could it beotherwise since God is the greatest worker of all and we are created in hisimage? The other observation from this second command in verse 28 is that the workwe do for a living should be the doing of something good. The RSV is notquite accurate here. Literally it says, "Let him (the former thief) laborworking with his own hands the good." God is not indifferent to what youdo for a living. You belong to him first. He is your main boss and you willgive an account to him of how you spent your working life. The text says,instead of stealing work, but it doesn't just say work, as though any andall work is acceptable for the Christian. It says "Perform the good." Sotest your vocation! Is it the performing of what is good? But now as we close by looking at the third command in the text notice thata shift of focus takes place. At first Paul seems to be focussed on whatwe do -- don't steal, work! But in this last part of the verse his focusturns to the motive for working and not stealing. He says, the goal and purpose that God has for his people is not reachedwhen they simply quit stealing. And the goal and purpose that God has forhis people is not reached when they labor hard with their hands even doinggood in order to possess the money they earn. But he says finally that thegoal of God for his people, in all their gainful employment, is reached whenthey work in order to have so that they can give to those in need. This is utterly revolutionary. Do you see what it does? It takes the wholeof your life, including your secular job, and turns it into a work of grace.Paul wants you to think of your secular job as means to display God's grace.No more stealing in the service of illegal greed. No more working in theservice of legal greed. But now everything is in the service of grace notgreed. Don't steal to have. Don't work to have. But work to have in orderto give. Why? Because this is what it means to walk by faith. The very essence offaith is the delight of the soul in the experience and display of God's grace.And so faith is the power, by grace, to be content with what we have. Andfaith is also the power, by grace, to be DIScontent with what others DON'Thave. And so faith doesn't have to steal or hoard in order to be happy. Butit does have to give and share in order to be happy. The inflow of God'sgrace satisfies the heart of faith, and the overflow of God's grace satisfiesthe needs of others. And faith is utterly addicted to these expereiencesand displays of the grace of God. And so we return to where we began. If there is to be evangelical obedience,there must be evangelical doctrine about God and his soveriegn grace. Whatare the purposes of God in your life? What is the work of God in your life?Verse 24 says, "Put on the new nature, created after the likeness of God."There it is! We are created by God to be the likeness and the image of Godin the world. When people see your life and study why you work, do they seea display of the grace of God? They will if you don't steal in order to have, and don't work in order tohave, but work in order to have so that you can give. Put on the new nature,and make your whole life a display of the power of grace. Don't live to get;live to give! Amen.   Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
