  August 4, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor     
       Jesus: Worthy of More Glory ThanMoses   Hebrews 3:1-6   
  Therefore, holy brethren, partakers of a heavenly calling,consider Jesus, the Apostle and High Priest of our confession. 2 Hewas faithful to Him who appointed Him, as Moses also was in all Hishouse. 3 For He has been counted worthy of more glory than Moses, byjust so much as the builder of the house has more honor than thehouse. 4 For every house is built by someone, but the builder of allthings is God. 5 Now Moses was faithful in all His house as aservant, for a testimony of those things which were to be spokenlater; 6 but Christ was faithful as a Son over His house whose housewe are, if we hold fast our confidence and the boast of our hope firmuntil the end.    
      We Need Two Things    Human beings need two things: we need to hear from God and we needto go to God. We need a word from God and we need a way to God. Weneed to hear from God so that we know what he is like and what hispurposes are for the world and what he requires of us. And we need away to God because to be cut off from God in death would be darknessand misery and torment for ever. So we have these two great needs: tohear from God and to go to God. We need revelation from him andreconciliation with him.  Now consider how Hebrews 3:1 addresses these two needs. It says toChristians: "Therefore, holy brethren, partakers of a heavenlycalling, consider Jesus, the Apostle and High Priest of ourconfession."    
      We Need a Word from God and a Way toGod    Christians are people who have heard and believed a heavenlycalling, and are therefore partakers of it, sharers in it -- "holybrethren, partakers of a  heavenly calling ." It is a heavenly  calling because it comes from heaven --  from God. And it is a heavenly  calling      because itinvites us and leads us  to  heaven -- to God.  In other words this "heavenly calling" relates to the two greatneeds that we have: a word from God and a way to God. It's a heavenly  calling, which means it is a word from heaven, a wordfrom God. And it's a  calling , which means it is meant to showus the way home to God. Christians are people who have been grippedby this calling. The word of God broke through our resistance, andtook hold of us with the truth and love of Christ, and reconciled usto God and is now leading us home to heaven. This means thatChristians are people of great hope. God has spoken from heaven, andmade a way to heaven, and we have believed and our hope andconfidence are firm.  And the reason our hope and confidence are firm is not because ofourselves. There are sinners of every kind in this room this morning-- sexual sinners, lying sinners, stealing sinners, killing sinners,parent-disobeying sinners. The hope of a heavenly calling does nothang on our righteousness. If it did we would be hopeless. Our hopeand confidence hang on Jesus. This is why verse 1 continues:"Therefore, holy brethren, partakers of a heavenly calling,  consider Jesus  ." This is what we are doing thismorning. This is what preaching is about. It is what Sunday School isabout. It is what small groups are about. Considering Jesus.  We often think that considering Jesus is something thatunbelievers should do. "Consider Jesus," we say to the seeker and theperplexed. And that's right. But this book of Hebrews is devoted tohelping  Christians  consider Jesus. "Holy brethren . . .consider Jesus." Well why say that? Don't holy brethren automaticallyconsider Jesus? The answer is No. Remember the warning back inHebrews 2:1, "We must pay much closer attention to what we haveheard,  lest we drift away from it. " The danger is constantlyin our way that we will stop considering Jesus and become moreinterested in other things and drift away from the word and perhapsnever return and prove that we were never truly partakers of theheavenly calling. So Hebrews calls us (Christians!) again and againto "Consider Jesus."    
      Jesus is the Word and the Way    The reason is that he is the only answer to the two great needsthat we have. We need a word from God and way to God. We needrevelation from God and we need reconciliation with God. And thepoint of the book of Hebrews is that Jesus is both. This is why verse1 ends with two descriptions of Jesus: "Therefore, holy brethren,partakers of a heavenly calling, consider Jesus,      theApostle and High Priest of our confession ."  These two descriptions of Jesus correspond to our two great needs:Jesus is our Apostle, and Jesus is our High Priest. Apostle means"one who is sent." So Jesus is the one sent from God to earth withthe revelation of his heavenly calling. "High priest" means one whois a go-between, who offers a sacrifice so that there can bereconciliation. So Jesus is our high priest. Look back two verses toHebrews 2:17 to see what this more clearly: "He [Jesus] had to bemade like His brethren in all things, that He might become a mercifuland faithful  high priest  in things pertaining to God,  tomake propitiation for the sins of the people ." That great phrase,"make propitiation" means "make a sacrifice for our sins that bringsGod's anger at us to an end" and makes us friends.  So what the writer is saying is: You Christians, you who share inthe calling of God  from  heaven  to  heaven, you havegreat confidence that you have heard from God (through your apostle)and you have great hope that you are going to God, loved andreconciled and secure, you Christians consider Jesus, think aboutJesus, meditate on Jesus, listen to Jesus. Why? Because he is theApostle from heaven who brought you your calling. And he is thefinal, once for all High Priest of God whose sacrifice of himselfreconciled you to God and guarantees your homecoming to heaven.Consider Jesus, God's  Apostle  -- the final word from God --and God's  High Priest  -- the final way to God.    
      Consider Jesus    This whole book of Hebrews is written to help us consider Jesus.There is more to consider about Jesus than you could ever exhaust inthis life. In chapter one the point was that Jesus is superior toangels. Jesus made and sustains the world (1:1-2, 10), but the angelsrun errands in it (1:14). In chapter two Jesus takes on human fleshand fulfills the hope of Psalm 8 for all his people (2:7-8): "You [OGod] have made him for a little while lower than the angels; you havecrowned him with glory and honor, and have appointed him over theworks of your hands; you have put all things in subjection under hisfeet."  And the point at every stage of this book is:  Consider thisJesus ! Ponder him. Fix your eyes on him. If your mind is like acompass moving through a world of magnets, making it spin this wayand that, make Jesus the North Pole of your mental life that yourmind comes back to again and again through the day.  
    Consider His Superiority over Moses    So we ask the writer of this book, and the God who inspired it,what do you want us to consider about Jesus today from Hebrews 3:1-6?And the answer is: Consider his superiority over Moses. Think aboutthis. Ponder this. Focus on this. Why? Because in considering this,your confidence in your heavenly calling will be made stronger andyour hope will be more bold.  There are two ways that Jesus is superior to Moses mentioned inverses 2-6 and what strengthens our confidence and our hope is notjust the raw fact of Jesus' superiority over Moses; it's what we seeabout Jesus that makes him superior. Seeing Jesus in a fresh way inthis text is what helps us "hold fast our confidence and the boast ofour hope firm until the end" (3:6b).  So let's look at these two ways Jesus is superior to Moses. Verse2 introduces the comparison and shows that both Jesus and Moses werefaithful in God's house, which is a picture of God's people. "He[Jesus] was faithful to Him [God the Father] who appointed Him, asMoses also was in all His house." So first there is a comparisonbefore there is a contrast. The writer is not putting Moses down.That's not the point. Moses was faithful in the household of God. Thewriter is quoting from Numbers 12:6-8 where God says,  Hear now my words: if there is a prophet among you, I, the Lord,shall make myself known to him in a vision. I shall speak with him ina dream. 7 not so, with my servant Moses, he is faithful in all myhousehold; 8 with him I speak mouth to mouth, even openly, and not indark sayings, and he beholds the form of the Lord.  When the writer turns now to contrast Jesus and Moses, it reallymeans something because Moses was one of a kind in his day -- with amore intimate relation to God than any other prophet.    
      Jesus is Worthy of More Glory    So consider Jesus now; consider his superiority over Moses. Firstin verse 3,  For He [Jesus] has been counted worthy of more glory than Moses,by just so much as the builder of the house has more honor than thehouse.  Jesus is worthy of more glory than Moses. As the Olympics come toan end, we don't have any difficulty tracking with the word "glory"and one person being worthy of more glory than another person.There's more glory in gold than in silver, and more in silver than inbronze. Unless of course you're injured, and in spite of the injurypress on and do some phenomenal feat. Then there is another kind ofglory that may bring even more praise than an individual gold medal.  Verse 3 says that Jesus is worthy of more glory than Moses inrelation to God's house. And he gives an astonishing reason. BecauseJesus is the builder of the house and Moses is a part of the house.Look at it carefully. Verse 3: [Jesus] has been counted worthy ofmore glory than Moses." In what way? "By just so much as the builderof the house has more honor than the house." In other words he issaying: Jesus is to the people of God as a builder is to a house.Moses is to the people of God as one of the people of God is to God'shousehold. Therefore Jesus is Moses' builder. In short, Jesus madeMoses.  Now let this sink in. "Consider" this! This is your Apostle andHigh Priest. He is the one who brought you a heavenly calling fromGod and made you a way to God. On him hangs all your hope of heaven.If you have any confidence this morning that your sins are forgivenand that you will persevere in faith and attain your heavenlycalling, this confidence depends on Jesus. The greater and moreglorious he is, the greater our hope and confidence.    
      Jesus Made Moses    It would be as if the decathlon contestants were gathered togetherone night bragging about who of them was the greatest, and Jesus wasone of the decathlon contestants. And one said, "I threw the javelinfarther than anyone else. I'm the greatest." Another said, "I put theshot farther than anyone else. I'm the greatest." Another said, "Ijumped higher than anyone else. I'm the greatest." And eventuallythey all look toward Jesus in his burgundy sweat suit sitting calmlyin the corner, and someone says, "What about you?" And Jesus says, "Imade all of you. So I'm the greatest."  Verse 3: Jesus is worthy of as much more glory than Moses as thebuilder of a house is worthy of more glory than the house. Jesus isworthy of as much more glory than every gold medal winner of theOlympics as the builder of a house is worthy of more glory than thehouse. He made the house. He made Moses. He made the minds and heartsand legs and arms of the Olympic athletes. So Jesus is the greatest.  Verse 4 makes explicit just how great he is: "For every house isbuilt by someone, but the builder of all things is God." Verse 3 saysthat Jesus made the house of God. Verse 4 says that the maker of allthings is God. Conclusion? The same as chapter 1: Jesus, the Son ofGod, is God. That's how great he is.  The word of our Apostle is a sure word because it is a wordcarried by God himself. The atoning work of our High Priest on thecross is a finished and all-sufficient work, because it has infinitevalue as the work of God himself. Consider this about Jesus: he madeMoses. And he made you.    
      Jesus is the Son; Moses a Servant    One other superiority of Jesus over Moses is mentioned in verse5-6a: "Now Moses was faithful in all His house as a servant, for atestimony of those things which were to be spoken later; 6 but Christ was faithful  as a Son over His house." Moses was a servant inthe house of God. Jesus is a Son over the house of God. Thedifference between a servant and a son is that the son, byinheritance, owns the house, and is Lord over the house, and providesfor those in the house out of his wealth. But the servants don't ownanything in the house, and the servants follow the word of the owner.The servants receive their provision from the owner.  So again, Jesus, as a son, is superior to Moses in these threeways: he owns the house of God; he rules the house of God and heprovides for the house of God. By comparison Moses is just a servantin the house. He doesn't own it; he doesn't rule it; and he doesn'tprovide for it from his wealth. So  consider Jesus  in relationto Moses.  And the striking thing here in verse 6 is that the writer wantsyou immediately to apply this superiority of Jesus to yourself. Doyou see how verse 6 ends: "Christ was faithful as a Son over Hishouse  whose house we are, if we hold fast our confidence and theboast of our hope firm until the end ."  The church of Jesus Christ is the house of God today. Which meansthat Jesus this morning -- not just back in Moses' day or in his wondays on earth -- but this morning is our Maker, our Owner, our Rulerand our Provider. He's the son; we are the servants. We are thehousehold of God. Moses is one with us in this household, and he isour fellow servant through his prophetic ministry. But Jesus is ourMaker, our Owner, our Ruler and our Provider.  And the text concludes by saying we are his house -- we are hispeople, we are partakers of a heavenly calling --  if we hold fastour confidence and the boast of our hope firm until the end ." Theevidence that we are part of the household of God is that we don'tthrow away our hope -- Hebrews 10:35 says, "Do not throw away yourconfidence, which has a great reward" -- we don't drift intoindifference and unbelief.  Becoming  a Christian and being  a Christian happen in the same way: by hoping in Jesus-- a kind of hoping that produces confidence and boasting in Jesus.  What are you hoping in this morning this morning? Where are youlooking for confidence. In yourself? In shrewd investing? In physicalfitness programs? In hard work? In luck? The word of God to you thismorning is, Consider Jesus. And hope in him. Then you will be part ofhis house and he will be your Maker, your Owner, your Ruler and yourProvider.  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
