 
TO be in science explorer of God is indeed a great theme. To do the exploration for the self­experience—is a very small theme. To live for good and bad self-experience—is also small and individual as self-realization. To grow small or huge Within in Being is a theme of 'No-one'. That is given. 
That is Grace. That is given to us when we show in us the real Oneness-Aim or the Divine Life as longing to unite with God. 
The divine state of Being in us is latent—it has to be awakened. He who has God—is the Being in love with Truth. One among millions could become One in Being as God-man if he had such a huge aspiration, if he were so imperative in winning will to aspire unconditional in self­sacrifice—to become God. It is to be Knowledge, Power, Bliss. For us all it is indeed a far-going 
• 
theme. For you here in reaction of life for self-sacrifice as the scope of your exploring I, in science, it is good wonder doing work but it will only have its pure value and fulfil its real scope when it is done unselfishly. 
The state of a Truth realized human being is to be egoless. That means to be without self-reaction, impersonal—and without I-life impersonal. It is to be unself­reactive in intellect. It is to be free of all that which is in us Creation as "bindings". That life of ours that we seem to live and do and experience is more or less a form of life that is impersonal because we come to think in an objective order of thought. 
Our Inner Life is Self in experience. Our External Life as intellect is the I as Self-realization. This we as Human Creation do in life experience. 
The Real I, the Pure One as Self in us established and realized, is in the head and in the heart in unison a reactionless state, impersonal in Self Existence. This Self Existence is the show in us that is indivisible and pure and impersonal and right and real in its existence. What we see, know and realize in us in intellect, is the Portion of us in the Universal Mind that in its realizing reaction is unconscious of the Divine I. This is to say when we in us see, know and feel, and that is a form of existence which is in no way an executive function in us as the intellect, we in us realize the Real I as a state of Pure Existence. In this state we arc unself-reactive and unself-conscious in the intellect. 

As the Spirit in us, is the Self Impersonal the non-reaction Existence and as such is non-experience in intellect. In other words—God has to be in us Real Existence which we know, see and feel. God in us is the Act that is in Creation, all that which is reacting and as such all that has an experience whether conscious or unconscious. We come to know                      in us God when we in us see, know and feel the Infinite Realization reaction grow, evolve and within us self-experience. When we speak of spiritual experience we see, know and feel. It is a life of Self in us which is no more experience in intellect as finite Existence. To see, to know, to feel is to see, to know and feel the Unison of all as Existence in a realized state which is the inherent divine state in us as the Self. That is to be given from the Realized Show in us which is the Existence of Truth—of God. 
In the plane of life impersonal this is clear; to mind impersonal it is in no way obscure; in us as the ordinary intellectual finite type— it is no more experience. What we when we as mystical aspirants speak of Being means to have the Life within imperative and clear as order to realize in us God. We have to realize God in us—it is Order in us. We as disciples of a man who is God-realized have to live for the Self. We have to live for God. We must see, know and feel in us Truth. 
As Life Motion as mind in self-sacrificial reaction to surrender the individual I-Order-Impersonal, we do in us realize The Order of Self. That is to say, we think for objective purpose and give-in in objective reaction and self-react in objective order impersonal through experience, till we do in us realize the I-State that is Self imperative Realized. This is the difference of our being objective impersonal in Life within; and subjective in us as head, as intellect in self reaction. 

This I in us, is life of mind and in it we as subjective realize Wonder Impersonal, grow in it self-reactive to the Self that is impersonal. This means—we do in us see, know, feel God unrealized— as state objective; and we feel in us God as Life Imperative Subjective. In other words, we live inus as object of the Real I that in us is realized; and we grow in its subjective experience. We live in our I, self-deluded of a life of Self that is unrealized. 
What is the Wonder in us, in this you, or I—may I ask? It is that we in this I, owe to be conscious of God in any or all states of I as human creature. We in us, Self-Impersonal, unrealized—know, see, feel the Realization Reaction as a life of realized reaction. We have to be free in us of Self and of I and of the life as function of the head; and in us form, to be able to live in us real and true, a life that is deep in Self-Realization. 
To see, to know, to feel is to give up the individual I and in it to make new the I as idea, as motive, as form, as Self—as Realizing Reac­tion for the Realizing Use that is to be free and true and unselfish. This is the State of being as Liberation. 
That Self-state Impersonal, real, is good and bad in one all-Being Order that is unselfish. This is the high realized I in us that in us has to be awakened. Good and bad has to self-react in us unselfish. To be a Real I of Being-Order unselfish, one has to see and be the real I. To obtain Grace, which is giving in us Truth, one must find the Pure Human Selfish Divine Guide. 
Now is the time to realize in us the One-All-I-State as real Faith. Now is the time to see in us God, when one of the real Masters in Being, and as human creation—is Life Realized, is Order Imperative in us in Conscience. 
Looking around in this world of chaos to-day must we not acknowledge that we act foolishly in this individual life? Why do we act so foolishly and so individ­ually in our I as human head and selfish heart? Because we still must know, see, feel in us Truth as form; God as spirit; life as means to the end. 

We have to see God being in us as actual Use and so in any one who Within has the Imperative Order as the Selfless Conscience. This is the Life of Being when our Portion Imperishable is Self-Realized; when mind is Self impersonal; when mind is Truth-realized. When God in us is realizing imperative in Self—then we know, see and feel the Act of Being demonstrate or show in us the Wonder of Realization. 
We have to self-realize to the Selfless Point, where we in us have no more realizing reaction, no more existence order, no more real or false show impersonal; no Motion Imperative in I, as the Order Imperative as Self-State of Being—but have become non-realizing impersonal; non-acting impersonal. 
God is the aim, God is the Use in exploration. God is use in head, in mind  as intellect, as intuition, as inspiration as life impersonal. God in us is God as the Wonder Impersonal. God is All-in-All— the I. 
We have to draw one only line of demarcation in all the differences of the head and the heart, and that is, that in both, we show no further sign of Life Real. No one is real in I individual or in I finite in experience. No one is pure impersonal or real imper­sonal, or true or untrue impersonal. All in us is indivisible unself­reactive, impersonal in reaction to this Imperative Realized I-Life; all in us is unself-reactive unrealized impersonal, uncon­scious Imperative as I. We as I as human creation show no Divine I-Life till we in us sow-in the Divine I—as Life realized. 
No one is able to realize himself as God—unless drawn to God by one who is God. 
The Final Form of Existence cannot be adjusted within the Knowing Order of the Finite Mind. 
It is useful to have a form of knowing as feeling of what is doing beyond the realm of this divine intellect of man. 
We have come to-day to you here to enforce the statement 

that we believe and not through words and explanations but through deep experience that Meher Baba is such a Pure Being as Jesus was, as Buddha was, as all your great Masters were who have stamped you in India as the spiritual vanguard  of the world. 
We believe that Meher Baba has come into the world to effect the transmutation of consciousness in this new evolutionary cycle as the necessary prelude to the establishment of the new civil­ization. 

