"From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." (Mt. 4:17). We regularly receive criticism, especially from those who claim that they agree with our message but not our tactics, that our ministry is not Christ-like. But the truth of the matter is that the ministry of the Westboro Baptist Church, in particular her public ministry on the streets of this nation, is modeled precisely after that of the Lord Jesus Christ's. Any group calling themselves a New Testament Church must also model their ministry after Christ's as Galatians 1:8 tells us that not even one of the powerful beautiful angels would preach another Gospel "But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed." This is one of the litmus tests you should use to determine if the place you call a church really is one according to the Bible definition. I believe there is value in examining His ministry to understand how to model it. Preachers today like to put out this image of Jesus as a preacher walking around Judea with a doe-eyed, stoner look talking about love and tolerance, healing all the lepers and telling the adulteress women around Galilee that he loved them ­ all of them, of course. In one of the most illogical leaps of fiction in all of history, Christ somehow managed to incur the wrath of the entire Jewish nation to the point that they killed him preaching that He loved everyone? Seriously? That's not the message he preached, obviously. Matthew 4:17 establishes the foundation of Christ's earthly, public ministry. He had preached and baptized a few times in Judea before this, but we have here the affirmative declaration of His ministry's beginning. It is a heavy time in His life personally and for believers in general, as John has been cast into prison, and his public preaching ministry has come to a close, allowing for the ministry of Christ to come to the forefront. As John had declared beginning at John 3:28: "Ye yourselves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am sent before him. He that hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom, which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom's voice: this my joy therefore is fulfilled. He must increase, but I must decrease" (John 3:28-30). 1  Like most things in Scripture the beginning of a thing establishes the theme and direction of it. So we have here the establishment of Christ's primary theme throughout His ministry. I believe that if you were to summarize the overall theme of Christ's ministry and indeed the entirety of the Gospel, it is "Repent or Perish". I believe this to be a critical point in the analysis of Christ's message. Like many things in Scripture, this is simple. If Christ's message was one of "I am here to save everyone, I love all mankind from the beginning of time unconditionally", here would have been the time to start preaching it. Of course, at no time during His earthly ministry, nor anywhere in His revealed will, i.e., Scripture, do we find that He loves all mankind unconditionally, therefore He didn't begin to preach that universal lie of Satan; that lie that he first spoke in the garden, and phrased as "ye shall not surely die" (Genesis 3:4). This is an amazing thing to behold. You have this incredible opportunity, the opening lines as it were, of the greatest preaching ministry ever recorded, which Christ no doubt fully understood, and the God of All Things controlled. Here are the first moments of Christ's preaching ministry, and He tells us to repent. Contrast that to the message these so-called preachers across the globe spout out every Sunday, which is precisely aligned with Satan's message in the garden. They quote Matthew 7:1 "Judge not, that ye be not judged" as though it had no context established by the beginning of Christ's ministry! He preached this everywhere He went, as did John before Him as His precursor, as do His disciples and the Apostles after Him. To put this in its simplest terms, the message never gets old. Which is why we carry it forward, and why every church since the first New Testament church has carried it forward. It will be carried forward until the time for repentance comes to a close, and it will come to a close as Revelation communicates to us. Repentance then, is a very important thing to understand. It is not just some flip word to throw around as though it has no real meaning or that it isn't an absolute requirement for believers to seek it out. So what is repentance? The Webster's dictionary definition of the word `repent' is "to turn from sin and dedicate oneself to the amendment of one's life; to feel sorrow, regret, or contrition". 2  In the New Testament, the Greek is Strong's number 3340 metanoeo (met-an-o-eh'o). It is used 34 times in Scripture, always translated repent and means "to change one's mind for better, heartily to amend with abhorrence of one's past sins". The second word translated repent is 3338 metanoia (met-an'-oy-ah). Strong's notes on these two words indicate that "the distinction often given between these is; 3338 refers to an emotional change, 3340 to a change of choice, 3338 has reference to particulars, 3340 to the entire life, 3338 signifies nothing but regret even amounting to remorse, 3340 that reversal of moral purpose known as repentance; does not seem to be sustained by usage. But that 3340 is the fuller and nobler term, expressive of moral action and issues, is indicated not only by its derivation, but by the greater frequency of its use and by the fact it is often used in the imperative". Repentance is a direct refutation of the doctrine of justification by works. Under a works-based doctrine, sins can be cleansed with some specific action or deed. Think blood sacrifice under the Mosaic code. This does not preclude action being taken as part of repentance, but repentance necessitates a change, and indeed a clearly present and demonstrable change, as John clearly points out when he calls out to the Pharisees to bring forth fruits meet for repentance. We are bound not to the ceremonial deeds, types, traditions and strictures of the Law, but bound by baptism to change our minds, to change our ways, and to cast off and away from us the sinful deeds of the flesh, to mortify our members. Repentance is made up of three key things: 1. Acknowledgement of the behavior as sinful. Consider these verses: Proverbs 28:13 ­ "He that covereth his sins shall not prosper: but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy". Psalm 32:5 ­ "I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the LORD; and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Selah". James 5:16 ­ "Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much". Without acknowledgement of the behavior as sinful, there is no impetus or initiative to change. In other words, if we don't see a behavior as being sin, why would we need or want to change it? 3  2. Sorrow for the behavior: sorrow is not repentance, as Hebrews 12:17 tells us "For ye know how that afterward, when he would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected: for he found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears." Esau was sorrowful for what he had done, but not in the sense of the transgression he committed against God. He wasn't penitent for the sin committed, he was sorrowful for the outcome and what he was now stripped of in the material world. Consider the summation of this point from 2 Corinthians 7:10-11 "For godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of: but the sorrow of the world worketh death. For behold this selfsame thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of yourselves, yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge! In all things ye have approved yourselves to be clear in this matter." Sorrow is an element toward repentance, but it is not repentance. It also is not a theatrical melodramatic thing. Certainly it can result in great anguish of heart, but outward displays of sorrow are not the point. There is a time to mourn in sackcloth and ashes and a time to go into your well and express your sorrow there where others cannot see it. This must be legitimate heart-felt sorrow for the trespass you have committed against God in your behavior. 3. Departure from the behavior. Without departure from sinful behavior, we face certain destruction. Luke 13:3 ­ "I tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish". Romans 6:23 ­ "For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord". Acts 26:18 ­ "To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me". 4  Without turning from sinful behavior, there can be no entrance of forgiveness. As long as the behavior continues to be engaged in, even with acknowledgement and sorrow for it, there is no room for forgiveness. Repentance is embedded in our hearts, but it is a pretended thing if we do not bring forth the fruits of it and reform our behaviors, simply claiming to be sorry for what we've done is empty and irrelevant if we do not turn from doing it ever again. Repentance must be accompanied by faith. We cannot expect that simply reforming our lives and changing behaviors alone is enough. We must exercise faith in our Redeemer to forgive us of our sins. Repentance must be done for a reason, primarily out of fear of God and judgment. By the same token, we cannot think that claiming a trust in Christ without reforming our lives to conform to His commandments is acceptable or honest. We cannot truly show love toward God without repentance and following His commandments. Repent or perish was Christ's primary message, and so it is ours. I hope this has been helpful to you all. 5  Repent Words translated `repent', `repented', repentance and the associated verses. 05162  nacham naw-kham' a primitive root; v; AV-comfort 57, repent 41, comforter 9, ease 1; 108 1) to be sorry, console oneself, repent, regret, comfort, be comforted 1a) (Niphal) 1a1) to be sorry, be moved to pity, have compassion 1a2) to be sorry, rue, suffer grief, repent 1a3) to comfort oneself, be comforted 1a4) to comfort oneself, ease oneself 1b) (Piel) to comfort, console 1c) (Pual) to be comforted, be consoled 1d) (Hithpael) 1d1) to be sorry, have compassion 1d2) to rue, repent of 1d3) to comfort oneself, be comforted 1d4) to ease oneself Ex 13:17 And it came to pass, when Pharaoh had let the people go, that God led them not through the way of the land of the Philistines, although that was near; for God said, Lest peradventure the people repent when they see war, and they return to Egypt: Ex 32:12 Wherefore should the Egyptians speak, and say, For mischief did he bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against thy people. Nu 23:19 God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should repent: hath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken, and shall he not make it good? De 32:36 For the LORD shall judge his people, and repent himself for his servants, when he seeth that their power is gone, and there is none shut up, or left. 1Sa 15:29 And also the Strength of Israel will not lie nor repent: for he is not a man, that he should repent Job 42:6 Wherefore I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes. Ps 90:13 Return, O LORD, how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy servants. Ps 110:4 The LORD hath sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek. Ps 135:14 For the LORD will judge his people, and he will repent himself concerning his servants. Jer 4:28 For this shall the earth mourn, and the heavens above be black: because I have spoken it, I have purposed it, and will not repent, neither will I turn back from it. 6  Jer 18:8 If that nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. Jer 18:10 If it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good, wherewith I said I would benefit them. Jer 26:3 If so be they will hearken, and turn every man from his evil way, that I may repent me of the evil, which I purpose to do unto them because of the evil of their doings. Jer 26:13 Therefore now amend your ways and your doings, and obey the voice of the LORD your God; and the LORD will repent him of the evil that he hath pronounced against you. Jer 42:10 If ye will still abide in this land, then will I build you, and not pull you down, and I will plant you, and not pluck you up: for I repent me of the evil that I have done unto you. Eze 24:14 I the LORD have spoken it: it shall come to pass, and I will do it; I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent; according to thy ways, and according to thy doings, shall they judge thee, saith the Lord GOD. Joe 2:14 Who knoweth if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him; even a meat offering and a drink offering unto the LORD your God? Jonah 3:9 Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? (Repented ­ same Hebrew word) Ge 6:6 And it repented the LORD that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart. Ex 32:14 And the LORD repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people. Jud 2:18 And when the LORD raised them up judges, then the LORD was with the judge, and delivered them out of the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge: for it repented the LORD because of their groanings by reason of them that oppressed them and vexed them. Jud 21:6 And the children of Israel repented them for Benjamin their brother, and said, There is one tribe cut off from Israel this day. Jud 21:15 And the people repented them for Benjamin, because that the LORD had made a breach in the tribes of Israel. 1Sa 15:35 And Samuel came no more to see Saul until the day of his death: nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul: and the LORD repented that he had made Saul king over Israel. 2Sa 24:16 And when the angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy it, the LORD repented him of the evil, and said to the angel that destroyed the people, It is enough: stay now thine hand. And the angel of the LORD was by the threshingplace of Araunah the Jebusite. 1Ch 21:15 And God sent an angel unto Jerusalem to destroy it: and as he was destroying, the LORD beheld, and he repented him of the evil, and said to the angel that destroyed, It is enough, stay now thine hand. And the angel of the LORD stood by the threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite. Ps 106:45 And he remembered for them his covenant, and repented according to the multitude of his mercies. Jer 8:6 I hearkened and heard, but they spake not aright: no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle. Jer 20:16 And let that man be as the cities which the LORD overthrew, and repented not: and let him hear the cry in the morning, and the shouting at noontide; Jer 26:19 Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all Judah put him at all to death? did he not fear the LORD, and besought the LORD, and the LORD repented him of the evil which he had pronounced against them? Thus might we procure great evil against our souls. Jer 31:19 Surely after that I was turned, I repented; and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth. Am 7:3 The LORD repented for this: It shall not be, saith the LORD. Am 7:6 The LORD repented for this: This also shall not be, saith the Lord GOD. 7  Jon 3:10 And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way; and God repented of the evil, that he had said that he would do unto them; and he did it not. Zec 8:14 For thus saith the LORD of hosts; As I thought to punish you, when your fathers provoked me to wrath, saith the LORD of hosts, and I repented not: 8  07725  shuwb shoob a primitive root; v; AV-return 391, ... again 248, turn 123, ... back 65, ... away 56, restore 39, bring 34, render 19, answer 18, recompense 8, recover 6, deliver 5, put 5, withdraw 5, requite 4, misc 40; 1066 1) to return, turn back 1a) (Qal) 1a1) to turn back, return 1a1a) to turn back 1a1b) to return, come or go back 1a1c) to return unto, go back, come back 1a1d) of dying 1a1e) of human relations (fig) 1a1f) of spiritual relations (fig) 1a1f1) to turn back (from God), apostatise 1a1f2) to turn away (of God) 1a1f3) to turn back (to God), repent 1a1f4) turn back (from evil) 1a1g) of inanimate things 1a1h) in repetition 1b) (Polel) 1b1) to bring back 1b2) to restore, refresh, repair (fig) 1b3) to lead away (enticingly) 1b4) to show turning, apostatise 1c) (Pual) restored (participle) 1d) (Hiphil) to cause to return, bring back 1d1) to bring back, allow to return, put back, draw back, give back, restore, relinquish, give in payment 1d2) to bring back, refresh, restore 1d3) to bring back, report to, answer 1d4) to bring back, make requital, pay (as recompense) 1d5) to turn back or backward, repel, defeat, repulse, hinder, reject, refuse 1d6) to turn away (face), turn toward 1d7) to turn against 1d8) to bring back to mind 1d9) to show a turning away 1d10) to reverse, revoke 1e) (Hophal) to be returned, be restored, be brought back 1f) (Pulal) brought back 1Ki 8:47 Yet if they shall bethink themselves in the land whither they were carried captives, and repent, and make supplication unto thee in the land of them that carried them captives, saying, We have sinned, and have done perversely, we have committed wickedness; Eze 14:6 Therefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Repent, and turn yourselves from your idols; and turn away your faces from all your abominations. Eze 18:30 Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel, every one according to his ways, saith the Lord GOD. Repent, and turn yourselves from all your transgressions; so iniquity shall not be your ruin. 9  3340  metanoeo met-an-o-eh'-o from 3326 and 3539; AV-repent 34; 34 1) to change one's mind, i.e. to repent 2) to change one's mind for better, heartily to amend with abhorrence of one's past sins For Synonyms see entry 5862 Mt 3:2 And saying, Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Mt 4:17 From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Mr 1:15 And saying, The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the gospel. Mr 6:12 And they went out, and preached that men should repent. Lu 13:3 I tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Lu 13:5 I tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Lu 16:30 And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent. Lu 17:3 Take heed to yourselves: If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him. Lu 17:4 And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent; thou shalt forgive him. Ac 2:38 Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. Ac 3:19 Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; Ac 8:22 Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee. Ac 17:30 And the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth all men every where to repent: Ac 26:20 But shewed first unto them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the coasts of Judaea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance. Re 2:5 Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. Re 2:16 Repent; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against them with the sword of my mouth. Re 2:21 And I gave her space to repent of her fornication; and she repented not. Re 2:22 Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit adultery with her into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds. Re 3:3 Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard, and hold fast, and repent. If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and thou shalt not know what hour I will come upon thee. Re 3:19 As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore, and repent. Repented (same Greek word) Mt 11:20 Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not: Mt 11:21 Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the mighty works, which were done in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. 10  Mt 12:41 The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: because they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and, behold, a greater than Jonas is here. Lu 10:13 Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon, which have been done in you, they had a great while ago repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes. Lu 11:32 The men of Nineve shall rise up in the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: for they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and, behold, a greater than Jonas is here. 2Co 12:21 And lest, when I come again, my God will humble me among you, and that I shall bewail many which have sinned already, and have not repented of the uncleanness and fornication and lasciviousness which they have committed. Re 2:21 And I gave her space to repent of her fornication; and she repented not. Re 9:20 And the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood: which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk: Re 9:21 Neither repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts. Re 16:9 And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God, which hath power over these plagues: and they repented not to give him glory. Re 16:11 And blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their sores, and repented not of their deeds. 11  3338  metamellomai met-am-el'-lom-ahee from 3326 and the middle voice of 3199; TDNT-4:626,589; {See TDNT 486} v AV-repent 5, repent (one's) self 1; 6 1) it is a care to one afterwards 1a) it repents one, to repent one's self 2Co 7:8 For though I made you sorry with a letter, I do not repent, though I did repent: for I perceive that the same epistle hath made you sorry, though it were but for a season. Heb 7:21 (For those priests were made without an oath; but this with an oath by him that said unto him, The Lord sware and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec:) Mt 21:29 He answered and said, I will not: but afterward he repented, and went. Mt 21:32 For John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him not: but the publicans and the harlots believed him: and ye, when ye had seen it, repented not afterward, that ye might believe him. Mt 27:3 Then Judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders, 2Co 7:10 For godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of: but the sorrow of the world worketh death.s From Strong's Notes: The distinction often given between these is; 3338 refers to an emotional change, 3340 to a change of choice, 3338 has reference to particulars, 3340 to the entire life, 3338 signifies nothing but regret even amounting to remorse, 3340 that reversal of moral purpose known as repentance; does not seem to be sustained by usage. But that 3340 is the fuller and nobler term, expressive of moral action and issues, is indicated not only by its derivation, but by the greater frequency of its use and by the fact it is often used in the imperative. 12  3341  metanoia met-an'-oy-ah from 3340; AV-repentance 24; 24 1) a change of mind, as it appears to one who repents, of a purpose he has formed or of something he has done Mt 3:8 Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance: Mt 3:11 I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance: but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire: Mt 9:13 But go ye and learn what that meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Mr 1:4 John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins. Mr 2:17 When Jesus heard it, he saith unto them, They that are whole have no need of the physician, but they that are sick: I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Lu 3:3 And he came into all the country about Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins; Lu 3:8 Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance, and begin not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, That God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. Lu 5:32 I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Lu 15:7 I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance. Lu 24:47 And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. Ac 5:31 Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. Ac 11:18 When they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life. Ac 13:24 When John had first preached before his coming the baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel. Ac 19:4 Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus. Ac 20:21 Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Ac 26:20 But shewed first unto them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the coasts of Judaea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance. Ro 2:4 Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and longsuffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance? 2Co 7:9 Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repentance: for ye were made sorry after a godly manner, that ye might receive damage by us in nothing. 2Co 7:10 For godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of: but the sorrow of the world worketh death. 2Ti 2:25 In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves; if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth; Heb 6:1 Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection; not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God, 13  Heb 6:6 If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. Heb 12:17 For ye know how that afterward, when he would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected: for he found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears. 2Pe 3:9 The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count slackness; but is longsuffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. 14  
