




Baba And His Adherents 

RECIPROCITY OF CONTACT 

BY ADI K. IRANI 

Development of brain and intelli≠gence is both biological and subtle and is more or less automatic in process in the human as well as sub-human world. Reason and intellect can be perfected by the universities. Imagination usually associated with poets, philosophers and artists is the result of aesthetics and culture. Inspiration and illumination, the delight of a seeker on the path of purity and righteousness, is the out≠come of self-denial and occult training; but Freedom of Soul is difficult to attain without the grace of a living Master. This Freedom of the soul which lifts one above pain and pleasure and which dispels ignorance standing in the way of a true and synthetical understanding of the entire creation and its purpose, is hardly attainable without becoming adherents of One who Him≠self has realized that state. Such an One amidst the strife and struggle of life can soar high as a kite becoming comp≠letely detached from the world, only linked to it by a thread-like passage through which to serve the world with his beneficence and grace. Him we make our guide and Him our Beloved and in Him we find the deep longing of our heart fulfilled of its thirst and emptiness and our head cleared of the misconceptions of a truly spiritual life. In His company and devotion we stick to him like units of widely differing beings all controlled and huddled up to His proximity in a band of obedience and loveóthe two symbols of 'we give' and 'we take 'óthat keep us adherents as one-bodied, one-minded and one≠heartedóa widely preached aspect of a perfect life-on-earth so perfectly fol≠lowed by the adherents of Baba. For the living beyond and for the complete freedom from the tentacle of a world-engrossed life, we have the kite as our adept in soaring high from the gross≠ness of things to the 


absoluteness of blissóto whom we stick with all the allegiance at our command, through thick and thin, through peace and turmoil, through cheer and fatigue. 

OBEDIENCE We give Him obedience and absolute obedience with none of the concocted interpreting of His injunctions and a miserable show of sincerity and of love that would hardly stand His radiant look. We take up His word and against our heart we press it so deep that by the depth of our faith and courage we carry His word through to action. We like to give obedience so implicit and plain; but the surging waves of passion and conceit do modify the intensity of our action. It is only for a time we behave against His wishes, and not long before does it dawn on us the understanding that we went wrong. We wait and cogi≠tate and we resume uncritical obedience not yet convinced of the insolence that might come again. His presence so calm, so bright and so stable poises our minds and sets right our emotions. We realize the shortness of our temper and 

fickleness of our mind, and in a spirit of outspokenness we admit our fault and move further towards a life of sacrifice. 

EARTHLY BELONGINGS Our earthly belongings and our bright hopes of the dim world do not wait to gather our attention. They are expunged from the recesses of their dark hidings into the daylight of His power and laid bare to the scorching heat of His radiance to be cremated for ever in the ashes of a resurrected life. The process is a bit tough but not un≠natural. In the course of an ordinary life, it takes us far long to realize that all the material belongings and hopes of possession are the unstationary props of happiness; but Baba makes you feel so within a short time of His contact. He lives the truths of an Idealóto be practised by usóso gracefully well that He brings home to our understanding that spirituality is infinitely more to be lived than spoken or read. To live it we have to give and to give all we have to be stirred. WE GIVE LOVE By a deliberate attempt for≠





  

mulating into a friction of hearts amongst us, into a friction of diverse opinion and of temperament He chops out from our heart layer after layer of morbid indifference and callous conceit and opens out a flow of warmth be≠tween Him and us and ourselves so essential to the unfoldment of spiritual life. Despite our knowledge of the 

' 

giving' to be temporarily unpleasant we do feel hurt and offended, but the result is not far to seek; we find ourselves advanced in adherence; closer in heart and intensified in love of Him. When love in the beginning of His contact was so sincerely demonstrative, now calms down to a deeper love expressed reverentially. 

REVERENCE To give respect without loss of love becomes the solace of our heart. He also demands it, not that He wants it; He wants us to be full of it and be constantly reminded that our giving is yet incomplete. GIVE COMPLETELY We have loved Him; we have respected Him; we laid our possessions at His glorious feet; but we are still ret≠

tentive. We have not yet emptied the mal-contents of our likes and dislikes, our habits, our argumentation, our sentiments, all our cherished ideas and our love of self. To do it means to sur≠render completely. We cannot benumb our mind and await the master-mind to stimulate for us a new line of thought and action. We cannot sit silent and expect Him to work us up without a re≠sponse on our part. We can direct our thoughts; better we can resolve that whatever we like, whatever we dislike, whatever we do and whatever we disregard meet His active approval and His willing sanction. It is no use having an order sanctioned by Him in the light of our liking. He is generous and as infinitely generous as of exacting obedience. He will react promptly positive to an inadmissible demand but He will never overlook the short≠coming which prompted the demand. Except in cases of fundamental orders He will not react negatively. He will extend enough time and opportunity for one to correct himself under a res≠ponsible independence. If one is not wise enough to recover from his lost balance of obedience He 


will have Him ridiculed before the eyes of His other adherents. If Baba and His company does not revive him of his mental sluggishness, the thought of humiliation before his brethren will poignantly awaken him. No sooner is he set right than Baba begins 'giving us' infinitely more than 'He took'. 

HE GIVES KNOWLEDGE AND UNDERSTANDING 

We take from Him His love, His In≠finite Love wrought in the infinite de≠signs of His kindness and consideration to the minutest details of our moods, health and comforts. His personal touch and attention is a mighty stimulant. It does not for a moment leave us to think we are neglected or left uncared for. We feel we are backed by a source of infinite kindness and generosity beyond words. His words give us an under≠standing of life and its purpose and the futility of overestimating incidents which in the eye of the world are great or disastrous. Nothing is great which has no value beyond the life of toyful objects, and nothing is disastrous so long it does not deviate us from a clean and straight forward living. The des≠truction of the body is a phase of mat≠erial decomposition; the destruction of mind is a mode of finer decomposition; the destruction of the ego is a complete cessation of pain and misery. From one to the other is a state of experience equally joyful of its death as of its birth. Truly disastrous are the imped≠iments coming in our way of a prog≠resssive life towards Freedom. Life dissipated in excesses of sense-objects is a retard to one's progress to be shunned like dead rats. They are not sinful in the orthodoxical sense; they are infectious, and once the demoral≠izing influence sets in, the decay in character and morals becomes irrepar≠able. He makes us live into such convictions. Is this not some under≠standing? 

HE MAKES US MORAL He gives us morals and strength of character by holding us responsible for every act of moral turpitude we com≠mit. The responsibility of an answer to be given here and now, felt and cherished through the bond of love He has created for us is so pleasingly heavy that we hardly like to escape 





  

its strength-giving influence. We like to be protected by His influence, however binding it may be felt at the time of our moral eccentricity; because we know that no amount of the study of ethics or high-sounding sermons can effectively give us an ounce of spiritual morality that His one love-laden word com≠mands. We imbibe what He expends and breathe in what He exhales, for He has also given us power of assimilation. The mind and the heart in the long years of eliminating process become so empty and receptive that they inhale and digest the excellence of His vir≠tuous morality emanating from the same source that did the eliminating. Elimination precedes assimilation; the latter is pleasant since the former was painful. Painful as it was, it was easy of endurance in the beginning of our en≠thusiastic contact; and pleasing as it is today, it is difficult of sustenance in the sensitivity of our present state. 

HE GIVES US COURAGE So He gives the strength of heart and the breadth of mind. Where mind fails to reach the extremities of objective 

feelings and revolts when its interests are shared by others, the heart steps in full fledged revival of its hard earned vigour and disperses the boundaries of mental barriers that the momentary narrowness did create; and when the heart is carried away by attachments interpreted as Love, the mind retraces the heart to reasonableness. Both are developed and made codependent so that when the mind shrinks the heart expands and when the heart freezes the mind adjudicates. To acquire the bal≠ance of mind with that of heart, and the equipoise of each, we have to have a life of liberty. 

PECUNIARY SOLVED Liberal as He is in His love, He is similar in monetary considerations. The tension of income, the excess of waste, the dearth of loss and the pride of wealth all become foreign to our nature; for we are fed, clothed and brought up as collectively efficient, as individually our needs are fulfilled. No needs are overlooked that do not promote a peaceful and healthy life, and no lives are free of tribulations relating money as we who adhere to 


Baba in a bond of love and life. The distraction of earning is escaped but the knowledge of it is maintained. The dis≠gust consequent to extravagance holds us not, but the greatness of heart is gauged. We are trained by the exper≠ience of collective management the art of worriless getting and spending. HE GIVES US TRUE FRIENDS  We see no ground No cause of complaint No one so cold None so grave. All are to each self As much as one to all For the common ground we meet in Lies the heart of all. 

Our love and motive is centralized in  SPIRITUALITY  

Baba but nowhere do we find so free and unperturbed exchange of friendly affection and helpfulness as amongst ourselves.  Who can say who gives And who can say who takes; In Love's infinite bosom  

None gives none takes. We give so much as Love's obedience; and take So much as Knowledge, Love Infinite and Fate.  