Sunday, April 24, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Neither is there salvation in any other; for there is none other  name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be  saved." Acts 4:12. (There go the Muslims, and the Hindus, and the  Buddhists, and all the lesser lights among the heretics and  idolaters of this evil world.) "And they called them, and  commanded them not to speak at all nor teach in the name of  Jesus. But Peter and John answered and said unto them, Whether  it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto  God, judge ye. For we cannot but speak the things which we have  seen and heard." Acts 4:18-20.  Some sixty years ago I took to the streets in Pasadena, California, to speak and to teach in the name of Jesus ­ and Time Magazine journalized the event in their issue of June 11, 1951; to wit: (I believe Peter and John would have been proud.)  "REPENTANCE IN PASADENA. Evangelist Phelps, Ready to Preach in Jail. Fiveyear-old John Muir College (Named for Californias famed mountain-trudging naturalist [1838-1914]), at Pasadena (enrollment - 2,000) has no more than the average quota of campus sin. But to Fred Phelps, 21, a tall (6 ft. 3 in.), craggy-faced engineering student from Meridian, Miss., John Muir is a weed-grown vineyard. Day by day this spring he has called upon his fellow students to repent. His method: to walk up to groups of boys and girls munching their lunchtime sandwiches in the quadrangle, ask, ,,May I say a few words? and launch into a talk. Fred Phelpss talks drew crowds of up to 100. Over & over he denounced the ,,sins committed on campus by students and teachers... promiscuous petting...evil language ...profanity...cheating...teachers filthy jokes in classrooms...pandering to the lusts of the flesh. Such strictures sent Dr. Archie Turrell, principal of John Muir, and most of his faculty into a slow burn. Not only was Evangelist Phelps attacking them, they decided, but conceivably he was violating Californias state education code, which forbids the teaching of religion on any public school campus. SOMETHING OF A MARTYR. A fortnight ago they ordered him to stop his campus preaching. Phelps moved across the road, off campus, and kept on preaching. Principal Turrell warned him again. ,,He accosted me in very stern language, says Phelps, ,,and told me that he would call the law. So I told him that I had no fears. If the police arrested me I would preach to them in jail. As Phelpss audiences grew, police arrived, cleared the crowded sidewalk of both the earnest and the merely curious. Phelps was ,,invited into a police car and driven away from the scene; John Muir suspended him for the rest of the week. But Evangelist Fred Phelps, who had turned down an appointment to West Point to devote his life to preaching, was not to be discouraged by a little thing like suspension. Last week he was back, preaching from the lawn of a friendly Pasadena citizen across from the quadrangle. His audiences were bigger and more sympathetic; in fact, Fred Phelps now had something of the attraction of a martyr. OFF HIS STICK? Pro-Phelps students recalled that the California law against the teaching of religion has never been interpreted at John Muir as a ban on such voluntary groups as the Student Christian Association, the Roman Catholic Newman Club, The Christian Science Club, and the Mormon Deseret Club. In any case, they thought Principal Turrell had no right to pursue Phelps across the street. ,,I dont agree with what he says, said a history major. ,,But I agree that he has a right to say it ­ off campus.' Said another: ,,I think some of us can stand a bit of revival. Maybe Phelps has got something. Students were delighted with the story that Phelps had been ordered to consult the school psychologist,  Sunday, April 24, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  a middle-aged lady, and that he had turned the tables on her by ,,psycho-analyzing her.  Gloated an admiring coed: ,,I hope he did. They had no right to suggest that hes off his  stick. Just because youre religious, it doesnt mean you have to be crazy."  That is the end of the Time Magazine story, which I have recently read again ­ and, I must say, with much rejoicing, happiness, and thanksgiving to my dear Lord Jesus for saving me, calling me, and keeping me in this glorious way for the sixty years encompassed in the Time's news story ­ and the aftermath ­ to the present hour. General MacArthur, in his swan song to the cadets at West Point, spoke of the twilight of his life after the dawn of his life with its epic wars and battles. MacArthur's private life was tainted with fornicating with harlots, and his public life dripped with the blood of millions. Yet, he was a huge American hero. But, what do the angels think? Paul, the condemned apostle and the martyr, also had a swan song, so to speak, which he delivered through Timothy to all the young Christian soldiers; to wit:  "Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. Thou therefore endure hardships and afflictions with me, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The husbandman that laboreth must be first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead according to my gospel; Wherein I suffer trouble, as an evil doer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound. Therefore I endure all things for the elect's sake, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory. It is a faithful saying; For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him; If we suffer, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he also will deny us... For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing." (2 Tim. 2:1-12; 4:6-8)  How closely does the life of the old fornicating hero General Douglas MacArthur compare to the lives of the Bible heroes? That's the all-important question. What do the angels think? Who cares what the shave-tail cadets strutting on the close-order drill fields at West Point think? The twilight of life ­ as the general called it ­ is coming and will soon be upon us all. "Time is now fleeting, the moments are passing; passing from you and from me. Shadows are gathering; Death-beds are coming; coming for you and for me." How good, how kind of our Father; that one is permitted to look back over sixty years ­ from the dawn of life to the twilight of life ­ and make out certain events here and there constituting undoubted evidence that one's calling and election is sure (2 Pet. 1:10); to wit:  "But that it spread no further among the people, let us straitly threaten them, THAT THEY SPEAK HENCEFORTH TO NO MAN IN THIS NAME. And they called them, and COMMANDED THEM NOT TO SPEAK AT ALL NOR TEACH IN THE NAME OF JESUS." (Acts 4:17,18)  Now compare the high-handed treatment of Peter and John by the priests and Sadducees, with the way Dr. Archie Turrell and the authorities of John Muir College and Pasadena treated me in 1951, all as journalized by Time Magazine; to wit: "Over & over he (i.e., Phelps) denounced the sins committed on campus by students and teachers" ­ (think, John the Baptist, crying in the wilderness, naming the sins, and demanding that they bring forth fruits meet for repentance) ­ "Over & over he  Sunday, April 24, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  denounced the sins committed on campus by students and teachers...promiscuous petting ...evil  language...profanity...cheating ...teachers filthy jokes in classrooms...pandering to the lusts of the  flesh."  Now let me digress briefly from the Time Magazine quote, to make a few salient points: 1) My list of campus sins contains not a word about sodomites! Whereas today, that is one dominant theme of all our street preaching, which is: 2) powerful evidence from the signs of the times that the end of the world is very near; and, 3) this is true notwithstanding the fact that the apostle Paul included the sins of Sodom among those that would doom the sinner to Hell; to wit: "Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived; neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor EFFEMINATE, nor ABUSERS OF THEMSELVES WITH MANKIND, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God." (1 Cor. 6:9,10) But now, Beloved, the great overriding sin of the sodomite ­ today ­ and the sin that harbingers the imminent return of the Lord Jesus in power and glory, and the end of the World ­ is that the present day sodomite vigorously and fiercely and violently DENIES THAT SODOMY IS A SIN AT ALL. Moreover, to the filthy, militant sodomite, the matter is closed ­ and will not be opened ­ for discussion. No matter what the Bible says, no matter what science says, and no matter what history says. Moreover, the whole World of so-called "straight" (i.e., non-fag) people ­ civilized and developed, together with uncivilized and undeveloped ­ ALL, ALL, BUT ALL, AGREE WITH THE FAGS, THAT SODOMY IS NOT A SIN. (!)(!)(!). Moreover, anyone who dares to disagree with the sodomites' ridiculous position will be forthwith targeted, demonized, marginalized, ostracized, and promptly set up for ignominious destruction! Now to continue the quote from Time Magazine; to wit: "Such strictures (i.e., my preaching against student and faculty sins) sent Dr. Archie Turrell, principal of John Muir, and most of his faculty into a slow burn. Not only was Evangelist Phelps attacking them, they decided, but conceivably he was violating Californias state education code, which forbids the teaching of religion on any public school campus. SOMETHING OF A MARTYR."  Well now, Beloved. Such nonsense. Is not this the same Satanic manner and the approach of the authorities in our text, whereby they dealt with Peter and John? They did not like Peter's preaching, and so they set about concocting lying ways and pretended, non-existent rules, to seize them and silence them. And is not this the same Satanic device employed against the humble members of WBC when they go forth on the mean streets of this doomed nation, selflessly doing the work of an evangelist, and making full proof of their ministry? 2 Tim. 4:5. It was a very serious thing that the school and police powers and authorities did to a young preacher boy sixty years ago in Pasadena, California.  Beloved. That outrageous case is still open upon the books of Heaven. Very shortly now, before the Great White Throne, I expect to confront Dr. Archie Turrell and all his guilty John Muir College faculty members, who participated in the charade designed to silence and punish a peaceful and unoffending messenger of the Great King of Glory. Then and there I also expect to confront the Pasadena Police Dept. authorities who, under color of State Law, sixty years ago, prohibited the free exercise of my religion and my freedom of speech ­ all in flagrant violation of the First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States of America ­ AND ­ WHICH IS INFINITELY WORSE ­ in violation of Laws of the Kingdom of God which were enacted especially for the timely protection of the King's personal ambassadors while on publishing business of the King, all as provided for in Psalm 105:14,15; to wit:  Sunday, April 24, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  "He suffered no man to do them wrong; yea, he reproved kings for their sakes; Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm" (Psalm 105:14,15)  And the enacting clauses; to wit: "Then said he unto the disciples, It is impossible but that offences will come; but woe unto him, through whom they come! It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the sea, than that he should offend one of these little ones." (Lk. 17:1,2)  "SOMETHING OF A MARTYR." Time: "A fortnight ago they ordered him to stop his campus preaching. Phelps moved across the road, off campus, and kept on preaching. Principal Turrell warned him again. ,,He accosted me, in very stern language, says Phelps, ,,and told me that he would call the law. So I told him that I had no fears. If the police arrested me I would preach to them in jail. As Phelpss audiences grew, police arrived, cleared the crowded side-walk of both the earnest and the merely curious. Phelps was ,,invited into a police car and driven away from the scene; John Muir suspended him for the rest of the week. But Evangelist Fred Phelps, who had turned down an appointment to West Point to devote his life to preaching, was not to be discouraged by a little thing like suspension. Last week he was back, preaching from the lawn of a friendly Pasadena citizen across from the quadrangle. His audiences were bigger and more sympathetic; IN FACT, FRED PHELPS NOW HAD SOMETHING OF THE ATTRACTION OF A MARTYR."  Well, Beloved, would you believe, that after sixty years, the Antichristic Pasadena school and religious authorities are still boasting of their unlawful and godless treatment of this then-young preacher which they perpetrated lo these sixty years ago. Rather than repent and seek forgiveness for doing the Devil's work in attempting to thwart and to defeat Gospel preaching, they are cracking jokes and defaming the heralds of peace.  According to Muckraker Larry Wilson in the Pasadena Star-News of 10/12/2010, False Prophet George van Alstine of Altadena, the former longtime Pasadena Unified board member, has dug up more news about the awful Rev. Fred Phelps' local roots, which Janette Williams reported in the paper Monday in Citybeats. Wilson wrote: "George, knowing Im an ex-Mustang, jokingly wrote me: ,,Dont you think we should start a movement to get old Fred into the John Muir Alumni Hall of Fame?" To which Wilson replied: "MAYBE IF THE SCHOOL STARTED UP A HALL OF SHAME."  Beloved. Have we now come full-circle in comparing experiences of Westboro Baptist Church with those of the primitive church early on in the 1st Century AD?; to wit: "And to him they agreed; and when they had called the apostles, and beaten them, they commanded that they should not speak in the name of Jesus, and let them go. And they departed from the presence of the council, REJOICING THAT THEY WERE COUNTED WORTHY TO SUFFER SHAME FOR HIS NAME." (Acts 5:40-41) ("Dont you think we should start a movement to get old Fred into the John Muir Hall of Fame? MAYBE IF THE SCHOOL STARTED UP A HALL OF SHAME.") Pasadena Star-News, Oct. 12, 2010. Solid evidence that Muckraker Larry Wilson and False Prophet George van Alstine are mockers and scoffers: "in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts." 2 Pet. 3:3.  I love you. Amen.  
