
The Catholic Worker, November 1960, 2.
Summary: When the city says it will use interest money they returned to acquire more property, she responds by asking that they give it to WNYC radio “which provides such joy to so many.” (See Doc #775) (DDLW #776).
THE CITY OF NEW YORKOFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLERMunicipal BuildingNew York 7, N. Y.
Lawrence E, Gerosa, Comptroller
November 1, I960
The Catholic Worker39 Spring StreetNew York 12, New York
Att: Charles M, Butterworth IIIRe: Damage Parcel No, 8 and 9Section 2 Block 427, Lot 35,36 (Manhattan)
Dear Sir:
This office is in receipt of your communication dated October 24, 1960, together with a copy of a letter addressed to the City Treasurer by Dorothy Day, the Editor of the Catholic Worker requesting information with respect to the disposition of the check in the sum of $3,579.39 which she returned to the City and which represents interest on an award made to Dorothy Day in connection with the above captioned Parcels.
Please be advised that the money has been deposited in an account marked “Sales of City Properly formerly held by Board of Transportation,” and will be utilized in the future for the purpose of acquiring property in the public interest.
Should you within the near future desire the return of the aforesaid monies, as interest, application therefore may be entertained pursuant, to the provision Section 93-d of the New York City Charter.
Very truly yours,Jacob GoldmanChief, Division of Law
 
 
THE CATHOLIC WORKER39 SPRING STREETNEW YORK 12, N YNovember 3, 1960
Mr, Jacob GoldmanChief, Division of LawThe City Of New YorkOffice of the ComptrollerMunicipal BuildingNew York 7, New York
RE; Damage Parcel No. 89 Section 2 Block 427, fLot 35, 36 ManhattanDear Jacob Goldman,
Thank you very much for your very kind and courteous letter addressed to Charles Butterworth, III, and since there is a notation on the top saying, “in replying refer to Law’”, I might say in parenthesis that Mr. Butterworth is a graduate of the Harvard Law School, as well as being one of the editors of The Catholic Worker. You say in your letter that in regard to Damage Parcel No. 8 and 9 Section 2 Block 427, Lot 35, 36 (Manhattan) you advise us that the money deposited, our income check of $3,579.39 “will be utilized in the future for the purpose of acquiring property in the public interest”. We thank you very much for your generous, offer to return the aforesaid monies, but the letter which Mr. Butterworth wrote to you was prompted not only by the desire to know to what use the money would be put but also to add a suggestion which I hope you will not think presumptuous. It is rather frightening to think of your acquiring any more property and dispossessing any more people, no matter how noble your purpose. It would make us very happy indeed if the interest money could be donated to the WNYC radio station which provides such joy to so many. We appreciate certainly all the information services and classical music and the broadcasts from the UN.
Gratefully yours in Christ,Dorothy DayEditor, The Catholic Worker
