Shaykh Abū Talhah ‘Abdur-Ra’ūf Khādim al- Khurāsānī (rahimahullāh), also known as Mullā Khādim, was born in Helmand in the village of Adhān. He began his study of the shar ’ī sciences at a young age due to his strong desire to learn the religion. He then joined the caravan of jihād, opening a new chapter of his life. Shaykh Abū Talhah joined Muhammad ‘Umar (head of the Taliban) whom he then worked with together in hisbah (commanding the good and forbidding the evil), and he used to consider hisbah work to be an important part of his life.

After sometime and by Allah’s grace, Kabul was liberated, and the Shaykh was injured by a tank shell in a battle in Shār Āsiyāt and lost his leg. This was a great sacrifice for the cause of Allah on the battlefield. He was appointed by the Taliban as the director of the military college in Kabul, and also went on to play an important role as a field commander on the frontlines during the crusader invasion of Afghanistan. He was captured by the Americans in one of the battles and was amongst a number of prisoners who were transferred to Guantanamo where he was imprisoned for six and a half years in

30 SHUHADĀ‘

some of the most horrifying conditions. The Americans then handed him over to their Afghan puppets and he spent another year and a half imprisoned by the murtadd regime.

His time in prison, however, served as a period for him to further seek knowledge and review the sound ‘aqīdah of Ahlus-Sunnah. He was initially upon the Deobandi ‘aqīdah, which encompassed deviations concerning Allah’s names and attributes and other aspects of faith (including irjā’). He abandoned this, adopted the pure Sunnah, and thereafter, strived throughout the remainder of his life to call the people to this great blessing.

After being released from his imprisonment in Kabul, he rejoined the Taliban and became a member of their shūrā council. He was also appointed as the wālī over 14 of the Afghan wilāyāt. He was active in da’wah, calling the people to the ‘aqīdah of tawhīd, and as a result he was subsequently dismissed from his position as wālī, as the ‘aqīdah of tawhīd conflicted with the Deobandi ‘aqīdah upheld by the bulk of the Taliban leadership. He remained

-----------------------------------------------------Page 30-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
SHAYKH ABŪ TALHAH (MAY ALLAH ACCEPT HIM)

as a field commander and proved extremely capable, and as a result he was once again appointed as a wālī, this time over three wilāyāt. He again placed focus on calling to tawhid and, as a result, was once more dismissed from his position as wālī, going back to being a field commander once again.

Shaykh Abū Talhah had long dreamed of seeing the re-establishment of the Khilāfah, as did many of the mujāhidīn who were fighting to achieve that very goal so that the Ummah’s glory would return. When the Khilāfah was announced, he was from amongst those brothers who eagerly hastened to declare their bay ’ah and join the caravan of the Khilāfah. He alongside his brothers in Khurāsān presented what was required of

AMONG THE BELIEVERS ARE MEN

them for the Islamic State leadership to officially recognize their bay ’ah. Accordingly, the Khilāfah expanded into Khurāsān and appointed Shaykh Abū Talhah as the deputy wālī for the region, second-in-command to the wālī Shaykh Hāfidh Sa’īd Khān (hafidhahullāh).

After the announcement of the Khurāsānī bay ’ah, Shaykh Abū Talhah began touring the region in a caravan of the Khilāfah’s soldiers, calling the local tribes to give bay ’ah to the Khalīfah. Numerous tribal elders responded positively, extending their hands and declaring their oaths. Finally, upon hearing of Shaykh Abū Talhah’s presence in Adhān, the Deobandi partisans of the Taliban in the region set up roadblocks and checkpoints, preventing him from leaving the village until an American airstrike killed him along with five of his companions on Monday 21 Rabī’ al-Ākhir. Shaykh Abū Talhah thereby attained shahādah at the age of 45 after a life of jihād, hisbah, and da’wah. We consider him such and Allah is his judge. May Allah have mercy upon him and his companions in martyrdom.

THE WĀLĪ SHAYKH HĀFIDH SA’ĪD KHĀN (HAFIDHAHULLĀH) PROMISES REVENGE FOR THE KILLING OF SHAYKH ABŪ TALHAH (RAHIMAHULLĀH)

dabiq

31

-----------------------------------------------------Page 31-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
In the name of Allah who revealed an āyah about the muhājirāt and preserved it in the clear-cut revelation until the establishment of the Hour. May blessings and peace be upon the Imām of the mujāhidīn and the beloved of the Ansār and Muhājirīn as well as his family, companions, and good followers until the Day of Recompense. As for what follows: Because hijrāh for Allah’s cause is a great matter, Allah revealed about it, {And the first forerunners among the Muhājirīn and the Ansār and those who followed them with good conduct – Allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with Him, and He has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide forever. That is the great success} [At-Tawbah: 100]. Similarly, if not for the greatness of hijrah, the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) would not have given it as an example in the hadīth “actions are according to intentions,” as he said, “So whoever ’s hijrah is to Allah and His Messenger, then his hijrah is to Allah and His Messenger.” Hijrah from Makkah to al-Madīnah also represented a great event and important turning point in the prophetic mission, as it contained many great lessons. Rather, it was the greatest event in the history of Islam, and for this reason it was used as the basis for the Islamic calendar.

Hijrah for Allah’s cause has many purposes, amongst them being to escape tribulations, fearing that one may fall into them and that his religion may be affected by them. Also, getting used to seeing kufr and shirk without changing it could lead to death of the heart, to the point that the person does not recognize Islam and its people. Also, from amongst the purposes of hijrah is to join the sides of the Muslims, support them, strengthen their forces, and wage jihād against the enemies of Allah and their enemies.