   Literalism 
March 28, 2010 
Reverend Mark Belletini 
 Opening Words
  
We are here 

with our whole lives in tow, 

our worries and joys, our loves and losses, 

our hopes and doubts, our pain and strength. 

Amid spring snow, flowers and rain, we arrive 

to weave a community that empowers love. So, 

 
Mindful that we share a common world, but approach 
that world in different ways, we 
begin our celebration together by kindling our prom
ise of mutual honesty, attentiveness, 
and deep courtesy. May we become more proficient at
 gratitude and awareness, that we 
might more deeply embody the kind of justice and pe
ace which embraces everyone on earth. 
 
Sequence 
(a Midrash on the Torah passages for Pesach) 
 
And so Moses and his wife Zipporah and his sister M
iriam and brother Aaron all walked into the 
King™s Palace, and said in unison: ?Let my people g
o!? 
?Let your people go? To do what?? barked the King. 

?To get away from the fighting, and name calling an
d righteous sarcasm about health care 
issues,? replied Moses. 

?To found financial and industrial and governance i
nstitutions based on generosity and 
cooperation, not personal gain and greed for the se
lf-defined few,? chimed in Miriam. 
?To create educational systems that engage every ki
nd of child, in every kind of family, and 
which see as their vision, the encouragement of the
 growth of the whole human person into a 
grounded maturity,? answered Aaron. 

?To offer a community where your firstborn and my f
irstborn might become friends, and where, 
when they grow up, they can marry whomever they wis
h, or not marry, as 
they
 choose,? offered 
Zipporah. 

The King frowned. Then crossed his arms. Then, with
out warning, he reached up and took off 
the Blue Crown, the one worn by every Warrior King 
for a thousand years, and said to them, 
?Let me pack my bags. I™m going with you.  Me and m
y whole family.?  And there was a 
sprinkling of laughter in the room; and then they a
ll fell silent. 
 
silence 

 
Remembering that the Passover Story says that every
one left together, we think of our own 
togetherness, and we call to mind now all those 

who make this journey with us: those whom we love a
nd those whom we find hard to love, those 

   whose memories we keep in our hearts, those whose f
inal future we will never see. We name 
them aloud or simply thank them in the silence–
  
naming 

 
They came out of bondage, says the legend, they cam
e with all their differences and similarities, 
and they came out singing, singing, singing songs o
f all the nations, singing music with joy.  
 
The First Reading
 comes from the Gospel of Mark, which was written do
wn around 71 CE, by 
an anonymous author we only name Mark.  

 
After they left Bethany, he felt hungry. He saw a f
ig tree in the distance, green with leaves, and 
he went up to see if he could find any figs on it. 
When he reached it, he found nothing but leaves, 
for it wasn™t the season for figs. And so he spoke 
to the tree and said to it:  ?Henceforth, may no 
one ever eat fruit from you.?  His students heard w
hat he said. 
 
When they reached Jerusalem, he climbed into the te
mple, and began to drive out all the 
merchants, and he turned over the tables of the cas
hiers and the pigeon-dealer™s seats, and he 
would not allow anyone to use the courtyard as a sh
ortcut from one part of the city to the other. 
Then he began to teach:  ?It™s put this way in our 
scriptures: ‚My house is a house of prayer for 
all the nations.™ But you have turned it into a ref
uge for racketeers.? When evening came, he and 
his students left the city. 

 
Next morning, as they were walking past, they notic
e that the fig tree had withered from the root. 
 
The Second Reading
 is a poem by Naomi Shihab Nye, written in 2002, and
 published by Harper 
Collins. It™s called:  My Father and the Fig Tree. 
 The name Joha, in the poem, is the Palestinian 
trickster figure. 

 
For other fruits,  

my father was indifferent.
 He'd point at the cherry trees and say, 
 "See those? I wish they were figs."
 In the evening he sat by my bed
 weaving folktales like vivid little scarves.
 They always involved a fig tree.
 Even when it didn't fit, he'd stick it in.
 Once Joha
1 was walking down the road  
and he saw a fig tree.
 Or, he tied his camel to a fig tree  

and went to sleep.
 Or later, 
when they caught and arrested him,  

his pockets were full of figs.

 At age six I ate a dried fig and shrugged.
 "That's not what I'm talking about!? he said.
 
   "I'm talking about a fig straight from the earth  

Š gift of Allah! Š on a branch so heavy  

it touches the ground.
 I'm talking about picking the largest, fattest, 
  
sweetest fig in the world,  

and putting it in my mouth."
 (Here he'd stop and close his eyes.)

 Years passed, we lived in many houses,  

none had fig trees.
 We had lima beans, zucchini, parsley, beets. 
 "Plant one!" my mother said,
 but my father never did.
 He tended garden half-heartedly,  

forgot to water, 
let the okra get too big.
 "What a dreamer he is.  

Look how many things he starts and doesn't finish."

 The last time he moved, I got a phone call.
 My father, in Arabic, chanting a song
 I'd never heard. "What's that?" 
 He took me out back to the new yard.
 There, in the middle of Dallas, Texas,
 a tree with the largest, fattest, sweetest figs  

in the world.
 "It's a fig tree song!" he said, 
 plucking his fruits like ripe tokens, 
 emblems, assurance
  
of a world that was always his own. 

 
Sermon 

 
Not long before he died, my father was sitting in h
is wheelchair at the dining room table. It was, 
in fact, his last time at the table–from that day o
n, he couldn™t get out of bed no matter how 
much help he had. My mother was sitting at the tabl
e that day, and I was there, and my sister was 
there. The supper was simple, the conversation, som
ewhat minimal for an Italian American 
family.  

 
Without warning, my father sat up straight in his c
hair, hunched his shoulders and then waved 
his hands as if he was conducting a big band. Then 
suddenly, he burst out singing, ?Up we go, 
into the wild blue yonder, climbing high, into the 
sun–?  We all looked at him with open-
mouthed bafflement. It took a few seconds for us to
 realize that this was a song we recognized. 
But then, since he had stopped singing, I realized 
he couldn™t remember any more of the words 
past the first two lines; so I quickly looked up th
e words via my IPhone, and showed it to him 
with the letters as large as I could make them. He 
smiled, read them, and then finished singing 
the first verse. 

 
   Now I had supposed my father sang this song because
 he had served in the Army Air Force 
during the 1940s War. However, somehow he contracte
d 
Yellow Fever
, a terrible illness, very 
rare in the States, which ended his flight training
 for good.  
 
But I assure you, before he sang it that day at the
 supper table, none of us had ever heard him 
singing this song, or referencing it in any way bef
ore this time. He 
had
 talked a few days earlier 
about his sickness during the war, and his weeks of
 recovery by the Salton Sea in Southern 
California. Perhaps, I thought, that was what promp
ted it. 
 
Then, after letting the surprising incident sink in
 for a few hours, I realized that I might have 
been being a bit literal, thinking it was only a co
ncrete memory coming to life. I realized that the 
sudden song, while 
based
 on memory, might also be his way of reconciling hi
mself with his own 
coming end. After all, he had also been saying thin
gs like this for the past year, ?One day, not 
long from now, I™ll be way up there with my ma and 
pa, playing pinochle.?  Up there–. ?The 
wild blue yonder–? 

 
Seeing past the literal meaning made the event all 
the more poignant and strangely touching. 
 
Taking things literally can just be a way of stoppi
ng too soon. If I take literally the story of King 
David in the Bible, then read that archeologists ha
ve so far not been able to find much evidence 
for a vast empire ruled by a guy named David, then 
I lose the story because it™s not literal play-
by-play reporting. If I think a story has to be lit
erally true in order to be true at all, it™s my 
expectation which robs me of the power of the story
. Like in the wonderful children™s story this 
morning, if I expect a blanket, and only a blanket,
 a little button–or just a story about a 
button–is not going to make me very happy. But if I
 allow myself to be more flexible and 
realistic in my expectations, and take the story of
 David for what it is, a poignant story about 
love and loss, courage and cowardice, hate and rage
, beauty and sexist power and entitlement, 
disappointment and lust, self-doubt and mystical ra
pture and justice–I can be moved, inspired, 
or better, come to transformative new understanding
s about my own loves and losses, self-doubts 
and raptures. After all, as I say each year during 
the Passover Seder, ?a story is true in the way a 
story is true.? 

 
On the other side of the equation, if I read the st
ory from the Gospel of Mark about the fig tree, 
and get upset with the prophet because of his pique
 against the fig tree, I am 
also
 allowing a rigid 
literalism to siphon off the power of this slice of
 ancient literature. Unfortunately, to read ancient
 
scriptures literally, that is, uncritically, is wha
t we all have been trained to do. Yep, I mean all o
f 
us. Whether we grew up in deeply conservative congr
egations, Christian or Jewish, or not. And I 
mean even if we grew up Unitarian Universalist. Som
ehow, this literalist bent has become almost 
universal. I™m not sure I know how this happened, b
ut it did. And by reading scripture 
uncritically, I mean reading it without looking at 
language, context, history, or literary styles. 
Reading it on the surface. People as brilliant as B
ertrand Russell certainly critiqued the 
scriptures, but he did so from a literal perspectiv
e only, and thus, his famous essay ?Why I Am 
Not A Christian? leaves me cold and sad, even thoug
h, like him, I don™t call myself a Christian. 
 
The fig tree image in Mark™s story 
can
 make no sense, in truth, unless you refuse the lit
eral 

   reading. It™s necessary to note 
other
 literary references, like, for example, the book o
f Jeremiah. 
Mark™s Jesus clearly asks us to connect with Jeremi
ah™s writings when he actually quotes them 
during the temple incident:  ?My house is a house o
f prayer for all the nations.?  Not only did the 
Hebrew prophet Jeremiah write that sentence, he als
o predicted the destruction of the Temple in 
his
 day, announcing it would collapse into a heap of r
uin like the old Temple at Shiloh. But, 
more importantly, he also offered us the reason why
 temples fall. ?When I wanted to gather 
them, says the Eternal, there were no figs on the f
ig tree; even the leaves are withered, for the 
heritage I left them has passed away from them."  

 
Let me say that again: Their ?heritage has passed a
way from them–? 
 
What heritage? The heritage of justice-making at th
e heart of religion. 
 
How did they lose their heritage? When you look at 
the historical context, you find out that the 
Temple in both Jeremiah™s and Jesus™ day was more t
han a religious center for carrying out the 
ritual demands of the Torah. It was the chief cente
r of the ruling aristocracy as well. It was the 
IRS. It was the symbol of collaboration with Rome. 
It was the chief employer in the city, almost 
a monopoly, in fact. You suddenly get a sense of Ma
rk™s understanding of what Jesus did in the 
Temple by overturning the cashier tables and pigeon
-seller seats. Please (it drives me wild when 
I hear such assertions!) he wasn™t, as a clearly pr
acticing Jew, decrying Jewish religious practice 
and ritual, any more than Jeremiah was decrying it.
 Or worse (and this just about sends me 
around the bend!) he wasn™t foolishly saying that s
pirituality is somehow tainted by financial 
realities.  

 
No, he was making a political, social, economic sta
tement about an aristocratic system in the 
year 30 which collaborated with Roman oppression so
 as to gain privileges denied the poor and 
the sick, including affordable medical care and gai
nful employment. One reason, in fact, that 
Jesus got himself into trouble before he staged his
 little street theater in the Temple was that he 
offered acts of healing..i.e. heathcare– 
for free,
 to the poor who couldn™t afford regular and 
ruinously expensive medical care.  

 
So the story as Mark told it is this: if the purpos
e of the Temple, the official shelter for the 
aristocracy in cahoots with Rome, is to ignore the 
commands of the Torah-- ?Do not defraud. Do 
not defer to the powerful. You shall not be deceive
d. Love your neighbor as you love 
yourself.?Šthen why not tear the damn thing down? W
hat good is it? If the fig tree, symbol of 
the Temple, bears no fruit, let it perish. For the 
people are indeed hungry–.for justice, the 
sweetest fruit of all. They do not need a tree that
 produces nothing that satisfies–
  
You see how much more poignant things get when you 
avoid the literal reading of things, and go 
deeper?   

 
But you know, that doesn™t mean that I have no appr
eciation for the literal at all, or that being 
literal is always somehow wrong. No, not at all. It
™s a terrible way to approach literature, I think, 
biblical or otherwise–but frankly, I like a literal
 fig, not a metaphorical fig. As some of you 
know, I grew up with them in my back yard. They are
 my favorite fruit, along, I suppose, with 

   tangerines and oranges. Like Naomi Shihab Nye™s Pal
estinian father, I want the biggest, fattest 
figs, fresh from the tree, not all dried up in a Ne
wton. I want to feast on the red, seedy flesh, the 
black-purple skin, so earthy.  I don™t want a symbo
lic fig out of the book of Jeremiah, I want a 
real fig from a tree in my back yard. 

 
I don™t live in hot Dallas, like the poet™s father 
does. I live in Columbus where snowfall can bury 
the crocuses. But I bought a fig tree anyway, last 
summer. A new kind of fig tree that, unlike 
Palestinian fig trees, or my grandfather™s fig tree
, sheds its leaves in the fall, and survives 
dormant in a pot indoors, and can then be planted o
utside in the summer, its beautiful mitten-
shaped leaves unfurling fresh each year. There is m
y little fig tree up there. It™s so small, you can 
barely see it if you™re sitting in back, but I assu
re you, it™s beautiful. It may take years before I 
grow a crop of figs, but I am willing to cultivate 
the thing until then. 
 
"What a dreamer he is,? say Nye™s relatives, critic
al of her father. ?Look how many things he 
starts and doesn't finish."

  
For me, being a dreamer is not an insult. I™m a dre
amer too. And just like I want literal figs, not 
symbolic figs, to hold in my hand, to drop in my hu
ngry mouth, I want real justice that I can 
touch, and taste, not some mirage of shimmering uto
pian hope. 
 
The health bill passed. As you know, some folks are
 mustering strong attacks against it. But 
nevertheless, I want literal, not metaphoric, healt
h care for everyone in the country. I can™t 
produce a list of folks who shouldn™t get health ca
re, can you? Can any of you give me a list of 
names of citizens, or even visitors, who should die
 on the streets, unattended and ignored just 
because of who they are? 

 
And, I want literal civility. I don™t want to hear 
sarcastic and, I personally believe, racialized 
metaphors like 
Obamacare
 instead of the simple word healthcare. I want lite
ral windows without 
cracks in them–I don™t want history™s new 
Kristalnacht
, symbolic stones crashing through a 
congressman™s windows. I don™t want to hear symboli
c words like Minority Leader John 
Boehner™s ?Armageddon,? which is a biblical word th
at refers 
literally 
to a ruined fort in the 
Galilee, but metaphorically to a catastrophic battl
e at the end of time. It is not the end of time. It
 
is not the end of the world. I want healthcare lite
rally and carefully shepherded by people who 
love their brothers and sisters, and consider it an
 injustice if they die for lack of treatment. And I
 
want it now, not at the end of time. 

 
When the US State Department gives DNA tests to Som
ali refugee families who immigrate to 
Columbus from that Somali refugee camp in Kenya wit
h 350, 000 inhabitants, to determine if all 
of their children are genetically related to the pa
rents, sending any adopted children back to the 
camp, tearing them from their new and loved familie
s. I want them to stop it. Literally, not 
metaphorically. I want literal justice for immigran
ts to this country, not legislated heartlessness. 
 
I want literal justice, like Jesus and Nye™s father
 wanted literal figs from their trees. A fig tree 
that produces figs satisfies deep hunger. A fig tre
e that does not produce figs has no purpose, just 
as any policy that obstructs justice---that is, equ
al access to privilege and power--- for one and 

   all, has forgotten its purpose, like Jeremiah remin
ded us, and reminded us over 2700 years ago. 
Whether it™s a policy of the government: ?Don™t ask
, don™t tell,? or a policy of the State of Ohio 
?You™ll marry who we tell you to marry and no one e
lse–? I want a literal end to such policies. 
Not a symbolic end. Not street theater, as fun as t
hat might be, a few overturned tables and all 
that. I dare to dream of a literal end to the polic
ies that ridicule, obliterate or distort justice. I
 
want the policies of injustice to 
literally
 wither just like that metaphorical fig tree wither
ed to the 
root. I want them to dry up and blow away. And then
 I want a new tree to rise, unfurl its leaves, 
and bear figs, sweet and delicious and plenteous.  

 
So, by all means, literalism has its place. Yes, it
™s not the best way to read literature, but I™m als
o 
sure that any policies of justice that do not promo
te literal justice: real, solid and factual justice
 
amount to little. 

 
The poet™s father, she tells us, sang her a ?fig so
ng? in Arabic when he gazed upon his back yard 
fig tree. My father sang a song to me too, as he fa
ced his own coming death. The songs were 
symbolic, powerful vehicles for expressing and carr
ying deep human emotion. They were not to 
be taken literally. But they were meant to be taken
 seriously. For, no matter what music we 
make, or songs we sing, justice, I say, is either l
iteral, or it simply doesn™t exist. 
 
Offering          
Only the free gifts of the members and friends of t
his congregation keep it strong. 
There are no outside sources, no hidden resources, 
no denominational assets to draw on. To be 
an independent congregation, as all Unitarian Unive
rsalist congregations are, means to bear 
the responsibility for everything ourselves, for th
e privilege of freedom is not free. The 
opportunity to give gifts this way, instead of elec
tronically, is now here. Let the offering be 
given and received. 

 
Blessing of the Fig Tree 

  

May you bear fruit. 

May it be sweet. 

May you grow tall. 

May your fruit be plenteous. 

May your life be long. 

May you recover and thrive after winter. 

May you feed the multitudes. 

May you bring delight and wonder. 

May I and all here gathered before you be thankful.
 Amen. 

