
ONCE a Hindu king feeling disgusted with the daily mono­tonous routine of life, began to philosophise with himself and came to the conclusion that life for a man had a deeper meaning and significance than an eternal repetition of sense and pleasures. He argued with himself that since he was sure to die some day in spite of his power in plenty, would it not be worthwhile for him to die before death and thus become a Jivan-mukta? 
Having decided upon this line of action, the king sent for the Brah­mins and pandits and asked them the method by which he could achieve Jivanmukti. The Brah­mins after deep consideration said, "Maharaj, you would be well advised to order a cow to be made of gold, distribute a certain amount in kind or cash amongst Brahmins and also to undertake sixty-four pilgrimages to holy places. If you follow these instructions, by God's Grace you are sure to realize your heart's desire." The king performed everything he was told but nothing resulted therefrom. 
The king then approached the yogis and explained his plight to them. The yogis undertook the responsibility and by way of initiation perforated the king's ears and imposed upon him the four principal ordeals peculiar to that order viz., Brahmacharya (celebacy), Vanaprasthi (annihilation of the sex idea), Dundakamandal (begging at a place where one lives) and Bijyahome) (spiritual attention of the Guru). 
The first three orders are for the novice himself to deal with, but the fourth ordeal or operation which brings about God-realization, rests with the Guru. This type of Guru was not to be found amongst the said yogis who consequently failed in their undertaking. 
Not feeling daunted by the situation the king turned to the 

Muslim Divines and explained to them his desire and difficulty. As was to be expected, the Muslim Divines promised him the desired result, if he accepted the Muslim faith. The king readily acquiesed. The Muslim Divines converted him to their religion, circumcised him and imposed upon him the cadinal duties of their faith, viz., pilgrimage to Mecca fasting, the payment of poor-tax, etc. The king underwent all these austerities unflinchingly and at the end found himself no nearer to the Goal. When the Muslim Divines were asked to explain their failure in the matter, they said, “We have instructed you in what our religion has enjoined upon us to do. Beyond this we cannot help you.” 
The king was deeply disappointed at this reply and finding no hope from any quarter, he became mentally unhinged. In this state of madness, with one hand on his split-ear (symbol of Hinduism) and the other on the physical symbol of the Muslim faith, he went about asking the question to everyone he met: "This is Hindu and this is Muslim. 
Who am I?" 
At long last the mad king came up against a Perfect Master, to whom he asked the same question: "This is Hindu and this is Muslim. 
Who am I?" The Perfect Master in order to test him, ordered that he be given a good thrashing and finding that he (the king) still kept on repeating his query gave him a single look of Perfection and quietened him forever. When asked as to what he has to say now the king replied, “I cannot now describe in words what am I.” 
The moral is that an aspirant of the Path must not give up the search for God, in spite of untold difficulties and disappointments. In fact when one feels utterly dis­appointed when one loses all hope of external factors helping him on­ward in his quest and no sooner when one recoils on himself in utter helplessness the Master appears on the scene and performs the trick. 
According to Meher Baba, disappointment and hopelessness is one of the nearest stage to the goal of God-realization. 

