
Baba came to the West for the first time in 
1931. A center had been prepared for Him by 
Meredith Starr, an Englishman who had met 
Baba in India. All of us who were destined to be 
of His early English group, were somehow drawn 
to Meredith's place in North Devon -East 
Challacombe. 
I personally had reached a crisis in my life. I had been seeking, not for a Master, but to know and understand something of God. This was my great desire. I was running an experimental theater in London but suddenly had to alter all my plans. 
I found a note in a magazine called, "The Everyman," in which Mr. Starr spoke of the East Challacombe Center. I wrote to Meredith and I went. It was a converted farmhouse in the beautiful countryside· of North Devonshire; here Meredith told us about the great Master he had met in India. 
While I was at the Center, Baba cabled that He was coming to the West. I had to go back to London but I arranged to return to the Center and meet Him later on. Baba came to East Challacombe, however He cut short the length of His stay, and I received a call saying not to come but to meet Him at Kitty Davy's house in London. 
Baba wanted to visit the theater, so Margaret Craske bought tickets for a musical comedy and she invited me to come. She instructed me to wait by the box office until Baba's party was seated. I was standing there when they passed. They had decked Baba out in a long English coat and He wore a hat that was down to His nose. His hair was flowing. Once Baba's party had left the lobby, Meredith appeared and took me to His box. There was one empty seat beside Baba; they told me to sit there. He simply looked at me and patted my hand. During the performance I hardly saw or heard anything except Baba. He chuckled quite a lot because there was a funny fat man in the play and Baba always liked fat men and comedians. After the play, I just looked at Him and said, "Baba, I must see you again." He nodded. 
He spent one week in London and I went every day to see Him at Kitty Davy's house. I was with Him most of the time. He went to the cinema, He saw many people and when any of us asked Baba to go out He always had a lot of people come along, not just two or three. 
The night before Baba left England we played Negro spirituals. He was especially fond of "Steal Away to Jesus," and "Is There Anybody Here Like Weeping Mary?" He sat among us, beautiful and radiant, while the songs played, and we were all terribly sad because we did not know when we would see Him again. He said, "Oh yes. You will see Me again." On one occasion He said to me, "You're very lucky to have met Me now," and He added, "It's not luck that brings you here." 
That first meeting with Baba was unforgettable. Like many others I was moved by His radiant love and beauty, so much so that I wept continually. For years I cried every time I looked at Baba, because in some way I felt His great crucifixion in coming into the body. 
