 1 2004-4-4 The Liberal Bible  Mark Belletini  Opening Words  We are here,  to open the scroll of our hearts and therein read the sacred text of our lives.  The joy and suffering we have known there bid us increase the joy and lessen the suffering of all those with whom we share the earth.  And thus we pray:  May we live fully, love deeply, learn daily and speak truly that together we might leave the sacred legacy of a better world.  Sequence  Life is hard, the philosophers of life tell me. Life is suffering, echoes the Buddha, a thousand other prophets and poets, wise all. True enough, I suppose. God knows I am not unacquainted  with brokenness and pain. But I am remiss in my calling as a human being if I neglect to sing praise for the saving mercies tucked by their thousands  into the intricate folds of hurt and loss. Daffodils, for one.  Forsythia.  Red tulips.  Budding oak branches against a silver sky. The shadow of a maple against a stucco wall. Fresh grapes flown in from Chile.  A loaf of bread.  
 2 A phone call from my godson. A crackling run of laughter between friends. An embrace.  A glass of water with lemon in it. A kiss.  Fresh resolve.  The sight of a child, amazed at a pill bug. A surprising moment of self-forgiveness. A familiar song on the radio,  or the CD of the Kyrie of Paul Paray  playing in the car.  News of slow, but hopeful political progress  in Tbilisi in the Asian Georgia.  The green of grass.   The gift of tears in the shower. Each and every single breath we take. And the solace, in this noisy world, of silence  silence   Mercy looks a lot like love, too. The mercy of those we have loved all the way into the forever-places in our hearts. The mercy of friends, lovers, spouses, children. The mercy of knowing how basic our interwoven lives are to all meaning. We give thanks for the mercies of love which live in us, by either silently or vocally naming those we care about especially today, or those who have loved us into the present moment.      naming  9 AM   Life is tough, yes, but mercy is everywhere, not least in the blessing of music that gladdens the heart. 
 3 11 AM Life is tough, yes, but mercy is everywhere, not least in the blessing of human voices joining in an ancient song of divine mercy: Eleisonñ.   Readings:  The First Reading comes from the influential  Womenôs Bible, written by Susan B. Anthonyôs closest friend, Elizabeth Cady Stanton and some other friends, back in1898. In it she mentions several women, famous and lesser known, from the western scriptures.  Look at Deborah!  We never hear sermons pointing women to the heroic virtues of Deborah as worthy of their imitation. Nothing is said in the pulpit to rouse them from the apathy of ages, to inspire them to do and dare great things, to intellectual and spiritual achievements, in real communion with the Great Spirit of the Universe.  Women as queenly, as noble and as self-sacrificing as was Esther, as self-respecting and as brave as was Vashti, are hampered in their creative office by the unjust statues of menñ  Look at Huldah and Vashti! Huldah and Vashti added new glory to their day and generationäone by her learning, and the other by her disobedience; for Resistance to tyrants is obedience to God.  The Second Reading comes from two sources: The Jewish Torah, namely, the book of Shemoth, which we call Exodus in most English translations; I have used the Hebrew names of the characters in this translation. And the second source is an authentic quotation from Jesus of Galilee inserted into a context created later in the gospel of Mark.  A. Now Moshe was tending the flocks of his father-in-law, Yitro. He drove the flocks into the high chaparral, and came into the shadow of the great mountain 
 4 range called Wasteland (Heb.: Horeb)  There, a messenger from the Eternal appeared to him in a blazing fire rising out of a thorn-bush. Moshe stared at the fireñit blazed in the entire thorn-bush, but the branches of the bush were not burnt up by the flame. So Moshe said to himself, ?I must turn off the beaten path and find out why the bush is not turning to ash.? As soon as he had left his path, the Eternal spoke to Moshe, ?Come no closer. And take off your sandals, for this earth is sacred. I am One your ancestors called God.?  At this, Moshe hid his face behind his hands, afraid to look any further.  The messenger continued: ?I have felt keenly the plight of my people in bondage. I have heard their outrage, I have known their sufferings. So I am here to bring them out of the land of slavery. And I am sending you to do this.?  Moshe said, ?And who am I, that I should go up to the king of Egypt and tell him to free the people??  ?I will be with you,? said the Eternal. ?That in itself should be a sufficient sign that I am the one who is sending you.?  ?But listen, what shall I say to the people? I canôt just go up to them and say ÇThe God of your ancestors sent me to you; now can I? Why not tell me your actual name so I can tell the people who it really is who is sending me??  ?I am becoming that which I am becoming,? said the voice. ?Tell them ÇI am becomingô is sending you.?  ?But what if they donôt believe me? What if they say ?The Eternal did not appear to you in fire?? ?What is that in your hand?? said the Eternal. ?My cane,? said Moshe. ?Throw it on the earth.? And he did and immediately it turned into a frightful serpent. Moshe recoiled. ?Now, pick it up by the tail.? And Moshe did so and picked up what proved to be his cane.?  ?But listen,? cried Moshe, ? You know very well that I have never been a man of words, after all. I stammer.?   ?I will be with you as you speak.? 
 5  ?No, please listen. You need to send someone else to be your agent.?  But then the Eternal grew angry at Moshe, and so Moshe fled, and returned to his father-in-law, and said, ?Let me have some vacation time so your daughter and I can go back to Egypt and check on all our  relatives there.? And Yitro said, ?You have my blessing. Shalom.?   B. from Jesus: The Sabbath was made to serve human beings.  Human beings were not made to serve the Sabbath.  Sermon  The present world is a difficult place. Between the tinderbox of the Mideast, both in Jerusalem and Baghdad, and the horrific culture clashes here in the United States with mudslinging between religious and political conservatives and everyone else, and between the very presidential candidates themselves, there is enough heartache to bend me to my knees as I cry out, ?Mercy, Mercy, I just canôt take it any more.?  One of the principle heartaches for me during these last twenty years is the death of the word ?liberal.? The political and religious right in this nation have succeeded in turning it into a curse word, into a condemnation. Say you are a liberal, and you are dismissed with a hearty laugh by the Rush Limbaughs and Sean Hannitys on the political side, and the Dr. Kennedys and Pat Robertsons on the religious side. Today, the most progressive claim you can make for yourself and live without contemptuous mockery is to say, ?I am a Moderate.? And even then you get accused of being wishy-washy.  No, certitude and security are the two bywords of our era. Absolute unchanging truth has replaced the noble concept of emerging truth. Absolute morality has replaced the concept of situational or rational ethics. And good and evil have now become the vocabulary of presidents and radio show hosts instead of the clergyñradio pundit Rush Limbaugh, for example, says that there is a war between conservatives and liberals, and that it is ?the war between good and evil.? 
 6  Historically, Unitarians and Universalists  proudly claimed the liberal attitude. ?Liberal religion? is a phrase found throughout our literature. But to Rush Limbaugh and his ilk, we are all evil. Absolutely evil.  There was a man here at the Forum on Friday night who claimed that he was good because he was following the Bible, and that only those who follow the Bibleñall of it, ?without picking and choosing passages,? are really moral, and really good. The rest of us are simply wrong and hell-bound.  Now I donôt have to tell you that this man actually speaks for many in our nation these days. And because of that, I can certainly understand why many liberal religious folks are suspicious of the Bible, and why they might flinch when it is quoted or used in any way. They are aware that, for religious ?true-believers,? the Bible has ceased to be a library of many books written over a thousand year period by a variety of human beings for many reasons. In their hands, it has become a hammer, a bludgeon, a poison-pen letter, a jail key, a kangaroo court, and, I have to add,  a golden badge of self-congratulatory self-righteousness.  But I say that what the fundamentalists have done to the poor thing is to make it into an idol, a Golden Calf in the form of a book. ?Save us from the modern world!? they pray to their idol. ?Confirm that we are good, special, chosen, and that we are superior to all others!?    But I for one am disgusted when such idolatry disguises itself as a religion, 
religion which links itself, without shame, to reactionary politics and conservative social agendas. But more importantly, I am peeved that religious and political liberals have both given up on their own liberalism, and have given over this extraordinary cultural treasure, the Bible, to bloodthirsty braggarts who dangle their own precious children over the fires of their sick and imaginary hellfire.  And the reason that this gets me so riled is that you can clearly just as easily read the Biblical books and find liberalism all through them.  Unvarnished, good, old-fashioned liberalism, too.  
 7 You know. Liberalism.  Generosity of welcome.  Generosity of spirit.  Generosity period. Look in the thesaurus with me: Liberal: Lavish, impartial, humanitarian, unstinting, open-minded, open-handed, freethinking, bounteous, tolerant, flexible, open to reason, unsparing, magnanimous. And I say the Bible is crammed with all of this liberalism.  For exampleñthe Book of Ruth, which story I told the children this morning.  Itôs not history, itôs a reflective novella, written around the year 400 BCE.  The unknown author was dealing with issues of immigration, an issue in those days, as it is in ours.  People were asking: is there such a thing as a pure people?  Donôt immigrants arriving thin the blood of the native born?  Especially those fool Moavitesñand here you can read any immigrant group you want.  The Book of Ruth takes the liberal attitude, and says, ?All people are welcome, and make a nation. The idea of a pure people is wrong to begin with. In fact, our greatest chieftain, David, was the grandchild of this immigrant woman and a local man.?  Same thing is true in our nation: the Revolutionary War wasnôt fought by just white Anglo-Saxon Protestant men, as our conservative think tanks like to tell you, but also by some 350,000 German immigrants who were already here, and Jewish regiments, and Yoruban Africans, and Catholic Italians, and Poles, and Spaniards and Sovenians, and French atheists.  Immigration from all parts of the world has been shaping the American people from the beginning, as it shaped the Hebrew people from the beginning. Itôs not like our distorted history says: we started out white Protestants and were ?invaded? by all of these immigrants later.  Or take Genesis, the book the wild-eyed Creationists like to say they take literally.  In this book, the sun and the moon are called ?lamps.?  In every other culture in the world at that time, the sun and the moon were called god or goddess.  By observing that the sun and the moon were things, like lamps, the book of Genesis establishes the process of scientific observation.  If you worship the sun and moon, you canôt subject them to scientific observation.  So in the much criticized book of Genesis, I find the beginning, not the antithesis, of the scientific method, an approach beloved of liberals.    Scholars of language can read the scriptural books in their original.  Thus, they can tell from the language that some books were written earlier or later than others.  This is not really all that difficult. If I showed any of you in this room, 
 8 without naming the author, some English from Shakespeareôs time, some English from Chaucerôs time, some English from Dickensô time and some English from our present day Mary Oliver, I dare say you could easily decide which English phrases predated the others.  So, using such an approach, what are the two oldest texts in the Bible, as we now have it?  The Song of Deborah and the Lament of David over Saul and Jonathan.  Both of these ancient texts were placed in later contexts (the books of Judges and Samuel respectively), but they are easily recognized as being of the oldest strata in the whole collection.  And what is the Song of Deborah about?  Itôs the prayer of a woman general who helps defeat a marauding army.  And how does the Lament of David for Jonathan end? I quote: ?Thy love, O Jonathan, was more wonderful to me than the love of any woman.?  In other words, the two earliest writings in the scriptures deal with a ?woman in military authority,? and the love, the same-sex love, between two men.  Are not such issues liberal concerns?  No wonder the great feminist of the 19th century, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, demands that we look at Deborah!  As well as Vashti, who told her husband to go to hell, when he wanted to parade her around like a trophy bride before all of his leering men friends.  Or Huldah, the wise prophet.  Or Esther (Hadassah) the clever strategist.  All these women sound like they are shaped in the liberal spirit to me.  At Jim Bosveldôs memorial service yesterday, Steve Abbot read a passage from 
the 58th chapter of Yisayahu, or Isaiah.  It reads like this:  (And if the fundamentalist fellow who was shouting here on Friday night was here,  I just might tattoo this passage on his frowning forehead.)   ?To be sure, these people say they seek me daily.  They say they are eager to learn my ways,  and have the whole nation become like them.  They want to be intimate with me.  They tell me they have fasted,  and done all the proper rituals to convince me  that I should be close to them. 
 9  But on the same day they do these rituals,  they are oppressing workersñ and are filled with strife and contention.  They strike out at all with a wicked fist.  No, no, no. If you really want to ?fast?  so as to come close to me, this is how you do it. First, unlock the fetters of injustice. Second, untie the cords of the yokes you put on people.  Three, let the oppressed find their freedom.  Four, share your bread with the hungry.  Five, help the wretched poor find homes no different than your own.  Six. Clothe the beggars dressed in rags.  Seven. Pay attention to your own family needs.  If you ?fast? like that, then shall the light dawn,  and then you shall be like a watered garden, and then you shall be like an unfailing spring.?  This sounds like liberalism to me.  Or how about Jesusô famous dictum: ?The Sabbath was made for human beings, not human beings for the Sabbathñ?  Is this not a humanistic approach to life, a humanitarian attitude toward religion, similar to Isaiahôs?  Religion is not ritual for its own sake, itôs to help strengthen people to get out there and do humanitarian justice work.  All of this is liberalism as far as I am concerned.  And if you are looking for liberal theology, you have it heaped high in the story of Moshe (Moses) and the burning thorn-bush.  The story is filled with wisdom.  First, in order to hear the voice of the Eternal, Moshe has to leave his well-worn and familiar path and go off the beaten track.  This is a liberal message, since liberals preach that freedom precedes faith, and only freedom enables a person to truly grow and deepen in spirit.  There can be no coercion in either religion or politics.  To underscore this, the author says that Moshe finds this bush that calls him off the path, is burning in a mountain range called Wasteland, which is all that Horeb means in Hebrew.  Liberals insist that there is not a  proper place or time for religious depth.  You donôt have to find your religion in a great cathedral or 5000-seat auditorium designed by a famous 
 10 architect. You can find your deepest values even in a stony wilderness.  Second, what Moshe finds when he gets off the trail is clearly a paradox.  A bush on fire that does not burn up.  It makes no sense. This paradox clearly is a warning to theologians to be cautious in their theological language.  It warns them not to find fixed or unchanging metaphors for the divine, or the most deep.  It tells them that there is indeed meaning and substance in the idea of divinity, but that itôs always moving like fire, and cannot be pictured, described, or captured, or treated as an object.  Itôs basically saying that the question as to whether God is or is not is basically meaningless, since the word ?is? refers only to objects or things, and God is no thing. This is and has always been the basic liberal attitude in theology.  Third, when the voice from the bush speaks to Moshe, and Moshe tries to figure out what the voice really is, he gets two answers.  The first answer is that ?I am that which desires an end to all slavery.  What is my name, you ask?  My name is ÇI hate slavery and desire freedom.ô?  The second answer is a wisecrack and another warning. My name is ?I am becoming what I am becomingñ? Ehyeh asher ehyeh in the Hebrew, which could also be translated ?I will be what I will beñ? but never ?I am that I am,? the very weak King James translation. The Sublime is that which moves and becomes, not that which is fixed and never changes, contrary to assertive, but completely foolish fundamentalist thinking.  Thus, this too is a liberal approach.  And note that the Eternal is not going to do anything without the human being, Moshe.  Divinity is empty without humanityôs agency.  And this Moshe is a pretty fallible guy too.  He killed someone once, runs away like a coward at the first chance, and has a hard time speaking clearly, hardly the best choice for a great prophet. But thatôs the point of the storyñanyone can have access to hatred of injustice and action to end it.  You donôt have to be a superhero to be religious in a liberal wayñ the call to change the world by helping people get out of the enslaved conditions, their ruts, their habits, their excuses, their self-made limits, their comfort with privilegeñthis is a call that goes out to everyone.  Universally.  And this too is the liberal attitude in theology.  
 11 I could go on an on.  All I am saying is that the Bible can be read liberally even more easily than it can be read conservatively.  Not every book, not every chapter, of course. But what else could be expected in a book that is not a single book, but a library of many books, written at different times for different reasons?  And liberals would never just read the thing without consulting scholars, wisdom teachers and contextual writers to help them, since: 1), that would just be lazy, and 2), that would be to treat the bible as a singular authority with plain meaning equal from word to word,  and 3) and, worst of all, it would be to admit that we are letting fundamentalists dictate to us the meaning of the thing.  It would be to admit that we liberals are on the defensive, and that all we can do is sit here and wring our hands while the shouting Savonarolas of our time take over the culture and remake it after their own Golden Calf image.  I for one donôt count such a weak attitude as liberal, just cowardly and foolish.   I wonôt ever debate a fundamentalist, and send quotations volleying back and forth to try and convert them to my view.  Conversion is their thing not mine, and trading proof-texts is a fundamentalist form of argument, not a liberal one, which is holistic and carefully reasoned and very slow.   In any case, I assure you, no one in this room is evil.  No one in this room is a festering pit of sin.  No one in this room makes God mad, and no one in this room is bent on eradicating fairness and reason off the earth in the name of a false God, a Golden Calf.  But there are plenty of people in this room who wish to unfetter the yokes holding people down, to feed the hungry, clothe the bedraggled, and create shelter for the shelterless. And I say, whether you actually read or care for the Bible or not, you are a fine example of the biblical model of liberalism.  So keep up the good work.  Remember, there is nothing ?moderate? about it.  Itôs out and out liberalism.  And look, canôt you see the burning bush is blazing for you, too?   Watch out, Pharaoh! Watch out, Golden Calf.  Watch out, preachers without either Mercy in your heart, or Humility in your mind.  Here we come.  
 12 Offering  When you go to the English thesaurus, you find a whole list of synonyms for the word ?liberal.?  Among these are magnanimous, generous, lavish, bountiful, extravagant, ample, plenteous and abundant. So naturally, at this time, I invite all members and friends of the church to be as liberal as they can in supporting the vision and mission of this most liberal congregation.     Prayer  And now I pray for bread for the journey. Leavened or unleavened makes little difference. Just give me a loaf that restores me in my travel.  And give me seeds for the sowing, and strength for the scattering. Let the vision of the harvest sustain me, but let it be the stony realities of the unturned earth which teach me the necessary hardship that precedes any harvest.   And I pray for wind in my sails, and steady stars to steer by, and good companions aboard. O love, these are my prayers. And this is my songñ  
