Sunday, July 24, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  The mad rush to pass laws allowing same-sex marriages ­ that is, men given in marriage to men, and women given in marriage to women ­ is nothing less than a mad rush to be cast into the lake of fire ­ as it was in the days of Noah. Make no mistake. This is not your garden-variety homosexuality. That's bad enough. After all. Have you not read on good authority that these people eat each others' excrement and drink each others' semen and urine; and then ape the whorish  woman in the Proverbs of Solomon; to wit:  "Such is the way of an adulterous woman; she eateth, and wipeth her mouth, and saith, I have done no wickedness." Prov. 30:20.  Indeed, such is the way of the sodomite animal, that the Book of God brands him a LIAR, a MURDERER (Jn. 8:44), a FILTHY (2 Pet. 2:7) and UNLAWFUL TRANSGRESSOR (2 Pet. 2:7,8). And so, I say, every sodomite who ever lived, as described in Scripture, and as portrayed in daily experience, is about as filthy and sinful and abominable as it is possible for a human being to be. Nevertheless, according to the ancient Babylonian Talmud ­ (which is a book of rabbis' interpretations of what we refer to as the Old Testament Pentateuch, written some 1000 years before Christ; think of the Talmud as being to the Pentateuch what Gill is to our English Bible ­ it explains it) ­ I say, the population of the old world was more evil and corrupt and perverted, which manifested itself by the wholesale, worldwide acceptance and universal practice of SAME-SEX MARRIAGE. Which brought on the total annihilation of the ancient world by a universal Flood, as the only appropriate punishment from God; to wit: "And spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing in the Flood upon the world of the ungodly." (2 Pet. 2:5)  No other nation or population has ever been thus annihilated. Nor has any other nation or world ever practiced the pernicious sin of SAME-SEX MARRIAGE. This nation ­ THIS STINKIN NATION -- is playing with dynamite (no, nuclear weapons), forked lightning, nests of Diamondback rattlesnakes. A secular media source recently published a piece with this tantalizing headline; to wit: "HOW SAME-SEX MARRIAGE POINTS TO END OF THE WORLD." Since the worldly wise media are beginning to ponder on the terrible judgment of the Flood waters that God used to completely destroy the first world; and since conversation everywhere is in perverted and lying praise of the wonderful "benefits" of SAME-SEX MARRIAGE; surely it is our duty as those who do know our God to be strong and to do exploits (Dan. 11:32b).  Beloved. In this hour of mighty shakings and movings, it is no time for us to get lockjaw. We are ready to obey the holy injunction; to wit: "Study (i.e., give diligence) to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, RIGHTLY DIVING THE WORD OF TRUTH." 2 Tim. 2:15. The Bible abounds with passages about Sodom, sodomy, and sodomites, and related themes. We have published a famous Compendium Of Bible Truth that everybody should be familiar with and study in connection with the Bible verses therein. "But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts; and be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you with meekness and fear." (1 Pet. 3:15)  And, our Father speaks to us on a daily basis by His providences; i.e., His dealings with us and with others. All things whatsoever arise from and depend upon the Divine decrees. Put another way: Whatsoever happens or comes to pass in time; was decreed to happen or come to pass in eternity. Our Father may often have a special message for His Elect, in this or that event, not easily heard, or heard at all, by others; to wit:  Sunday, July 24, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  "Who hath ears to hear, let him hear. And the disciples came, and said unto him, Why speakest thou unto them in parables? He answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given. ...Therefore speak I to them in parables; because they seeing not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand. And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias, which saith, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive; For this people's heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed; lest at any time they shall see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them. But blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear." (Mat. 13:9-16)  "In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes; even so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight." (Lk. 10:21)  Our dear Lord Jesus expects us to carefully and prayerfully read the daily outpourings of providence, for therein does He speak to us; and He has given us a beautiful and descriptive name for the process; to wit: "The Signs Of The Times." All of the shenanigans surrounding the Satanic push for the adoption of worldwide Same-Sex Marriage laws is a perfect example of The Signs of the Times, that we have a solemn duty to "discern" accurately, on pain of displeasing our Commander in Chief Who entrusted us with the important message in the midst of the battle; further, it is a manifestation of rank hypocrisy to neglect to discern or to mis-read an important sign of the times; to wit: "The Pharisees also with the Sadducees came, and tempting desired him that he would show them a sign from heaven. He answered and said unto them, When it is evening, ye say, It will be fair weather; for the sky is red. And in the morning, It will be foul weather today; for the sky is red and lowring. O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky; but can ye not discern THE SIGNS OF THE TIMES?" (Mat. 16:1-3)  Another rhetorical question: Can ye not discern the signs of the times? Yes indeed. And especially since our Captain has given us lots of practice and lots of strong meat and lots of exercise; to wit: (We are the King's Beef-Eaters.) "But strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age, even those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil." (Heb. 5:14). So, Beloved, in addition to the Christian's full body armor for all out war (see, Ephesians, ch. 6); our Captain of the hosts has equipped us with extraordinary and supernatural and mysterious discerning powers that are elsewhere called "mighty weapons" ­ "mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds"; to wit: "For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh; For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, BUT MIGHTY through God to the pulling down of strong holds; Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ." (2 Cor. 10:3-5)  Remember the thesis of this sermon; to wit: The mad rush to pass vile laws allowing SAME-SEX MARRIAGES all over America, and thence, all over the world ­ that is, men given in marriage to men, and women given in marriage to women ­ is nothing less than a mad rush to be finally and forever damned of God, and cast into the lake of fire and brimstone. It is nothing less than to worship the dread sodomite Beast rising out of the sea; to wit:  Sunday, July 24, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  "And the third angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, If any man worship the Beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture (dilution) into the cup of His indignation; and HE SHALL BE TORMENTED WITH FIRE AND BRIMSTONE in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb; And the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever; and THEY HAVE NO REST DAY NOR NIGHT, who worship the Beast and his image, and whosoever receiveth the mark of his name." (Rev. 14:9-11)  I pause right here to reprove, rebuke, and exhort the young Governor of New York, Andrew Cuomo; and through him all of the world's present crop of opportunistic sons of Belial currently masquerading as statesmen. It's my job; to wit: "I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom; Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; REPROVE, REBUKE, EXHORT with all longsuffering and doctrine." (2 Tim. 4:1,2)  Your part in ramming the SAME-SEX MARRIAGE LAW down the throats of the cowardly legislators of New York was a shameful display of demon possession. Yes, I said DEMON POSSESSION. SAME-SEX MARRIAGE IS A FAIT ACCOMPLI, and I have said so for several years now. This nation no longer has the spiritual and moral strength to continue to resist Satan. The rest of the world is worse. Following New York's abject surrender to the forces of darkness, there will be a gallop to the finish line ­ opportunistic pigs vying for second place. A landslide victory for SAME-SEX MARRIAGE. Meanwhile, the wrath of God is poised to empty itself in total destruction upon this evil world, just as it did upon the condemned world of Noah via the universal FLOOD. Precipitated in each case by the finalization and universality of SAME-SEX MARRIAGE. From Adam to the FLOOD, was exactly 1656 years.  You can verify these dates by the first chapter of First Chronicles, exactly; and by the Third chapter of Luke. I beseech you, Beloved, to get some of these landmark dates fixed well in mind. Especially dates that are confirmed in Scripture, like this 1656 date from creation to the FLOOD. You can arrive at the exact date by reading the 32 verses of the 5th chapter of Genesis, which ends like this; to wit: "And Noah was five hundred years old; and Noah begat Shem, Ham, and Japheth." This is important to a study of the society whose conduct brought down the wrath of God upon them in the most devastating manner of any other in all of human history. Here we have an exact chronology, with names, relationships, extraordinary events; e.g., to wit: "And Jared lived an hundred sixty and two years, and he begat ENOCH; And Jared lived after he begat Enoch eight hundred years, and begat sons and daughters; And all the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty and two years; and he died. And Enoch lived sixty and five years, and begat Methuselah; And ENOCH WALKED WITH GOD after he begat Methuselah three hundred years, and begat sons and daughters; And all the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty and five years; And Enoch walked with God; and he was not; for God took him." (Gen. 5:18-24)  This is that same Enoch who was a mighty preacher on the Second Coming of Jesus Christ in power and glory; of whom we have a brief account in the New Testament; to wit: "And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, To execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him." (Jude 1:14,15)  Sunday, July 24, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  So it appears that there was some gloriously good preaching going on in the Old World; and that, Brother Enoch's walk with God was such that God intended him to be an example unto us, of how to live and how to preach in times of great danger to the righteous; to wit: "By faith Enoch was translated" ­ (i.e., raptured, taken up into Heaven without seeing death, as Elijah was) ­ Enoch was translated that he should not see death; and was not found," ­ (a suggestion that he was hiding because those violent, Antediluvian, Same-Sex Marriage Beasts were hunting him to do him harm because of their hatred of him and his preaching) ­ "Enoch was not found, because God had translated him; for before his translation he had this testimony, THAT HE PLEASED GOD." Heb. 11:5. Beloved, let us aspire to please God. We live during dangerous times, "perilous times," even as Enoch and Noah. Good. The church has been torched and bombed and vandalized numerous times. Especially during the last 20 years, since we began exposing the sins of the sodomites by vigorously expounding Scripture on the subject. Our people have been beaten and hospitalized; defamed and robbed; falsely accused, arrested & jailed, etc. The humble and longsuffering members of Westboro Baptist Church will have tons of evidence ­ powerful, probative, irrefutable, eye-witness evidence; which they are ready, willing, and able ­ even eager ­ to present to our dear Lord Jesus on the great and dreadful Day of Judgment; to wit: "And shall not God avenge (vindicate) his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith" ­ (i.e., HIS TRUE FAITH) ­ "on the earth?" Lk. 18:7,8.  Both Enoch and Noah lived and preached to the Old World (i.e., the World before the Flood, aka, the Antediluvian World). Enoch lived and preached a while before Noah. Yet, the content and spirit of their preaching, judging by the samples the Holy Ghost selected for us, is the same. Enoch preaches about the Second Coming of Christ in power and glory to condemn and punish the ungodly for each and every wicked deed they ever did, and for each and every "hard speech" they ever spoke. NO EXCEPTIONS. ZERO TOLERANCE. The picture the Holy Ghost paints of Noah, as of a man in the last throes of fear for his own and his family's lives at the hands of outraged neighbors & countrymen; is, simply, wonderful and glorious, in that, Noah refuses to capitulate so much as ONE INCH; to wit: "By faith Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house; by the which he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith." (Heb. 11:7)  According to the ancient rabbis, some dating as far back as c. 1000 BC, SAME-SEX MARRIAGE was the precipitating cause of the Flood of Noah. No other society in history has tolerated the legalization of SAME-SEX MARRIAGE. America will do so at her eternal peril. God destroyed the Old World with a Flood, and has threatened to destroy this world with a fiery, world-wide holocaust if we sanction SAME-SEX MARRIAGE.  WBC is talking to you, Gov. Andrew Cuomo, and all your governing kind: The mad rush to pass laws allowing SAME-SEX MARRIAGES ­ that is, men given in marriage to men, and women given in marriage to women ­ is, in fact, nothing less than a mad rush into the eternal fires of Hell. And so, it has come down us, to maintain and defend pure Gospel truth in a doomed nation and world. Many years ago, King David put the question: "If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?" (Psa. 11:3) Beloved, look around. The foundations ARE GONE. David the prophet can see & hear us. Here's our answer: PLENTY! Just Stay Tuned.  I love you. Amen.  
