

Once Saved Always Saved
Video
February 23, 2014

Now in 1 john 5 the part that I want to focus on is beginning there in verse 10, where the bible reads ??He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in himself: he that believeth not God hath made him a liar; because he believeth not the record that God gave of his Son.  And this is the record, that God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.  He that hath the Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son of God hath not life.  These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God; that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the Son of God.   The title of my sermon tonight is Once saved always saved.  It??s about the eternal security of the believer, the fact that once we get saved there is nothing we can ever do to lose our salvation.  Now usually when you hear the term once saved always saved, it is out of the mouth of people that are criticizing that doctrine, oh you're one of the those once saved always but you know I??ll just embrace it, I think it is a great way to explain what we believe and a great term to break, and all throughout the bible and all throughout history derogatory terms that have been used against God??s people have been embraced by God??s people.  For example they were called christians by others, you know they were called baptists in the middle ages many times for rebaptizing people after they just been sprinkled as babies.  You know people will attack us and use terms like easy believers as once saved always saved, I say to all of it amen.     I am a baptist, I??m christian, once saved always saved, easy believers.  It??s easy to be saved you believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and you shall be saved, and you know what it??s the hard part that was done by Jesus on the cross.  I mean how hard is it to get saved?  Well as hard as it is to take a drink of water, as hard as eating a piece of bread, it??s as hard as opening a door and walking through it, it??s as hard as calling on the name of the Lord.  That??s what the bible teaches.     Now I want to prove this to you from the bible in many different scriptures that we can never lose our salvation and not only that i??m going to turn to some of the scriptures that people will try to use to say that you can lose you it and show why that just doesn??t hold water but the first thing I want to point out is in 1 john 5 is the part that is probably the most controversial, a lot of baptist  don??t agree with this most independant baptist probably wouldn??t agree with this but I make no apology for it, it??s what I have always preached, it??s what I have believed since I was a child, I??ll stand on it now, this church has always stood on it, if you do not believe in eternal security , if you do not believe in once saved always saved, your not saved. You know and a lot of people would agree with that but that??s what the bible teaches right here because of the fact when you talk to the people that believe you can lose their salvation, here is what it comes down to thy ar trusting in their works to save them. Cause when you are trusting faith alone, you know when you are trusting Jesus alone you know you can??t lose it.      Look what the bible teaches in 1 john 5:10  it says ??He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in himself??  now if you get the context thats talking about the holy spirit because it talks about that there are three that bear record in heaven, three that bar witness in the earth.  The witness that abides in us if we are saved, is the holy spirit of God, it says ??he that that believeth not God hath made him a liar; because he believeth not the record that God gave us his Son.  So from that verse we can tell that there are two kind of people in this world.  There are those that believe on the son of God and those who are making God a liar and why are they making God a liar because they do not believe the record that God gave of his Son and then he tells us what that record in verse 11 ??and this is the record, that God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.??    look thats what you have to believe to be saved, verse 11 is the record that you must believe in ordinary to be saved and if you do not believe that record you are making God a liar. and there are three elements i want to point out about that record quickly, ??and this is the record, that God hath given to us eternal life?? number 1 it says he has given it to us it is a gift.  The bible says for by grace are ye saved through faith and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God not of works lest any man should boast.  So in order to be saved you have to believe that it??s a gift, you can??t try and earn your way into heaven and do it by works, you have to do it by faith alone and just receive that fr gift of eternal life.  So he says you have to believe the record God has given number 1 it??s a gift.  Number 2 he has given us what? eternal life. What does eternal mean? it never ends, so therefore if you don??t believe that God gave us eternal life, then you're not saved.  So if you think God just saved us temporary, you??re not saved.  The bible says you have to believe that God has given us eternal life, and the third thing is that this life is in his Son, you gotta believe that it??s through his Jesus Christ.  These are the three elements that are found in verse 11.    And he says in verse 13 ??These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God; that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the Son of God.??  Now nothing when he says ??have eternal life?? he didn??t say had, past tense that be you lost it.  He didn??t say will get you know like you wait till heaven to find out.  He says you can know you have eternal life, not look just before I get into all the multitude of scriptures that teach you, you can not lose your salvation, first let??s just look at the word eternal that says everything right there.   Eternal means never ending, it come from a root word like terminate right.  termination eternal and the E at the beginning is a negating prefix, and so eternal means no ending.  It has a synonym in the bible everlasting.  So let me ask you this if I have life today that never ends, if I have today on february 23rd eternal life and down the road at some point I were to lose it was it ever eternal?  No because it ended. So if I have eternal life today that means it can never end because by definition that??s what eternal life even is.  Otherwise it would make no sense.      But turn if you would to matthew chapter seven first of all, matthew chapter number 7 we see that we have eternal life, we can know that we have eternal life.  Jesus also said in john 6:47 ??verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me hath everlasting life.?? again present tense, that you have it right now if you believe on Christ meaning that it is gonna last forever.  You can??t lose it but look at matthew 7:21 it says ??Not every one that saith unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but he that doeth the will of my father which is in heaven??  I??m gonna show you in just a moment what the will of the father is but let me start out by saying this saying Lord, lord doesn??t get you into heaven.  If saying Lord, Lord were enough then this verse would not be true.  Is saying Lord to God enough to get you into heaven? No.  You have to do the will of the father which is in heaven, which I am going to show you in a moment what that is but look what he says next ??Many will say to me in that day Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works?  And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you; depart from me, ye that work iniquity.  Now let me point out first of all that he didn??t say I use to know you, not if you could lose your salvation, if these people have once been saved and then lost their salvation could he really say to them I never knew you if he used to know them? No.  So this right here shows that the people that are going to be damned on judgment day, who think they are saved but really aren??t, are not people that lost their salvation that??s not possible.  It??s people who are trusting in what??s the last word of verse 22? works.  The people who are trusting in their works Jesus says to them ?? I never knew you?? not i used to know you because you can??t lose it.  The never had it in the first place, now look if you were to stand before God right now and God were to ask you why should I let you into heaven? would you say I have done many wonderful works?  absolutely not, no bible believing christian, no one that understands salvation is by grace through faith would ever say but God how can you not be letting me in when I have done so many wonderful works.  The only person who would say such a thing is one that thinks their works has something to do with getting them into heaven.    Look what their listing we prophesied in it, we preached in it, we've done wonderful works in it, we have cast out devils in your name.  Look are these people claiming the name of Jesus? Yeah.  Have they called Jesus Lord? Yeah.  Are the doing a lot of wonderful works in Jesus name? Yeah.  So why in the world are they cast out? Why are they not allowed into heaven? because anyone who trusted in their works is not saved.  The bible says it??s not of works lest any man should boast.  Boasting like what?  Boasting like I have done many wonderful works.  I have done many wonderful works, I have prophesied in your name and cast out devils of course they are going to let me in. no flesh shall glory in his presence.  Jesus paid it all, all to him we owe.  Sin has left a crimson stain, he washed white as snow.  We have nothing to boast of salvation is grace through faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and the bible is teaching us crystal clear in this passage that if you go to hell he never knew you and if you are trusting in your works even if you are saying I believe in Jesus, I??m doing it in the name of Jesus but you say I am going to heaven because of my works, you're not saved thats what the bible teaches.    Now lets look at the will of the father because a lot of people will get confused they??ll see the will of the father in verse 21 and say see you have to do the works.  Well these people did the works but go to John chapter six, let??s see what the will of the father is, and also coincidentally john chapter six is another great passage that proves that you can??t lose your salvation.  In several different verses but the bible says in john 6:35 ??and Jesus said unto them,?? now  before I read this what would you say when you got there and Jesus is telling you, you can??t come into heaven?  You know what I would say is ??wow wait a minute I believed in you, you says who so ever believed in him should not perish but have eternal life, you said it??s by faith we are saved, you said if I confess with my mouth the lord Jesus and believed with my heart God raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. what??s the deal is that not true??? I wouldn??t be talking about my works. I wouldn??t be bragging about my works because my works and my righteousness are nothing, they are filthy rags before God.  It??s gotta be by grace through faith. Now look what it says in John 6:35 ?? Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life: he that cometh to me ?? we he might hungr in the future, I mean what does it say? ??he that cometh to me shall never hunger:?? you see how salvation is a one time thing? You come to Jesus Christ you eat of the bread of life that he gives you and he says ?? you shall never hunger and he that believeth on me shall never thirst.?? It??s the same thing that he said to the women at the well in chapter four when he said ?? if you drink of this water you will thirst again, if you drink of the water I give you, it??ll be a well water springing up inside of you unto everlasting life, you??ll never thirst again.?? And it says in verse 36 ?? But I say unto you, That ye also have seen me and believed not.?? So he is talking about people who have not believed.  ??All that the father give unto me shall come to me and him that cometh to me, I will in no wise cast out.??  Another great verse about not losing your salvation.  He says you guys have to believe but one that comes to me I will in no wise cast out.  Verse 38 ??For I come down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me.??  and this is the father??s will because remember in matthew seven he said you have to do the will of the father?  What does it mean to do someone's will? Do what they want, that??s a perfect definition.  If I said I want you, If I said to my son I want you to do my will, that means you're going to do what I want, we are going to do it my way.  So look if you get into heaven you're not getting there man??s way, your getting there God??s way.  That??s why it says in John 1:12  ??But as many as  received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name: Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.??  It??s God??s will that matters in regards to salvation, not man??s will and what does it say here?  This is the father??s will which has sent me that if all, that which I that he has given to me I should lose nothing another get proof that we can not lose our salvation but should raise it up again at the last day. Now watch another aspect of the father's will in verse 40?? And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day??  So what??s the will of the father?  That people will see the Lord Jesus Christ, believe on him and be raised up at the last day.  What is the will of the father according to verse 39 and 40?  That people would believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and that none of them would be lost, none of them would ever lose their salvation and that they would be raised up at the last day.  Now look you can not lose your salvation he said in verse 37 him that cometh to me  I will in no wise cast out.  Once you have been saved you have past from death to life.    Go to chapter five just flip back one page, so doing the will of the father which is in heaven is not just saying in every area of life, you are always doing God??s will, all the time keeping every commandment.  You know if they were keeping every commandment that saves us, none of us would be saved.  Not one because there is not a just man upon the earth that doeth good and sinneth not.  For all have sinned and come short of the glory of God.  As it is written there is none righteous no not one.  No one will be justified by the works of the law.  No one will be justified by keeping the commandments but it says in john 5:24 ??Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life,?? again present tense that means it??s gonna last forever and if it doesn??t that means you never had everlasting life. Now what??s so silly about this thing where they say well you might have everlasting life today but you might lose it tomorrow, not only is that completely illogical because that didn??t last forever but it could only last one day.  Not only is that completely illogical but when you stop and think about God knows the future and you stop and think about the fact God knows everything and God knows how your life is going to go he knows the end from the beginning. To sit there and think he knows you're going to lose it but says its everlasting anyways, he knows you're going to lose it but calls it eternal that??s nonsense.  It makes no sense but he says here?? the one who believes has everlasting life and shall not come into condemnation;??you will not be condemned.  He doesn??t say you're never gonna sin again, but you're not going to be condemned is what he is saying, and then he says this ??but is passed from death unto life.?? I mean that??s just a powerful statement about the fact we are saved eternally, we will not be condemned, we have passed from death unto life.    Go back to chapter 3 because in chapter 3 we find a very powerful scripture.  That kinda ties in with when Jesus said ??I never knew you.??  Look at john 3:18 here is another verse that proves you can??t lose your salvation.  John 3:18 says ??He that believeth on him (talking about Jesus Christ) is not condemned: but he that believeth not is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God.?? Notice the past tense, he hath not believed on the only begotten Son of God.  There are two kinds of people in this world those who believe and those who do not believe.  Notice what he says about those that do not believe, thou hath not believed, thy never believed but once you believe on the Lord Jesus Christ you are saved, you are a believer.  You are sealed with the holy Ghost you can not lose your salvation.  If you could lose your salvation verse 18 wouldn??t make any sense.  To put it into two categories like that those who believe and those that hath not believed.     Now let??s think about it, lets say you can lose your salvation right, and let's say a guy believed on Christ and then down the road he stops believing, he loses his salvation, whatever you want to call it right.  Well then he wouldn??t fall into any of these categories.  Cause he neither believes but you could not say he never believed because he did back then.   See how this doesn??t make any sense because it is not true because once you believe you are saved, your sealed, and your secure.    But let??s flip over to John 10 I just wanna go through all the stuff in the book of John while were here.  We saw three back to back powerful evidence in chapter 6, just back to back to back that you can??t lose your salvation just in the space of a couple verses.  We saw chapter 5 verse 24, th verse that was shown me when I got saved as a six year old boy.  We saw john 3:18 another powerful verse that shows, you have either not believed it or you are still believing it and you're still saved and you still have everlasting life.  The we seen John 10:28 ?? And I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.My Father, which gave them me, is greater than all; and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father's hand. ??  He says you're in Jesus Christ??s hand and you??re in the father??s hand and nobody is going to pluck you out of that hand.    Now flip over to chapter 11, one time I had somebody say this to me I was out soul winning and you know I was preaching eternal life to someone and they said this to me.  They said this ??well it??s like this you're holding his hand and he??s holding your hand and he is never gonna let go of you but you can let go of him is what they thought.  Okay so come up here John, come on up here for a second John.  Let??s see if this holds, come up here John, let??s see if this holds water okay.  So let??s use this illustration that I was given by somebody who believes you can lose your salvation. Okay so let??s go here, I am holding his hand right, and I am never going to let go of his hand but he can let go of my hand right okay. So go ahead John let go of my hand John go ahead and let go son, let go, go back to your seat son, let go no remember you can let go, i??m not going to let go but he can let go, he can let go anytime he wants to.  Right? Right? So you get the point right?  I don??t let go it doesn??t matter if he lets go, he can hold on as tight as he wants, he can let go, he can try to pull it out but guess what i??m stronger then him and that??s why he could not go and the bible says you??re my father which gave to me is greater than all.  God is stronger than you so if you were to have this hypothetical tug-a-war  with God like ?? let me go, let me go?? he is not going to let go because he said no one can pluck you out of his hand because his hand is so strong, you can??t get out.      Go if you would to John 11 there verse 25 it says ??Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die?? now this is a powerful verse for those who try to twist the definition of eternal life, some people will say ??well eternal life it doesn??t mean it goes on forever it??s just talking about the quality of your life.  You know it??s a type of life, a style of life you know it??s a quality of life?? you know okay what about never dying? Because eternal life in equated with never dying, which proves it, which people will say ??if you go back into the greek and you look at the word eternal it??s aionion you know like eon?? because you know someone will say something happened eons ago like eon?? and they say ??eon just means a really long time.?? So that??s what Jesus went around preaching, you??re gonna live for a really long time, if you believe on me you're going to live for a long time.  But what about people that would lose it according to these people they could lose it a week later,two weeks later, six months later.  Now is that an eon?  Now does anyone know long is an eon?  I don??t know, I don??t think anyone, ok thats way to much information hahaha.  Four eons equals 13 billions years, haha whatever, that was over my head. These homeschooled kids I tell ya.  But what I am saying is that doesn??t make any sense but but this whole thing of going to a foreign language, well nobody can really, I mean how do you dispute that unless you knew greek and how many people in here are fluent in greek? You know, so basically people through that at you, well if you go back to the greek, you know it??s aionion, and that??s like eon, and that??s like blah blah.  You don??t know whether that??s really true.  You know what I think that greek word means? Eternal. And you how I can prove that??s what it means?  Because Jesus compared it to never die.  So if he puts on this side live forever, everlasting life, eternal life, and over here he said never die, I think you get the picture.  Those are both the same thing shall not perish but have everlasting life, makes perfect sense.  So here he says ?? whosoever liveth and believeth in me?? so if you're here and you live and you believe you will never die, that is what the bible teaches.      Let??s go to 2 corinthians, actually you go to ephesians 1, I will go to 2 corinthians because another great teaching besides all the stuff we seen in the book of John, besides just the word eternal life, besides just the idea that he will never leave us nor forsake us, besides the idea that I never knew you, besides the idea those who believe have not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God, besides all that.  There is also the doctrine in the new testament that we are sealed with the holy spirit until the day of redemption.  Now in second corinithians 1:22 it says ?? Who hath also sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.?? so the bible says when we are saved, God seal??s us and gives us the earnest of the spirit in our hearts. Now what is the earnest? Well you remember the comic when you were a kid Frank and Earnest? Anybody ever read that comic? What does Earnest mean? Serious, earnest means serious.  If I say something to you in earnest, it means that I was being serious if I say something to you in jest it means I was not being serious.  So when the bible says here God has given us the earnest of the spirit in our hearts, an earnest as a noun cause obviously earnest is an adjective when we say you know doing something in earnest okay that would not be an adjective.  But if I say he has a very earnest life style, he is very serious okay. This is a noun, the earnest and what an earnest is, is a down payment on something to show that you are serious about buying it.  Okay so for example let??s say there is a house for sale and I am going to put down some, put down an offer on that house but let??s say their asking a hundred and fifty thousand dollars and I say I will give you an hundred and forty thousand and just to show you that I am serious, I am going to put down a thousand down in earnest money.  Anyone who has bought a house has heard of earnest money and you put you know I am going to put down a thousand dollars as earnest money just to show that I am not playing games because otherwise people be like I am going to give you a hundred and forty thousand like okay, you know psych. You know so the whole point is you know you put down the earnest money maybe like five thousand earnest money just to show that you??re serious okay. It??s a down payment.  What God is saying here is that he sealed us and he gave us the earnest of the holy spirit showing that were saved, showing that we will have eternal life, showing that we're going to go to heaven and be with him eternally, he gives us that down payment of the spirit now the reason that the spirit is called the earnest is or the down payment is because we are not fully redeemed when we get saved because our body has not been redeemed.  Now our soul and spirit have already been saved but has our body been saved? I mean did your body transform when you got, the moment you believed on christ ? Anything change about your body? Did it become perfect? Did it become righteous? No, your flesh is the same but at the resurrection, at what??s called the rapture.  The bible says in a moment in a twinkling of an eye we will be changed and the bible says that we are waiting for that day, to wait the redemption of our body.  The bible calls the rapture the redemption of our body okay.  So we haven??t go the whole package of salvation, we have not experienced all the benefits of salvation yet but we have the earnest of the spirit.  The full benefit of our salvation will be when we get rid of this flesh and we have a brand new glorified body and were in heaven with Christ. Then we will have the full benefit of salvation at that time.  Until then we have the earnest of the spirit in our heart, showing that God is serious, showing that God is going to do what he said. The bible said he begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, the day of Christ is another name for the rapture.  The Lord is coming in the clouds.    Look if you would at ephesians 1 there, it says in verse twelve ??That we should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted in Christ. ?? Now what does it mean to trust in Christ? That??s putting our faith in Christ, that??s believing on Christ, said in the next verse ??In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, Which is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory.?? There is so much packed into these verse here first of all it helps to define what it means to believe on Christ, to trust Christ, to put our faith in Christ, to believe he is the one who is going to save us, not trusting in our works but trusting in Christ but he says here that the holy spirit of promise.  What promise? The bible says in hope of eternal life which God that cannot lie promised before the world began. Still not convinced? First John 2:25 ??And this is the promise that he hath promised us, even eternal life??  The bible says the promise of God is eternal life, the promise of God is eternal redemption in glory and the bible says you are sealed unto the holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance. So do we have more coming? Absolutely I mean the inheritance gonna be huge, he that overcometh shall inherit all things the bible says I will be to him a father and he shall be to me a son.  We will inherit all things, we are joint heirs with Jesus Christ, we will inherit the kingdom of God . We will be redeemed in the body, we will receive a glorified body. And the bible says here that the holy spirit is the earnest of our inheritance until we mess up, until we sin, until we lose faith, until we let go, until we walk away, until we lose our salvation no. It says until the redeemption of the purchased possession because which which has begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. It??s not that he might preform it, he might back out, he might break his promise, he might put down the earnest of money and say no I changed my mind no.  He is serious, he has made a promise, he will redeem us body, soul and spirit.  We will inherit all things and just to guarantee that we will inherit, just to guarantee that we will be saved, just to guarantee we will inherit eternal life amd he won??t break his promise he gave us that down payment, he gave us the earnest of the spirit and he sealed us unto the day of redemption.     Go to chapter 4 verse 30 same book but I mean we just saw it in ephesians 1, he refers back to ephesians 1 in chapter 4 verse 30 when he says and grieve not the holy spirit of God or else you??ll lose your salvation, is that what he said? no because there is no verse in the bible like that instead he said ??  And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption. ?? so even if you do grieve the holy spirit of God you're still sealed unto the day of redemption.  Don??t do it don??t grieve him but your sealed, your sealed unto the day of redemption.    Go to Romans chapter 4, Romans chapter number four.  I mean there is so much scripture on this, so much, I mean I am just trying to cram all into one sermon.  Just to go over the fact that it is eternal life, just to go over the fact that it is everlasting, just to go over the fact that we shall never die, just to go over the fact that he never knew those who weren??t saved, just to go over the fact that those who do not believe, have not believed, just to go over the fact that we are sealed by the holy spirit of promise unto the day of redemption, which is the earnest of our salvation, just to go over the fact that we have been passed from death unto life and we shall never come into condemnation and now another aspect of eternal life, another aspect of once saved always saved.  Romans four teaches that our sins after we are saved are not even imputed unto us, after we are saved the sins we commit are not reckoned unto our account, look at Romans 4:5 ??But to him that worketh not,?? did you get that? well to him that only does a lit bit of work, is that what it says? ??but to him that worketh not but believeth on him that justifieth the?? but well if you have the faith you will have the works still. Is that what this said? This says you work not and believe, there are people that believe but do not have the works. Even, well James 2 faith without works is dead right but if faith without works is dead that means faith without works exists. How can you say faith without works is dead, if it is not possible to have faith without works?  People are like well if you have faith you always have works, the two go, you can??t have one without the other, okay well what about faith without works is dead? Exactly.  What? Like faith without works is dead would be a meanless statement, if it didn??t exist, faith without works must exist, I mean if I said the dog is dead, doesn??t it mean there is a dog there? I mean I am just trying to, I am just trying to break this down in a  way where everybody can understand.  I mean I said the dog is dead, well I don??t even have a dog, I don??t even know why I said that.  If I say the dog is dead there gotta be a dog there that we are even talking about for it to be dead.  So in order for  faith without works to be dead that means there has to exists a condition called faith without works okay and James two is talking to be that are saved, he is talking to people that are believers, he says my brethren and he talking, and I have done whole sermons on James two and I am not going to go into all the details because I have already done it too many times, it??s outside the scope of this sermon but guess what if I am saved today which I am, if that means I have faith in Christ right, what if I don??t have any works today? What does James say about my faith? It??s dead.  I mean can I really say to you, lets say I did no works for the past week, no works I have just been living in the flesh, I have just been doing, doing the ways of the world and I haven??t following God this week, and I just didn??t go to church and I just didn??t read my bible, didn??t pray I have just been living a worldly life this week.  Do I have works? If that??s the life I have been living the past week? No, then you could say my faith is dead.  But does that mean I have lost my salvation? No it doesn??t, it just means my faith will not profit anyone else you know if I, it??s all talk unless I have the works to back it up, what does that mean, not talking about getting into heaven but talking about my relationship with my fellow man okay because that??s why the bible says dead no man will be justified by works in the sight of God, but are we justified by works in the sight of man? of course because man can man see my faith? No, man can only see my works, man can not see my faith.  So in the sight of man we are justified by works, that??s what James two is talking about and that??s why it talks about Abraham being justified by works when he offered his son unto the altar at a hundred and thirty years old. Are you doing to tell me Abraham got saved when he was 130? No he got saved long before that but he showed his faith to the world in Genesis 22 when he was willing to sacrifice Isaac his son upon the altar, that was an amazing testament of his faith unto men.      Thats why the bible says in verse three chapter four, look at Romans 4:3, I am sorry verse two ??For if Abraham were justified by works, he hath whereof to glory; but not before God?? so Abraham was justified by works but not before God.  Look at verse five ??But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputeth righteousness without works,Saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin.?? now what do we see in that? We see the past, present, and the future.  I mean think about it a lot of people will say well when you get saved all the sins you did before you got saved those are all forgiven but going forward your responsible for those sins and you need to keep on getting forgiveness, you gotta keep on getting salvation, you gotta keep on getting redemption and their are people who think you have to ask for forgiveness everyday to stay saved.  I mean I have talked to them all the time out soul winning, alot of catholics and even a lot of protestants will tell ya you have to ask for forgiveness of your sins everyday or you are not going to be saved. But what does the bible say here? It says the past is covered in verse seven ??Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven?? and that??s past tense.  ??whose sins are covered.?? that??s a past tense verb and it says ??Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin?? thats the future.  So me today Steven.L.Anderson my sins are covered and forgiven and he is not going to impute sin unto me going forward.  I mean isn??t that what the bible says he saves us from our sins past, present and future.     Otherwise I guess it you??d be best option would be to get saved you know right at the end of your life right on your deathbed and that??s what a lot of catholics do because catholicism teaches that, they just think you know what I want to live it up, I want to be wild, I want to party, I want to sow my wild oats, and then when I get older I am going to go ahead and get it all forgiven and get it all absolved, go to mass everyday.  You know I am too old to party anyways at that point so I might as well get up and go to mass every morning and get this all absolved and their gonna split hell wide open because they have not trusted in the Lord Jesus Christ as their saviour.  Their trusting in works, their trusting in religion, their trusting in the church instead of in the Lord.     Look its clear, how can I lose my salvation if God??s not even going to impute my sins unto me according to Romans 4:8 flip over to chapter 8 of Romans, you're in Romans go to chapter 8. Look what it says in Romans 8:33 ??Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth.?? Now God??s not going to lay anything to our charge, man can??t lay anything to our charge, are sins are not imputed unto us.  Who is he that condemneth? Remember the verse that says we shall not come into condemnation? We have been past to death unto life?  ?? Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us.?? So what Christ did for us is not just past tense. Yes he died, yes he was buried, yes he rose again but he also ever liveth to make intercession for us, to make sure we shall not be condemned, to make sure no one can lay anything to our charge, to make sure sin will not be imputed unto us spiritually going forward, it says he makes intercession for us. ??Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation or distress or persecution or famine or nakedness or  peril, or sword? As it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.??     Let me ask you this if you are justified, if you are saved, if you have believed on the Lord Jesus Christ will God ever stop loving you? Will you ever be separated from his love? No but let me ask you this is it loving for God to send someone to hell? Is that an act of love? Sending someone to the lake of fire is not love, if I love you I am not going to put you in hell and make you burn forever and ever. Now it gets quite because people are like well wait a minute God loves everybody. Yea okay where is that in the bible? Its not there the bible I there, I can show you nineteen scriptures after the service were God says he hates people okay and look God loved past tense, God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son that whosoever that believe in him should not perish but have eternal life.  Look God loved everyhbody, God loves everyone at some point but there comes a point Hosea chapter 7 where he said I will love them no more and there comes a point where when you don??t believe on Jesus Christ and you die without Jesus Christ and your not in the love of God, you are under the wrath of God, you are under God??s wrath. Now look, does God love the unsaved? Yes, Does God love the saved? Yes, but here is the difference, when you are saved he will never stop loving you, nothing can ever separate you from the love of God when you are saved but when you are not saved you can come to a point where he says I love you no more.  Where he says you are damned eternally, you are under my wrath and look people for an example blaspheme the Holy Ghost I mean they were done, over and to say that God loves everybody sounds great except that there are 19 scriptures where he clearly talks about hating people and even specifically talks about I will love them no more, I hated them and I will love them no more in the same verse. And so we need to study to show ourselves approved unto God. You know it??s easy to just repeat squawk,squawk, God loves everybody squawk,squawk just repeat things that you??ve heard instead of studying the bible and learning what the bible actually teaches.  That is not what the bible actually teaches and so we need to just stop just repeating things we hear and here is another thing people will often do squawk, hate the sin love the sinner, squawk, hate the sin love the sinner. Okay you know who that quote is from Mahatma Gandhi, Mahatma Gandhi was not a bible believing christian, Gandhi did not believe on Jesus Christ and he is in hell right now. And he is the one who said hate the sin love the sinner, here, here's what??s funny I would like to do an experiment one time, I??d like to go to christians all across, all across the world and all across america and just show them a couple of quotes and just say which one of these do you think it right and the first thing I will show them is Gandhi??s quote, okay Gandhi??s quote, now I will show him Gandhi??s quote I won??t tell him who it??s from and then I will show them the quote from David, the man after God??s own heart who said ?? do not I hate them oh Lord that hate thee, and am not agreed with those that rise up against thee, I hate them with perfect hatred, I count them my enemies?? Ask them which one of these is more Christ like? Which one of these is more Christian? Oh Gandhi, oh yes, that??s the quote that they would take and they wouldn??t even recognize the quote from the holy bible. They??d probably say that??s not in the bible, that??s not from the bible, how readeth tho that is in the bible Psalm 139 and so thats kinda sad, that??s kinda off topic from the sermon but my point is, here??s my point and here??s why this is important.  If God is never gonna stop loving you, if you are never gonna be separated from his love you're not gonna end up in hell, I mean do you get that? Because look will the Lord chastens us but he will do it because he loves us.  The bible says whom the Lord loveth he chastens and scourges every son whom he recieveth, look will I spank my children? yes because I love them, but if I were to kill my children, that??s not love, if I were to send them to hell, that??s not love okay. So we love in this warped mentality were we just repeat stuff we have heard and we just go around saying you know all sins equal, you know it sounds great it??s not biblical and in fact it is borderline insanity and to say all sin is equal. Ya just kill 20 people or steal a pencil same thing, same thing in God??s eyes ah God isn??t a just God then.  But guess what God is a just God and all sin is not equal and there is no verse in the bible that says all sin is equal.  In fact Jesus looked at Pontius Pilate and said he that delieved me unto thee hath the greater sin. Now how can you have a greater sin if all sin is equal? If God loves everybody how come there are 19 scriptures where God takes about hating people? Sorry to confuse you with the facts, its okay let me just get back to my sermon.    But anyways go quickly if you would to Psalm 89 in the old testement, Psalm 89 and the reason I bring these things up is because there are all these false teaching out there that confuse people. Well and look to me some of these teachings just defies logic, like for example saying all sin is equal that defies any reasonable persons mind, that defies anyones logic that has a reasonable mind or saying God loves people that are roasting in hell right now and under, you know he sends people to be tormented for all eternaty because he loves them.  How can anyone believe that? That just doesn??t make any sense, I don??t know, I mean what, somebody help me out here. What else do I say to that? I mean God loves everybody but most people burn in hell that doesn??t make any sense. Now yes God loved those people, he died for them, he wanted to save them, he did everything he could and they rejected him finally says I love them no more. You know that makes sense because thats what the bible actually teaches that he doesn??t love people that??s why he sent them to hell because they??re bad because he sent them there because they didn??t get saved because they did not get justified, they didn??t get redeemed and look you say well but he is a loving God. But does that mean he loves everybody? No it doesn??t and to sit there and say all sin is equal is, I mean you??d almost have to be, I mean it be like something you would expect to hear from someone is a mental institution, like if you went to a mental asylum where somebody just thinks well ya I mean killing people is the same as you know just, you know doing whatever just I mean you know jaywalking you know, yeah right. I mean you slap somebody in the face and you gun somebody down. You mean we might think it is different you know but in God??s eyes its as, you know, I mean goodnight but you know what God given us the spirit of a sound mind, if you actually read the bible and get off these man made teachings and again I am getting off target here but lets look at Psalm 89 now I??ll quickly I have already mentioned earlier in John 1:12 ??as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name: ?? so how do we become a son of God? by believing on the name Jesus Christ. Now is everyone a son of God? No because he said we become a son of God when we believe on Christ, so if we become a son of God that means we weren??t one in the past and now we become a son of God by believing in Christ. So when the mormons tell you thats were all Gods children, that just isn??t true because we become sons when we believe in Christ also it says in Galatians chapter 3 verse number 26 it says ?? For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus?? So were children by faith look at what the bible says in Psalm 89 about the children of God it says in Psalm 89 verse 20 ??I have found David my servant; with my holy oil have I anointed him:?? Now David in the old testament is a symbolic a lot of times of the Lord Jesus Christ because Jesus Christ is known as the son of David and a lot of times he will call Jesus Christ prophetically David my servant also now this passage does have a literal application to David himself but also has a spiritual application towards the Lord Jesus Christ.       Look down at verse 29 I??ll show you what I mean, this is talking about David, ??His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven.?? But if we were to apply this to the Lord Jesus Christ read this passage ??His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven. If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments; If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments; Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes. Nevertheless my lovingkindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Once have I sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto David. His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me. It shall be established for ever as the moon, and as a faithful witness in heaven. Selah Now there is an application there to David physically but hold on a second is David really gonna rule for all eternity on the throne or is it gonna be Jesus Christ who??s gonna sit on the throne of his father David ruling and reigning.      The bible says in Isaiah 53 which is a prophetic passage about the Lord Jesus Christ, that he shall see his seed, that Jesus would see his seed and be glad, Jesus Christ did not have physical children while he was on this earth, despite what hollywood will tell you.  Jesus Christ seed is a spiritual seed, all those who believe on him become his sons and the bible tells us here that his seed if they disobey his commandments what does it says he is going to do look at verse 31 ??If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments;?? they are going to lose their salvation, they??re gonna go to hell, I??m not gonna love them anymore, is that what it says? He says ??I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes. Nevertheless my lovingkindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips?? God??s not going to break his promise, God??s not gonna break his covenant, God??s not going to change what he said, he is not going to alter the thing which came out of his lips.  He will punish us but he will not stop loving us and he will not send us to hell and a lot of people think well if you can??t lose your salvation and flip over if you will to Hebrews 6, people will say this if you can??t lose your salvation you might as well go out and live a wicked life and they say what are you saying are you? Are you saying there is just no consequences you can go out and live a wicked life? Just do whatever you want? Just do whatever? But hold on a second what about this life? So to sit there and say I??m saved I can just go out and do whatever I want and I am still going to heaven. Yeah true but you are gonna be destroyed in this life. Now is anyone just okay with that? Is there anyone here that would say I am okay with just living a horrible miserable life and losing everything and being severely punished by God, everytime I turn around being cursed and everything I do as long as I make it to heaven I am okay with that. No because we also want to be blessed in this life, don??t we, I mean do you what God to curse you and punish you and be, that be like if my children said oh wait a minute so you mean to tell me no matter how much I misbehave mom and dad you??re still gonna be my parents and you??re still gonna feed me and I still get to sleep in my bed at night, oh cool I am just gonna go out and just break every rule, I am never gonna obey you.  You know what??s going to happen they're gonna get spanked and they??re gonna get spanked and they??re gonna get spanked and they??re gonna be miserable and they are never gonna get to do anything fun. They??re gonna miss out on all the fun things and they??re just gonna keep getting punished and you know what that??s how it is in your life if you disregard God??s word after you??re saved.      Now if you are not saved you might be able to have a good time and get away with it but you??ll be in hell in the end which is worse but if you are saved, you can??t get away with sin, if you are saved, he doesn??t chase most of his children, he scourges every son whom he receiveth.  So if you're not saved children, listen to me young people, you say well you know what I??m saved, I??m going to heaven I am just gonna forget God??s commandments, you will be destroyed, God can destroy your life any time he wants to, God can cause you to be fired from your job anytime he wants to, God can infect you with disease anytime, it is what he said he would do.  If you go back to Deuteronomy 27-28 when he goes through all the blessings and curses.  He says look I??ll curse you when you go out and I??ll curse you when you're on your way home and I??ll curse your job, I??ll curse your wife, I??ll curse your children, I??ll curse everything that you d. You will fail, you will be filled with disease, you??ll lose your money look God will punish his children no question about that, if we just completely disregard his word.  So there are plenty of reasons to obey God??s commandments even tho escaping hell is not one of them.  Plenty of reasons to obey God??s commandments, we want God, first of all we just love him, if we love God lets keep his commandments, we should keep his commandments because we want to, not because we are being forced to number one.  Number two we what God to bless us.  Number three we don??t want God to punish us.  Number four we love our fellow man and we know we are going to get more people saved if we live for God then if we live for the world cause we love others and we want to get them saved.      Where did I have you turn?  Hebrews six okay, so I, I??ve already show you you know a huge amont of scripture that you can??t lose your salvation and you know several points all different which ways so now lets go into, in the short time we have left, let??s go to some passages that people will try to use to say you can lose your salvation and I??m starting with the most common one, now ironically the number one scripture that people show me to show me that you can lose your salvation is matthew seven which was the first verse I showed you in my sermon this morning to show you that you can??t lose it.  Where it says I never knew you but I have literally in my time soul winning and preaching have had more people show me matthew seven 21 through 23 to they and show me you can lose your salvation then any other verse in the bible.  See right here you can??t just say Lord, Lord you gotta, it??s like you know hello it says right there I never knew you and this is your proof text that you can lose it?  But that shows you those who believe not those who are not saved the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which believ not and the fact that someone can actually show you Matthew seven as a proof that you can lose your salvation just shows you that they are spiritually blinded, that should just show you right there that they are not saved, they can??t even see the meaning of the simple words, I never knew you.  Okay so I am not even gonna turn back to that one, we already talked about that one.  The second most common verse people take me to is Hebrews six and those of you who have been soul winning a long time, you will probley agree that these are the top verses that people take you to. Hebrews 6 lets look at this verse four it says ??For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, And have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. For the earth which drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God: But that which beareth thorns and briers is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing; whose end is to be burned. But, beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany salvation, though we thus speak?? So lets say a few things about this passage, first of all number one if this verse were teahing that you can lose your salvation, which its not but if it were isn??t it pretty clear that its saying you??d never be able to get it back because it says in verse six ??If they shall fall away,?? it says it is impossible in verse four, if they shall fall away in verse six ??to renew them again unto repentance; ?? So if this verse were theoretically teaching you, you can lose your salvation wouldn??t it be saying you can never get it back, but yet everyone you talk to that thinks you can lose it, thinks you can get it back and its like now I??m saved, now I??m not, now I??m saved, now I??m not and they go back and forth.  But heres the thing about this passage where does this passage say that these people are saved? or that they had everlasting life? It doesn??t, and that??s the thing when we show verses to prove that you can??t lose your salvation, they use words like saved, they use words like eternal life, they use words like everlasting life, they are clear scriptures.  This verse does not say saved, it does not say eternal life, here is what it actually says ??those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost And have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; ?? Now what is this talking about ? This is not talking about a person who gets saved, this is talking about a person who hears the gospel, the holy spirit is working in their hearts, they finally understand it, what does it mean to be enlightened? Dinge the light bulb comes on, I get it now, I understand it, I comprehend it and it fully hits home with them and they have been enlightened, they've tasted it, they??re right there,where this is it, I understand it, the holy ghost is working, they??ve tasted it and they just no, it??s their final rejection.  You know its funny when my wife got saved I, and she got saved before she was my wife, you know you should never marry someone that is not saved, this is before that when I first meet her, I meet her out soul winning first thing I did was give her the gospel, you know that??s how me and my wife actually met but I gave my wife the gospel about 20 times before she got saved, it took about 20 times of her hearing the gospel, she was a hard case you know I had to keep giving her the gospel, keep giving her the gospel and it took like about 20 times before my wife finally got saved but she will tell you this if you ask her she will say you know I never fully really understood it until I got saved. She said even tho you kept telling it and explaining it to me it just, I just never, it never quite clicked me, I just never quite understand it and the bible talks a lot about people hearing the word and understanding it not.  They don??t get it, so I kept explaining it and explaining it but it is hard for the unsaved person to understand, in fact it??s gotta be threw the holy spirit that they even understand cause the natural man receiveth not the things of the spirit of God, it takes the Holy Spirit to even illuminate someone and enlighten someone and the Holy Spirit illuminates and enlightens someone and they get it and then they reject it, a lot of times that??s their last chance.  That??s what the bible is teaching here because what is the key word here in this passage? It??s the word in verse eight ??But that which beareth thorns and briers is rejected,and is nigh unto cursing;?? whats a synonym for rejected? Reprobate. Those that are reprobate, now look isn??t the bible here in Hebrews six talking about someone for whom it is impossible to get saved. This is talking about a guy, its impossible to renew this guy into repentance, this guy is not getting saved, this guy is going to be burned, this guy is rejected.  These are like the people in Romans one , that God turned over to a reprobate mind, this is like pharaoh whose heart was hardened okay. But the disagreement that I have with people who would use this to say you can lose your salvation is their saying these people got saved and lost it, this passage doesn??t say they got saved, this passage doesn??t say they had everlasting life, It just says they tasted it and they partook of the Holy Ghost.  Look the Holy Ghost spoke threw Caiaphas the high priest, who wasn??t even saved, the Holy Ghost came upon Caiaphas in the book of John and he spake as he was moved by the Holy Ghost and he was not even saved, denying belief on Christ, so the fact the Holy Ghost is working in someone does not mean that they are saved, just because they tasted it they??re that close and then they fall away from it.  I have seen this, I??ve known people who were on the fence about getting saved, you know they're open to it, they??re coming to church, they??re thinking about it but they??re not saved but they??re thinking about it, the seeds being watered, the seeds been planted its being watered, and they they come to a point where its like no and they walk away from it and then those people become reprobate.  They just, its like you can never get that person saved and I can name for you people specifically that I??ve known like that where I??ve seen this in, in my own life okay. So that??s Hebrews six.    We already seen matthew seven, lets go to Matthew 24, Matthew chapter 24, I??m just trying to go to the top scriptures that people will try to use to, to say that you can lose your salvation.  Matthew seven is the number one, I don??t even know what to say about that, its so bizarre, it says I never knew you period end of story. Then we go to Hebrews six the second most common and, and what do we see there, there??s no clear statement that those people were ever saved or had eternal life, so therefore they must not of been saved because otherwise it would contradict the whole rest of the bible, so obviously those people were just on the verge of getting saved the Holy Ghost is moving and working in them, they??ve tasted it, it??s right there and they walk away and now they??re reprobates.  That??s what Hebrews six is teaching and what??s the moral of Hebrews six, the moral is if you??re not saved and God??s working in you and your hearing the word of God and the power of God??s word is working in you, now is the time to get saved because you never know when it??s gonna be your last chance to get saved, that??s what Hebrews six is teaching.       Now look at Matthew 24 verse 13, here??s another passage, probably the third most common that I??ve been shown a verse 13 ?? But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.??. Now they say see right there to be saved you have to endure until the end to be saved. Now if you go to verse 9 or let??s go to verse 22 first look at verse 22 ?? And except those days should be shortened, there should no ?? what? ?? flesh be saved: but for the elect's sake those days shall be shortened.?? Now let me ask you this verse 22 are we talking about people going to heaven when we say saved?  Were talking about the flesh being saved. Is there a difference between the flesh being saved and the soul being saved? Absolutely because in first Corinthians five it says ??To deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus?? So the flesh and the spirit are two different things and so to sit there and use this passage to teach works salvation, you gotta endure to the end to be saved, when it is talking about your flesh being saved, its not talking about your soul being saved. For example when Peter was drowning, what did he cry out to the Lord? ??Lord save me?? Is that when he got saved? Like thats when he is going to heaven when he cried out Lord save me. No he is talking about saving me physically from drowning, there??s a physical salvation there and here it flat out spells out ??And except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved: but for the elect's sake those days shall be shortened. ?? What days? The days of the tribulation, go back if you would to verse nine because member the verse in question is verse 13 right? Lets get the verses leading up to verse 13 to get the context it says in verse nine ??Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you:?? so does that sound like somebody??s flesh is in danger? Ya, So do you see how they could be saved from being killed? because it says ??Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you: and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name's sake. And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another. And many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many. And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.?? Endure what? This period when people are being killed for the cause of Christ, where people are being betrayed into the hands of the authorities, where people??s love is waxing cold and people are in danger, it??s a time of great tribulation such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be. That??s the context of Matthew 24, and it says the flesh shall be saved.  What does that mean? That means if you survive the famine, pestilences, warfare and beheadings and endure to the end you will be saved, meaning you??ll be rescued outta there via the rapture, that??s what it teaches and that??s why by the way people believe in this phoney pre-trib rapture.     It can lead you into other false doctrine like this right here cause people who are pre-trib don??t understand this verse and that??s why the biggest independant Baptist Church in Arizona and I will preach against this church by name because they don??t even, there not even King James only and in their statement of faith it says ??If you don??t endure to the end you shall not be saved?? Thats what it says Tri-city Baptist in Chandler look it up on the internet.  Tri-city Baptist aah I can??t believe you??d criticize another church. Hey if they are going to preach lies and heresy and false doctrine, if they??re gonna put a niv in the hand of their teenagers and in their main service they??ll use the King James to please the old people, there trying to please the old people, and please the elderly with the King James and in there teenages youth department where all the girls are in short shorts on their website and they??re giving them all an niv and given them false bibles , esv, new american standard, rock and roll. Hey that is not the future of an independant baptist church, that??s the future of a church one day its gonna be completely off the deep end new evangelical. I mean look those old people are going to be gonna go be with the Lord someday. If were given all the young people a different version, were not even given the young people the King James, were not giving the young people the old hymns of the faith, were not giving the young people the standard of dress, where you dress like a lady and dress like a man and dress modestly look you're destroying the future and that church, that, that fraud tri-city baptist in their statement of faith go look it up it says you have to endure till the end to be saved under the salvation. Look it up just go on there and type endure, you know the little find, in there big long statement of faith, oh you know its only those who endure to the end that are truly saved.  Your teaching works, is what you're doing. Oh but they say its by faith, ya but they say if you endure until the end you weren??t saved.     See this calvinist, look I am against calvinism and calvinism is a fraud where you just never really were saved if you fall away, you know, well when the armenian says you can lose it and the calvinist says you never really were saved in the first place and the bible believing baptist says you know what you might get out of church but your still saved, you might quite on God but he??s not gonna quit on you, the eternal security of the believer, once saved always saved and they??re gonna take this Matthew 24 a tribulation passage and turn all that on its head, which is a sentence taken out of context. You take it out of context right, he that endureth till the end shall be saved, I mean it almost, it sounds like that right.  I mean what if we just took that all by itself, let??s be honest doesn??t that sound like it says you have to endure till the end to be saved, thats what it says right? But thats why you have to read the bible in context and thats why anybody who takes this verse by itself and quotes it by itself is a liar.  Anybody who quotes well you have to endure till the end to be saved, thats how you??re going to get to heaven is a liar, that is not what this says.  This says your flesh will be saved, this says they're trying to kill you and you gotta endure that persecution.      Go to Matthew ten, well find the same thing Matthew chapter ten.  Same exact thing another passage people will bring out to say you can lose your salvation. You say why are you so fired up? Why are you so upset? Because even baptists are deceived today, you know we, we need to stand strong on this.  Look I know we, I know that everybody here already believes you can??t lose your salvation. I are at least ninety-nine percent, I already know we believe this but you know what its not enough to just to know something, we need to know what we know it and we need to know why we know it and we need to know how to prove it from scripture because I want these foundations of doctrines to be strongly laid for the next generation and that everyone will not just walk out of here saying I know that we can??t lose our salvation but to say I got ten reasons why we can??t lose it biblically and I??m ready when they try to pull this fraudulent. I you know he that endure till the end shall be saved and whip that out of context and throw that at me, ya I know how to answer it, I know what the truth is, we need to know the truth.     The bible says in Matthew chapter 10, the same thing ah let me find it verse 21 ??And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death,?? so what are we talking about? Were talking about someone being physical killed, saved people being killed for their faith. ?? and the father the child: and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death.?? Why because the children don??t believe the same things that the parents believe, I wonder if its because they are reading out of a different bible? I wonder if its because they have a completely different music? I wonder if it is because they have a completely different doctrine, different lifestyle, different training, different schooling, different everything.  He said ??the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death.  And ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake: but he that endureth to the end shall be saved. But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another: for verily I say unto you, Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of man be come.??  So again what are we talking about? The Second coming of Jesus Christ. Is that not what its talking about in verse 23?  Second coming of Christ, so in verse 21 people are being killed for the cause of Christ and in verse 22 were being hated and if we endure till the end will be saved, by what? The coming of Christ, he said just flee into another city, they??re killing you, the heads are coming off, flee into another city and you know eventually if you can endure until the end you??ll be saved, you??ll be delivered.  That??s why, ya know and I can go on and on, you know there are so many scriptures on that subject of Matthew 10 and Matthew 24, we can go on and on.     I mean he keeps going look at verse 28 ??And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul:?? Do you see how there is a distinction being made? Between the body being saved and the soul being saved? The body being killed, the soul being killed?  ?? fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell. ??  We can go on and on, I??ve got a few other scriptures that people will go to second Timothy Chapter 2 it just proves that you??re own security even more when you actually turn to it.  I don??t have any time but folks we can??t lose our salvation and that??s the best news you??ve heard all day because if you could lose your salvation we??d all lose it . We??d lose it this week, you know I mean, no, none of us could, would be able to live up to the standard of earning our way into heaven.  Thank God that our sins are gone as far as the east is from the west God has separated us from our sins and thank God for that promise he has promised us, the earnest of the spirit and we got his word that promises us hundreds of times that we can never lose our salvation.  Don??t let the false teachers spin you on this and be read to give an answer and when you by the way when you go out soul winning don??t ever give the gospel to anyone without teaching them about eternal security before you pray with them, before you pray and have them call upon the name of the Lord make sure they even understand what the gospel is, what the good news is that salvation is free and it is eternal.  Now lets bow our heads and have a word of prayer.   Father we thank you so much for your word and we thank you for the truths of your word. Please Lord just help us all to preach this message to as many people as we can, people are not saved their lost and many people are even claiming the name of Jesus and they think their wonderful works are going to save them. Lord help us to preach this message of once saved always saved, of faith alone for salvation and that it is not of works. Help us to scream this from the housetops, help us to stand against the churches that call themselves baptists and preach all this false works based calvinistic, repent of your sins and jump through hoops to be saved. Lord help us to stand against it, to fight the good fight, to earnestly contend for the faith and to just proclaim door to door and to our friends, family and loved ones that salvation is the free gift through Christ, we love you and thank you and in Jesus name we pray Amen  Alright lets sing one more song before we go, how bout 227. Alright we broke the record again, what's the number? oh wow its best when we only break it by one. That means we will break it again sooner hahaha. you know and you know what it's exciting because we are living in a day when a lot of independent baptist churches are getting smaller, shrinking but you know what we need to keep growing and thriving and you know if we keep preaching the truth and knocking doors, you know there??s no reason why we have to get smaller, it can only get bigger and so thank you everyone for being here today and helping out, ok lets sing 220. 


