
"But this is all blind faith..." is the blind phrase I have often heard from people who care very little to see what they mean to say. To look upon faith as blind in one case and at the same time believe it to be capable otherwise under different circumstances is in­deed a blind outlook on faith. To call faith blind only under particular circumstances is to imply that under some other circumstances it is not blind. It is absolutely wrong to consider one faith as blind and at the same time believe another to be otherwise. In accordance with the individual outlook on life a person may hold faith any way he likes, whether blind, lame, alive or dead. But once a particular nature is attributed to faith by one, it must be considered as the uniform nature of all faiths by that person. If any faith is to be called as blind, then all faiths must be labelled as such. If one faith cannot be considered as blind, then all faiths must be taken as full of eyes. The 
difference between faiths must be considered as the difference in degrees and not in kind. 
Faith may be full or flicker­ing, fixed or fleeting, rich or poor, weak or strong, but for all these differences in its deve­lopment in keeping with the other preparations of a human being, it will always remain the same one faculty of visualising the invisible or the blindness that can see. I believe all faiths to be blind and not blind both together at one and the same time, because much can be seen through faith that would otherwise ever remain beyond perception, and when one perceives anything clearly, no question would remain for faith, as then it would cease to exist in knowledge and experience. 
Generally, the loss of the 
medium of seeing is confused 
with the inability to see, and 
when a man loses both his eyes, 
he is called blind. But unfor­
tunately, at the same time, he is 
also believed and is made to believe to have lost the ability to see, although, in fact, such a person continues retaining the power of seeing, and does see all blackness before him. 

It is all the more pitiable to hear the blind phrase when delivered with an air of supe­rior knowledge, and as the last word in argument against God-Realization and those who are after this inevitable goal of the soul. 
Full faith has more eyes than two in perceiving the Truth, but, keeping in view the ordinary human faculty of sight, faith is certainly blind, and, as such, the faith in God of the average human being is as blind as for a bat to believe in the day. Until God is actually seen with the spiritual eye that mankind possesses, He is a huge faith, a grand faith, a faith against which only fools would dare laugh at, but all the same, the Lord remains an object of as blind a faith as blind can be. 
A human being may change his opinion, his ideas, his beliefs and even bis faith. He may disbelieve in what he may actually  see,   hear and feel. But no human being has ever been reported to believe himself for a moment to be a diamond, a carrot, a parrot or a bull. Even those who become unsound in mind do not appear to lose sight of the fact that they are human beings. In short, once a human being is always a human being to the end of his conscious life in all conditions and under all circumstances. Exactly in the same way, those fortunate souls who once see God always see God until unity with the Supreme Soul is achieved in Self-Realization. 
Therefore, when God is actually seen everywhere and for all times continually by one who reaches the sixth plane of cosmic consciousness, would that person be yet considered to have faith in God? Certainly not. God, for that person, then becomes a fact more tangible than the man's existence. 
Like God, every Master is necessarily a matter of faith for the disciple until such time as the latter is uplifted to the level of the former. Blind faith in God or in a Master that leads to God-Realization is a divine gift to mankind of a spiritual faculty of feeling and finding That which is beyond all bodily senses and beyond mind, matter and intellect. Such faith is no more blind than that based on political and economical theories, logical conclusions and scientific hypotheses. If objective ex­periments prove anything in the material sphere, subjective experiences prove many things in the world of spirituality. 

Faith is as much essential in the spiritual as in the material life. Without faith in one's doctor, lawyer, friend and rela­tive, life would be very difficult to live and cease to be a practical proposition. Faith implies belief, and the latter has necessarily to be based on trust that takes a fact for granted, just as a man who has lost both his eyes but not his power of seeing, decides in the dark. All the same, according to the good old maxim of "No risk, no gain", a prudent and reasonable risk is not only worthwhile but an absolute necessity in both the depart­ments of materialism as well as spirituality. 
But in no case can any fault ever be found with faith itself, whatever be its intensity or depth, nor does the object of faith matters in the least, be it true and genuine, or fake and false. What matters is the aim and aspiration behind a faith and the will and determination to achieve these. Faith, like all other powers and faculties, acts as well as reacts. It fails as much as it succeeds. All depends on the use one makes of faith. Therein lies all the blindness about it. If one is greedy enough to have faith in some get-rich-quick business and fails therein, it is due to his blindness for greed and not for the blindness of his faith. 
It is true that supernatural phenomenon strengthens faith, but the faith which is loosely based on miracles is found on shifting sands. For one thing, such spectacular performances like fire-eating and fire-walking that are the results obtained by following certain obscure laws of nature are no miracles. Miracles mean a deliberate over-riding of the ordinary laws of nature and bringing about results by viol­ating such laws on the strength of supernatural powers. And yet I 

consider miracles to be as much a sign of spiritual great­ness as a foreboding of a divine downfall according to the aims and objects for which a miracle is performed and by whom it is performed. I would, therefore, respect all those who can perform miracles, but I would be the last to measure spiritual advancement with the doubtfu1 yardstick of miracles alone. 
All the great Masters have worked much more within the four walls of the ordinary laws of nature even to the extent of putting up with personal per­secution and bodily annihila­tion than having performed miracles, although a Perfect Master can perform miracles as and when he likes without the fear of any reaction that one in the Path has to guard against. In the everyday life, too, we find that those who are fully empowered and entitled to make use of special measures and prerogatives take recourse to these in exceptional cases and only under extraordinary circumstances. 
Just as some materialists make wrong use of their possessions, achievements and learning, some mystics in the making, particularly those who run the risk of treading deep into the spiritual Path without a perfect guide, are apt to abuse the supernatural powers for personal satisfaction or out of curiosity and vanity, and thereby suffer an unthinkable retrogression. When those who, in spite of reaching the stage wherein miracles can be per­formed, have to face and guard against a deep downfall, the fate of those who can only be contented with a faith exclu­sively founded on miracles can better be left to imagination. 
For all the fruits of power, knowledge, bliss and freedom looming large on the spiritual path, it is far from being strewn with flowers. On the contrary, every stage is full of thorns that have to be carefully avoided and yet at times penetrate the body, mind and soul altogether. 
Granting for argument that 
faith on sight is set up on the 
strength of seeing an un­
disputed and outstanding 
miracle like raising of the dead, 
it is inconceivable that the 
impression of a solitary seeing. 
would stand the strain of 
feeling a grim struggle for an 
indefinite 

period between mind and  A will cannot win it, a wish  
matter that is inevitable in the  cannot have it. And yet, like an  
Path.  extinct volcano that suddenly  
The secret of faith lies in tbe  shoots out into activity, a deep  
fact that it is in itself a miracle  devotion or an intense longing  
that automatically brings in its  that may have been latently  
wake supernatural phenomenon  nursed for ages often manifests  
as a matter of course. Faith is  in a sudden outburst of all  
neither created by force, nor is  effulgent faith that those who  
it an accident.  are blind call it blind.  
c  
