   Simultaneity 
May 2, 2010 
Rev. Mark Belletini 
 
Opening Words:
  
We are here 

in the month of May, in Beechwold neighborhood 

to worship, to celebrate life and love and faithful
ness 
with the art-forms of our heritage: 

careful words, tender silence, beautiful singing, 

and the simple agreement to be together each week. 

 
And so, 
mindful that we share a common world, but approach 
that world in different ways, 
we begin our celebration together by kindling our p
romise of mutual honesty, attentiveness, 
and deep courtesy. May we become more proficient at
 gratitude and awareness, that we 
might more deeply embody the kind of justice and pe
ace which embraces everyone on earth. 
 Sequence:  
  
Oh universal and temporary privilege of breathing! 

As you push my frame out and pull it in, 

I give thanks for each and every breath. 

I love you. I love to breathe, and breathe freely. 

I take you for granted too often,  

but for the following minute,  

I bow to you with the full gratitude of my being. 

I offer praise for every molecule of oxygen 

dancing with the other gasses which make up the air
: 
nitrogen, argon, carbon dioxide, neon, helium, meth
ane, krypton, hydrogen, xenon. 
I bow in gratitude for the rainbows drawn in arcs b
y the moist fingers of the air. 
I remember that some of the molecules that I breath
e in today were breathed out earlier this week 
by people in Sumatra, Paris, Nairobi, Kabul, Vladiv
ostok or by that ten-year-old who immigrated 
with his parents from Mexico to angry Arizona.  

Breathing, not language, unites the world. 

And I am moved to know that every molecule in my br
eathing was once generated in the abyss 
of space,  

in the womb of exploding stars. Such wonders! 

I bow. I bow. I bow. I bow. And keep a respectful 

silence before wonders that quiet me

  
 
silence 

 
   I bow to my life and to your lives too, to the part
icular people in our lives that make our lives 
what they are. Naming them within, or saying their 
names quietly aloud, we remember those we 
love, or miss, or with whom we struggle–
  
naming 

 
Imagine that all we have is right now. This moment,
 these people, united by breathing to all that 
live, united by dreams of a world at peace, without
 pointing fingers, without heavy burdens, 
without a wall of separation between haves and have
 nots. 
 
Choir Anthem:  Imagine,  John Lennon 

 
The First Reading
 this morning comes from a most excellent recent boo
k by historian Diana 
Butler Bass called A People™s History of Christiani
ty, The Other Side of the Story, which I 
recommend especially to anyone who thinks they alre
ady know all they need to know about that 
history
. 
 
In April 2008, Mathew Felling of WAMU radio in Wash
ington, DC, interviewed Dr. Gordon 
Livingston, a psychiatrist who for more than thirty
 years has been studying human happiness. 
Felling asked the predictable question: ?What is it
? What makes people happy?? 
 
Livingston responded by listing three things: meani
ngful work, meaningful relationships, and a 
sense of hope for the future. The first two are, in
 many ways, self-explanatory. But hope for the 
future? How is that achieved? 

 
?By having a realistic sense of history,? Livingsto
n responded. He insisted that seeing the past on 
its own terms---not through the romantic gaze of no
stalgia---is intrinsic to human flourishing.  
Nostalgia, he declared, is the enemy of hope. It tr
icks people into believing their best days are 
gone. A more realistic view of history, he insisted
, envisions the past as the theater of experience, 
some good and some bad, and opens up the possibilit
y of growth and change. Our best days are 
ahead, not behind. Hope for the future. 

 
The Second Reading
 comes from a book I have much enjoyed and also reco
mmend, both to 
those who think they know as much as they need to k
now about Buddhism, and to those who 
think they know all they need to know about atheism
. Stephen Batchelor has been writing books 
on Buddhism for decades now. He and his wife live i
n France these days. 
 
When it came to my turn, I offered the Dalai Lama a
 brief history of Buddhism as a way of 
showing how, over time, it had responded to the nee
ds of different Asian cultures, but in so 
doing, had itself been transformed by the encounter
.  This appeared so self-evident to me that I 
worried my presentation might be too simplistic.  Y
et to my surprise, the Dalai Lama listened 
with a slightly puzzled look on his face, as though
 the idea was novel and rather dubious.  He 
asked for some concrete examples.  I suggested he c
onsider how the image of the Buddha in 
Japan looks Japanese, while in Tibet it looks Tibet
an.  He swung around and pointed to a Tibetan 
image behind him:  ?But look, this Buddha:  he is 
Indian.
?  It was difficult to know what to say.  

   The image he was pointing to looked, as Martine put
 it afterward, ?no more Indian than my 
eighty-four-year-old granny in Bordeaux.? 

 
Again I was forced to recognize that no matter how 
intelligent the person to whom one is talking 
may be, his or her view of the world might be based
 on entirely different premises.  What seems 
obvious to me as a modern Westerner may not be at a
ll obvious to a Tibetan lama Œ even one 
who, in so many other respects, seems to have embra
ced and understood the modern world.  And 
whereas I found the study of history to be a vivid 
illustration of the Buddhist teachings on 
impermanence, this did not appear to strike the Dal
ai Lama as particularly significant.  I realized 
with an unsettling jolt that the ?historical consci
ousness? I so take for granted was a peculiar 
feature of my own upbringing and conditioning.  As 
this exchange indicated, someone from 
another background might perceive the same data qui
te differently. 
 
Sermon 

 
When I studied Western church history in seminary, 
I became fascinated by the man Martin 
Luther. He was hard-drinking. He was hard-swearing.
 And he was a genius; a most intriguing 
combination, you may agree, in a religious leader. 
After all, it™s hard to imagine the Dalai Lama, 
or Katherine Schori, Presiding Bishop of the Episco
pal Church, tossing back glass after glass of 
beer while cursing a blue streak and pounding the t
able. Luther was a real character. But his very 
human qualities intrigued me. 

 
However, Luther™s humanity sort of soured and curdl
ed as he got older. I suppose it was all that 
drinking, but his anger and stubbornness led to man
y bad decisions. And these led to terrible 
historical events. There was class-warfare reflecte
d in the peasant uprisings. There were violent 
anti-Jewish attacks. And, sad to say, he taught tha
t the secular government had the sole right to 
determine the religion of its citizenry. Thus, in m
any places in Northern Europe after Luther, it 
was the Prince of your area who decided your religi
on. If he was a Catholic, then, by God, you 
were a Catholic. And if he was a Lutheran, then by 
God, you were a Lutheran. If you happened 
to be a Lutheran first and your prince wasn™t–too b
ad–you had to move.  And the military 
would help you if you didn™t.  

 
But, interestingly enough, all over Germany, there 
were princes whose military might just didn™t 
possess the skill or numbers to effect large migrat
ions of people who held to the wrong religion. 
So, in these places, the central church in the main
 city became a 
simultankirche
, a simultaneous 
church. 

 
I just loved that word when I first heard it. A sim
ultaneous church.  But what did that mean? It 
meant that there was one building shared by two dif
ferent religious traditions. The Lutherans had 
it in the early morning, the Catholics later; they 
alternated hours in the afternoon, and the 
Catholics and Lutherans– who were, after all, neigh
bors in the city, had to actually tip their hats 
to each other as they entered and exited this ?simu
ltaneous? church.  They had to relate to each 
other. They had to share.  They had to be, in short
, a community, a family. 
 
   Strangely, this simultaneous church experience in W
estern religious history set the stage for us. 
And it™s this history which Diana Butler Bass calls
 
realistic
 history. Remember? She™s quoting a 
psychologist who has studied the concept of happine
ss for years. 
 
?By having a realistic sense of history,? it says i
n her book, ?you can see the past on its own 
terms---not through the romantic gaze of nostalgia.
? And that, she submits, is ?intrinsic to human 
flourishing.?  ?Nostalgia,? she reminds us, ?is the
 
enemy 
of hope. It tricks people into believing 
their best days are gone. A more realistic view of 
history envisions the past as the theater of 
experience, some good and some bad, and opens up th
e possibility of growth and change. Our 
best days are ahead, not behind.? 

 
What a refreshing statement. Our best days are ahea
d. And that is true, the simultaneous church 
experience reminds us, even if we don™t see eye to 
eye religiously, spiritually, or culturally.  
 
Our ancestors were the great-grandchildren of Luthe
r™s Protestant Reformation. They were not 
fond, however, of Luther™s legacy–namely, that reli
gion was not free, but something to be 
coerced.  

 
They agreed that Luther was right to criticize the 
Bishop of Rome who claimed authority for 
himself that they could not find in their Bibles. B
ut they also were aware that they were not 
comfortable with 
any
 traditionally understood Biblical attitudes toward
 church organization and 
government as well. At first, their own discomfort 
bothered them. After all, the New Testament 
clearly talks about 
episkopoi
, which means supervisors, and is usually translate
d as 
bishops
. So 
no getting around that word. And it clearly talks a
bout a 
presbyter
, translated as 
an elder
, but 
later pronounced as 
priest.
 And, it talks clearly about 
deacons
, which just means table-waiter in 
Greek. But deacons were clearly part of a top-down 
hierarchy of church leadership. Still, our 
ancestors continued to read the Bible carefully. Fo
r example, they refused to call their buildings 
?churches,? calling them Meeting Houses instead, si
nce they were aware that the word 
?ekklesia? or church, only meant the community of p
eople, not the building; the family, if you 
will, not the house. 

 
Eventually, our ancestors, who were progressive in 
their thinking, found interpretations of 
scripture that made sense to them. Passages that lo
oked to the future, not the past. Passages that 
were not nostalgic. And our ancestors were aware th
at, in a realistic world, it wasn™t just 
Lutherans and Catholics that might have to share th
e same space simultaneously. They were 
deeply aware that we 
all
 might have to do such a thing if we™re really goin
g to be honest. They 
anticipated in their thinking what Stephen Batchelo
r makes plain, namely, that there isn™t even 
the slightest chance that we are all going to share
 assumptions, ideas, religious or irreligious 
concepts. We™re not even going to share the same do
ubts. Stephen Batchelor had been teaching 
Buddhism for years, but wasn™t even a Buddhist yet,
 when the Dalai Lama was a young boy, 
born and raised a Buddhist as he was in Tibet. But 
yet this brilliant Lama was baffled by 
Batchelor™s simple assertion that Buddhism changes 
from culture to culture, and 
benefits
 from 
those changes. The Lama did not share the Westerner
™s breath-taking sense of history, or his 
sociological slant. Now look, he™s no dummy, that D
alai Lama. Sharp as a tack. I™ve heard him 
speak and my God, he was brilliant, witty and clear
ly well-informed. Yet Stephen Batchelor, also 

   a brilliant man, began with totally different 
basic
 assumptions. And so they found themselves 
understanding the world–even the Tibetan Buddhist w
orld they shared– in different ways. 
 
Our ancestors imagined that was probably going to b
e true of all of us. That even if we 
used
 the 
same words, they would still have different meaning
s for each of us. If I say God, you won™t 
necessarily hear what I mean. If you say Jesus, you
 may mean the Jesus you were taught about as 
a child, who terrified you with threats of hell in 
Sunday school, or if you were raised Jewish, the 
Jesus who threatened his fellow Jews with pogroms a
nd hatred. Myself, I would hear in that 
name the words of the ancient teacher who was conce
rned for the outcasts, the hurt, the 
imprisoned and the poor. Same name. Different peopl
e. In short, this relentlessly deep honesty 
about the meaning of things suggests that those of 
us who are Unitarian Universalists would not 
even feel the least bit safe if we fenced our commu
nity with a creed. Some people tell me it™s 
?easier? when everyone knows clearly what they are 
supposed to think, feel and believe. They 
think a creed provides this sense of ?ease.? Maybe 
so. But we seem to be the sort of people who 
are not so sure that the ?easy? way is automaticall
y the ?best? way.  
 
No, our ancestors said, in order for us to meet saf
ely, we have to meet freely. Moreover, we have 
to govern ourselves freely. We have to organize our
selves freely. And so we decided not to 
impose creeds, belief statements, summaries, or fai
th statements on each other, nor arch over 
each other with hierarchical control, supervisory s
ynods, spiritual aristocracies, or king-like 
archbishops with serious political power. Instead, 
we agreed to meet as different, distinct, unique 
–but 
equally
 dignified partners, 
together
–and 
entirely without external coercion. 
Total 
freedom. We agreed to meet together for worship in 
community and in the service of justice for 
one and all. And we called this agreement to meet b
y another ancient word, covenant. 
 
As the first reading says, any telling of history t
hat is not 
realistic
, that is, that is told only 
nostalgically, cannot ever hope to proclaim ?Our be
st days are ahead, not behind.? So 
realistically, and despite the central importance o
f the word in Unitarian history particularly, I 
have to admit that the word ?covenant? has had a pr
oblematic history in this particular 
congregation. Even though the Griswold Williams cov
enant ?Love is the doctrine of this 
church–? was recited regularly at worship for over 
30 years, it proved controversial for some 
folks, who were clear they disliked certain words w
ithin it.  So, after what felt to me like a 
difficult year here emotionally–my first year here 
in fact–after a new covenant was being 
created by a committee and the Griswold Williams co
venant was lying dormant, the 
congregation voted at their yearly June meeting tha
t there would be no 
official
 covenant for this 
congregation. 
Neither
 the Griswold Williams, 
nor
 the elegant one crafted by the committee.  
 
I admit this was a difficult decision for me, since
, as an amateur, but passionate, historian, I 
wasn™t sure if an unwritten, unspoken and invisible
 agreement to meet together qualified us as a 
Unitarian Universalist congregation at all. But I d
ecided to let the decision sink in, and to work 
with it instead of against it. Our ancestors, I now
 think, would have agreed with my decision. 
 
I decided, after some months of meditation on the i
ssue, that, in some ways, the decision was 
freeing. 

   After all, I am not sure if any set of words, howev
er lovely or generalized, are deeply useful, or 
anything more than memorized sounds after 30 years,
 which is a really long time in some 
respects.  Our religious ancestors were aware that 
covenants do indeed change over time, and 
continue to change. Alice Blair Wesley goes so far 
as to suggest that, if the congregation is 
healthy, its leadership is healthy, and its spiritu
al grounding is healthy, unwritten covenants can 
serve the common life just as well as the written o
nes. That™s a lot of ?ifs? of course! 
 
But the written ones 
can
 be striking. The language of the earliest covenant
s in our movement, in 
congregations such as the one in Salem, Massa-chuse
tts, the congregation first founded by the 
Pilgrims, and which is now a Unitarian Universalist
 congregation, used language typical of their 
times. Here is the 1636 version of their covenant, 
which read in part: 
We covenant with our Lord, 
and one with another; to walk together–in his bless
ed word of truth; to be his people, in the 
truth and simplicity of our spirits. We promise to 
walk with our brethren, with all watchfulness 
and tenderness, avoiding jealousies and suspicions,
 back-bitings, censurings, provokings, secret 
risings of spirit against them; but in all offences
 to follow the rule of Jesus, and to bear and 
forbear, give and forgive, as he hath taught us. In
 public or private, we will willingly do nothing 
to the offence of the church; but willing to take a
dvice for our selves and ours, as occasion shall 
be presented. We bind our selves to study– all trut
h and peace; both in regard of those that are 
within or without; no way slighting our sister chur
ches, but using their counsel, as need shall be; 
not laying a stumbling-block before any, no, not th
e Indians, whose good we desire to promote; 
and so to converse, as we may avoid the very appear
ance of evil. We resolve to shun idleness, 
nor will we deal hard, or oppress any–   

 
This is not a creed. This is a promise to willingly
 meet together in community and, well– you 
heard it–
behave
. Which means that no one gets to elect himself or 
herself archbishop for the 
day, and tell anyone else what to do or what to bel
ieve. No one gets to speak for God, or for 
anyone else, interpret the scripture for anyone els
e, criticize the scriptures for anyone else, or 
ignore anyone else, or mock or oppress anyone else,
 even, it boldly says, ?the Indians–outside.? 
I™m not sure if they understood that ?the Indians?–
that is, the Iroquois, also lived by the 
civilizing practice of the free covenant, but perha
ps they wrote this odd little sentence in their 
covenant to suggest exactly that. Each member in a 
church, the progressive congregational 
tradition agrees, like the Iroquois did, to coopera
te with each other, to work together for the 
common good, and to listen to each other, as well a
s speak with each other. To be part of such a 
congregation does not mean that you can believe wha
tever you want, in isolation from those who 
differ from you–that™s not community, that™s just a
 collection, like a box of random sea shells. 
In other words, to belong to such a congregation is
 belong to a living community where everyone 
agrees to be in ?converse,? that is, conversation w
ith each other about the deeper issues of life. A 
covenanted church is a place where I want to be wil
ling to grow, and even to be ruthlessly honest 
about the changes experience has brought about in m
y life and way of thinking. What™s 
wonderful about having no creed–and by creed I mean
 even what I call a fairy-tale creed, you 
know, like when someone says, ?Oh most people aroun
d here think just like me?–is that I can 
change my beliefs, and then redefine them again– an
d 
still
 be an active, committed member of 
the community.  

 
   Let me get back to this business of an 
unwritten
 or an understood covenant. There was, I think, 
an unwritten covenant between the civil rights work
ers in this nation back in the sixties. The idea 
that men and women of all colors and ethnicities sh
ould have the right to vote was clear to 
everyone. They didn™t write it down, but they did p
roceed from it and organize around it. And 
yet, at the famous March on Washington, women sang 
songs, but didn™t give testimonies at the 
microphone. Women were outside of the dream for man
y men. And so women like Dorothy 
Height realized that commitment to a covenant imply
ing freedom for some, implied freedom for 
all. So she slowly but surely moved the men of the 
civil rights movement to understanding that, 
without women having the same rights as men, the wh
ole civil rights movement was being 
undercut. Did she toot her horn, whine, demand? Did
 she cut King off mid-sentence, yell at 
Ralph Abernathy, scream at Jesse Jackson? Did she w
ithdraw her support because she didn™t get 
her dream of gender equality fulfilled immediately,
 or walk away judgmentally because a man as 
brilliant as King hadn™t preached this already?  No
. She understood the depth and grounded 
nature of a covenant agreed to by a community worki
ng for justice. Patiently, slowly, with 
organization and skill and kindness, she got the me
n to enlarge their focus. They 
changed
 their 
beliefs–but still remained great leaders of the civ
il rights movement–as was she. 
 
When Luther broke from the Roman Church, he took th
e three historic creeds of that church with 
him; he really believed uniformity was possible, an
d that folks could be coerced into religious 
identity from the outside. He changed the way the s
acraments were interpreted, and theology was 
preached, but he kept the standard creeds. He was a
 brilliant man, Luther, but I really disagree 
with him. I rather take heart in our progressive tr
adition of covenantal community, where people 
agree, not on what they believe or don™t believe, b
ut only to be there to support each other for the 
long haul. Thus, I want to end with the beautiful v
erbal covenant of my colleague Alice Blair 
Wesley, who adapted the 17
th
 century covenants of the original free congregatio
ns of this 
movement for modern use. I think it summarizes beau
tifully what the purpose of this, or any 
Unitarian Universalist congregation is–at its best–
where we can gather, simultaneously, and be 
and become exactly who we are–and no one else. 

Though our knowledge is incomplete,  

our truth partial and our love uneven, 

From our own experience and from  

the witness of our tradition (to wit) 

            that new light is ever waiting to break
             through individual hearts and minds 

            to illumine the ways of humankind; 

            that there is mutual strength 

            in willing cooperation; 

            and that the bonds of love keep open 

            the gates of freedom, 

therefore we pledge to walk together in the ways 

of truth and affection, 

as best we know them now, 

or may learn them in days to come, 

that we and our children may be fulfilled, 

and that we may speak to the world 

   with words and actions 

of peace and goodwill. 

 
Offering 

 
On this spring day, we gather in freedom, 

in mutual support of each other, and this our 

common home, the earth. We labor together 

to make this a home for the spirit, and a shelter 

for the hurting. We offer our generosity  

either in the modern way, electronically,  

or this way, that we might flourish and all might f
lourish.  
 
Benedicite for Spring 

 
O you peonies, opening your wide eyes  

on branches stretched out like dancers™ arms, 

blest are your fiery petals.  

Blest your outrageous colors, oh tulips! 

Blest are you, that you exist in the same world 

as we do, right here and right now. 

O you green leaves of spring, unfurling, 

chartreuse and pink and yellow-green, 

we bless you, 

you the living mosaic illustrating the precise mean
ing of life and truth. 
O you dandelions on the lawns, 

rubber-stemmed, jagged toothed–. 

we bless you for looking like a flock 

of rare birds, or scattered gold coins. 

Weeds you are, but life too, just like we are. 

Blest are you, wonders of spring, harbingers of hop
e, 
blessings, as it were, on us, we who bless you. 

Amen.  

  

