INTRO.- ILL.- Fanny Crosby, was an American mission worker, poet, lyricist, and composer.  A lifelong Methodist, she was one of the most prolific hymn writers in history, writing over 8,000 hymns and gospel songs, with over 100 million copies printed.  This is despite her being blind from shortly after birth.  Crosby is also known for her preaching, teaching, and her rescue mission work.  By the end of the 19th century, she was "a household name".Known as the "Queen of Gospel Song Writers" some of her best songs are: "Blessed Assurance", "Pass Me Not, O Gentle Saviour", "Jesus Is Tenderly Calling You Home", "Praise Him, Praise Him", "Rescue the Perishing", and "To God Be the Glory". Because some publishers were hesitant to have so many hymns by one person in their hymnals, Crosby used nearly 200 different pseudonyms during her career.Crosby once said: “Before 1840 my friends had nearly spoiled me with their praises.  At least I began to feel my own importance as a poet a little too much.“So the superintendent, Mr. Jones, thought something ought to be done to curb such rising vanity.  One morning after breakfast I was summoned to the office.  It was an impressive occasion, and I remember what Mr. Jones said almost word for word:“Fanny, I am sorry you have allowed yourself to be carried away by what others have said about your verses.  True, you have written a number of poems of real merit; but how far do they fall short of the standard that you might attain. “Shun a flatterer, Fanny, as you would a viper; for no true friend would deceive you with words of flattery.  Remember that whatever talent you possess belongs wholly to God.  You ought to give Him the credit for all that you do.”Then the dear man said to me, “Fanny, have I wounded your feelings?”  Something within me bore witness that Mr. Jones spoke the truth.  So I answered, “No, sir.  On the contrary, you have talked to me like a father, and I thank you very much for it.” "In years afterward I gradually came to realize that his advice was worth more than the price of rubies."It’s good to be reminded of certain things in life.  It’s good to be reminded to stay humble and remember that every good gift comes from above, not from us.  He is the author of good in us. To Him be the glory!  (I Corinthians 10:31)And it’s the job of every gospel preacher to remind his people of what God says in His word about life.  In our text, the apostle Paul urged Titus to remind the people about their Christian responsibilities.PROP.- Let’s look at those Christian responsibilities and be reminded about how they apply to us.1- Remind the people to obey those in authority2- Remind the people to be considerate toward all3- Remind the people to remember God’s loveI. REMIND THE PEOPLE TO OBEY THOSE IN AUTHORITY1 Remind the people to be subject to rulers and authorities, to be obedient, to be ready to do whatever is good, ILL.- I love the old story about Christian Herter who was the governor of Massachusetts in the late 1950s.  He was running hard for a second term in office.  One day, after a busy morning chasing votes (and no lunch) he arrived at a church barbecue.  It was late afternoon and Herter was famished.  As Herter moved down the serving line, he held out his plate to the woman serving chicken.  She put a piece on his plate and turned to the next person in line."Excuse me," Governor Herter said, "do you mind if I have another piece of chicken?"  "Sorry," the woman told him.  "I'm supposed to give one piece of chicken to each person."  "But I'm starved," the governor said."Sorry," the woman said again. "Only one to a customer." Governor Herter was a modest man, but he decided that this time he would throw his little weight around.  "Do you know who I am?" he said. "I am the governor of this state.""Do you know who I am?" the woman said.  "I'm the lady in charge of the chicken.  Move along, mister." It’s called respect for authority whether that authority is the police or the lady dishing out the fried chicken.  Respect for others in life is essential for a better and that includes respect for authority.ILL.- I remember in 1968 after I bought my first new car, a 1968 Pontiac Firebird, a hot car of sorts.  I was driving down 4th Street in Joplin, MO, when suddenly I was pulled over by the Joplin police.  As soon as I pulled over, I jumped out of the car and went back to talk to that the Police officer.  What was wrong with that?  Nothing back then but it would be today. When you get pulled over by the Police or Highway Patrol you stay put in your car otherwise, they may blast you with their loud speaker, saying, “STAY IN YOUR CAR!”That Joplin, MO, police officer said, “Did you know that you were going 40 mph in a 20 mph zone?”  I remember well what I said because that was one of my first traffic tickets.  I said, “No, sir, but if you say so then I believe it.”  Back then I think he just wanted to check my driver’s license.  Today, it would be your driver’s license, registration and proof of insurance.  After a short while, he said, “Well, I’m going to give you a ticket for speeding but I’m going to make it out like you were going 30 mph instead of 40 mph.”  Why did he do that?  I don’t know.  I’m sure it wasn’t because he thought I was such a nice guy.  It’s probably more like grace.  But he saved me $20.At that time, a speeding ticket cost $2 per mile so it would have been $40 but cost me $20 instead.  I acted very courteous to that police officer because he had authority.  He was the law officer.  However, I have known of people to argue with police officers in order to get out of a ticket and generally, that doesn’t work.  Occasionally, it may work but not most of the time.  Generally, a person just digs their hole a little deeper.ILL.- I was fishing one time on a pontoon boat and another guy who was also fishing.  It just happened that the water patrol approached us and asked to see our fishing licenses.  I had my fishing license but my friend did not.  He told the water patrol that he had forgotten his fishing license and they said they were going to give him a ticket.  He argued with them, “You are not going to give me a ticket.  I have a license.  I just don’t have it with me.”  He continued to argue with them and they said something about taking him to jail.  He said, “Go ahead and I’ll sue you for false arrest.”  On and on, he argued with them but he lucked out, because they didn’t give him a ticket.  He felt somewhat proud because he thought he argued them out of getting a ticket.  That is not the way to act toward those in authority!   1 Remind the people to be subject to rulers and authorities, to be obedient, to be ready to do whatever is good.We are to do all the good we can in this life and that includes obeying the law whether we like the law or not.  It also includes obeying our boss or manager or whoever is over us in the working world.  And we may not like them either!  We’ve all had bosses whom we didn’t like but we still had to do what they told us to do.  It’s a matter of keeping your job and it’s also a matter of obeying the Lord who said to be in subjection to rulers.  It’s a matter of doing what is right in the eyes of the Lord.II. REMIND THE PEOPLE TO BE CONSIDERATE TOWARD ALL2 to slander no one, to be peaceable and considerate, and to show true humility toward all men. 3 At one time we too were foolish, disobedient, deceived and enslaved by all kinds of passions and pleasures. We lived in malice and envy, being hated and hating one another.ILL.- SAN JOSE, CA—It is not nice, and definitely illegal, to spit on a cop—even if he’s a horse.  (I don’t know when this happened but I’m sure it was long time ago!)  That was the lesson learned by Carl Vikstrom, 43, who allegedly did the deed to “Sport,” a horse ridden by police officer Will Smoke in downtown San Jose.  Sgt. Greg Trapp said state law provides that police dogs and horses may not be harassed, annoyed, or agitated.Well, what about people?  What about people harassing, annoying or agitating people?ILL.- Cell phone people.  Young adults (those between the ages of 18 and 29) are especially likely to say that they have encountered several of these situations recently:- 70% of 18-29 year old cell owners have used their phone for entertainment when they were bored.- 64% have used their phone to quickly retrieve information they needed.- 42% have had trouble doing something because they did not have their phone nearby.- 30% have used their phone to avoid interacting with the people around them.And many people are far more attached to their cell phones by either talking or texting to the point that they have become an annoyance to many people around them!  Such as:1. Talking on the phone while checking out at a store.2. Checking your phone, taking calls, or texting during a meeting.3. Talking on your phone while at your table in a restaurant.4. Talking on your phone in an elevator, restroom, car, or other space where those around you can’t escape your conversation.And the list goes on an on.  Smart phones have become idiot phones for some who don’t use them in a polite way, not thinking of others around them.Obviously, using a cell phone incorrectly is not the only way that we annoy or irritate people.  It’s a selfish lifestyle that does it. It’s selfishness in everything we do and I see it a lot of that in people’s driving habits.  Everyone is trying to get ahead, to get where they are going without regard to other drivers.The same is true in shopping and almost everything we do. We’ve all heard of people getting into fights on Black Friday in an effort to get something on sale and before anyone else gets it.Whatever happened to common courtesy?  To being kindly and unselfish toward others?  Whatever happened to slowing down to take time for others?  To being neighborly?Philippians 2:3-4 “Do nothing out of selfish ambition or vain conceit, but in humility consider others better than yourselves.  Each of you should look not only to your own interests, but also to the interests of others.” Galatians 6:9-10 “Let us not become weary in doing good, for at the proper time we will reap a harvest if we do not give up.  Therefore, as we have opportunity, let us do good to all people, especially to those who belong to the family of believers.”  Let us do what?  Let us do GOOD to all people, not evil things, not annoying things, not selfish things. Romans 12:17-18 "Do not repay anyone evil for evil. Be careful to do what is right in the eyes of everybody.  If it is possible, as far as it depends on you, live at peace with everyone.” Hebrews 12:14 “Make every effort to live in peace with all men and to be holy; without holiness no one will see the Lord.”We must strive for peace with all people.  If we don’t live in peace and show peace to others how can our light shine for the Lord? III. REMIND THE PEOPLE TO REMEMBER GOD’S LOVE4 But when the kindness and love of God our Savior appeared, 5 he saved us, not because of righteous things we had done, but because of his mercy. He saved us through the washing of rebirth and renewal by the Holy Spirit, 6 whom he poured out on us generously through Jesus Christ our Savior, 7 so that, having been justified by his grace, we might become heirs having the hope of eternal life.ILL.- Bill and Melinda Gates and Warren Buffett, the founders of the Giving Pledge, put almost $2 billion toward philanthropic work in 2012–the year’s only ten-digit givers–with Gates edging Buffett by a mere $35 million.  The Gateses and Buffett both giving away at least $25 billion apiece through the end of last year.That latter number for Buffett will grow rapidly.  He has committed that his entire Berkshire Hathaway holding, north of $58 billion, will be donated before or at his death, with a further mandate that it will be put to use within ten years of the latter. Add in his selfless giving model–he outsources to the Gates Foundation, his name on nary a building or endowment.  Buffet said, “If you have trouble living on $500 million, I’m gonna put out a book, How to Live on $500 Million.  Think about whether the other $500 million might do more for humanity than it will for you and your family.”What Warren Buffet has done and plans to do is a very commendable.  He has more than enough money for himself and is willing to do some good in this world with his money.  And Bill and Melinda Gates are doing the same.  And many people would say, “What a great act of love!”But there is one far better, that far outreaches anything man will ever do."When the kindness and love of God our Savior appeared."When did that happen?  It has happened many times in world history but the greatest and ultimate time was when Jesus came from heaven to earth to seek and to save the lost!John 3:16 “For God so love that He gave His one and...”John 3:36 “Whoever believes in the Son has eternal life, but whoever rejects the Son will not see life, for God's wrath remains on him."Romans 6:23 “For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.”What do all these verses say?  They remind us of the promise of eternal life that we have by faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.God’s gift to mankind of eternal life is the greatest act of unselfishness there is.  It’s the greatest sacrifice ever made in order to give us God’s greatest gift.  No human person has sacrificed more nor offered more than what God has done for us and offered to us.It’s the greatest promise ever given but that promise isn’t always received.  Not everyone believes in this gift or will accept this gift.Most people would gladly and quickly take any money that is offered to them, but they shun God’s gift of eternal life.  Why? Some don’t believe it’s true.  Some don’t believe in God or Jesus.  Some doubt.  Some doubt the sacrifice of Jesus on the cross. And some are ignorant of how to accept that gift.God’s gift stands true and free:  John 3:16CONCLUSION--------------------ILL.- When Queen Victoria was a child, she didn't know she was in line for the throne of England.  Her instructors, trying to prepare her for the future, were frustrated because they couldn't motivate her.  She just didn't take her studies seriously.  Finally, her teachers decided to tell her that one day she would become the queen of England.  Upon hearing this, Victoria quietly said, "Then I will be good."  The realization that she had inherited this high calling gave her a sense of responsibility that profoundly affected her conduct from then on.I wonder what kind of motivation is needed to get us to fulfill our Christian responsibilities of submitting to those in authority and being considerate toward all people???If we constantly remember how much God’s loved us and loves us on a daily basis then we should be quick to do what is right in this life.  If His love for us doesn’t motivate us then I don’t know what will.Steve Shepherd, Cape Girardeau, MOshepherd111@hotmail.com