INFLUENCING PEOPLECol. 4:2-6Prov. 27:17 ?As iron sharpens iron, so one man sharpens another.?I Cor. 15:33 ?Do not be misled: Bad company corrupts good character.?INTRO.- ILL.- A mother took her young son shopping.  After shopping in one store, a clerk handed the little boy a lollipop.  "What do you say?" the mother said to the boy, to which he replied, "Charge it!" Parents do influence their children in certain ways.  What do you do today that one of your parents did when you were a kid?  Do you do anything just like they did?  Do you have any of their habits?ILL.- And old TV commercial used to show a father walking along with his little boy.  The little boy was probably about 3 years old.  The dad picked up a rock and threw it.  The boy did the same thing.  The father sat down against a tree, lit up a cigarette and laid his pack of cigarettes on the ground.  And the last scene showed the little boy picking up that pack of cigarettes.Parents do influence their children whether they realize it or not!  What we do influences others!  Sometimes we sharpen others and sometimes we drag people down, but we do influence one another!  We influence one another in many ways and about many things.We influence one another in regard to sports (Cardinals and Cubies), hobbies, habits, vacations (Cancun, Mexico), houses, cars (Ford has a better idea, you know), clothing, food, religion, etc.ILL.- In 1978 I bought a foreign car.  A Japanese Subaru.  It was a little four-door car with a 5-speed overdrive floor shift.  It got fantastic gas mileage.  I could get 45 miles per gallon with that car while driving 70 and 75 miles per hour.  And believe it or not, I got as high as 52 miles-per-gallon.  No kidding!  I bought the car when I was preaching at the First Christian Church of Iberia, MO.  Why did I buy a car like that?  It was all because of one deacon in our church.  He had bought a Volkswagen Rabbit.  They were very popular at that time.  He kept talking about the good gas mileage and the good traction he had with that front-wheel drive car.  He just kept talking about it until I couldn?t take it any longer.   Finally, I went to look at those cars.  I liked the VW Rabbit, but I didn?t like the price tag.  That?s why I ended up buying that Subaru which was also a front-wheel drive car.  And it turned out to be a great car and it was much cheaper than the Rabbit.  SO THEN I LET HIM HEAR ABOUT IT!We do influence people!  And our greatest concern should be to influence people for Christ and His church.What are we doing to influence people for Christ?  That is, people inside the church and people outside the church.  We are doing something even when we don?t realize it.ILL.- We had an elder in the church at Iberia, MO, named Ralph Riemensnider, who did everything he could for the church.  He had a good voice and led the singing on Sunday morning.  He taught a Sunday School class and a midweek Bible study.  He would even preach if I had to be gone.  Whenever there was manual work that needed to be done around the church, he was there to help.  Clean snow from parking lot or whatever.  I asked him one time why he did so much for the church and he gave a man?s name as his answer.  He said, ?Virgil Burks is the reason.?   Virgil had been an elder in the church years earlier and he was a diligent worker in the church.  Virgil?s good and godly example had a positive influence on Ralph.  We do influence others for Christ whether we realize it or not.Of course, sometimes we exert a negative influence on people.  I?ve known of some people who wouldn?t come church because of someone else in the church.  He may have been a nasty foul-mouth or something else which was very negative. SUCH PEOPLE INFLUENCE PEOPLE AGAINST CHRIST.  And this is something we don?t want to do.  We don?t want to turn people off to Christ.  WE WANT TO TURN THEM ON!I want us to think about the influence that we have on people for Christ.  Family members, friends, fellow workers, neighbors, social acquaintances, and even people we don?t even know but may happen to rub shoulders with them in the grocery store and Wal-Mart and so on.PROP. - The apostle gives us some things we can do to influence people for Christ.1- Devoted prayer2- Clear preaching3- Wise conduct4- Gracious speechI. DEVOTED PRAYERV. 2-3 ?Devote yourselves to prayer, being watchful and thankful.  And pray for us, too, that God may open a door...?ILL.- An ocean liner was sinking and the captain yelled out, ?Does anybody here know how to pray??  A preacher on board said, ?I do.?  The captain said, ?Good.  You start praying.  The rest of us will put on our life jackets.  WE ARE ONE LIFE JACKET SHORT.?Many times we only pray when we get between a rock and a hard place.  That is, when our back is against the wall.  And that is a good time to pray.  ILL.- It?s like a friend of mine who was involved in a bad auto accident in Paducah, KY.  He was laying outside his truck on the ground, thinking he was dying.  AND HE WAS PRAYING!  and that?s a good time to pray.Whenever we find ourselves in some kind of trouble, we are quick to pray.  So be it.  But we need to be devoted to prayer all the time!  We need to be knocking on God?s door all the time!In good times and bad.  In fair weather and foul.  The more we devote ourselves to prayer the more we can influence others for Christ.  Huh?  How?s that?  What does prayer have to do with influencing people for Christ?ILL.- One of my college professors was Don DeWelt.  And Don was known as a ?praying man.?  It was noised all over Ozark Christian College that Don would get up at 4 every morning for prayer and Bible study.  And in Don?s class at the college he would constantly encourage us students to have some kind of devotional life of prayer and Bible study every day.I generally get up at four every morning now.  And I do begin to pray as soon as I get up.  However, I get up because my back hurts, not because I am devoted to prayer.  BUT I SHOULD BE.When I was a student at OCC I remember going to Don?s house one time to talk to him about a problem I was having.  And after explaining the problem to him, his immediate response was, ?Well, let?s pray about it.?  And he got of his comfortable chair and got down on his knees and started to pray about the problem.  BELIEVE ME, THAT HAD A POSITIVE EFFECT.I thought to myself, ?This guy believes what he preaches.  He believes in the power of God and the power of prayer to change things in a person?s life.?His godly influence made me want to pray more.  We do influence others for Christ by having a devoted prayer life!A devoted prayer life also influences people for Christ when they know we are praying for them.Doesn?t it make you feel good to know that someone says, ?I hear you.  I understand something of what you are going through.  I will pray for you.??THAT?S A POSITIVE INFLUENCE ON PEOPLE!  You can say those words to me all you want!  I need your prayer support!  I don?t know of anyone who doesn?t need prayer support!And knowing that someone is praying for you faithfully every day is a positive influence on you and others.Luke 18:1 ?Then Jesus told his disciples a parable to show them that they should always pray and not give up.?We have surely given up if we have stopped praying.  But praying will keep you from giving up on life.Matthew 7:11 Jesus said, ?If you, then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father give good gifts to those who ask him!?Our Heavenly Father loves us more than we will ever realize in this life and wants to bless us and give to us.  And He often does, even in our blindness.  Even when we?re not aware of it.  But He may even be quicker to give to us if we ask of Him.James 5:16 ?The prayer of a righteous man is powerful and effective.?Prayer is a powerful tool in the life of the Christian.  And that?s because God is all-powerful.  He can do things we cannot do.  And He will do things when He ask of Him.We must be devoted to prayer.  For our sake and for the sake of others.  Prayer a powerful tool and a good influence on others.II. CLEAR PREACHINGV. 3-4 ?Pray that God may open a door for our message... pray that I may proclaim it clearly...?ILL.- In New England, it is the long-standing custom for a visiting preacher to stay in the home of a church family.  One Sunday morning, the lady of the house who was hosting the preacher prepared a delicious breakfast of bacon and eggs, biscuits and gravy, and even pancakes.  And, of course, coffee, juice, and milk.  But the minister apologized, saying, ?Oh, I?m sorry, but I never eat breakfast when I am preaching in the morning.?The mother and her little eight-year-old boy went to church that morning and after the service was over she asked her boy, ?Did you like the preacher?s sermon??  The boy replied, ?HE SHOULD HAVE ET.?And for me, I have discovered that it doesn?t make much difference whether I eat or not!  ILL.- When heavy rains flooded the homes of several people in Medford, Oregon, the preacher sent his young son down to the basement to check for damage.The preacher asked his son, ?Did the water destroy my files?  ?No,? he said.  ?How about my books??  ?They?re fine.?  ?And what about that special box where I keep my sermons??  His son said, ?NO, DAD, THEY?RE DRY AS EVER.?I think we all know that some preaching influences people for Christ in a positive way and some preaching doesn?t.Dry sermons, long-winded sermons, and poorly prepared sermons do not influence people for Christ in a positive way!Whenever I preach I do want to bless you, encourage you and help you in life and in your relationship to Christ.  Sometimes I do that and sometimes I don?t.ILL.- For example, just last Sunday I preached a sermon about extending grace to others.  I didn?t think it was a great sermon, but I felt like it was an important sermon, because we all need to extend grace and forgiveness to others.  DID I BLESS YOU?  DID I HELP YOU?  I pray so.I know of one person I helped.  I received a note from someone who said they needed to know how many more times they should forgive a certain person.  And apparently, I answered that question.  THERE SHOULD BE NO LIMIT TO OUR FORGIVENESS.Paul said, ?Pray that I may proclaim the mystery of Christ.  Pray that I may proclaim it clearly.?Clear preaching about Christ and clear preaching of the Word of God is absolutely important in order to influence people for Christ.  And I want to do that.What can I do to make my preaching clearer?  What can you do?Well I can study more, think more, read more, reflect more.  It always pays to read and think.  I try to do that, but some days it just doesn?t come to me very well.  It couldn?t be my age though!What can you do to help me?  Pray for me.  Pray that God will bless my study, my preparation and my delivery of His message.  Pray that I will be able to make it clear and helpful and encouraging!I want to do that for you!  You deserve the very best I can give you with the Lord?s help!  HELP ME TO HELP YOU!  I want to bless you and help you in your relationship to Christ!Clear preaching can influence people for Christ.  One other thing to consider is this: CLEAR PREACHING CAN?T HELP ANYBODY IF ANYBODY AIN?T HERE!  If any bodies ain?t here!  That?s not good English, but I want you to get my point.If we don?t get here and we don?t try to get other people here, then clear preaching won?t help anybody!  Preaching to an empty pew doesn?t do any good at all!I asking that you do your best to invite more people to visit our services!  Friends, family, neighbors, whomever.  ILL.- Dwight L. Moody was once criticized for a grammatical error in his sermon.  He replied, ?I am using all the grammar I know for Jesus Christ.  Are you??  Nuf said.Things that influence people for Christ.1- Devoted prayer or a devoted prayer life2- Clear preachingIII. WISE CONDUCTWise conduct or good behavior.V. 5 ?Be wise in the way you act toward outsiders; make the most of every opportunity.?We all need to think about how we act when we are outside the church, out in the world, at Wal-Mart, while shopping, while eating out at a restaurant, while going to the Bagelfest, etc.Do we act up?  Or do we act accordingly?  Do we act according to how a Christian should act?ILL.- I must tell you this.  I could hardly believe this of my wife.  As you know, we recently flew to Cancun, Mexico, for a 4-day, 3-night vacation.  And while there we went shopping.  Everybody said, ?You must go downtown to the flea market.  You can get a bargain there.?So we went out to the front of our hotel to catch the local bus.  We got on the bus and I said to the driver, ?How much does it cost??  He could see I was an American gringo, dingo and didn?t know much.  He said, ?Ten pesos.?  Well, I didn?t have any pesos.  I said, ?I don?t have any pesos.  Do you take American money??  And he immediately pointed to the back of the bus as if he was saying, ?Shut up and sit down.?  Hence!  A free bus ride to the flea market!  Not a wise action.  Not wise conduct.  Not a good witness for an American Christian preacher.  But I was ignorant.  After that I got some pesos.  And from then on I gave the bus drivers the ten pesos per person for the ride.But listen to this: when we got to the flea market Elaine was looking for a straw hat to wear when we went snorkeling the next day.  That?s a wild story in itself that I?d love to share with you.  She?s lucky to be alive today.Elaine found a nice straw hat.  She asked, ?How?s much??  The lady merchant said, ?Thirty-one American dollar, but I make you a special deal.?  Elaine said, ?How much??  She said, ?Twenty-eight dollars.?  Elaine said, ?No.?  The lady said, ?How much you pay then??  AND THIS WAS WHEN I WAS SO EMBARRASSED.  Elaine pulled out a $5 bill and offered it to her.  And the lady got mad.That was so unbecoming of a Christian woman!  No, I?m just kidding.  They were out to take us to the cleaners.  Get some American dollars.  Those merchants would say, ?Come in here and let us rip you off!?  And I think they meant it.  Some were anyway.Brethren, even though many people in the world are out to ?rip us off? we must still think about our witness and our conduct in the world if we truly want to influence people for Christ.  We must be as nice as possible, gracious, kind, courteous to others, etc.  No matter who they are, no matter where we are.ILL.- I?d rather see a sermon than hear one any day,I?d rather one would walk with me than merely tell the way, The eye?s a better pupil and more willing than the ear; Fine counsel is confusing, but example?s always clear.We must influence others for Christ.  By:1- Devoted prayer lives2- Clear preaching3- Wise conductIV. GRACIOUS SPEECHV. 6 ?Let your conversation (your speech) be always full of grace, seasoned with salt, so that you may know how to answer everyone.?ILL.- A mother invited a preacher to dinner one time.  But she was somewhat worried because her two young sons had picked up the habit of cussing occasionally.She said to them, ?I?ll tell you what.  If you boys don?t cuss one time, I?ll give you an apple pie.  But if you do cuss, I?ll give the pie to the preacher.?  And they said, ?Okay.?The meal went over very well.  No problems.  And just before the preacher left he said to the boys, ?Remember, by God we live and by God we die.?And one of the boys replied, ?AND YES, BY GOD, YOU LOST YOUR APPLE PIE.?Paul said let your speech be seasoned with salt.  Salty speech in this text does not mean cussing or bad language.   That kind of language does not influence people for Christ, but rather against Christ.Rough, crude language, unkind words, etc. can only turn people away from Christ and the church.ILL.- I preached in a church one time where one of our deacons managed a service station.  He had a young married man working for him full-time.  One time I pulled intio the station to see about getting my car serviced and that young man said to me, ?Steve, you should hear the way Francis talks when you are not around.?  And I knew what he meant.That deacon was not winning friends and influencing people for Christ with his foul language.  He certainly didn?t draw anybody to the church.As Christians we are supposed to be gracious, kind and thoughtful in the way we talk to others.  Any where and everywhere.  Inside the church and outside the church.  While eating, playing and golfing, etc.ILL.- And as someone said, ?Don?t knock the church.  Knock on doors for the church!?In your speaking, talking to others at work or wherever, please don?t knock the church!  Please don?t criticize the church!  The preacher, the leaders, the programs, etc.  Negative comments and destructive criticism will not draw people to Christ nor influence them for Him!  If your only talent is criticism then you need to do with it what the man with one talent did in Matthew chapter 25.  BURY IT!Be gracious when speaking to other people.  Be gracious when talking about the church.ILL.- I read a lot of Max Lucado?s books.  He helps me a lot.  Max preaches at the Oak Hills Church of Christ in San Antonio, TX.  That church runs 3000 to 4000 in attendance.  But Max gets no paycheck, no salary for his ministry there.  How does he make a living then?  How does he feed and clothe his family?  And how does he get money so he can play golf?HE GETS PAID FOR HIS WORDS.  For his books.  His income comes from his book royalties.  And I?d like to know what he makes!WHAT IF?  What if you got paid for your words?  That is, for the gracious, uplifting words that you spoke to people?  The kind words that you spoke to people?  The helpful words.  The encouraging words.  WHAT WOULD YOUR PAYCHECK BE?  OR WOULD YOU GET PAID AT ALL?   Gracious speech can go a long way to influence others for Christ.CONCLUSION---------------------------------------------ILL.- A saintly little old lady attended a revival meeting at her church.  At the invitation time, she went forward.  The preacher said to her, ?Why did you come forward?  This invitation is for sinners to quit sinning.?  She said, ?That?s just the point.  I ain?t been doing nothin? and I?m a quittin?.?If you are doing nothing for Christ, to witness for Christ, to influence others for Christ, then you are sinning.We all need to think more about how can we influence people for Christ in a positive way.  I?ve given you some of those ways.1- Be devoted to prayer.  Pray for others and tell them you are.2- Support me in my preaching ministry.  Back me.  Pray for me.  Encourage me even if I preach a lousy sermon.3- Watch your conduct or behavior at work and out in the world.  People are watching you.4- Speak kindly to all people.  Use your mouth for the Lord.  Invite people to church.  Let?s commit ourselves to influence people to Christ!