Sunday, March 15, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And she said to them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Tell  the man that sent you to me (good, young king Josiah), Thus  saith the Lord, Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and  upon the inhabitants thereof, even all the words of the book  which the king of Judah hath read; Because they have  forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, that  they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their  hands; therefore my wrath shall be kindled (i.e., `poured out  upon this place,' 2 Chron. 34:25) ­ against this place, and  shall not be quenched." 2 Kgs. 22:15-17.  (There follows an example of the special arrangements which shall be made by a loving God for each of His elect children's safety, comfort and bliss when ­ as the old black spiritual puts it, "the world's on fire;" to wit: "O my loving brother, when the world's on fire, Don't you want God's bosom, for to be your pillow? He'll hide you over, in the Rock of Ages, Rock of Ages cleft for me." Dead bodies everywhere; fire and exquisite torment everywhere; absolutely no place to turn for relief; and then, repeated reference is made in Scripture to the capstone of all suffering; i.e., to watch your infants suffer and die ­ cooked to death! at your own hands! and then eaten! by you and/or your bartering "friends."  Infanticide and Cannibalism ­ in one and the same dastardly deed ­ all as contained in the Book of the Law of God, then-recently found and read by king Josiah ­ particularly Lev. 26 and Deut. 28; e.g., to wit: "And I will cause them to eat the flesh of their sons and the flesh of their daughters, and they shall eat every one the flesh of his friend in the siege and straitness, wherewith their enemies, and they that seek their lives, shall straiten them." Jer. 19:9.)  Beloved, it was that kind of preaching that got the prophet Jeremiah arrested, jailed, and put in the stocks by old Black-mouth (Pashur); to wit: (let us not skip lightly over this momentous subject). "Then came Jeremiah" ­ (i.e., after preaching on certain, coming cannibalism in the family, in Hell) ­ "from Tophet, wither the Lord had sent him to prophesy; and he stood in the court of the Lord's house; and said to all the people, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring upon this city and upon all her towns all the evil that I have pronounced against it, because they have hardened their necks, that they might not hear my words. Now Pashur (Black-mouth) the son of Immer the priest, who was also chief governor in the house of the Lord, heard that Jeremiah prophesied these things. Then Pashur smote Jeremiah the prophet, and put him in the stocks that were in the high gate of Benjamin, which was by the house of the Lord. And it came to pass that on the morrow, that Pashur brought forth Jeremiah out of the stocks."  No doubt to see if Jeremiah was subdued and contrite enough under the humiliation of being so openly and shamefully dealt with, ­ on account of nothing in the world but his preaching! Think of it. Jeremiah was a young man of fine reputation, of the priesthood, without hint of scandal; and now he has been ignominiously dealt with by the tyrant Black-mouth ­ ONLY because of his faithful preaching.  Sunday, March 15, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  So, the question now is ­ how is Jeremiah taking that outrageous kind of treatment? Maybe Pashur rushes in to see, flings the jail open ­ and, and, ­ Jeremiah smacks old Black-mouth up aside of the head ­ verbally. Jeremiah ain't no ways tired.  The Jews say that even though Jeremiah is of the Aaronic/Levitical priesthood on his father's side, he descends from scrappy little Rahab the Harlot on his mother's side ! Then said Jeremiah unto him, "The Lord hath not called thy name Pashur, but Magormissabib (terror all around). For thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will make thee a terror to thyself, and to all thy friends; and they shall fall by the sword of their enemies, (hit me up aside the head, will ya ?!), and thine eyes shall behold it; and I will give all Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon, and shall slay them with the sword. (Put me in the stocks and keep me in jail all night, just because you don't like my preaching, will ya?) And thou, Pashur, and all that dwell in thine house shall go into captivity; and thou shalt come to Babylon, and there thou shalt die, and shalt be buried there, thou, and all thy friends, to whom thou hast prophesied lies." Jer. 19:14 - 20:6. (Don't like me preaching what the Lord says about Infanticide and Cannibalism? Well, la-de-da. Aren't you the delicate little flower? Well, neither I nor Jeremiah nor any other Gospel preacher thought that up.)  That is solid gold Bible, and plenty of it. And it may be that such preaching and accurate prognosticating is the only way to get the seriousness of the matter across to the abominable, Hell-bound mocking and scoffing fools of the current goofball era, that we have to deal with; to wit: "And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary unto me; Then I will walk contrary unto you also in fury; and I, even I, will chastise you seven times for your sins. AND YE SHALL EAT THE FLESH OF YOUR SONS, AND THE FLESH OF YOUR DAUGHTERS SHALL YE EAT." There you are. Does it read that way in your Bible? Lev. 26:27-29. "Moreover all these curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and overtake thee, till thou be destroyed; because thou hearkenedst not unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee... AND THOU SHALT EAT THE FRUIT OF THINE OWN BODY, THE FLESH OF THY SONS AND OF THY DAUGHTERS, which the Lord thy God hath given thee, in the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee; So that the man that is tender among you, and very delicate, his eye shall be evil toward his brother, and toward the wife of his bosom, and toward the remnant of his children which he shall leave; So that he will not give to any of them OF THE FLESH OF HIS CHILDREN WHOM HE SHALL EAT; because he hath nothing left him in the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee in all thy gates. (Deut. 28:45, 53-55)  (Yes, Beloved, we are supposed to preach about these supremely horrific days that are coming, from the hands and the wrath of a supremely angry God ­ days when vile sinners are left to themselves, thereupon to regularly commit the most dreadful sins and crimes known to man ­ Infanticide, Homicide, and Cannibalism ­ and committed under the most egregious and extenuating of circumstances ­ like delicate human beings conniving to hide left-over human  Sunday, March 15, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  carcasses to pick the bones and eat the flesh ­ later.) Remember, Beloved, the Holy Ghost  chose the words and framed the sentences to convey truth and certain, coming actuality to us; to  wit:  "The tender and delicate woman among you, which would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom, and toward her son, and toward her daughter, And toward her young one that cometh out from between her feet, and toward her children which she shall bear; for SHE SHALL EAT THEM for want of all things secretly in the siege and straitness, wherewith thine enemy shall distress thee in thy gates. If thou wilt not observe to do all the words of this law that are written in this book, that thou mayest fear this glorious and fearful name, THE LORD THY GOD." (Deut. 28:56-58)  These words are a few of the words which king Josiah read for the first time when he was 24 years old, and "Hilkiah the high priest said unto Shaphan the scribe, I have found the book of the law in the house of the Lord. And Hilkiah gave the book to Shaphan, and he read it, before the king...And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the book of the law, that he rent his clothes," and ordered his servants to enquire of Huldah the prophetess, saying, "Go ye, enquire of the Lord for me, and for the people, and for all Judah, concerning the words of this book that is found; for great is the wrath of the Lord that is kindled against us, because our fathers have not hearkened unto the words of this book, to do according unto all that which is written concerning us." 2 Kgs. 22:8, 11-13. Huldah's response constitutes our text for today.  Dr. Gill has several weighty comments about this colorful Lost-and-Found Book-of-God drama. For example, he says the following about the many speculations as to how the Book got "lost;" to wit: "The entire Pentateuch is intended, and that, not a copy of it, but the very autograph of Moses, written with his own hand, as it seems from 2 Chron. 34:14; to wit: `And when they brought out the money that was brought into the house of the Lord for the extensive renovation thereof, Hilkiah the priest found a book of the law of the Lord given by Moses,' which points us directly to a bedrock command of Moses at Deut. 31:4-6; to wit: `And it came to pass, when Moses had made an end of writing the words of the law in a book, until they were finished, THAT MOSES COMMANDED the Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord, saying, Take this book of the law, and put it in the side of the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God, that it may be there FOR A WITNESS AGAINST THEE.'" Dt. 31:24-26.  Gill: "Some say he (Hilkiah, the high priest) found it in the holy of holies; on the side of the ark; there it was put originally; but, indeed, had it been there, he (Hilkiah) might have found it before" ­ (Josiah had been mightily interested in seeking and serving the Lord for 8 years, from when he was 16 years old to when he was 24 years; and so for at least 8 years, Hilkiah had been going into the holy of holies once a year, and would doubtless have seen the huge scroll containing the Pentateuch written by Moses himself and deposited in the ark of the covenant) ­ "and must have seen it, since, as high-priest, he entered there once every year; MORE  Sunday, March 15, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  PROBABLY SOME PIOUS PREDECESSOR of his (i.e., of Hilkiah) had taken it from thence in  a time of general corruption, as in the reign of Manasseh, and hid it in some private place,  under a lay of stones (as, Jarchi says, e.g.), in some hole in the wall, which upon search about  repairs was found there."  STILL, Josiah would seem to have been ill-served from the time he began his reign at 8 years of age, and until the book of the law was actually found in a hole in the wall, and thereupon made available to him for reading and study of the precious words themselves. There is nothing ­ absolutely nothing ­ like reading and studying the Holy Ghost words ­ I mean, words that were actually selected by the Holy Ghost ! The servants of the young king Josiah mightily ill-served their young sovereign ­ upon his ascending the throne at age 8 ­ by failing to tell him and instruct him in the meaning of Deut. 17:18-20; to wit: "And it shall be, when he sitteth upon the throne of his kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of this law in a book out of that which is before the priests the Levites; And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein, all the days of his life; that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of this law and these statutes, to do them; That his heart not be lifted up above his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the commandment, to the right hand, or to the left; to the end that he may prolong his days in his kingdom, he, and his children, in the midst of Israel." (Dt. 17:18-20)  Beloved, is not our dear Lord Jesus the faithful witness, though all others be miscreants and liars; is He not the first begotten from the dead, which guarantees our following behind; is He not the prince of the kings of the earth, who has loved us and washed us from our sins in his own blood; and has he not made us kings and priests unto God? Thereunto made us (past tense ­ not future) kings! Rev. 1:5,6. If, then, earthly kings are so wondrously prepared and equipped for relatively mundane duties on earth, how much more should not we whose citizenship is in heaven, even while we dwell below; I say, how much more should we avail ourselves of such heavenly advice as Dt. 17:18-20?  Gill: "Write him a copy of this law in a book." Dt. 17:18. "The word Mishneh, rendered copy, signifies double; hence some take it to mean a double exemplar or copy of the law he was obliged to write out, whereby it would be the more imprinted on his mind, and he would be furnished with it for his use at home and abroad, as the Jewish writers observe. So, Jarchi, by the copy understands two books of the law. The same is said in the Talmud, and with which Maimonides agrees."  So, Beloved, it is clear that each new king had to copy the entire Pentateuch, personally, in long hand, TWICE. Then each had to carry one copy with him everywhere he went, and to read often in it every day, and apply its teachings to each of life's situations as they arise, in the providence of God. And, Beloved, it may be good for us to apply these lessons ­ as far as applicable ­ to ourselves.  Sunday, March 15, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 5  Gill: "Yet it seems strange that he (Josiah) should be 26 years of age, as he now was, and had proceeded far in the reformation of worship, and yet be without the book of the law, and the high-priest also; it looks as if it was, as some have thought, that they had till now only some abstracts of the law, and not the whole."  Nevertheless, see how good King Josiah wrought the holy and uncompromising righteousness of God with what he had; even though the invisible line of no return had been crossed in Israel ­ even as with doomed America; to wit:  "And like unto him was there no king before him" ­ (And like unto WBC was there no church before them) ­ "that turned unto the Lord with all his heart," ­ (Josiah, born when his evil, fornicating father Amon was a spoiled brat of 16 years! and assassinated when Josiah was 8 years old! precipitating the early coronation of Josiah as king at a tender age), ­ "and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the law of Moses; neither after him arose there any like him" ­ (neither after them arose there any like the faithful souls at Westboro Baptist Church). ­ "NOTWITHSTANDING, THE LORD TURNED NOT FROM THE FIERCENESS OF HIS GREAT WRATH, wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah" ­ (i.e., America) ­ "because of all the provocations that Manasseh" ­ (i.e., Josiah's desperately, unprecedentedly evil grandfather who misruled Judah for 55 years!) ­ I say, "Manasseh had provoked him withal." 2 Kgs. 23:25,26.  Judah's (i.e., America's) doom was quite irreversible. Their cup of iniquity was full. The invisible line had been crossed, from which there was no returning. Now come the words of God's everlasting covert (hiding place), of consolation and love for His weary pilgrims, in the midst of the raging fires of His wrath upon the wicked; to wit:  "But to the king of Judah (WBC) which sent you to enquire of the Lord, thus shall ye say to him, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, As touching the words which thou hast heard;" ­ (words of God's wrath to come, which only the elect hear and fear); ­ "Because thine heart was tender, and thou hast humbled thyself before the Lord, when thou heardest what I spake against this place, and against the inhabitants thereof, that they should become a desolation and a curse, and hast rent thy clothes, and wept before me; I also have heard thee, saith the Lord. Behold therefore, I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou shalt be gathered into thy grave in peace; and thine eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon this place. And they brought the king word again." (2 Kgs. 22;18-20)  "The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart; and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come. He shall enter into peace; they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness." (Isa. 57:1,2)  I love you. Amen.  
