                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                             
﻿يا رب لك الحمد حتى ترضى ولك الحمد اذا مرضيت ولك الحمد بعد الرضا ولك الحمد ابدا ابدا ابدا والحمد لله الذي هدانا لهذا ولن نهتدي ولو ان هدانا الله. والحمد لله الذي لم يتخذ ولدا ولم يكن له شريك في الملك ولم يكن له ولي من الذل وكبره تكبيرا. والحمد لله الذي أنزل على عبده الكتاب ولم يجعل له عوجا. والحمد لله الذي نستغفره ونستعينه ونتوكل به وعليه. ونعوذ به من شرور انفسنا ومن سيئات اعمالنا. من يهدي الله فلا مضل له ومن يضل فلا هادي له. ونشهد ان لا اله الا الله وحده لا شريك له ونشهد ان محمدا عبده ورسوله. ارسله الله بالهدى ودين الحق ليضهره على الدين كله فكفى بالله شهيدا.فصلى الله عليه وسلم تسليما كثيرا كثيرا ثم أما بعد.فان اصدق الحديث كتاب الله وخير الهدي هدي محمد صلى الله عليه وسلم.وان شر الأمور محدثاتها وان كل محدثة بدعة وان كل بدعة ضلالة وكل ضلالة في النار.

يقول الله عز وجل في كتابه الكريم بعد ان اقول اعوذ بالله من الشيطان الرجيم:
وَإِذْ نَتَقْنَا الْجَبَلَ فَوْقَهُمْ كَأَنَّهُ ظُلَّةٌ وَظَنُّوا أَنَّهُ وَاقِعٌ بِهِمْ خُذُوا مَا آتَيْنَاكُم بِقُوَّةٍ وَاذْكُرُوا مَا فِيهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ 7:171
"And [mention] when We raised the mountain above them as if it was a dark cloud and they were certain that it would fall upon them, [and Allah said], "Take what We have given you with determination and remember what is in it that you might fear Allah." 7:171

ربي اشرح لي صدري ويسر لي أمري واحلل عقدة من لساني يفقهوا قولي. اللهم ثبتنا عند الموت بـ لا اله الا الله, امين يا رب العالمين.

All of you have been reminded multiple times that Ramadan is approaching, and we cannot take enough precaution to take most advanage of this month. It's probabl a tragedy in all our lives that year after year we look back and say we could've done more. And so it's only apprppriate that we take this opportunity to remind ourselves and I remind myself that one of the greatest obstacles that comes before a person (a muslim) is taking full advantage of this month of forgiveness, this month of mercy, this month of blessings, this month of starting your life fresh, of a new beginning. That obstacle that lies before us, that is a personal obstacle, is the obstacle of Ghaflah, commonly described as heedlessness, but it's a little bit more. it's the attitude of doing something without realizing what you're doing. Not really thinking about what you're involved in. Not really thinking or caring about how you're time is spent, or what comes out of your mouth, or what actions you perform, or how your actions impact other people, or how they impact your own self, your own personality. This sickness is sickness of "Ghaflah". And you know if you reflect and I reflect on my own life, you'll find that sometimes we're making Salah but we're not really making Salah. Standing in front of Allah (azza wa jaal) we're reciting Quraan but we have no idea what we're doing, our mind is somewhere else. We are physically in prayer, but in our hearts we are Ghafil. We're completely heedless. And so it happens that we come in the month of Ramadan and we're fasting, yet we're not conscious of the fact that we're fasting. We're feeling hungry and we're feeling thirsty but at the same time we're in a state of Ghaflah. And this Ghaflah that Allah (azza wa jahl) mentions is in the hearts of people:

"وَلَا تُطِعْ مَنْ أَغْفَلْنَا قَلْبَهُ عَن ذِكْرِنَا"
The messenger is told (PBUH) in this aya, talking about the disbelievers, the messenger is told not to listen to them, not follow them, not to pay attention to them. But instead of Allah (azza wa jal) saying ولا تطع المكذبن (don't follow the liers) or ولا تطع الكافرين (don't follow the disbelievers) or ولا تطع المشكرين. He doesn't say moshirkeen or kafireen, he uses a specific term for these disbelievers and he says: وَلَا تُطِعْ مَنْ أَغْفَلْنَا قَلْبَهُ عَن ذِكْرِنَا وَاتَّبَعَ هَوَاهُ وَكَانَ أَمْرُهُ فُرُطًا 18:28
Don't follow the one whose heart we have made empty or void or made it neglect the rememberance of Allah and follows own pathetic empty desires.
This is a very sad state, because this is the state of a disbeliever. But sometimes this tragedy occurs to a believer. That sometimes the believer becomes Ghafil. And you know it's not permanent. We go in and out of Ghaflah. You're in the jumaa, I'm engaged in the act of reminding you and myself so perhapds we can snap out of our Ghaflah. Sometimes somebody gives you advice or you hear an aya in the Quraan pr you hear somebody give a talk that touches your heart and you snap out of Ghaflah. And minutes after the Jumaa prayer we're in our cars and walking out of here and we slip right back into the state of Ghaflah.

So how do we prevent this state from overpowering us? it's inevitable it will come upon us once in a while or really as part of my day but really how do we consciously attack this state? How do we consciously appreciate how to overcome Ghaflah and instead of being people of Ghaflah we become people of Thikr. الذاكرون

Allah (azza wa jal) also speaks about people who believed, that also had a book, that also had a messenger, that also claimed to be in a state of full submission to Allah, but they were in total Ghaflah all the time. And I told you where this Ghaflah rest, where does this disease rest: it rests inside the heart. And Allah says about those people: ثُمَّ قَسَتْ قُلُوبُكُم مِّن بَعْدِ ذَٰلِكَ (Your hearts became hard after that). Their hearts are hard, they're full of heedlessness. They're full of neglect, they're not concerned with the rememerance of Allah. And so in order to take these people that are baisically sleeping, they don't realise what they have in terms of Islam, to wake them up Allah (azza wa jal) reminds us what he does. And this passage that I want to share with you from Surat Al-Araf is dedicated towards Ghaflah. The entire passage deals with Ghaflah. So Allah says: وَإِذْ نَتَقْنَا الْجَبَلَ فَوْقَهُمْ كَأَنَّهُ ظُلَّةٌ To Bani Israel Allah says: He raised the mountain above them and shook it. Like it was a canopy above them, like an umbrella above them. Now image if you were not concerned about the halal and the haram, if you were not concerened about remembering Allah, you live your life sort of like a nonchalant, Allah decides to raise a mountain above your head and shake it above your heard. Would this be a good reminder to wake up and to snao out of your Ghaflah? Absolutely! I mean Allah does this to us in more sublt ways. He did this to them in a very profound way. But if you're in a plane and there is turbulence, you stop listening to your MP3 song, and you stop doing whatever you're doing and start saying الله لا اله الا هو الحي القيوم and whatever Quraan you started memorizing. Right? because in a state of emergency, the first thing we turn to is Allah (azza wa jal). And this is so much so even the kafir does this. The kafir sees a flood coming and says: Oh My God.


So these states in which Allah scares us or brings upon us something that is really mind boggling or is shocking, those are opportunities to become "thakireen" of Allah again, to remember Him again. So Allah raises this above them, and He shakes this mountain above them, then he says to them: خُذُوا مَا آتَيْنَاكُم بِقُوَّةٍ (hold on to what we have granted you, with great stenght, with great might, hold on to it) meaning the Torah. So then Allah by proxy is telling us that we have to hold onto His book, and that's appropriate to remind ourselves of because this is the month of Quraan that's coming up.

So now this mountain is raised above them and they are told to hold on to their book. And you know Allah will give this umma opportunities. You would think a mountain hovering your head is a bad thing. You would think this is a punishment from Allah. But if this was a means with which they snapped out of their Ghaflah and they became those who remembered Allah again, then this a gift from Allah. And so we look around us and we see the umma in tragedy. We see many terrible things happening across the world. And those things if we just look at them as tragedy, then that in itself is a bigger tragedy. Those events that are supposed to shock us, that are supposed to sadden us and overwhelm us, those are means by which Allah is giving us an opportunity to wake up! Just like bani Israel was given the opportunity to wake up.  And once you wake up what do you do? you need a means by which you stay awake. Just like I said, as soon as the khutba is over what happens to most of us including myself? We leave here and we go back to sleep. So Allah while the mountain is hovering above their head and they're awake now, He tells them to a prescription of how to stay awake, how do you stay awake?  Hold on to what we have given you with great strength (خُذُوا مَا آتَيْنَاكُم بِقُوَّةٍ).
وَاذْكُرُوا مَا فِيهِ(and keep rememebring what is in it). mention what is in it, mention what is in the Quraan.
لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ (so you may attain taqwa). And taqwa is not just fear, taqwa is an awareness. Taqwa is to be aware of your surroundings. To be aware and to be cautious, that is to be motaqee, someone who is careful about what they say and what they do. Right?
so Allah gave us a prescription to remain aware, to remain away from heedlessness in this aya. but Allah goes forward. this was a specific example of bani Israel. But this is a problem of not just bani Israel, it's a problem of all mankind.

So Allah says: 
وَإِذْ أَخَذَ رَبُّكَ مِن بَنِي آدَمَ مِن ظُهُورِهِمْ ذُرِّيَّتَهُمْ وَأَشْهَدَهُمْ عَلَىٰ أَنفُسِهِمْ أَلَسْتُ بِرَبِّكُمْ ۖ قَالُوا بَلَىٰ ۛ شَهِدْنَا 7:172
Allah speaks of when all of us were created in the form of "rooh" and Allah pulled us out of the back of Adam (AS) and He made us all witness over one thing, He made us all aware of one thing: Am I not your Lord? And all of us, Allah quotes us (qaloo) who's they, it is us, testified before Allah (bala: off course), (shahidna: we bear witness), and then Allah gave us a disclaimer, He made us say this: that He is our Lord, but look at the profound statement He makes, he said: أَن تَقُولُوا يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ 
I made you do this, so on the day of judgement, you don't have room to say on the day of resurrection:  إِنَّا كُنَّا عَنْ هَـٰذَا غَافِلِينَ. WIthout a doubt we had no idea, we were Ghafil, we were unaware, we were heedless about this promise.
You have no room to stay this anymore, because Allah already made you aware of it.
Subhan Allah. Look at this declaration of the consciousness of the human being that Allah put inside the fitrah of the human being.
Or Allah says you will make other excuses because of your Ghaflah instead of admitting your fault when you come before me on the day of resurrection, he says:
أَوْ تَقُولُوا إِنَّمَا أَشْرَكَ آبَاؤُنَا مِن قَبْلُ (you're going to say, our parent's fault. They were doing shirk before us). It's not our fault, they raised us al mushrikoon.
وَكُنَّا ذُرِّيَّةً مِّن بَعْدِهِمْ ۖ and we were the children afterthem. it's not our fault, it's our parents' fault. don't blame us, blame them. and then the people will say:
أَفَتُهْلِكُنَا بِمَا فَعَلَ الْمُبْطِلُونَ Are you going to destory us because of what they wrong doing people did? because of these people who put us in a state of lying, in a state of falsehood, are you gonna punish us because of that? so people will make excuses. Since Allah quotes this excuse, what is he telling us directly? That these excuses are useless. 
The reason he made us testify (أَلَسْتُ بِرَبِّكُمْ ۖ قَالُوا بَلَىٰ ۛ شَهِدْنَا) Am I not your Lord? And we all testified. After that these two excuses that I had no idea, or it's not my fault, it was my surroudnings', it was my parents', it was my upbringging. That's the reason I'm m essed up. Neither of these excuses are valid anymore. Allah invalidates both of them.

But then he says: وَكَذَٰلِكَ نُفَصِّلُ الْآيَاتِ 
This is how we explain and clarify the miraculous signs (the ayat).
وَلَعَلَّهُمْ يَرْجِعُونَ so they may return. Meaning return from their state of heedlessness, return from their sleep, and they return to being awake again. To realizing the reality.

Allah speaks of this, then after this who's Muslim?
First He speaks of Bani Israel, then he speaks of all children of Adam. What are these lessons for, for who? for the Muslims. The Quraan is revealed, and who is reciting this Quraan? Whos is going back to this Quraan for guidance? It's meant for mankind, but the people who consult it are the Muslims. So Allah speaks of the case of a Muslim. He speaks of the case of someone who claims to be in Islam. And not just a Muslim, a knowledgeable Muslim. Allah (azza wa jal) speaks of someone who knows. You know you might be the case himself or herself. You know something is wrong and you still do it. You might know people that know the halal from the haram. They know the right from wrong, they know what to look at and what not to look at. they know what to say and what not to say and they still do it. Allah speaks of this person and says:
وَاتْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ نَبَأَ الَّذِي آتَيْنَاهُ آيَاتِنَا Now read onto them the news of someone who We gave our ayat.
Allah says we gave this person our ayat, meaning this person had clear knowledge. 
فَانسَلَخَ مِنْهَا The wording is very profound, he says: This person who Allah Himself gave him knowledge, he slithers out of those ayat. Insilakh in Arabis is used when a snake sheds its skin. And Allah speaks of this person, who is covered in the knowledge of Islam. He's covered in the ayat of Allah, he knows this stuff. And what does he do? he slithers out of it. Despite knowing it, he makes his life different. فَانسَلَخَ مِنْهَا .
And so Allah gives us this ugly image of a person who's shell is that of a knowledgeable person, who's shell is that of a person who knows Islam, or portrays himself as a Muslim, but that's just a skin that he's already shed. In reality, that's not his skin, that's not his reality.
So he says: فَأَتْبَعَهُ الشَّيْطَانُ فَكَانَ مِنَ الْغَاوِينَ
That when he leaves the ayat of Allah, what has he left? He had left Allah as his walee. He has left Allah as his friend and guardian. So then when Allah leaves him too, then who's left to follow him? Who's gonna be on his case following him trying to make him go the wrong way? It will be shaytan. So Allah says when he slithers out of the ayat of Allah, this knowledgeable Muslim, this knowledgeable believer, when he decides to go astray then the shaytan follows him, and he becomes from those that are confused and lost.

وَلَوْ شِئْنَا لَرَفَعْنَاهُ بِهَا : Allah says "if we had wanted we would have elevated him by that knowledge We had given him". Because of those ayat this person could've had alot of elevation in Allah's eyes. Imagine in our own eyes, somebody had more respect because they're older or more knowledgeable or scholarly or whatever else. Allah says we would've elevated him and given him higher status in His own estimation. That Allah would consider him noble just because of the ayat Allah Himself gave him.

But then He speaks of this tragedy and says: وَلَـٰكِنَّهُ أَخْلَدَ إِلَى الْأَرْضِ 
"However, this person, he inclined towards the earth". He's stuck to the earth, he remained directed towards the earth. his goals were lowly. This is the image provided, pathetic. He just went for things that gave him immediate pleasure. That's all he wanted out of life. وَلَـٰكِنَّهُ أَخْلَدَ إِلَى الْأَرْضِ 

وَاتَّبَعَ هَوَاهُ "and he just continued to follow him empty desires".

A slight comment about empty desires. Allah (azza wa jal) put desires inside of us and it's part of the fitrah. (زُيِّنَ لِلنَّاسِ حُبُّ الشَّهَوَاتِ مِنَ النِّسَاءِ وَالْبَنِينَ وَالْقَنَاطِيرِ الْمُقَنطَرَةِ مِنَ الذَّهَبِ وَالْفِضَّةِ وَالْخَيْلِ الْمُسَوَّمَةِ وَالْأَنْعَامِ وَالْحَرْثِ)
Allah says these things: زُيِّنَ لِلنَّاسِ حُبُّ الشَّهَوَاتِthe love of women that Allah put in men, houses, horses, now horse power cars, investment strategies. Allah put the love of that stuff inside our hearts.  But this person out of that love, what did he choose to abandon, he chose to abandon the ayat of Allah.

So Allah gives him this example: فَمَثَلُهُ كَمَثَلِ الْكَلْبِ "his example is the example of a dog" Look how ugly the example is. Again, this is not a kaffir. Who's Allah talking about? A Muslim, who knowingly becomes disobedient, becomes Ghafil. Allah gives him example like that of a dog. And he says:

إِن تَحْمِلْ عَلَيْهِ يَلْهَثْ أَوْ تَتْرُكْهُ يَلْهَث (if you beat this dog, if put something on him, it's panting, it's drolling, and if you leave him, it's still sticking its tounge out, it's still drolling). Meaning this person becomes so pathetic, even as a human being, that wether they're hungry or not, they're thinking about food, wether they have a desire or not they're looking at shameless things. Wether they have to or not they're using foul language. Meaning sometimes you do things because you're overwhelmed by desire, you want to do it and you say I was overwhelmed, so I was seduced into this act or this statement, or I stole because I was hungry. But he becomes like a dog, if he needs to or not he's pathetic, fulfills his desires, and forces himself to fulfill his desires, even if he doesn't feel the need. 

ذَّٰلِكَ مَثَلُ الْقَوْمِ الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا (This is the example of the nation that deliberately lied against our ayat. They know the truth, but they still lie against them.

And so Allah says: فَاقْصُصِ الْقَصَصَ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ (Narrate this to them clearly, in an elequen fashion, make this clear to these people, so they can think deeply about their own lives. 
يَتَفَكَّرُونَ : is to think deeply.  Reflecting deeply about your own life experience. Your own thoughts, your own state when you wake up. Your own state when you go to sleep. 

سَاءَ مَثَلًا الْقَوْمُ (what a horrible example). A nation
الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا وَأَنفُسَهُمْ كَانُوا يَظْلِمُونَ (the nation that lies delibrately against our miraculous signs, and even regarding their own selves, they were unjust). Who did they wrong? they didn't wrong Allah. They don't take anything away from the dominion of Allah when they do something haram. When we abandon an obligation of Allah, when we disobey Allah or disregard Allah, or not careful with what Allah wants us to do in this life, or know our purpose in life, who are we wronging? who's being harmed? No one else except ourselves.

So Allah (azza wa jal) says: مَن يَهْدِ اللَّـهُ فَهُوَ الْمُهْتَدِي (whoever Allah guides, then he's the one who has been guided). One has to seek guidance from this book constantly, over and over again. It's called Quraan for a reason. Quraan means something read over and over again. You can't just go I know about Quraan, I know I've heard the ayat before, I've read it cover to cover, or I've read it when I was little, or I know the meanings of these lessons, or I've alread read tafseer. It's not like that. The word Quraan demands that you read it over and over again. You seek guidance over and over again. It's not something that you can fulfill your relationship with one time. 

وَمَن يُضْلِلْ فَأُولَـٰئِكَ هُمُ الْخَاسِرُونَ (And whoever He leads astray, then those are the ones that are the ultimate losers).

The heart of this khotba really is this warning against Ghaflah. And the last aya I want to share with you in this conext is probably the most important in this passage, on this subject. Allah (azza wa jal) speaks of people that He has created and spread around the earth for Hell, for Jahanam. He says:

وَلَقَدْ ذَرَأْنَا لِجَهَنَّمَ كَثِيرًا مِّنَ الْجِنِّ وَالْإِنسِ (We have created and spread about the earth multitudes, huge volumes of the Jinn and the human beings مِّنَ الْجِنِّ وَالْإِنسِ . And they he says why, why are these people going to hell.
You know if you read the first part of the aya, you'd think Allah made them so they can go to hell. no no no, they did something that made them bound towards the hell fire. there is something wrong with them. and he says about them:

لَهُمْ قُلُوبٌ لَّا يَفْقَهُونَ بِهَا (they have hearts, but they don't understand anything with them). This aya in and of itself is a puzzle. in and of itself, because Allah says in the Quraan: عقل يعقلون
They have intellect but they don't understand with them. But that's not what He said. What did he say here? لَهُمْ قُلُوبٌ (they have hearts!) but they don't understand with them.
You know the difference between a person who thinks just with their mind, and the person who thinkgs with their mind but have a clean heart, there is a difference. They see two different things.  So what is this person who has a heart but can't think with it. It is a person in who's heart there is no rememberance of Allah, there is only Ghaflah.  They can't see what the believer sees. Now the kaffir is very intelligent, he also has عقل  (mind A'ql) right? You'll have people that are professors and phd's that are disbeleivers. and you will have Muslims that are intellectuals also. A'ql is not the problem. the thought is composed of two things: it composes what you have in your mind and what you have in your heart. And just to illustrate this with a simple example before I conclude. 

You have students, kids, they see their friends smoking outside and they want to smoke with them. They go to health class, and they go to Bio class, and they learn that smoking destorys your lungs. When they buy a pack from the store, what does it say on the side? Surgeon general's warning it might lead to cancer. Is there anything missing in their knowledge? Is there anything missing here that this is bad? NO. But there is a desire to want to be like your friends. There is a desire to look cool. And where do desires rest? In their hearts. So they have intellect, but what's the problem? the problem is in the heart. desire. So Allah speaks about this and says:
لَهُمْ قُلُوبٌ لَّا يَفْقَهُونَ بِهَا

But then He gives us another puzzle:
وَلَهُمْ أَعْيُنٌ لَّا يُبْصِرُونَ بِهَا (they have eyes but they don't see with them).
What does this mean? they have eyes but they don't see. If they become people that hold on to this book with great strenght like Bani Israel was told:
خُذُوا مَا آتَيْنَاكُم بِقُوَّةٍ
If we become like that, and when we look outside and when we see the creation of Allah and we see our own life, we'll see it through the lense of the ayat of Allah. It's like you're wearing these shades, and everything you see is filtered or tinted with the shades of Quraan. And so just to give you an illustration of that, Allah (azza wa jal) says:

إِن كُنتُمْ فِي رَيْبٍ مِّنَ الْبَعْثِ (if you're confused, if you're in doubt about being raised again) then reflect of think about the earth. 
اهْتَزَّتْ وَرَبَتْ وَأَنبَتَتْ مِن كُلِّ زَوْجٍ بَهِيجٍ (the earth, it shakes, it rises alittle bit, and it sprouts a plant, all sorts of plants). The earth shakes, when you see a new plant you see a little tiny shake, and the earth will come up just a little bit, and a little tiny blade or grass will come out. So Allah draws this image to us in the Quraan. and He says if you're confused, if you're in doubt about being raised again, think about a plant when the earth shakes, and it rises and a plant comes out. Because on the day of judgement the earth will shake. and on the day of judgement the earth will rise. and on the day of judgement instead of a plant coming out we will come . So everytime a believer looks at a plant, or a tree, or a blade of grass outside, what are they reminded of? They're reminded of the day of resurrection. They have eyes with which they can see. But then there are people who don't have those eyes. So Allah says about them:
وَلَهُمْ أَعْيُنٌ لَّا يُبْصِرُونَ بِهَا 
They have eyes but they can't see with them.

And similarly He says: وَلَهُمْ آذَانٌ لَّا يَسْمَعُونَ بِهَا (They have ears, they don't hear from them).
They hear somebody talking about deen even from a distance, they get annoyed. I don't want to be part of this conversation, turn that stuff off, put a song on or something. They have ears but they cannot hear something that may soften their hearts.
This is a sad state for a human being. After this, Allah says:

أُولَـٰئِكَ كَالْأَنْعَامِ (these people are like cattle)
This is what i'll conclude with.
These people are like cattle. Allah didn't say these people are like animals. دابة, الدواب, او حيوان.
No, he said: (al'anam الأنعام) why?
Because al'anam are domesticated animals. animals that human beings train, cannot be wild anymore. and if you compare cattle, a domesticated farm animal, to any other kind of animal, you'll notice one big difference. domesticated animals have slower sense. You know a lizzard or a rabbit, or a bird, they're always looking around. They're very aware. compare that with a cow, it's very unaware. What's the passage about? the Ghafil!
So He says about these people: they've turned into cattle. they just eat and they sleep. we have kids here, they eat and sleep and play xbox and watch some stuff on youtube and go to sleep. that's life. That's it there is no more to it than that. 

and then he says:  هُمْ أَضَلُّ (no, they're even worse off). Why? because the cattle is still creation in fitrah, still obey Allah. Even though it's got dulled senses, it's still in obedience to Allah. It still eats what Allah commended it to eat. It still goes where Allah commended it to go. But these people not only do they have dulled senses which make them Ghafil, they're in disobedience to Allah. and Allah ends with:

أُولَـٰئِكَ هُمُ الْغَافِلُونَ (those are the people that are Ghafil). these are the people that are unaware and heedless. 

So we have to take this prescription seriously. The recitation of Quraan, the listening to dars of Quraan, you know if you can find mp3's or cd's or lectures of anybody that gives tafseer of Quraan that you can make it a habbit of listening to. This was actually a legecay of the Sahaba. Omar (ra) used to go around different circles and check different doroos of Quraan. why? because this is a means by which Sahaba stay awake. this is means by which they don't let Ghaflah sink in. So you will notice in yourself, the longer it's been since you read Quraan and reflected on Quraan or learnt something about Quraan, the worse off you'll feel inside your heart. You can notice in it, this existence of Ghaflah. You can identify it for yourself, and I can for myself. So we need to go back like Oxygen to this book. And this month is Allah's great gift to us to turn that into a habit. Because Allah says:

فَإِذَا قَرَأْتَ الْقُرْآنَ فَاسْتَعِذْ بِاللَّـهِ مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ الرَّجِيمِ  (when you're about to recite the Quraan what should you say? Seek refuge in Allah from shaytan).

In this month, Allah has given us the blessing of caging up the shaytan, so we can have an uninterrupted relationship with the Quraan and turn it into a habit, so that once this month is over, we're already in this cycle, we remain awake, we don't wait untill the next Ramadan to become awake.






