
“"اسلام عليكم و رحمة الله و بركاته“الحمد لله رب العالمين ، والصلاة والسلام على سيد الأنبياء والمرسلين و على آله وصحبه اجمعين”I don’t know about you, but that was a lot of really awesome talks &amp; I am a little dizzy myself, I had all these thoughts that I wanted to share with you but I am kind of overwhelmed with what I have heard myself. So, first of all I would like you to give it up to all of our presenters; Jazakumullahu Khairan. And it is very intimidating going after heavy weights like that, not literally, OK so, Umm.. But I do want to share with you &amp; I don’t think I’ll take that much time, I really honestly don’t think I will take that much time. Umm..I do wanna share with you some thoughts that I have some convictions that I have, some things that I have no doubts about in my mind, that I in shaa Allahu T’aala, I will see them in my near future &amp; if not, my children will see them in the United States in the very very near future. We are going to see a new standard for the Muslim community, we are going to see the standard being that are high school graduates, it’s not out of the ordinary that our boys &amp; girls have already memorized the Quran by the time they come out of high school. It’s gonna be a new standard. No, wait for the takbeers; hold on, that’s just the start. It’s gonna be a new standard that by the time our youth are in college, that they are fluent &amp; versed in the Arabic language at the very minimum as a second language &amp; they are already working their way to a third &amp; a forth language of their choice. So when they speak with each other &amp; they wanna kick it with each other they’ll kick it in Arabic, they’ll kick it in the language of the messenger of Allah (SAW) in “"الفصحة. There is no “عاميه”. "عاميه" dies in America. The dialectical Arabic dies in America &amp; “"الفصحة is born &amp; doesn’t matter if these children are African American or they are Indonesian or they are Pakistani or Bangladeshi, their Arabic is incredible &amp; by the time they come out of high school &amp; college, they’ll go onto their education &amp; by the way they haven’t just memorized the Quran, they have been studying it their entire life too &amp; by the time they come out of college their education in the Seerah &amp; in the fundamentals of Islam is rock solid. It is absolutely rock solid &amp; of course those of them that are Pakistani or still gonna go to Med school only &amp; you know the vast majority of the Arab kids will still go on to be engineers in shaa Allahu t’aala because that’s a sunnah, right?  But as they will go into those professional fields for the sake of “Islam” (*moves his hand in order to represent money*) as they do, even though they’ll go into those fields they’ll make sure, they’ll make sure that they have a minor in something that actually means something. They’ll at least have a minor, if not a bachelors before they go onto higher studies in sociology, in political science, in history, in anthropology; they’ll study the human sciences, the areas of enquiry that actually influence human thought because now that they have the guidance of Allah ‘Azzawajal, they study how far human studies have gone in understanding ourselves &amp; they’ll bring those two worlds together. They’ll understand political science from Quran’s point of view. They’ll understand psychology from the Quran’s point of view, from the prophetic point of view. They’ll understand sociology form the prophetic point of view, from the Quranic point of view. These will be a renaissance generation. They’ll be incredibly intelligent people &amp; the people all over the Muslim world are gonna say, one day is gonna come, you know how we used to say back in generations, “Where did you go to get you ‘ilm?”   &amp; people used to say “I went to Baghdad” &amp; somebody went to Madinah &amp; somebody went to this institution &amp; that institution. People are gonna say “I went to Delaware”, “I went to Dallas”. People from all over the world are gonna study the ‘ilm of Islam in America. It is going to happen. It is going to happen &amp; you ask, &amp; I am saying these things, I am not making it up, I am absolutely convinced, we are on a trajectory, we are heading towards this destination &amp; this is just from the ‘ilm point of view; I didn’t talk about the character of these youth because if they’ve memorized the Quran &amp; they can speak in Arabic but they don’t know what it means to lower their eyes &amp; they don’t know what it means to not be addicted to the next movie that comes out &amp; they have to go watch it, you know, it doesn’t mean anything; it’s empty, it’s hollow. So let’s talk about what character these people are gonna have. These are gonna be young men &amp; women that understand that the use of filthy languages, as I said in the previous session, in their culture the use of filthy language is beneath their intellect. They don’t just do it because its haram, they do not do it because they respect their intellect, they respect the fact that they are dignified human beings. When other people see them, when non- Muslims see them, they wanna get their act together &amp; say “How do we be like them?” Are Muslims girls are going to go to college? They are going to go to high schools &amp; colleges &amp; whatever profession they go into, whatever area of academics they go in to &amp; other women are gonna be like “How come I don’t dress like her?”, not the other way around. The Muslim girl is not gonna look at those barely dressed girls in high school &amp; say “How come my parents don’t let me dressed like that?” ,   the standards are gonna change. Because we are going to become the standard of what it means to be decent human beings, what it means to be role models. This session is about youth, searching for role models. I am telling you folks, you are already here, you didn’t even realize that you are role models for humanity. You are “"شهداء على الناس. If you hiding behind the idea that I have to find someone that will inspire me &amp; then hopefully I can change; listen, the greatest inspiration as we have already heard are already here. Umar’s great inspiration is his mother &amp;hearing that story I am inspired by my own mother. May Allah protect our parents, you know, I still know, I know, every time I write a cheque to something or give a donation to something, you know what comes immediately to me in my head? Second grade, my dad taking me to Jum’uah &amp; saying “never be cheap, always give sadaqah” &amp; he wouldn’t put the money in the donation box, he’d hand it to me to make sure I go put it there so it gets in my head that it’s important &amp; to this day, these (the sheikhs or people who were sitting behind him on the stage) are already retired, I have kids of my own. But whenever I give sadaqah, my dad’s voice comes in my head. That’s a role model. We already have them. We just haven’t looked. We haven’t looked. And when this generation comes up, when this generation rises, they are not just gonna build an amazing Muslim community, they are not just gonna build beautiful, elaborate masajid &amp; it’s not enough that these masajid are gonna be filled at fajr, that’s not enough &amp; it’s not enough that these people are going to be entrepreneurs that are going to start all kinds of amazing things, alternative riba free banking; they are going to start. They are going to start, you know, Muslim hospitals &amp; clinics &amp; medical practices &amp; pharmaceutical companies that are not there to pretend to heal people that actually suck them dry economically, they are not gonna be there to do that, they are going to create a new medical economy. They are going to create a new financial economy. They are going to make the world a better place not just for themselves but for the rest of the world. They are going to save America from itself; that’s what they are going to do. They are going to be the pioneers in media; they are going to be the top journalists in America. This is what these people will be. &amp; they are already sitting in this audience, the kids that that run around &amp; say “Brother Nouman, I found you on YouTube”, that kid, one day I am gonna be getting his autograph &amp; be saying “Sir, I am so proud of you. Thank you for winning the Pulitzer Prize in journalism, you have made Muslims proud.” That’s what’s gonna happen &amp; we have to think like this. It does not require millions &amp; billions of dollars to do this. All it requires is the mentality. We have to stop thinking defensively &amp; this is what I wanna conclude this talk with. The messenger of Allah (SAW) was given one of the most beautiful, I find one of the most beautiful ayat in the Quran on a sense of purpose, on a sense of mission. "قل هذه سبيلي", Tell them this is my path, you know a path always leads to a destination, right? So when the messenger is told to declare to the people, “This is my path”, it means he’s already indicating to the people that this is going somewhere. We are not there yet, you watch. And let me tell you  " ادعواالى الله على بصيرة" , I call to Allah with eyes open, with clear insight. You know what that means? That he is a visionary. Allah has given him a vision for grand things. Allah has given him a vision for great things, you know, so I wanna leave you with this idea of you know, defensive vs. offense. You know in sports, what do they say, what the best defense? , Offense. Constantly we are worried Islam is under attack. “Why do you have polygamy in Islam?”, “Why do you have these violent verses in the Quran?”, “Why do you do this?” &amp; “Why do you do that?” &amp; “Why do you do the other?”  You know what? It’s time to turn the tables on that conversation. “Why do you have no purpose in life?”, “Why don’t your youth look like our youth?”, “Why don’t your families enjoy the harmony that our families enjoy?”, “Why don’t you come enjoy the beauty of life that we have come to see?” We are gonna turn the tables on this. We’re gonna be the one asking the questions. “Why do you live with injustice &amp; not speak up against it?”, “Why do you not build communities that build strong youth?” We’re gonna be the destruction of the alcohol industry, not because we are gonna pass fatwas that it’s haram; Allah already did that for us. But because we are going to expose its evils &amp; the evils it gives birth to. We are going to educate the people about the harm, things that bring them harm. This is not just something that brings the Muslim harm, it brings society harm &amp; Islam came to save people from harm, even the non- Muslims. We will be the education. We have to think like that. We have to think like that. You are gonna be driving with your children many of you when this convention is over, you are gonna be taking the highway &amp; you are gonna see a filthy billboard. You are gonna see a billboard for a casino or you are gonna see a billboard for some beer or something &amp; you are gonna say “Hey kids! Look over the..this is haram. Don’t look there, OK? Don’t look there.” But you know what, your mentality has changed. You are gonna say to that kids, “You know that thing we are not looking at, our job one day is take that down &amp; replace it with something better.” That’s what we are here to do. Allah brought us here so that we can make this a better place. That’s what we are gonna do. That’s what it means to be role models &amp; you are all gonna be. And a last thing I wanna share with you guys &amp; I am done. I am talking to the younger folks here, especially the non-married boys &amp; girls. And I am calling you boys &amp; girls because you are not acting like men &amp; women yet, because if you were, I would call you men &amp; women. So I am calling you boys &amp; girls &amp; I am hoping by the end of this talk you leave here men &amp; women. Because the young, young boys &amp; girls, the ten &amp; eleven year olds look at you in the conference &amp; say “He walks like this, like he has got some deficiency in his leg so why can’t I?”, “My older brother does it”, “My sister’s dressed all weird, why can’t I ?”, you know, “She’s talking to boys, why can’t I ?”. They look at you, you are already role models whether you accept it or not &amp; you have to take responsibility for how you carry yourself. How you speak, how you text, how you post, how you troll, how you hash tag. You have to take responsibility for that. You have to, because you already are role models. When you go on a search for role models next time, look in the mirror. Look in the mirror. Allah has already put you in the position of leadership. You are Muslims. Allah has already put you in the position of responsibility. You are on the ummah of Muhammad (SAW), “لتكونوا شهداء على الناس” So that you all may be witnesses against humanity. It is God’s great gift, Allah’s great gift that we get to enjoy these treasured words; these words that you cannot put a price on. This “لا اله الا الله”, this “محمد صلى الله عليه وصحبه وسلم”, these words have no price &amp; we have the gift of saying those words out of our mouth. The majority of the people that walked this earth do not have this gift &amp; so since we have that gift, we are a gifted people, we are an honored people &amp; Allah gave us this honor so we could be role models to the rest of humanity. May Allah ‘Azzawajal help us recognize our place in the world &amp; may Allah ‘Azzawajal help us realize our future that I described for you &amp; even then some, so we can show this world the beauty of this religion in a way that it’s never, ever, ever seen before.بارك الله لي ولكم في القرآن الحكيم ونفعني وإياكم بلآيات والذكر الحكيم"”
