Juz 1 [Quranic Gems] - Nouman Ali Khan - Quran Weekly
Ayat 67 of Sura Bakra, in which Allah talked about the incident of the cow, ofcourse Sura Bakra is called "the Cow". When Musa AS said to his nation that no doubt that it is ALLAH who commands you to that, you should slaughter a cow, their first response was "do you take us for a joke" "are you kidding us?".. You want to us slaughter a cow! A murder just happened and GOD's response is that we should slaughter a cow?. It sounds ridiculous.I am sharing is as a first reminder because ALLAH made it a point to mention what their reaction was to ALLAH's instructions. A prophet is telling you to slaughter a cow on ALLAH's behalf . He is telling you to slaughter a cow weather that's make a logical sense to you or not.
It's God's ! its validated because its coming through his messenger SAW or in this case Musa A S but your response is, "you kidding?" "you taking us as a joke?". And you know this it is mentioned because it is a timeless problem. So to this day you are going to have people whom you hear are Muslims, who hear an instruction that is clearly from ALLAH's Messenger Sallaho Aillhhe Wasallam and they answer "are you kidding me?". "Are you serious?" . That going to be their reaction. You know you can't be serious. That's what Islam wants, that's what the Shariah says, that what the hadith say, that's what the ayah says. No way , that's does not make any sense etc. This kind of reaction and this kind of reaction make Musa AS extremely

upset so, within the same ayah he said, " I seek ALLAH refuge from that I should be among those who lose their emotional control". Jahil actually is opposite of a'akil. An a'akil is one who has got control over their emotions, jahil is the one who loses them. This final minute I want to remind you that this ayah is a warning for those who make a mockery out of ALALH's commandment. And on other hand it is also a warning for those who deliver ALLAH's message, who try to do the work of the prophets, who when say something on the behalf of ALLAH and its marked and its ridiculed ; that they(people doing dawah) should not lose their cool because Musa AS immediately says " I seek refuse of ALLAH that I should be from those who are jahil (who lose their cool). In other words its really enraged him and he does not want to lose his temper because then he will not able to do his job ".
So you know carrying the message of Islam and giving advice to them for sake of ALLAH, it requires a thick skin. You're going to deal with some very obnoxious people who say some very ridiculous thing and you're going to say I seek refuge of ALLAH that I should be from those who are jahil (who lose their cool). May ALLAH make us of those who one never make fun of ALLAH's commandment and 2) when they do give advice to each other and they hear things that are inappropriate in response , are able to control their emotions and control their temper

