How to achieve contentment, peace and purpose in life?-Nouman Ali Khan 

You see most people when they think about peace and contentment, they think about what they want to do for themselves. It’s kind of a selfish thing, and that’s okay because you know what, according to Muslim creed, human beings were introduced to the Lord before they even got here, but now when they come to this earth, there are no longer in his direct company, so there is this emptiness inside the human being, longing for that amazing company that the human beings once enjoyed. Now that emptiness, you can fill it with anything else and it will just be depleted and it won’t fill you and the only thing that will fill you is when you realize that the original covenant - You are master (pointing up), I am slave and I am ready to serve and I wanna serve only you. And if you turn to God, I’m not even saying Allah, you turn to god and you say to Him, I have decided to serve only You, show me the truth and I decided, I really want to be your slave, my inner most conscious, in the debt of my heart, I feel this was the purpose for which I was created and I want to come to you and only to you and I do not do blasphemy towards you, I do not want to follow the word of men, I want to follow your word, show me what you have to say, show me how to be your slave, because when someone says I want to be your slave, it’s really important now, for example, if I was a slave and I had a human master, how would you know if I was a slave? You wouldn’t! The only way that you would know that I AM a slave is when I am always doing want the master wants but the only way for me to know what the master wants is not telepathically, he's got to spell it out for me. If I was a slave and the master never tells me what he wants, he never tells me what he wants then guess what I’m gonna act on? My own will, and if I’m acting on my own will, I’m no longer a slave, I’m free. The only difference between a free person and a slave is that the free person acts on his own will and a slave acts on the will of his master. 
So if you decided your gonna be a slave to God, you’re gonna be his slave, then it’s necessary that you ask him, well tell me how to be your slave, The Quran's phrase for that is: 'Ihdinis Siratar Mustaqeem' - Guide us, Guide us to the straight path. tell me what to do, I don’t know what to do, I don’t know how to make you happy, I don’t know what you want me to do or what you don’t want me to do, how you want me to live or how you not want me to live, I don’t know none of these things, so I beg you to guide me, if that question has come into your heart, then read the translation even the most shallow translation of the first Surah, I’m not gonna say chapter, even though that’s what most books say, it’s the first unit(if you will) or the first Surah, just read it even in translation, you will find what  your inner conscious has been thinking of outlined right there. Comprehensive!! 
