Auzubillahiminashaitanirajeem.Bismillahirahmanirahim.       The last thing that I want to share with you is this is again the Introduction, the last part of my introduction. Is that when we read the Quran, or we try to understand the Quran, there is something that I want you to de-constructed in your mind, de-programmed, get them out of your system. The first of those things is, this, the Book, for knowledgeable people. This is the Book for people that have a lot of knowledge, that are well verse thing in religion that are scholars, or imams, or speakers, or khatibs or you named it, that's who this book is for. I want you to get out of this is from your mind,and when you read the Quran, you are thinking, this book, this book is a very academic kind of exercise or so religious spiritual text. I  didn't want you to think what like that first, you know what I want you think about it like?        You know when you have real problem, a lot of us have problem, we have family problems, we have marriage problems, we have problems with our in-laws, but you said its normal right.(laughs) Some of you have problems with your kids, some kids have problem with their parents, friends have problems with each other, some of you have problems at work, some of you have problems in business,  we have all kinds of problems, and when people have really bad problems, do you know what they do? They go talk to a friend. "Man, can I talk to you? Cause his is really bothering me." You call a friend and you are on the phone with them almost an hour. Talking about your problems, and hopefully people you talk to about your problem are in your family but for most of us, the problems is the family and got to find somebody else (laughs). Right?. So, and this gives birth to a really gigantic scam industry even though there is some very legimate psychology out there, they call you to charge over 350 dollars in an hour and say, "Tell me how you feel..", "Tell me about your problem..", and you talk about your problem for an hour and at the end of it, they will say, "Do you feel better?", (laughs). See? "You need to tell me something","No, my way is getting you to feel better is to talk about your problem". But you know when we talk a lot about our problems, they give a counsel, they give us therapy, they give us advices,  that is what the Quran supposed used to be. When you are having problems, and all of us do have problems, The Quran are supposed to be Allah giving you and me very relevant advices for my life and your life. Its personal relationship. Its not an academic relationship. Its not superficial kind of relationship. First and foremost, it is personal relationship. And when Allah giving us instruction, even when He telling stories about the past, even when He is telling the stories of the past, you are not supposed to think about the past. What are you thinking about? Yourself. I give you one example about that and I go on, I give you scary example about that. Not surely Muslim thinking about himself, when he is listening to the Quran, The Quran says, or teaches us, that even the Kafeer, the one who hates the messages of the Quran, the one who disbelieve the message of the Quran, when they listen to the Quran even they should be thinking about the past, they should be thinking about themselves.        How would that i get this from? I told you two surahs that mentioned a lot of stories about previous prophet. Which two surahs that I have highlighted it? Hud and  Syuaraa? 11 and 26. In Suratul - Hud, it once again, very interesting phenomena, this some brothers this morning, and literally this evening in iftar, Allah decided  to destroy the nation of Lut. You know that? Allah decided to destroy the nation of Lut. You know how He decided to destroy them? "Iza ja amru na ja an na a li ya ha a sa fi la ha". "When Our decision came, We decided to make their high points to their low points". You know what that means? Their buildings were very high, and Allah says some kind of earthquake, tornado, hurricane, whatever He sends, but those buildings start to caving in, the roofs, the ceilings started collapsing and building were falling apart because of this earthquake, that are coming to this nation. You know what happen when earthquake happen right? What were you supposed to do when earthquake? People get out of the building. Especially when it is minor earthquake stand at the doorways, the strong construction. But when it is major earthquake? get out of the building, be outside. Allah says , everything that was high was made low.not the trees stand, not the roof is standing, everything is destroyed. When everything destroyed, many people get crushed. But people who didn't get crushed, where are they now? They are outdoors. There are no roof left. This was ways one of the punishments.        "Fa am tar na alaihim hi ja ra tan minna sama' hi ja ra tam min si'' jiin malbul ", "He says, we done with start raining on them" now you have no roof left, you have no tree left, you have no shade left, so when its raining, where you got to go? No, you nowhere to go? No. What kind of rain was this? A rain made of stones and He asked the words 'mambul', you got to appreciate it, have you ever heard of words of things like flash floods? Right? The rain come is like a slap, like 'gush', and okay, its done. And then, another slap. 'A gush'. Fall like a buckets fools like a one shot. Allah says, the stones comes from the sky, one big smack, and you think its done. And another layer, then another layer, then another layer, you know i was giving the younger guy this example cause they put a lot modern war fair game 'prtttt', what ever else,'prrrtttt', its like that. You know. Reload and then again. Reload and then again. It kept on coming like that. And then the next ayahs, tell us something even more scary, says 'musawamatan', every single pebble had been branded, like they have criminal name on it. You know how sniper fire you target very  specifically, every single bullet that send for Allah send from the sky told who you're gonna hit , and this is where you're gonna hit them.        Exact targeting. First, Allah brought that target out of the houses because if they still inside the house, you can't hit them. So, first Allah shook the houses and got them out of the way. Now there are outdoors, then the firing began. The firing squad begin. And the end of this, you know what He says? Of course, what nation that I told you about? Lut. And you know who the first people who is listening to this word, the Quraisy is the first listening to this. And the Quraisy would listening to this, and to them this is oldest history, this is not something that happen that they saw, this is oldest history for them Allah says in the same ayahs, "wa ma hi ya lizalimin nabi ba'id", Watch out. For anybody who does wrong, this isn't that far away. For anyone who does wrong, This is far away. Who should do they think about now? Themselves. Immediately. The history lessons became alive for them. You, used to be party animal yesterday, this Ramadhan you turned away and you discovered Islam. And all of sudden you want to be a preacher in your family, and tell everybody that they are wrong, and that they are doing Haraam, before you do, you need to get a little bit of credibility, dont you? Before you open your mouth, lecturing your uncles, right? Before you start teaching and giving them Khutbah, you heard the Khutbah and you said, "I wanna do this at home." Its a good point my dad need to hear this one. This is gonna make a great point of argument. Right? A lot of excited young people do that, they discovered the religion, they hold on to it, and they use it to debate with family,. Right? When you do that, you are basically abandoning what the messagers did. You've got to have a little bit credibility first. When you turn into the religion, you become the best son, the best daughter, the best husband, the best wife, speaking of the best husband, i want to tell you a story, really a good one, on the subject. Making people conscious of Allah. You just  dont invite people to have taqwa of Allah with your words, your character as alike.        A friend of mine, he became a friend on a short trip, told me about how he was raised in a Muslim family. In this guy origin they are muslim who commit it and they are muslim have mixed their religion with Hinduism, and some Muslim they are just Muslim by name and they completely almost lost everything of the religion. They almost know nothing about the religion. So, as he is growing up in New York, he almost completely just wasn't even practically Muslim. He used getting fight with his mother, he went to jail a couple of times, he is in gang, and so kind of stuff. Later on in his life, he decided he wants to, you know , looking for God. And he knows by at least his name is Muslim, cause his name is Muhammad or something right, by name of muslim, he should looking for what religion first? Islam. So, he starts to look into Islam, start going into masjeed, start learning how to pray again, become more serious, at the time he was he has married, his girlfriend who is Christian or whatever, and he starts becoming more serious about religion, and then his wife knows that he is praying and beer is get out of the fridge, and he is not going out with his drinking buddies, and he doesn't go to Atlantic city on the weekends, he is a different guy. something change. You know. And he doesnt tell her.He didn’t yell at her.  Put the hijaab on, or whatever. He doesn't do that. He went to the scholars, (du'a for that scholars) he didn't tell me what is the scholars name but he told me that "Look, i becoming  more and more aware about Islam, but my wife is of course is a christian and she dont even practising Christians, she is just kind of  what I was before. She is exactly what i was before. How do i help her?" He said, dont tell her about Islam, just be the best husband you can be, and to do that,  just study what kind of husband the prophet was.(s.a.w). Just do that. Dont worry about what you need to tell her, worry about being the best possible husband and that is the sunnah of messager (s.a.w). The messager will buy his wife gifts, the messager will joke with his wife, the messager will spend time with the mother of believers, the messagers will praise and compliment them out of the other believers,I mentioning for a purpose guys.(laughs). He would compliment them. You guys is the first they thought in their life. And the wife said "what?  you know nothing." (laughs) You are doing some basics with them, "I know the economy is bad but i was really short of sugar." Very painful for you to say the compliment , especially for those who compromise for originally country is Pakistan, for you to give the compliment to your wife can cause an ulcer. So, I understand. But, its a sunnah guys. Good foot. That's amazing. You know. And your soul is your wife, are the sisters who so used to hear nasty things from us, and when we say nice things, they get freaked out. (laughs). Especially when the husband says, "You look nice today.", "What do you want??". (laughs). He got worried. We got to fix that. Its a problem. It cant be healthy. So, he starts doing this things with his wife. At the beginning when they are use to argue with sometimes about Islam, and tell her how Christianity doesnt make sense how can 3 be 1 and 1 be 3 and all of those kind of arguments, you heard them before right. And none of those can work with this like. "I'm a Christian and that's it. It is in my heart and leave me alone." Three years gone by with him talk about Christianity how dump it is or whatever, stops debating with her, he just being what he can be as the best husband and one day, he is making Maghrib and his wife joins him in the salaah. (Allahuakbar). And he is in the salat like.. and what is happening here.right? So, he gives salaam, and look. "What happen?","What? Nothing.""No, you've got to tell me what happen.", and of course she says what pretty much any wife could say, "its complicated." but eventually she tells them. and she tells that "Look, im never seeing a husband like you, my dad wasn't like that, im never seeing  a father like you, the way you are with our child, i never seeing a father like that, its so beautiful, this religion can't be wrong.  It can't be wrong." This is it taqullah. You see, how aware you are of Allah and your wife. It is not how many ayahs you memorize, how many hadiths you know, how many knowledge you can spit out at someone, how many quote from the scholars you can deliver, it is not about that. It is about how you are living your life. People can see that and you calling people to Taqwa to Allah s.w.t. Wala tamunnun ila wa antum muslimunna and thats for next part. In 5 minutes i have to give you break as people have to get their car and park them it would at work. But what I wanna share you this lat 5 minutes, is wa la tamun tunna ila wa antum muslimun . This is ayahs number one. there are three items right? This is the first item. "Dont you dare die, except you are muslim".        You know what is the most important thing we have to do as family? Is we have to talk about death. As family. Not as preachers, Not at khutbahs. As families. Not “If i die”. its “When I die”. People say , "if i die, do this, this and this." No, no, no. its "When I die, do this, this and this." Make sure when I die please make dua for me. Even for the teenage kids, when they just begin their consciousness, make them aware of death. If there is opportunity to go to the jenazah, take your family, take your kids especially. Let them see the jenazah. Let them see the barrier. Other than that, I am talking about be aware of death,and the best way to  be aware of death, to be aware of our mortality also,  is we have to take our children out of the comfort zone. I am telling you, wallahi, wallahi even one of us that are not doing it well in the country , have minimal level of jobs, and barely getting buying the apartments, we are still living as king compare to people in the rest of the world. Our children has a lot of luxury. Even those of you who living in the small apartments, you open the fridge and there is four different kinds of soda,and three different kinds of juice, and there is a people who have clean water for weeks. We have a lot luxury and our children used to it, we have to take ourselves out of it sometimes. Even for a little bit. To put life into perspective again. and that is really important. It is because when we are become the custom to luxury all the time, and we start getting used to it, we forget of what we really are. What we really are is dirt. Allah created us from it, and we go back to it. That is how we really are. A human being forgets that.the higher up it goes, we forgets what we came from. We have to remember of where we were came from. This is the first agenda. I haven’t talk to you about the law of Islam, the prayer, the hijaab, and beard and this. None of that stuff, All i want to tell is be aware of Allah, man. Just be aware of Allah. be aware that you are going to die. That your life has a purpose and your conscious of Allah now, so that He can take care of you later. You forget about Allah in this world, He will have you forgotten in the afterlife.  When after you die. What you're gonna do.               As disbelievers can deny at the akhirah, disbelievers can say nothing came afterlife after after death, but even disbeliever can't deny  death itself. Death is reality. That's gonna come. and there is one thing that makes us , you know worry, and Ramadhan about that. "How much left?", couple of weeks right? How fast we go by? Your entire life gonna be like that. My entire life gonna be like that, Ramadhan, you know how fast it is went by? That is how fast life goes by. It is a good training on how, you know, “Oh God I got to do this this this....like those of you care”. I got to pray more, I got to finish Quran, I got to do this , I got to do that, I have a little bit time left, If you can develop that attitude in Ramadhan, you should transfer that attitude to the rest of your life. We have a little bit time left. I got to get stuff done. I got to put this investment in place.So, once I am gone I keep getting the credit. Sadaqah jariah keep getting it. From my children, from what I taught, From what I help people with, from good things that i do to this world .This is our first campaign, for our family before anybody else, If we can do that, in shaa Allah u wa taala, we are gonna ready for our next phase of this campaign. We are going to create a beautiful society that Allah wants us to become.POWER OF QURAN - PART 1 - :) - NOUMAN ALI KHAN LECTURE