Surah  Fatiha  ­  Points  to  Ponder     By  Nouman  Ali  Khan      InshAllah  we  are  going  to  talk  about  few  things,  not  a  Tafseer  but  just  few  points   of   reflection   from   Surah   Fatiha,   which   actually   covers   some   of   the   most   fundamental   aspects   of   our   deen,   actually   if   we   consider   Surah   Fatiha   that   we   recite   in   every   Salaah,   a   summary   of   all   of   Islam.   So   if   somebody   understands   Surah   Fatiha   properly   then   they   also   have   the   ability   to   explain   Islam   to   somebody  else  comprehensively  because  it  contains  pretty  much  everything  you   need  to  know  to  give  someone  a  full  picture  of  what  Islam  really  represents.  
We   are   going   to   divide   study   of   Fatiha   into   into   three   parts.   First   three   ayaats,   middle   ayaats   and   then   the   last   three   ayaats.   Not   a   very   detailed   tafseer   but   a   very  simple  discussion.    
To   make   the   matter   brief   we   are   not   going   to   go   into   Bismillah....   Some   mufasiroon  consider  it  to  be  the  first  verse  of  Fatiha  others  say  no  its  not.  
At   the   very   least   we   have   to   translate   Alhamdu   lillah   as   praise   and   gratitude   belongs   to   Allah.   The   word   hamd   includes   two   things   praise   &   gratitude;   you   cannot   translate   it   as   `Praise   belongs   to   Allah'   or   just   `Thanks   belongs   to   Allah'.   Now  Arabic  has  a  word  for  either  of  them,  you  could  say  Madh  or  Sana  for  praise   and   you   could   say   Shukr   for   Thanks.   So   Alhamdu   lillah   includes   Madh,   Sana   &   also  Shukhr,  it  includes  all  of  these  things  in  one  word.    
First   we   need   to   understand   the   difference   between   praising   Allah   &   thanking   Allah.   Before   we   talk   about   Allah   let's   talk   about   generally   these   two   terms.   Someone   you   praise   isn't   necessarily   someone   you   thank   and   someone   you   thank  isn't  necessarily  someone  you  praise,  these  are  mutually  exclusive  things.    
In  other  words  for  example  if  you  see  a  really  nice  car  in  the  parking  lot  you  are   not   going   to   thank   the   car   but   you   might   praise   the   car   that   it's   a   nice   car   you   don't  go  over  and  pat  the  car  on  the  hood  &  say  thank  you  so  much.  
On  other  hand  take  a  religious  situation,  its  obligatory  on  all  believers  and  this  is   not   something   new   in   our   messenger's   revelation   its   been   there   from   the   very   beginning   of   all   the   messengers   that   we   have   to   be   grateful   to   our   parents   now   Ibraheem  (AS)  also  has  to  be  grateful  to  his  parents  so  he  is  grateful  to  Aazur  but   does  he  praise  his  father?  What  the  father  does  is  it  worthy  of  praise  or  criticism?   What   the   father   does   should   be   criticized   so   he   is   grateful   to   him   but   he   is   not   praising   him.   So   you   can   praise   someone   without   thanking   them   or   you   could   thank  someone  without  praising  them.    
Now   in   regards   to   Allah   we   say   Alhamdu,   we   don't   say   almadhu   wal   shukrillah   we   don't   separate   the   two   words   we   put   them   under   one   word,   which   is   hamd.   This   has   very   profound   implications,   it   means   everything   that   Allah   does   we   thank  Him  for  and  at  the  same  time  we  praise  Him  for.  This  changes  our  attitude   towards   Allah   very   drastically   from   people   of   other   faith.   You   may   know   Christians   and   other   people   of   other   faiths   in   your   circles,   you   may   even   know   some  Muslims  who  don't  know  the  deen  very  well  and  sometimes  they  say  things   about  Allah  that  are  far  from  appropriate.      

Have   you   ever   heard   things   like   if   God   is   so   great,   how   come   there   is   so   much   war,   how   come   so   much   hunger,   famine,   disease,   chaos   in   the   world,   where   is   God  when  all  of  this  is  going  on?  I  was  on  a  flight  back  from  Las-Vegas;  there  was   a  Quran  conference,  I  swear  :)  and  next  to  me  was  an  old  Jewish  couple,  they  are   holocaust  survivors.  He  sees  me  reading  Quran  and  the  old  man  says  to  me  why   don't  you  read  this  to  me,  recite  it  to  me.  It's  a  really  long  flight  so  we  are  talking   halfway  through  yeah  we  believe  in  God  too  we  also  have  faith  and  half  an  hour   into  conversation  yeah  I  don't  really  believe  in  God  so  I'm  like  what?  You  started   half   an   hour   ago   saying   you   have   faith   too,   he   said   where   was   God   when   the   holocaust  happened?  In  other  words  they  are  kind  of  in  a  conflict  on  other  hand   how  can  we  believe  if  this  &  this  happened.    
Our   first   response   whether   we   understand   it   or   not,   is   that   we   praise   Allah   for   everything   he   does   and   we   thank   Allah   for   everything   he   does.   We   may   not   understand   the   larger   plan   or   wisdom   in   it   but   we   need   to   have   this   attitude.   Many  a  times  you  may  have  heard  this  parable  that  parent  is  giving  medicine  to  a   child.   The   medicine   tastes   bad   to   a   child   but   the   mother   is   still   going   to   give   it   and  when  the  child  understand  better  the  child  will  praise  as  well  as  thank  but  at   that  moment  child  is  complaining  cause  he  doesn't  understand  what  else  is  going   on.  There  are  two  worlds  at  work,  the  seen  &  the  unseen  and  we  see  one  world   and   start   complaining   and   because   Allah   sees   both   of   them   and   His   plan   is   in   conjunction  with  both  of  them  whatever  He  does,   we  thank  Him  for  and  praise   Him  for.    
Another  wonderful  thing  about  beginning  of  Fatiha,  the  hadith  tells  us  that  Allah   has   99   names,   but   we   don't   say   Alhamdu   lil   Malik,   Alhamdu   lil   Khalik,   Alhamdu   ur   Raheem,   Alhamdu   lil   Hakeem,   praise   &   gratitude   belongs   to   the   Wise,   the   Knowledgeable,   the   Powerful,   the   Creator   we   don't   use   any   of   those   names.   In   Fatiha  we  specifically  use  Allah  and  there  is  profound  benefit  in  that.  The  benefit   is  if  we  thank  and  praise  Allah  only  for  being  khalik  then  the  only  thing  you  are   appreciating  is  that  he  created,  if  you  thank/praise  Him  only  for  being  Wise  then   the  only  thing  you  are  appreciating  is  that  he  is  Wise  or  if  you  only  do  it  for  His   Mercy   then   that   is   the   only   thing   you   are   being   thankful   for.   Alhamdu   lillah   covers  all.  
The  other  thing  that  is  really  interesting  and  unique  about  language  of  the  Ayaa,   the  way  it's  structured,  what  is  the  difference  between  saying  `Praise  belongs  to   Allah'  vs  `We  praise  or  we  are  grateful  to  Allah'.  The  difference  between  these  is   very   profound,   when   we   say   `We   praise   Allah'   we   have   not   always   been   around   or  will  not  always  be  around  but  the  praise  of  Allah  has  always  been  around  and   will  always  be  around.  When  I  say  `We  praise  Allah  or  I  praise  Allah'  I  didn't  talk   about  the  rock,  tree,  sky,  earth  &  everything  else  that  praises  Allah.  I  only  talked   about  myself  but  when  we  say  `Praise/Gratitude  belongs  to  Allah'  it  means  for  all   times,  all  places,  all  instances  of  that  praise  belong  to  Allah  whether  we  count  it   or   not,   whether   we   do   hamd   or   not,   its   independent   of   us.   This   is   Allah's   introduction   to   Himself   in   the   Fatiha   and   the   very   next   thing   Allah   uses   is   Rab.   This  is  heart  of  the  matter.  Rab  in  English  translation  is  commonly  translated  as   Lord.   The   classical   Arabic   meaning   include   a   few   things,   the   one   who   owns,   the   one   has   complete   control   &   authority   over   something,   in   charge   of   complete   taking   care   of   something,   the   one   who   gives   gifts   and   most   importantly   the  

master.   The   word   Lord   is   not   used   as   much   in   common   English   language,   the   closest  word  in  english  to  Rab  is  master  because  Rab  was  used  for  the  owner  of  a   slave.  What  do  we  call  someone  who  owns  a  slave?  Master.  So  in  Arabic  a  slave  is   called   `abd'   and   Master   is   called   `rab'.   If   Allah   is   telling   is   he   is   Rab   then   what   does   it   makes   us   immediately?   It   makes   us   a   slave.   So   first   Allah   introduces   us   how  we  should  be  grateful  to  Him  and  how  praise  worthy  He  is.  Now  you  should   know   that   there   is   a   relationship   between   you   and   Him,   he   takes   the   role   of   Master,   we   take   the   role   of   slave.   Couple   of   important   pointers   that   no   Muslim   should   ever   forget,   there   is   a   difference   between   someone   who   worships   and   some  who  is  a  slave.    The  difference  between  a  slave  &  worshipper:  We  were  just   praying   Taraweeh;   that   is   an   act   of   worship.   Christians   do   worship   on   Sunday;   Jews   do   worship   on   Saturday.   Hindus   do   worship   at   their   temple.   Different   religions   have   different   forms   of   worship.   What   is   the   difference   between   someone   who   is   worshipping   &   someone   who   is   a   slave?   Worship   happens   at   certain  time,  fasting  is  act  of  worship,  Hajj  is  an  act  of  worship  but  slavery  is  not   specified   by   a   time   and   is   not   limited   to   an   act.   Worship   is   limited   to   an   act.   A   slave  is  a  slave  all  the  time,  he  is  not  a  slave  from  9  to  5  or  between  the  prayers   or  right  at  the  time  of  prayer.  So  Allah  is  not  only  demanding  that  we  worship  but   also   become   His   slave.   When   sleeping,   wakes   up,   in   masjid,   in   Ramadan   and   when  eid  he  is  a  slave.  
Slavery   is   different   from   service   (servant   in   English   comes   from   service),   some   people   translate   it   as   servant   of   Allah   but   there   is   a   difference.   You   provide   service   at   a   company,   accountant,   engineer,   and   programmer.   In   return   you   expect   a   paycheck.   A   service   is   an   agreement   in   which   both   parties   own   something,  you  owe  the  work  and  they  owe  the  money.  A  service  is  also  limited;   once   you   serve   as   accountant   they   cannot   tell   you   to   wash   the   windows   unless   the   economy   is   really   bad.   If   they   do   you'll   say   this   is   not   part   of   my   service   contract,  this  is  beyond  my  job.    
A   slave   doesn't   have   a   job   description;   a   slave   job   description   is   `whatever   the   master   says'   as   opposed   to   servant   there   are   certain   things   he   does   and   everything   else   he   is   free.   Allah   declares   himself   rab   &   then   rabbil   aalameen,   master   of   nations,   people   and   generations   of   the   world.   Master   &   slave   are   ugly   words   in   English,   in   human   history   and   also   particularly   in   American   history   these   don't   bring   back   fun   memories,   these   are   ugly   things   to   remember.   And   whenever  you  think  of  a  master  do  you  think  a  slave  loves  their  master  or  hates   their   master?   In   human   history   a   slave   hates   their   master.   If   you   give   slave   a   choice   they'll   prefer   to   be   free,   another   thing   they   usually   doesn't   praise   their   master  usually  they  don't  thank  their  master.    
Before  Allah  told  us  he  is  our  master,  he  told  us  first  Alhamdu  lillah.  Praise  came   first,   in   other   words   its   because   you   are   so   grateful   to   Allah   and   you   have   to   praise   Allah   so   much   that   naturally   you   want   to   become   His   slave.   This   is   a   different   kind   of   slavery   something   that   begins   with   hamd,   no   other   slavery   begins   with   hamd,   no   other   slavery   is   voluntary,   half   way   down   the   ayaat   we   volunteer  ourselves  as  slaves  `You  alone  we  worship...'  Allah  doesn't  say  become   slaves,   we   say   we   worship,   we   enslave   ourselves,   we   give   ourselves   in.   Notice   nobody  ever  applies  for  a  job  to  become  a  slave,  nobody  ever  says  I  make  a  really   good   slave,   I'm   really   good   at   taking   beatings,   I   love   living   in   a   shack   in   the  

backyard  etc.  Nobody  wants  to  be  a  slave  but  when  it  comes  to  Allah  we  declare   in  Fatiha  that  we  actually  want  to  be  His  slave.    
Now  another  thing  that  you  never  associate  with  a  master  is  mercy.  A  master  is   usually   associated   with   oppression,   forcing   things   on   you,   punishing   if   you   disobey   him   but   Allah   describes   Himself   Arrahmani   arraheem.   Two   words   for   mercy.  Now  the  common  translation  given  is  the  Beneficent,  the  Merciful  but  I'm   going   to   give   you   a   down   to   earth   translation   cause   you   don't   use   the   word   beneficent   in   everyday   English   so   you   don't   probably   connect   with   that   word   easily.    
Arrahman   means   someone   who   is   being   extremely   merciful   right   now,   unimaginably,   extremely   merciful.   Now   when   you   say   about   someone   being   merciful   they   may   not   be   engaged   in   mercy   right   now   they   may   be   merciful   but   not   necessarily   right   now.   When   you   say   this   is   a   nice   guy   that   doesn't   necessarily   means   he's   being   nice   right   now   but   when   you   say   Arrahman   what   does   it   mean?   that   not   only   Allah   is   extremely   merciful   but   that   His   mercy   is   being   executed   immediately.   Arraheem   means   someone   who   has   always   been   and   will   always   be   merciful.   Arrahman   takes   care   of   our   immediate   need   for   mercy   and   Arraheem   takes   care   of   our   future   need   for   mercy.   Both   of   them   are   covered   in   these   two   words   and   these   two   words   are   incredibly   powerful   in   depicting   Allah's   mercy.   Between   these   two   words   lies   this   understanding   that   we   will   never   understand   how   merciful   Allah   is,   we   won't.   Now   let   me   tell   you   something   about   us   as   master.   You   own   a   car;   a   thousand   years   ago   somebody   was  master  of  a  goat  or  his  or  her  cow.  The  cow  stops  giving  milk  what  does  the   master   have   a   right   to   do?   As   a   master   you   can   do   anything,   slaughter   it   if   goat   stops   giving   milk,   as   master   of   laptop   if   it   stops   working   you   can   slam   it   on   the   floor  or  whatever.  If  you  own  something  and  it  has  a  job  to  do,  when  it  doesn't  do   its  job  then  you  have  the  full  right  to  do  anything  with  it.    
We   acknowledge   that   we   are   property   belonging   to   Allah   and   we   also   have   a   task/job  to  do  because  if  you  are  the  slave  then  your  job  is  whatever  the  master   says.  What  if  we  never  figured  out  what  the  master  says  or  never  cared?  and  we   live  life  thinking  that  we  are  free.  Does  the  master  have  the  right  to  do  away  with   us?  Absolutely.  If  you  disappoint  the  master  once  he  has  that  right.  Now  imagine   how   many   times   you   &   I   disappoint   Allah   and   how   many   times   humanity   disappoints   Allah,   does   he   let   it   slide?   Does   He   keep   letting   it   go?   Unimaginable   how   merciful   he   is   being   (Arrahmani   arraheem)   to   us   even   though   He   is   the   master.  You  see  the  placement  of  those  words?  It  puts  us  in  an  incredibly  grateful   position.   You   want   to   go   back   and   say   Alhamdu   llilah   again   cause   now   we   are   grateful   for   His   exceeding   mercy   that   he   doesn't   punish   us.   By   the   way   even   though   you   learn   His   commandments   e.g.   don't   lie   whenever   you   do   lie   does   lighting   strike   from   the   sky   and   cut   your   tongue   off?   You   get   to   talk   again   don't   you,   whenever   you   steel   there   is   no   axe   flying   to   chop   your   hand   off,   you   could   steel  again,  cheat  again,  oppress  again  and  the  more  people  do  that  and  nothing   happens  you  know  what  they  do?  They  get  more  brave,  if  somebody  cuts  a  stop   sign  first  time  they  do  it  they  are  looking  all  over,  second  time  look  around  little,   third  time  they  get  more  brave,  they  think  its  ok  this  is  an  ok  neighborhood.  And   if   they   get   caught   at   that   time   they   are   in   shock   how   could   this   ever   have   happened.   This   is   exactly   the   attitude   of   human   being   with   Allah.   Allah   lets   him  

go   out   of   mercy,   he   thinks   Allah   lets   him   go   cause   He   didn't   see   or   nobody   is   watching,   we   are   not   on   camera,   there   is   no   surveillance   or   record   but   when   Allah  does  catch,  he  is  in  shock  how  could  have  this  happened,  how  did  I  become   such  a  criminal,  how  did  I  let  it  go  so  far.    
And   then   this   is   the   part   that   I   really   want   to   emphasize   and   the   rest   would   be   brief.  Maliki  yawmi  addeen,  what  is  the  polar  opposite  of  mercy?  Its  punishment.   If   you   could   say   mercy   is   at   the   positive   end   and   punishment   is   at   the   negative   end,  what's  at  zero?  Justice.  You  would  think  Allah  told  us  about  His  mercy  what   else  he  is  going  to  tell  us  about?  His  punishment.  But  in  fact  he  tells  us  about  His   justice.   Master   of   Day   of   Judgment   when   everybody   gets   what   they   deserve.   From   this   we   learn   a   profound   lesson   you   don't   have   to   fear   the   punishment   of   Allah;   you   have   to   fear   the   justice   of   Allah.   If   Allah's   justice   begins   there   is   no   difference  between  that  and  punishment.  Allah  offcourse  does  not  punish  unless   there   is   a   right   to   do   so.   So   if   justice   begins   it   means   mercy   has   ended,   Mercy   is   Allah  doesn't  do  justice  to  you;  he  lets  it  slide  but  justice  is  everything  you  did  get   counted  &  audited.  This  is  explained  in  the  Quran  elsewhere  I'll  give  you  a  brief   reference  to  it,  you  know  people  are  given  book  in  their  right  hand  on  the  day  of   Judgment  now  just  because  the  book  is  in  your  right  hand  doesn't  mean  you  are   done  with  the  testing;  now  you  have  to  present  your  book  so  now  you  think  you   are   going   to   be   nervous   when   you   are   about   to   present   your   book?   You   know   when  you  are  taking  your  test  in  class,  some  teacher  likes  to  grade  the  test  in  the   classroom   in   front   of   you,   what   happens   to   the   student   at   that   time?   They   are   nervous.   So   now   that   idea,   the   book   is   to   be   presented   before   the   angels,   they   have   to   open   it   up,   you   feel   good   because   it's   in   your   right   hand,   you   have   definitely   failed   if   it's   in   your   left   hand.   Now   Allah   out   of   mercy   he   says   `He   will   be  given  an  easy  audit'  in  other  words  not  everything  will  be  checked,  the  angels   will   go   easy   on   this   guy,   he   is   about   to   present   page   25   they'll   be   No   No   No   we   had  enough  you  can  go  and  when  he  gets  to  the  other  side  he  is  incredibly  happy   because  he  passed,  he  graduated  so  he  starts  reciting  and  this  occurs  in  another   place   in   the   Quran   `when   he   gets   to   the   other   side   what   does   he   say   O   read   my   book,  look  I  graduated  what  did  you  get?'  the  point  I'm  trying  to  make  is  we  fear   Allah's  justice,  the  messenger  (saws)  told  us  `The  one  who  is  asked  even  once  it's   like  they've  been  destroyed  already'  The  angels  comes  to  you  and  what  were  you   doing   on   November   30th   outside   the   AMT   theatre   at   3PM,   what   was   that   over   there,   one   little   question,   that's   enough.   If   the   questioning   begins   we   are   done   for.   We   beg   Allah,   this   is   a   hadith   of   the   prophet   `O   Allah   give   us   an   easy   accounting   &   reckoning   in   which   we   benefit   from   Allah's   mercy   and   we   stay   away  from  Allah's  justice'  Allah's  justice  is  for  the  wrong  doers,  Allah's  mercy  is   for  the  believers.  May  we  be  included  from  them  inshAllah.    
Then   after   you   understand   these   few   things   about   Allah   you   understand   one   more   thing   there   that   is   very   important   for   theological   purposes   &   students   of   philosophy.   Now   a   day   when   our   kids   go   to   college   its   mandatory   for   them   to   take  at  least  one  philosophy  course  and  guess  where  the  emaan  gets  messed  up?   That   one   philosophy   course.   These   professors   their   whole   idea   of   being   intellectual   nowadays   is   to   be   agnostic.   In   other   words   I   don't   believe   there   is   a   God  I  don't  believe  there  is  no  God  I'm  just  not  sure  that's  what  makes  me  really   smart.   It's   the   stupidest   thing   I've   ever   heard   but   that's   the   academic   culture   today.   Agnosticism   is   considered   a   high   intellectual   place   and   intellectuals   that  

have   faith   they   consider   them   biased,   they   call   it   faith   biased;   I   call   it   truth   biased,  right.  Here  is  what  I  want  to  share  with  you  that  are  really  important  for   you   to   understand   when   you   talk   to   other   Muslims   or   Non   Muslims   about   deen   and   Allah.   It   is   impossible   to   believe   in   God   without   believing   in   an   afterlife.   If   somebody   says   they   believe   in   God   but   they   don't   believe   in   an   afterlife   that's   impossible  then  what  they  are  basically  saying  is  they  don't  believe  in  God  at  all.   These  two  things  are  connected  you  can't  separate  them.  So  I  want  to  show  you   what  the  connection  between  these  two  things  is,  why  are  they  inseparable  from   each   other,   the   belief   in   God   &   belief   in   afterlife,   why   are   these   two   things   connected?   If   anybody   believes   in   a   God,   then   they   have   to   believe   that   He   is   perfect  in  every  way,  He's  got  the  best  names,  best  attributes  and  he  is  flawless  if   you   give   any   flaw   to   God,   He's   not   God   anymore,   if   you   say   anything   imperfect   about  God  then  you  believe  in  less  than  God  and  among  His  most  perfect  name  is   He's  Just,  isn't  He?  One  of  the  attributes  of  perfection.  So  if  we  believe  in  God  He   has   to   be   just   that   is   necessary   condition   of   believing   in   perfection   of   Allah.   We   believe   Allah   created   this   world   and   in   this   world   is   their   justice   or   injustice?   There   is   injustice;   there   are   criminals   who   get   away   with   it.   There   are   innocent   who   get   punished   and   people   live   their   whole   lives   like   that.   There   are   people   who  do  so  much  good  &  the  only  thing  they  get  in  return  is  the  death  penalty  and   there   are   people   who   do   so   much   bad   &   they   live   the   life   of   Kings,   they   kill   and   get  away  with  it.  If  one  person  kills  another  person  what  is  the  most  you  can  do   to   them?   Kill   them,   if   one   person   kills   a   hundred   people,   what's   justice   what   should  you  do  to  this  one  person?  What's  the  most  you  can  do,  how  many  times   you  are  going  to  kill  him?  Once,  is  that  justice?  He  paid  for  one  life,  he  didn't  pay   for   100   lives,   is   that   justice?   No.   And   this   guy   might   be   a   loner   and   the   one   he   killed   was   supporting   an   entire   family   even   if   you   kill   him   is   that   still   justice?   Was   more   damaged   caused   by   that   loss   of   life   than   this   loss   of   life.   Even   if   it   is   one  for  more  it  may  not  be  just.  Justice  is  a  very  tricky  thing  so  the  question  that   comes   in   the   mind   of   an   atheist   is   if   God   is   perfect   how   come   there   is   what?   Injustice;  because  He  created  it  so  everything  should  be  just.    
Now   the   answer   to   that   is   very   simple,   I   started   by   saying   how   many   types   of   realities   are   there?   The   world   of   the   unseen   &   world   of   seen.   This   is   the   seen   world.  Those  of  you  who  are  in  accounting  you  understand  debit  &  credit.  This  is   the  world  of  debit;  some  debit  some  credit  you  know  when  the  books  are  going   to   be   balanced?   Day   of   judgment;   when   justice   is   absolutely   served.   When   one   guy  killed  a  hundred  he  pays  for  how  many?  He  pays  for  a  hundred,  here  he  can't   pay  for  a  hundred  but  there  he  can  pay  for  a  hundred.  In  other  words  believing  in   a   perfect   God,   as   we   do,   necessitates   that   Allah   executes   justice   that   justice   comes  not  in  this  life  but  in  the  next  life.  Believing  in  a  God  demands  we  believe   He  is  perfect,  believing  He  is  perfect  demands  that  we  believe  in  justice,  believing   in  justice  demands  that  we  believe  in  an  afterlife.  All  these  things  are  connected.   Some  basic  lessons  of  Al-Fatiha  for  a  crime  to  be  punished  and  good  deeds  to  be   rewarded,   isn't   that   justice?   Good   should   be   rewarded   and   bad   should   be   punished.  Who  decides  good  and  who  decides  what's  bad?  Before  we  get  to  that   answer   from   Fatiha   I   want   you   to   think   about   this,   human   society   from   its   beginning  has  been  in  conflict  there  has  been  a  fight  between  men  &  women,  I'll   give  you  a  simplest  version  of  it,  I  used  to  teach  in  an  Islamic  school,  boys  &  girls   in  six  grade  half  the  class  are  boys  the  other  half  are  girls  and  we  can't  give  them  

recess   together   so   some   days   boys   have   recess   other   days   girls   have   recess   so   I   said   in   the   class   look   we   only   have   five   weekdays   how   about   we   give   3   days   to   one   group   and   2   days   to   the   other   group   and   I'll   let   the   girls   decide   who   gets   3   days  and  who  gets  2  days,  guess  what  they  decided?  Girls.  Then  I  said  ok  let  the   boys   decides   who   get   3   and   who   gets   2,   what   did   the   boys   decide?   Boys.   I'm   putting   the   problem   very   simply   to   you   when   there   is   a   conflict   between   man   and   woman   what   is   man   capable   of   fighting   with   only?   Himself.   What   is   the   woman  capable  of  fighting  with?  Herself.  Lets  put  in  contemporary  terms  you  go   to   divorce   court,   the   husband   and   the   wife   is   there   the   judge   is   a   woman,   who   does  she  feel  bad  for  more?  The  woman  starts  sympathizing  with  the  woman.  If   judge  is  a  man  who  recently  got  divorced  and  he  is  a  judge  whom  is  he  going  to   side   with?   He   is   going   side   with   the   man.   You   understand?   Human   beings   have   biases   in   the   end   the   judge   is   going   to   be   man   or   woman.   You   want   to   decide   what   are   the   rights   of   men,   what   are   the   rights   of   women,   what   are   the   obligations  of  men  &  women,  how  you  create  justice  between  men  &  women,  in   marriage,   in   business   or   in   every   aspect   of   social   life   how   do   you   create   justice.   Lets  let  men  decide  they'll  favor  men,  lets  let  women  decide  they'll  favor  whom?   How  can  we  get  a  judge  who  is  neutral,  a  neutral  judge  doesn't  side  with  men  or   women  actually  loves,  sides  &  understands  both  of  them  perfectly.  Who  could  be   that?  That  could  only  be  Allah,  the  one  who  created  both  of  them  &  knows  them   better  then  they  know  themselves.    
Here   is   another   problem;   the   first   was   man   vs.   woman.   The   second   is   boss   vs.   employee   in   sophisticated   terms   we   call   it   the   problem   of   capital   vs   labor.   The   boss  has  an  employee,  he  pays  him  lets  say  $200/week  and  gives  him  3  days  off   in   a   month,   Now   the   employee   wants   to   get   paid   more   and   he   also   wants   more   vacation,   what   does   the   boss   want?   He   wants   to   pay   him   less   and   wants   to   give   him   less   vacation.   The   employee   wants   to   work   less   &   gets   paid   more,   the   employers  want  to  pay  less  and  get  more  work  out  of  him.  So  you  have  to  have  a   balance  between  them,  now  that  problem  is  an  ancient  problem,  back  in  the  day   the   feudal   lord   and   the   farmer   today   you   have   GM   and   the   union.   It's   the   same   problem.  The  real  question  is  how  do  you  find  justice  between  these  two  sides  if   you  let  the  management  decide  who  will  they  favor?  Management.  If  you  let  the   worker   decide   who   will   they   favor?   Worker.   This   is   always   going   to   remain   a   struggle,   you   have   to   have   a   balance   between   capital   and   labor;   by   the   way   our   deen  has  that.  Our  deen  has  that  balance  between  these  two  conflicts.  The  first  is   the   social   conflict,   the   second   is   the   economic   conflict   here   is   the   third   conflict   the  government  vs  the  people.  The  government  says  there  should  be  more  taxes,   more   control   and   the   people   say   what?   Less   tax.   The   government   says   there   should   be   less   services   provided   the   people   say   there   should   be   more   services   provided.   They   both   are   at   conflict   between   each   other.   So   what's   the   balance   between   the   government   and   the   people?   In   the   end   if   you   have   a   judge   either   that   judge   sides   with   the   government   or   that   judge   sides   with   people.   You   can't   have   both.   So   the   third   conflict   is   a   political   problem.   The   last   problem   is   Allah   created  us  with  clay  but  he  put  inside  it  something  else  the  Ruuh  and  this  clay  it   feels   hunger,   thirst,   it   has   desires,   it   wants   to   beautify   itself,   it   wants   to   earn,   it   has   greed,   it   has   all   these   things   but   the   Ruuh   (closest   word   in   English   is   soul)   wants   to   worship   Allah,   wants   to   remember   Allah,   the   soul   says   keep   standing,   finish   it,   the   body   says   go   take   a   break,   go   drink   some   water,   go   eat   something,  

the   soul   says   wakeup   and   come   for   fajr,   the   body   says   stay   sleeping.   There   is   another  war  going  on  inside  every  person,  the  battle  between  soul  and  the  body.   There   are   some   people   who   only   take   care   of   the   needs   of   their   body,   there   are   other   extremist   who   only   take   care   of   the   need   of   their   soul   like   some   monasteries   among   the   Christians,   we   are   not   going   to   get   married,   we   are   not   going   to   eat   good   tasting   food,   we   are   going   to   wear   uncomfortable   clothes   like   some   brands   of   ancient   Sufism   (in   Islamic   tradition),   Suf   comes   from   word   `Saf'   which  is  wool,  they  used  to  wear  really  uncomfortable  wool  because  they  did  not   want   to   enjoy   the   pleasures   of   this   life.   They   only   want   to   keep   concerned   with   their  soul  so  they  keep  denying  their  bodies.  Now  is  there  a  balance  that  can  be   reached   between   these   two   things?   There   is   but   its   very   difficult   you   know   the   Buddhist   has   his   own   balance   and   the   Hindu   guy   has   his   own   balance   and   the   Christians   try   to   figure   out   their   own   balance   and   they   end   up   all   in   imbalance.   Who  is  the  only  one  who  can  provide  the  perfect  balance  between  the  body  &  the   soul?  The  one  who  created  the  body  &  also  created  the  soul.  In  other  words  true   balance  can  only  come  from  Allah.  These  four  are  basically  the  entire  problem  of   humanity.   When   we   get   to   the   ayaa   `Guide   us   to   the   straight   path'   where   is   this   straight   path   its   neither   to   the   left   nor   to   the   right   and   the   nation   that   goes   on   this   path   is   called   the   middle   nation,   Why?   Because   this   path   is   right   down   the   middle.  It  doesn't  favor  men,  it  doesn't  favor  women,  it  doesn't  favor  government   or  people,  it  doesn't  favor  body  or  soul  it  is  a  balance  between  all  of  these  things.   It's   right   down   the   middle   so   we   have   to   ask   Allah   for   that   we   make   Allah   the   judge.   It's   an   incredible   declaration   in   the   Fatiha,   recognition   that   true   justice   only   comes   from   Allah;   this   is   the   quest   for   hidaya.   A   lot   of   times   we   think   of   guidance  as  something  about  staying  away  from  certain  haram  things  and  that's   it,   that's   what   guidance   is.   Guidance   is   something   so   much   more   something   so   powerful   the   stuff   we   been   reciting   tonight   we   finished   Baqarah   tonight   Alhamdullilah  and  we  start  Al-Imran  the  things  we've  been  reciting  thus  far  if  the   Muslims  just  understood  a  speck  of  what  has  been  recited  thus  far  we  would  be  a   different   ummah,   we   would   be   an   entirely   different   ummah.   May   Allah   make   us   of   those   who   beg   Allah   for   His   guidance   and   are   able   to   live   by   that   guidance.   May  Allah  make  us  of  those  who  followed  the  path  who  Allah  already  favored  in   the  past  and  not  make  us  of  those  who  either  they  earned  rage  or  went  astray.    
You   know   the   Fatiha   begins   Alhamdu   lillahi   rabbi   alAAalameen,   Arrahmani   arraheem,   Maliki   yawmi   addeen.   Those   are   all   ideas,   you   could   call   them   knowledge,   the   knowledge   that   praise   belongs   to   Allah,   gratitude   belongs   to   Allah,  the  knowledge  that  he  is  master  of  the  nation  and  people  of  the  world,  the   knowledge  he  is  exceeding  mercifully,  the  knowledge  that  He  is  master  of  day  of   judgment,   all   of   that   is   knowledge.   When   we   say   `we   worship',   `we   enslave   ourselves',   this   is   not   knowledge;   this   is   action.   The   Surah   began   with   what?   Knowledge.   And   immediately   we   start   talking   about   action,   all   of   Islam   is   like   that  you  have  to  have  knowledge  and  that  knowledge  better  leads  you  to  action,   that's   all   of   Islam   in   Fatiha.   Here   are   two   extremes,   you   know   we   said   it's   the   middle   path   right   so   there   is   balance   between   two   ingredients   knowledge   &   what?  Action.  That's  also  part  of  guidance.  But  what  are  two  extremes  sometimes   people   have   knowledge   but   they   don't   have   action   and   sometimes   people   have   action  but  its  not  based  on  any  knowledge  and  this  used  to  be,  if  you  want  to  look   at   nations   of   the   past,   Bani   Israel   (Jews)   they   had   knowledge   but   no   action,   the  

Nisara  (Christians)  they  had  a  lot  of  action  they  worshipped  a  lot,  what's  missing   is   knowledge,   you   got   two   extremes   each   one   missing   one   ingredient.   Now   in   Fatiha   the   balance   is   the   middle   path   (Ihdina   assirata   almustaqeem)   but   what   are  the  two  imbalanced  paths?  (ghayri  almaghdoobi  AAalayhim  wala  addalleen)   The  path  of  those  who  earned  rage,  you  know  who  these  people  are?  They  have   knowledge   but   they   don't   have   action   and   who   are   the   people   that   are   lost?   I   don't   say   gone   astray   cause   you   don't   use   that   nowadays   anymore   when   you   speak   to   each   other,   when   somebody   invites   you   to   dinner   and   you   get   lost   on   the   way   you   don't   call   them   &   say   I've   gone   astray   could   you   tell   what   exit   to   take,   you   don't   do   that.   You   say   I'm   lost.   Addalleen   are   the   lost.   So   you   have   almaghdoobi  AAalayhim  the  people  who  have  knowledge  but  don't  have  actions   consistent   with   that   knowledge   on   the   other   hand   you   have   people   who   have   action   but   its   not   based   on   any   knowledge,   when   you   act   without   knowledge   what   are   you   called?   Lost   subhanAllah   the   surah   has   that   balance   and   warns   us   against   these   two   elements   of   imbalance.   These   are   some   of   the   more   basic   lessons      &   profound   wisdom,   the   gems/treasures   that   are   embedded   inside   Surah   Fatiha   that   we   recite   every   single   day.   You   know   we   ask   Allah,   this   is   the   center   of   the   Surah,   Ihdina   (guide   us).   If   I   ask   you   for   water   I'm   not   that   thirsty   right  now  &  you  don't  give  it  to  me  I'll  survive  right,  not  the  end  of  the  world.  But   if  I  was  dying  of  thirst  the  way  I  would  ask  you  for  water  would  it  be  the  same?   No.   There   is   a   difference   in   attitude,   the   way   I   ask,   and   the   way   I   beg.   We   ask   Allah   for   guidance   every   time   we   stand   in   Salah.   How   do   we   ask   Allah   for   guidance,  what  words  do  we  recite?  Ihdina  assirata  almustaqeem.  Are  we  really   dying   of   the   thirst   for   guidance?   Or   is   this   a   casual   if   I   get   it   good   if   not   its   Ok.   There  is  always  the  next  Rakah,  I  could  ask  again,  what  attitude  is  it  with  which   we   are   asking   Allah,   Allah   doesn't   just   know   the   words   we   are   saying   he   also   knows   the   attitude   of   our   heart.   We   have   to   ask   Allah   for   guidance   sincerely,   desperately,  we  have  to  feel  the  need  for  it,  you  don't  ask  for  something  you  don't   need.   So   until   you   feel   the   need   for   guidance   you   won't   really   learn   how   to   ask   for   it   you   and   I   both.   We   have   to   feel   that   desperate   need   for   Allah's   guidance   then  we  ask  for  it  then  Allah  opens  our  heart  to  receive  the  message  and  wisdom   of  this  Quran  which  is  the  guidance  we  are  reciting  through  out  this  month.  May   Allah   accept   our   standing   in   salaah,   may   Allah   open   our   hearts   to   receive   His   guidance   and   change   our   behavior   and   our   lives   and   lives   of   our   family   on   account  of  it.  May  Allah  enlighten  our  heart  with  the  light  of  the  Quran.    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

