
Responsibility of ''Being Witness to Humanity''Middle of Surah BaqaraAyat 142 -143Prophet ((SAW)) has moved to madinah and now his audience is different , the mushrikoon of Arabia were different audience and now He ((SAW)) has come into contact with a Christian and Jewish  community more so there was interaction before but it was indirect and  very minimal, but now there is  an direct interaction with  Christian and Jewish  community and in particular the Jewish  community Allah Azzawajal chose to address first and you will find an interesting thing a long address with the Christian community is found in the next surah Al-e-Imran and a long interaction with the Jewish  community is found in Al-baqara.One of the fundamental reason that the Jewish community of Arabia decided to reject Muhammad Ur Rasool Allah ((SAW)) by large is that He ((SAW)) did not belong to the family, He ((SAW)) was not from the children of Ishaq (A S), He (SAW) was from the children of Ismail(A S) so he was not from the “chosen group” ,He ((SAW)) was not one of them. When Allah Azzawajjal revealed the Quran and he revealed instructions, a lot of instructions were same which Allah gave to Musa (A S) .The sharia we follow a lot of it is a continuation of the sharia of Musa (A S).So as part of it Muhammad  ((SAW)) used to fast on the same days as the Jews, he used to pray in the same direction as the Jews did and even claimed the day of ashura the day of victory of Musa (A S ) as the day of fasting and celebration for the Muslims so there is a lot of parallel .Allah Azzawajjal exposes in surah baqarah that there was a knowledgeable group among the Jewish  community of Madinah that have actually done their home work and they looked to this messenger(S AW) and they found that every single description that they were given about him in there books ,so they came to the conclusion that in fact this “IS THE Messenger of Allah(S A W) “. And at the same time they came to a very strange conclusion also that “NO MATTER WHAT WE WILL NOT FOLLOW HIM, WE WILL NOT ACCEPT HIM AS A MESSENGER OF ALLAH”. Because they were kind of mad at God (naaouzobillah) that how can he sent a messenger at the wrong address.So in this surah what Allah Azzawajal does is that he exposed them, they actually start blaming Jibreel   (A S) that he must have gone to the wrong address.Allah defends Jibreel(A S) in this surahSay: Whoever is the enemy of Jibreel-- for surely he revealed it to your heart by Allah's command, verifying that which is before it and guidance and good news for the believers.    Whoever is the enemy of Allah and His angels and His apostles and Jibreel and Meekaeel, so surely Allah is the enemy of the unbelievers.And Allah reminds them that if there is any ounce of sincerity that He((SAW)) is not from another family you come from the same father Ibrahim. So the ayat of baqarah started reminding the Jewish community about the legacy of Ibrahim (A S).There is a conversation between Ibrahim (A S) and his childrenWhen Ibrahim (A S) asked his children a question and this is the same question asked by Yaqoob (A S) to his children  And this (submission to Allah, Islam) was enjoined by Ibrahim (Abraham) upon his sons and by Ya'qub (Jacob), (saying), "O my sons! Allah has chosen for you the (true) religion, then die not except in the Faith of Islam (as Muslims - Islamic Monotheism)."Ibrahim (A S) left a will for his children he gave them parting advice and so did Yaqoob (A S) .In others word Ibrahim (A S) his son Ishaaq and Ishaaq’s son YaqoobTwo generation difference , the grandfather long ago said something to his kids and generation later the grandson is saying the same exact thing to his kids on his death bed. The generational tradition is being continued, in on ayah three generations.Yaqoob’ s (A S) other name was Israel and he was saying to the son ‘s of Israel(bani Israel) “ Allah has chosen the deen for you do not you dare die except you are muslims” .They are being reminded that this is not something new to you this Islam is something your father gave to you, and he is given Islam by his father Ibraheem (A S).But now the time for warning is done Allah azzawajal has given them an exhaustive argument, opportunity after opportunity to come to truth and it became clear that these people are no longer interested in the truth , and now something else need to be said.Bani Israel was in the habit of causing pain to their messengers, they did not even spare the one who by Allah ‘s permission helped them to cross the water even he says in the Quran “Why do you cause me pain?”.They told him “do you take us as joke?” “Are you kidding?” this is how they talk to their messenger, the one the take so much pride in.And [recall] when Moses said to his people, "Indeed, Allah commands you toslaughter a cow." They said, "Do you take us in ridicule?" He said, "I seek refuge in Allah from being among the ignorant." But now Allah azza wajal is about to close the doors. Those who knew that Muhammad (S A W) is in fact the final messenger, but they still said “but c’mon He(S A W) still prays in the same direction as us, He (S A W) still fast in the same days as we do , so Allah is still kind 0f on our side”.What does Allah do? He changes the qiblaAnd now muslims moved to the madinah ,before the prophet (S A W) moved He used to pray to the kaaba in a way that the kaaba is in front of Him(S A W) and Al-aqsa is in front of Him(S A W) ,they are lined up together. Although original instruction was to pray to Al-aqsa,He (S A W) still has the house built by His father Ibrahim (A S) in front of Him(S A W).When He goes to madina that is impossible because when he prays towards al-Aqsa His back is toward Makkah.Allah gives Him (S A W) the instruction to turn His back and remarkably you know who is really offended by this ??? Bani Israel the jews of the madina.Ayaat areThe fools among the people will say: "What hath turned them from the Qibla to which they were used?" Say: To Allah belong both east and West: He guideth whom He will to a Way that is straight.    They said “What happened why you guys are praying in a different direction now”Here is very simple question if you believe that these muslims are not on the truth, then whether they pray east west north south why do you care??? You should not be offended at all.The fact that they get angry, they exposed the knowledge that they held within.Now when Allah says He guides whoever He wants to a straight path the muslims have just been guided towards the qibla The Kaaba, but you know in it there is a hint, there is a clue if Allah is guiding us to the Kaaba and at that moment when these ayaat came that Kaaba is surrounded by idols when Allah says he will guide the muslims to a straight path and he has just guided them to the Kaaba He has already dropped the hint that I will send you back to kaaba and you will be cleaning up that house , that will be the completion of your guidance because  I am guiding you back to that house. This became the capital of the ummah which is Al- Makkah, the place we converge,our faces converge every few hours across this world, it’s a symbol of us becoming a new Ummah. and then Allah added another salt on the wound after these ayat next ayaat areشَہۡرُ رَمَضَانَ ٱلَّذِىٓ أُنزِلَ فِيهِ ٱلۡقُرۡءَانُThe month of Ramadhan [is that] in which was revealed the QuranThat is the guidance for you  هُدً۬ى لِّلنَّاسِ وَبَيِّنَـٰتٍ۬ مِّنَ ٱلۡهُدَىٰ وَٱلۡفُرۡقَانِۚ فَمَن شَہِدَ مِنكُمُ ٱلشَّہۡرَ فَلۡيَصُمۡهُۖ وَمَن ڪَانَ مَرِيضًا أَوۡ عَلَىٰ سَفَرٍ۬ فَعِدَّةٌ۬ مِّنۡ أَيَّامٍ أُخَرَۗ يُرِيدُ ٱللَّهُ بِڪُمُ ٱلۡيُسۡرَ وَلَا يُرِيدُ بِڪُمُ ٱلۡعُسۡرَ وَلِتُڪۡمِلُواْ ٱلۡعِدَّةَ وَلِتُڪَبِّرُواْ ٱللَّهَ عَلَىٰ مَا هَدَٮٰكُمۡ وَلَعَلَّڪُمۡ تَشۡكُرُونَ (١٨٥)a guidance for the people and clear proofs of guidance and criterion. So whoever sights [the new moon of] the month, let him fast it; So the month of fast of Bani israel stopped, so it completely known that one ummah that had that status (bani Israel) is gone and now a new ummah is being inaugurated by two major things1.The change of the Kaaba.2.The instillation of the month of Ramadan  .These two things are identifying us as a distinct new nation completely separate from Bani Israel.Subhan Allah how Allah sets us apart and as a statement of setting us apart He honored us with the following ayah وَكَذَٲلِكَ جَعَلۡنَـٰكُمۡ أُمَّةً۬ وَسَطً۬ا لِّتَڪُونُواْ شُہَدَآءَ عَلَى ٱلنَّاسِ وَيَكُونَ ٱلرَّسُولُ عَلَيۡكُمۡ شَهِيدً۬اۗas We have appointed you a middle nation, that ye may be witnesses against mankind, and that the messenger may be a witness against youThat is how we made you a balanced nation a middle nation .. what is the mean of being the middle nation It’s a very important thing for us to understand. There are two nations that Allah alludes to in surah Fatiha  , when we are told to stay away from two paths that can go in the wrong way we are told to stay away from  غَيۡرِ ٱلۡمَغۡضُوبِ عَلَيۡهِمۡ وَلَا ٱلضَّآلِّينَ not of those who have evoked [Your] anger or of those who are astrayand I will give you one of the simplest explanation that in sha Allah You will remember and you will teach your children what these two paths means?Essentially our deen is truth, it is combination of two thingsOne, it is knowledge, it’s good, sound ,accurate knowledge.But just because you have knowledge is not enough you must know take that knowledge and change your life I  will call that Action.You have to have knowledge and that knowledge must transform into actions. These are the two fundamental of our religion.I will give you a simple example just to get the point across, just because you know fire burns it’s not enough !! now you must act and not touch it, it will be foolish to know something and act in contradiction to what you know, now you know the truth you must act upon it. These are the two conditions of a proper commitment to the straight path, the path we asked Allah for. now there is two kind of problems there is a person who knows a lot and does not act on it that’s one problem he has got one half of the picture.here is another problem there is person who really wants to act .wants to do good things but you know what the problem is He does not know much so he is doing things as best as his imagination tells himIt’s not really based on knowledge.So you have two problems before you either you have knowledge without actions or you have actions without knowledge.Now if you pay attention to Jews and the Christians that Allah talks about extensively in the Quran the problem of the Israelites was that they have a lot of knowledge, Allah testifies to their knowledge, they understood the book Those to whom We gave the Scripture know him as they know their own sons. But indeed, a party of them conceal the truth while they know [it].They even recognize this messenger ((SAW)) like they would their own children .if a kid starts crying in the back during the khutba you would know it’s mine that’s how well they recognize messenger ((SAW)) ,Allah testify their knowledge but their knowledge unfortunately did not transform into actions.What happened to the Christian side of things, Allah talks about them meaning well , doing good things and yet when it comes to even the most fundamental of knowledge the doors are closed, they are refusing to think, refusing to want to learn ,that becomes a problem on the other hand.We were made the middle nation, the nation that find the balance between two sides, the side of knowledge and the side of actions,that’s one of the many benefits of Allah calling us the middle nation .Now why were we made the middle nation, you would think that this is cause for celebrations, you are finally made a middle nation yes thats Awesome but Allah never gives an honor, He never gives a position except that He brings it with a lot of responsibility , so in the same ayah it’s not  next ayah , you cannot even finish this ayah without getting to the responsibility, this ayah is not just about the honor وَكَذَٲلِكَ جَعَلۡنَـٰكُمۡ أُمَّةً۬ وَسَطً۬اis the honorbut Allah did not stop at the honor then He piled on us the responsibility the burden that comes with being an Ummah . You cannot just say Alahmdullilah we are the Muslim Ummah!! that’s not enough, by the way if that is enough you would be just like Bani Israel who said we are the chosen people that’s enough for us we do not need to take any responsibility because we already get the boarding pass to jannah now we are set.That’s not the case with us ,what did Allah sayلِّتَڪُونُواْ شُہَدَآءَ عَلَى ٱلنَّاسِ وَيَكُونَ ٱلرَّسُولُ عَلَيۡكُمۡ شَهِيدً۬اۗI made you a nation so that you can be witnesses against all people , you and I have been made a member of this Ummah and are fundamental task as an Ummah is that we became witnesses against humanityyou know what that means it means that we carry Islam when we open our mouth and we carry Islam with our character the way we do business with people the kinds of neighbor we are the way we cross the street, the way we talk back , the way we deal with ignorancewe are constantly witnesses against humanity that this is what a Muslim is, coworkers are going to a party they are going to the bar they going to have bear and you are going to say no and you advise them too, that I know you are not Muslim but it’s not good for you Allah gave us the honor to be at the service of humanity we don't just look out for the good of the Ummah we look out for good of humanity that’s we are supposed to be, you are witnesses against people of what this truth is but if you and I , if our Islam, if our dedication to Allah does not go beyond the four walls of this masjid, if we are a different person outside and we are a different person in here and you would not recognize that person outside, you would not know is that the same guy at the masjid ?? Is he Muslim?? Oh my God…SubhanAllah!! this is a serious problem , and by the way(شُہَدَآءَ عَلَى ٱلنَّاسِ) this concept that is so Heavy in our deen, you know what that’s mean on judgment day when people that were around us , who have the ability to interact with us , that (SAW) us, our coworkers ,our friends , our neighbors even our non Muslim family, all of them will testify on judgment day that this Muslim who was my friend , my co worker , my neighbor, I never (SAW) a glimpse of Islam in him , he never brought it up it’s not my fault. They will have a case against us.even though they have their own responsibility but we also supposed to be witnesses against them because if we are not witness against them they will be witness against us, it’s  either one or the other, we going to court either way , we have to decide which side we are going to stand on . And if this is not bad enough, Allah Azzawajal adds another responsibility S A W the messenger is mentioned He (SWT)  said  وَيَكُونَ ٱلرَّسُولُ عَلَيۡكُمۡ شَهِيدً۬اۗ The messenger (SAW) will be a witness against you the ayah is still not done but I want to focus on this part of the ayah , it’s a very heavy part of the ayah. Similar ayat have occurred in the similar places in Quran One of the poets of Muhammad (SAW) among his companions Hassan Ibn e Sabit , beautiful voice,He (SAW) used to have Hassan ibn e sabit recite poetry to fire the troops up when they will go on military expedition. He (SAW) used to love him so much that one time He (SAW) called Hassan ibn e sabit and said “Hassan recite Quran to me”.Hassan ibn e sabit was shocked “messenger of Allah you want me to recite Quran to you it was revealed to you, He (SAW) said but I love to listen ” and so he starts reciting Quran he starts reciting surat un Nisa the forth surah and he is reciting and Messenger (SAW) is enjoying the recitation and he gets to an ayah How will it be when we bring a witness against every nation, we will bring you(meaning Muhammad (SAW)) as a witness against these nation( meaning Muslims) Hassan looks up , he looked at the face of the messenger (SAW) His face was drenched with tears and He (SAW) saying stop stop I can't take any more.What does it means that messenger will be a witness against us ? you know what that means ? it means the messenger of Allah (SAW) before he left this world , when His worldly life that component of His life came to an end He took a witness from all of us, did i deliver the message?? Did I do my job? And we all testified as an Ummah .. Yes !!The trust that was given to you ,you passed it on. Then He (SAW) said the one who is here better deliver this message to the one who is not here you better be witnesses to humanity and if we do not do this job guess who would be complaining about us on judgement day …. The Messenger of Allah (SAW).These people I left them a job, they knew this book and they did not carry it, it did not reflect in our personality ?? The mouth opened but it never had the word of Allah on it.One of the scariest places in the Quran Allah Azza wajjal talks about His messenger ((SAW)) andThe Messenger will say on that day My Master this nation of mine abandoned Quran. Now I want you to appreciate the weight of these words so I am going to skip a little bit and go on next ayah and share something with you, you know the qibla just changed right!!!! No one here will think it is a small event, billion of people on the earth for generations to come from that time now will be praying in different direction because of that one decision and now look what Allah says We have certainly seen the turning of your face, [O Muhammad], toward the heaven, and We will surely turn you to a qiblah with which you will be pleased. So turn your face toward al-Masjid al-Haram. And wherever you [believers] are, turn your faces toward it [in prayer]. Indeed, those who have been given the Scripture well know that it is the truth from their Lord. And Allah is not unaware of what they do.We (SAW) your face turned to the skyThe Messenger((SAW)) is in madinah  He is still praying towards Al aqsa his back is towards Makkah  and He misses the house that his father built, it hurts Him that He has to turn his back towards the house built by Ibrahim AS. It hurts His feelings but He does not complain to Allah , you know what He does he looks at sky that’s all He does. And Allah reveals the ayah which saysWe (SAW) you face turning to the skyNotice loved one among each other, when you go home, if somebody really loves you, your mother really loves you ,your wife really loves you (sometimes ).If there is an expression your face that is a little bit different your mother will say something is wrong ,you will say nothing maa nothing, she will say no no something is wrong ,I can see it in your eyes. And you would say I see in the mirror I see my eyes, I don’t see anything what do you see?? But that’s the nature of someone who truly loves.The messenger (SAW) did not complain , did not make dua all He did was look at sky and the ayah is revealed of the Quran that We (SAW) your face turning to the sky then for sure We swear by it, there is no doubt what so ever that we are turning your face ,We are turning you in a direction that pleases you .Allah is telling His messenger (SAW) that this qibla has changed se he (SAW) could be happy ,that is how much He loves His messenger(SAW). and imagine that messenger (SAW) ,he did not have to ask, compare this to Musa AS ,read surah Taha ,read surah Shu’araa,read them see how much musa As Asks Allah Oh Allah they have got a crime against me , they gonna go kill me, give me Haroon , my tongue won’t move, he has got a list of complaints, he has got a few problems before he goes back to Egypt, Allah takes all of those complaints and addresses them . But with His messenger (SAW) it’s something different, He did not even have to open his mouth , He just looked up and billions of people will pray in a different direction, so this man (SAW) will be pleased. That’s the relationship Allah has with His messenger (SAW), and if that messenger complains against you and me, what lawyer you and I going to get?? what case are we going to have ?? We have no case left!! so when he says وَيَكُونَ ٱلرَّسُولُ عَلَيۡكُمۡ شَهِيدً۬This job just becomes very serious And thus we have made you a just community that you will be witnesses over the people and the Messenger will be a witness over you. And We did not make the qiblah which you used to face except that We might make evident who would follow the Messenger from who would turn back on his heels. And indeed, it is difficult except for those whom Allah has guided. And never would Allah have caused you to lose your faith. Indeed Allah is, to the people, Kind and Merciful.And we did not keep you towards alaqsa except to see who would really follow the messenger (SAW), it was a test of loyalty .how it was a test of loyalty?? The muslims in madina were used to pray towards aqsa even before Islam, Now they have to turn ,it’s a test of their loyalty ,The muslims that were in makkah were used to pray in what direction? towards the qibla(kaaba), but when they came to madina they have to turn their back towards qibla  , it’s not just the prophet (SAW) turned His back but His companions have to turn their back too. but now they have to make their choice between what they have been doing their entire lives and following this man (SAW) and Allah said I have put this in place so that I can test everybody  The muhajiroon and the Ansaar I just wanted to see who is loyal, and then Allah azzaawajjal finally adds, it’s so beautiful The yahood were so offended that the qibla changed ,they came up with taunts for the muslims,so the say to the muslims , Heyy you have been praying in the wrong direction all these years han, all those prayers nothing counted ,and some muslims who do not know any better they even started worrying may be he is right ,because you know these were the Ribai, the scholar  that time so even if they are doing trash talk, it’s coming from a reputable source, you would first assume may be there is some weight to it, maybe they are right ,Oh my God all those prayers did not count?? And Allah says in the same ayah I will translate Allah will never waste your prayers, but actually that is not what the arabic says, the arabic says that Allah will never waste your faith.and there is a consensus among the companions of the prophet (SAW), and the consensus among every scholar that Iman means prayers in this ayah, Iman usually means faith. but the question is Allah could have said salat, Allah could have said that Allah would not waste your prayers but He said Allah would not waste your Iman  , you know why ?? Because to Allah your salat and your Iman are one and the same thing , thereisno difference , If there is no salat how can be there Iman, that is one and the same to Allah.certainly Allah is especially when it comes to all people He is compassionate and merciful ,Ra’auf in arabic is such a beautiful word , it means someone who knows what you are going through, Allah says He knows what you are going through He knows the troubles you have, you know when you try to talk to somebody about your problems the first thought that come in your mind that he is not going to understand , he does not understand what I am going through ,Allah lets you know about himself that He is Ra’auf  , if there is no one who knows what you are going through, He does !!!He is Raa’uf ,Raheem. What a beautiful conclusion to us being inaugurated as an ummah, but now I want to share with you a concluding message. What is the mean that we have become an Ummah and we share this responsibility?? It means many thingsbut I wanna leave you with one action item , one thingThe messenger delivered the message to  us and that message in summary is Allah’s book, He (SAW) delivered that book ,His (SAW) life mission was to deliver this book to the best of His ability and He did His job, He finished His job ,you and I not only have to deliver this book but to represent it’s teaching in our character , not only that but to be closer to Allah what better  way to get close to Allah by uttering the words that He himself gave you to utter . I can come up with a way to praise Allah on my own but I ll never be able to compete How Allah praises himself, I can come up with my own ways for asking Allah for things , but I will never teach myself a better way to ask that the way Allah told me to ask, ask like this.if Allah says ask like this you know like Adam AS, deep trouble sent down to the earth, he has got to ask for forgiveness, but Allah says He is so merciful ,Adam AS might come up with his own way of asking for forgiveness, but you know what Allah said that I will tell you the right words for asking forgivenessFirst he said say this, once you say this I will accept your tauba , that’s Allah ‘s book.The bottom line I have to share with you today, one of the big difference between us and Bani srael that they were nationalistic that kept them from the truth, Allah made this guidance for humanity you know what that means , when you and I say LAILAH ILLALLAH there is nothing between us stronger than this kalma, it is thicker than blood, it is thicker than the color of my skin it is thicker than  the country of my origin or the accent of my tongue it is thicker than the origin of my ancestors, none of its relevant now , what is relevant now is that you and I share LAILAH ILLALLAH, that is this ummah , thats what that means, and the way in we keep our unity intact and the way keep that unity strong , Allah azzawajal gives us a system by which we can stand like a unified army every few hours standing in a row not by rank of age or color ,just b LAILAH ILLALLAH you stand in a row, you dont get ahead of the other brother make straight line, and you do what when you get united you recite Allah’s word ,so if you and I stand in salat and we do not understand Allah’s word ,we listen to the Quran being and we don't get it, it’s not our fault, we are not arab,I am not arab either ,it’s not our fault the vast majority of this ummah is not arab,so easy argument is that Heyy I am not arab it’s not my fault ,that’s why I don't know the Quran that’s why I listen to it and sounds kind of nice ,but I don't know what that means, I ll just read translations, honestly ask yourself this questionWho in the world is going to write a translation that will compete with Allah’s word?? Who is going to do that?? who is going to translate the beauty, the perfection , the guidance , the strength?? the effect of Allah’s word,these are Allah’s word, there are no alternatives, I am trying to translate the ayat for you but you got to taste that sweetness yourself, when that comes to mind and we all understand that learning this language for the sake of being able to say to Allah ,I didn’t learn this language so I can chit chat with Imam sometimes ,I didn’t learn this language so I can order the shwarma in the moroccan restaurant,I learn this language so when I make salat then I can talk to you ,that you are talking to me, that there is a conversation between us, and that conversation you know when the Quran is in our heart,it’s effecting us and we are understanding it, then unity becomes easy,you are already physically together now your hearts are together you are unified by the same message ,right now that’s not same message we are understanding in salat,it’s a tragedy ,it’s  a catastrophe we need to work on this,and I give you some historical backdrop and I am done.I tell you that the greatest contribution to the study of arabic language was made by non arabs, you know the first compilation of arabic word was done by a man Seebaway, He compile arabic grammar as we study it today was non arab, the greatest mufasiroon who talked about the linguistic beauty and perfection of the Quran , they were non arabs, the vast majority of this ummah population wise is non arab and the majority of scholarship of this ummah is non arab just by statistics , some of our greatest scholars are sitting far from arabia to this day, what Allah did is remarkable He took arabic language and instead of making it the language of the people from a certain race from a certain background , He made it the language of His own,the language of His book, so messenger (SAW) was asked on one occasion who is an arab? you would say people from yaman sham syria jordan these are arabs, the arabic is just a language Sohaib ar romi comes from Rome he is roman, Salman al farsi comes from Persia, Bilal al Habshi is from Abyssinia , but when they speak arabic, when the understand Quran ,by the prophet’s (SAW) definition they are arab, and I am emphasizing on the arabic not that we should get rid of the language we have , no no thats not our history, buts it’s the common second language of all muslims, it’s a fundamental of all muslims , at least at the level that you can enjoy your salat , you can know what's going on between you and Allah’s word at least that much, then you ask yourself and question comes to mind it’s going to be hard, I cannot do it  , it’s  too much I tried on time and as soon as I did rafa nasb and jarr I am like innalillahiwainnailaihirojiun“I cannot do it, I am bad at English grammar How I am going to do that  , it’s way too much work “ just keep two things in your mind and I promise you , you will have success , come look me up if it does not work.Two thingsOne thing is the promise of the messenger (SAW).Second thing is the promise of Allah.First thing is the promise of the messenger (SAW) it occurs in Bukhari “The expert in the Quran is ranked among the highest angels”.“The experts” not you and me , He is way up there among the highest angels , these are the angels that record revelations by the way …… Top Angels.and the one who reads the Quran and stumbles in it He read and can’t get the A’ain out of his throat, tajweed teachers say Qaaf He says Kaaf, A’ain he says Ain.It’s not working, and it’s very hard on him it does not come easy for him, He has got twice, the experts got rank among the top angels and the one who is struggling is twice that.That’s the prophets (SAW) promise.so if you are having a hard time learning arabic … congratulations!!! So just don’t give up you are just eating up the reward.And here is the second promise that is from Allah.He repeats his promise three times , you know why Quran repeats something multiple times, when someone needs to hear something more than once , Allah says that more than once .maybe it’s did not hit you the first time , he says that again , maybe it did not hit you the second time he says that again ,just like your mother .. Do your homework!!! do your homework !!!DO YOUR HOME WORK!!!!oh you mean do my homework ?? it take a while …. What does Allah Azzawajjal Say He says We made the Quran incredibly easy.Now He did not say what about the Quran ? is it memorization of the Quran? is it the tajweed of the Quran ? is it tafseer of the Quran ? is it the language of the Quran ?? He did not restrict it to any one of these things. which means what … Everything !!Everything about the Quran !! Who made it easy ? not me!! not you!! not your teacher!! not a curriculum!! not a book!!ALLAH made it easy.. But then He put a condition on it.It’s easy but with one condition, with the intent of remembering Allah.If you really really want to remember Allah, and you say to Allah that you gave that salah so that I can remember you .Allah says to musa AS establish salah so that you can remember me.and if you really want to remember Allah like He deserves to be remembered and that is your motivation for learning anything about the Quran , if that’s your motivation then Allah’s guarantee that He will make it easy not anybody else’s . that is His promise and you call on Him on this promise Ya Allah you promised that you will make it easy , I am going to try again , I know I tried five six times before but I am going to try again ,as your promise I just got reminded.But He ends the ayah with a challenge and I will end on this challenge … as an Ummah one thing that will unite us is the unified love of this Quran, to encourage each other to learn more of it, remind each other of it, learn it together .Alhamdullilah that Imam has started the arabic program take part in it , participate it in full fledge , some of you have this like crazy notion that… yeah In sha Allah I m going to go abroad and study arabic , I am going to go Syria and jordan , you know good for you but if you are saying so for fifteen years, how about when that time comes you do it but right now there something right at your door step that Allah will ask you about, why did you take advantage of that , what is on youtube that is so important that you cannot come to the masjid and learn?? What is so important at home that you do not have time for Allah’s book? What is it? Do not make excuses !! Allah will know . you do not have to explain yourself to me and to the Imam and to anyone else but we better not have excuses before Allah azzawajjal.He says     “Is there anyone out there that is going to put little bit of effort to remember”.You know what that means that I made it so easy you do not have to put a lot of effort . You only have to give little sincerity and you will see what I do for you.That’s Allah’s promise to us and He says that three times.. Why because we need to heat that three time over, the way to unite this Ummah , to really be an Ummah is to be united.and Allah says “hold on to Allah’s rope tightly”when we hold down the same rope we do not have a choice but to be next to each other because it’s the same rope , that rope of Allah is the Quran .The more we are tied to the Quran , the more we are tied to each other it’s the glue that bonds us.I sincerely pray to Allah that He opens up opportunity for you  to become a student of this book, to learn more of this book , to memorize more of this book , to enjoy this book being recited in every single salat, I pray to Allah that He makes it easy for you to learn and He keeps your intention sincere and your motivation High,I pray that He gives you the ability to lead your family to learn Allah’ book and continually growing in their knowledge and their love of this wonderful words of Allah Azzawajjal .Ayat Links:http://quranexplorer.com/Quran/Default.aspxhttp://quran.com/
