
Islam and Why Muslim Men and Women Can’t Be Just Friends – Nouman Ali Khan on the Deen ShowThe Deen Show Host: Bismillah Alhumdolillah Assalamoalikum Peace Be with you greetings of peace to everybody all around the world who is tuned into the Deen Show. Your friend might have told you about the Deen Show your family member, your cousin, your neighbor and you tuned in because you heard that they talk about serious issues, purpose of life, where you come from, where are you going to when you die ; a crucial question that all of us should be asking because death is a reality and we don’t want to take this life as a joke. This is not a joke. So we have our next special guest who has been with us before Nouman Ali Khan in the Deen Show to discuss some very serious issues that are on the minds of all  people regarding baseball, football, clubs, night clubs, dance and all these other things distracting us. Is that the way to go? Is that the way to have peace and happiness in life or is there more to life? Find out answers to all these questions and more. We come back here on the Deen Show. We will be right back.The Deen Show Host: Peace Be on to you Assalamoalikum.Nouman Ali Khan: Walaikumassalam. Peace Be on to you as well.The Deen Show Host: It’s good to have you back here again on the Deen Show.Nouman Ali Khan: To be here. You are actually here.The Deen Show Host: Alhumdolillah the Bayyinah Institute.Nouman Ali Khan: Alhumdolillah.The Deen Show Host: We talked about it in our first show about the institute that you have, teaching people the Arabic language. Are you teaching people how to be an Arab or why are you teaching them Arabic? Nouman Ali Khan: Well yeah people should be Arabs all of them. No No No. We are trying to learn Arabic language as best as we can here to be able to study the Quran and actually even beyond that studying Islam more in depth.The Deen Show Host: Okay. Before we get in to that we need to scare some people off because some people when they hear Islam, they get turned away so we want to start off with some baby steps .When people hear about Brad Pitt they want to know about his gold fish or what Jalen Rose is doing. You know facebook, fifty cents.Nouman Ali Khan: Wait Brad Pitt has a gold fish?The Deen Show Host: No I am just saying that if it was then they would want to know. What is the purpose of life? This is a crucial question and we should be asking this question. Why is it important to ask a question or reflect about the purpose of life and where you are going when you die? Why is it so important?Nouman Ali Khan: You know its… Most people don’t ask themselves that question and I am very happy at the institute that we have people that have made such a big sacrifice in life , trying and studying here; leaving careers and  having put their studies on hold ,convinced their families of making this sacrifice which is actually in it and itself a proof that they have a very clear picture of what their purpose in life is . May Allah accept these kinds of efforts from them and especially the youth that are here. But you know this question is not something that everybody cares to ask about because the answer is difficult and the answer requires a lot of change in one’s lifestyle. Right. So it’s something that really on one’s own time if Allah blesses somebody if God blesses somebody to have the conscious mind to think and to put break on everything else in life and just stop and think. This question will lead us to some very serious consequences and some very serious changes in life but as important as this question is it is probably the most ignored question in most people’s lives.The Deen Show Host: Why does everything else seems more important than the Creator? What HE wants us to do? You know these things are just like for some people just fairy tales. You know their parents told them. You know for some people for many people baseball is more important you know. Who want the super ball? What that girl is wearing? What that boy is saying? All these things that really at the end of the day is like a false reality that people have created that is really a false perception of life. Why are people are more entertained by that instead of these more important topics that we are talking about?Nouman Ali Khan: I think to some extent all of us are like that to some extent. And it’s hard to avoid things that are happening around us in the world. But basic thing ; you know the basic matter boils down to what you can see and what you can’t . When we talk about God, the Creator, the Sustainer, the Provider, we talk about the afterlife and we talk about one’s purpose in life and where they are going after they go into the ground and all these sorts of things ; these are all matters of not the seen but the unseen.  People actually do not see the consequences of things like not praying or things like eating whatever they want or saying whatever they want. They don’t see those consequences right away . And people who even warn them about these things tell them that the real consequences of these things are coming much later. So if somebody lies right now their tongue does not get cut off.  Somebody does something wrong they do not see the impact of their action right away unless they are like robbing the bank and the cop shows up or something you know. So you don’t see the consequences of your action in this life immediately. And that is another reason to procrastinate , to put it off and this is a part of human nature in some sense. We love to work on things that have immediate rewards and we like to put things off which have long term rewards. I mean I can give you a simpler example than just religion. You know you have a workout program you have a diet program and if you stay on this program for 60 days or 90 days or 6 months then you will lose these many pounds then you will feel much better about yourself etc. You work out the first day, the second day you see the results or no? You don’t .You work for a week you see results? Not really. You go for a month you barely see any results. What most people will do? The goal is way too far away out there. People have become so accustomed  to get the results right away. Anything that is even a little bit long term we say it’s not for me/ give me a short cut /give me something else . The things that you made reference to ; entertainment , different kinds of partying and all these kinds of stuff. What is this? This instills gratification. I want something to happen for me and it is happening right away. I don’t want to wait for it to happen and this is at the heart of the problem. You know the human problem of not having enough patience and wanting to go. Just thinking now live in the moment and these are actually the advertising taglines on which millions of dollars are spent on ‘Live in the moment’ ‘you only live once’ ; ‘obey your thirst’ ‘whatever’ right?. These are the people that get PhDs in marketing and come up with these small taglines which actually become philosophies for people to live. I have friends whose probably the whole life you can summarize as if they obey their thirst. That is all that&apos;s there,just a spirit walking around. You know that’s what they are. So what we have to instill in to ourselves, into the company around us and slowly around our friends and people that we know is this idea that there is more to life than just these immediate pleasures that you are pursuing that leave you empty anyway. The Deen Show Host: We are trying to just jump around because time is short and hopefully one of the things that we discussed will resonate to some people. Some people will be able to relate to one thing rather than another like the letter that we got that we discussed on the show from a sister who got caught off guard and  got lit away and she was hypnotized by the guy ,remember that letter? And she was asking for advice what to do. Give her some wonderful advice (and through her to many others by the Permission of Allah). So let’s talk about the sisters  a little and our sisters in humanity who now at times , instead of seeking attention from the Creator of the Heavens and the Earth are seeking attention from the boys. So instead of wearing more they are wearing less. And you see one person came out to me and said ‘man I just saw my family member on facebook and I could not believe it how do I talk about it or do some kind of show. I consider this video because when I saw her she was like this and everything was off . I knew her when she was 13 14 and now let’s give her name Jazz okay. So Jazz is like this and it appears like this or the other. And this man is like man I feel so sad in the heart because he knows that she is going to get by the wolves. Man is out for one thing he is hungry and she is going to be just a captive enslaved and a prisoner that is out there in this scandalized society. Nouman Ali Khan: My advice to my sisters is complicated and it’s difficult for me to talk about it especially because I am a father and I have four daughters myself and my daughters are getting bigger and bigger actually ten years old running around here somewhere. And it is something I think and worry about a lot. The Deen Show Host: It is scary.Nouman Ali Khan: Oh yeah it is very scary but we have to… one of the things that our religion anchors us in is to not get caught up in to symptoms and to understand the disease. The Deen Show Host: Understand the disease.Nouman Ali Khan: Yeah. And so like the way somebody dresses ,the way somebody talks, his behavior; these are all symptoms. That is not targeting the disease. So for instance, some of the viewers  may have teenage kids that were brought up religiously and then they hit a certain point in life and then they just became a different person all of a sudden and now you can’t control how your daughter dresses or where your son goes and things like that and now you try to get the Imam to give Khutbah about how important hijab is how important good company is and  but those things ; they just fall on deaf ears .why? because you are trying to target a symptom and you are not addressing the disease. The disease is something that can’t be discovered without conversation especially with Muslim youth. Muslims are kind of off the beaten path in youth. Can’t even sometime tell if they are Muslims or not they way they dress. It is really easy to pass judgment and it’s really hard to slow down and sit each of these people down and actually have a heart to heart conversation and say what’s going on. Why do you think this is the good way to go and you will hear things like I can do whatever I want , I am a free person and you can’t tell me what to do and you will hear all these arguments and we should actually respectfully hear those arguments and try to address each one of them one at a time. And they should be addressed this way. One of the biggest phenomenon that atleast I have seen amongst Muslim sisters who have left a modest lifestyle  and have chosen a different way of living  One of the most common things that I have seen is isolation; they have low self esteem;  there were people constantly putting them down. In some cases ,actually recently ,I saw a father telling his daughter that she is too ugly nobody is going to marry her and this is the  father a dauhter;  I mean the place where you are supposed to gain your self esteem is the place your self esteem is being destroyed . Then there are matters of feeling judged like you know everybody has good days and bad days right. So she had a bad day and she doesn’t wear her hijab and all the sisters around her bounced on her ,what you are doing this is so wrong etc. And she says that these people are so judgmental and she distances herself from what have been a good company anyway . We don’t want to just tell them that they are doing something wrong ; most of them already know that’s wrong. Our purpose is not to judge but our purpose is to find ways to soften hearts and to bring them back. We do want to be honest about the message I don’t want to water down the conversation but at the same time we have to first feel for these people and especially their families to not be impatient and impulsive. Make time for these people and don’t cut them off they are already cut off enough you know.The Deen Show Host: We still have to love. We got to love. That’s what we are doing. We love them don’t we? Nouman Ali Khan: Yes of course The Deen Show Host: That’s why we are sharing because we care. The Deen Show Host: Tell us now can men and women, can boys and girls can they be friends? Can the girl like have this confidence that look I am just going to hang out with the guy and you know the girls are jealous of me. You know he will give me prom. He is nice to me actually he praises me he is always telling me sweet things he is so nice you know. I am going to do nothing with him we are just hanging out. Can this happen? Nouman Ali Khan: It cannot happen it’s happening that’s for sure. It should not happen that is also for sure. The Deen Show Host: But they are going to be like we are just friends. They are going to stay like that. Can boys and girls be just friends? Nouman Ali Khan: No. Boys know that all too well. They won’t admit it but they know it very well. Sometimes girls don’t and that’s what I worry about for my sisters, my daughters  that sometimes they don’t realize the elaborate scheming of men. The Deen Show Host: Elaborate scheming of men?Nouman Ali Khan: Yeah. So we are just meeting because you know we are just lab partners or we are discussing a project at he school, the MSA, the convention, we are discussing Islam you know and these the sisters won’t see through it at all sometimes and actually we have to raise the level of awareness and caution among our sisters. So that they… It’s no harm you are going to interact with men that’s going to happen right and in the business world in the school setting at the work setting it’s going to happen. You are going to have interaction but what are some guidelines that you have to respect that can make close interactions healthy as opposed to unhealthy. I actually personally believe we should have guided interactions between brothers and sisters especially young boys and young girls as they are coming up guided by the elders so they would know how to respectfully interact with one another also because you know in this society if we try to, for example, if I cut my daughters off and they don’t ever talk to anybody else right. Eventually they will go to college eventually they will go out in the workplace or go to the airport or travel or this and that and there will be other people around. I don’t want them to be shocked when they see the outside world. You know keeping our children in bottles is not going to save but at the same time letting them loose and say hey you can do anything  is also insanity. We have to find ways of guiding interactions between brothers and sisters and especially teenage boys and girls . It’s okay if they have interaction with each other so long as it is respectful and the boys are trained where to keep their gaze and how to keep the conversation business only and  how to ensure that they recognize when they are crossing the line and the elders are supposed to be there to guide those conversations. A lot of time in youth settings even in religious youth settings there is no older figure shepherding the conversation or shepherding the interaction. Like youth groups exist and the guys and the girls are all bunch of teenagers and they are running their own thing because youth should be leaders. Woah yes in most things but in some things you guys are ridiculous and you need elder people to be there older folks to be there. This  unnecessary interaction between men and women , you know where this happens? it happens with people who spend a lot of time together. So you go to college with some people or you go to work with some people and you know there is lunch and there are meetings and this and that and it’s regular and what  does that do? It gives shaytan an opportunity to may be not convince you one time but hammer away you  1% at a time and it adds up until it becomes a very very big problem. Just the other day I got a phone call , a very typical one;  usually I don’t take these kinds of phone call but this ,I just guess I was in a bad mood so I took it. So the guy calls me and says you know I am going to this college and there is this girl she takes all the classes that I take. Actually it is the other way round I am pretty sure but that is nice he put it this way. So she takes all the classes that I take. Yeah ahan. And you know we discuss classes, work and career because she is in the same major. Hmm and I have been talking to her for a couple of years and I haven’t done anything wrong. I was like yeah sure u haven’t. And then he says you know she just told me the other day that she is considering a proposal and my heart sunk and I don’t know what to do . . . what should I do? And this guy is  in this deep shock that she had a proposal. Did you propose  to her?He was like no. We were just friends. I didn’t realize that we were more than that until she told me  that there was a proposal.The Deen Show Host: So his heart is getting attached.Nouman Ali Khan: Yeah and I said Dude What do you want to do? You want to marry her? Then talk to her parents. Go. But there is already another proposal and I think she likes the guy or something and I don’t feel like life is worth living anymore. So I was like okay here is the first thing that you can do go and tell your parents. And he is like 21 or 22 years old and I told him go and tell your parents. And he was like no I can’t!! they’ll kill me!!. And I said okay. So u can’t live without her and you are not getting up to tell your parents. No. Why were you spending so much time with her? I just liked her. She was the real friend. She used to listen to me….. All this stuffLook if you go around … did you know religiously  what you were doing was wrong? Going out with her, sitting and eating fries with her at McDonald’s is wrong. You knew that or not? Yeah. Well now you know why Allah says don’t do it because it hurts you know. There are consequences of this in the akhira but emotionally people get scarred. People get really messed up and they don’t realize the price they pay emotionally even in this world.I would argue even it’s not fair to the people that these kinds of individuals will eventually marry because they are not emotionally attached purely to the person they marry. Their mind is somewhere else and they are reminiscing about somebody else and it’s not fair to another person so even from an emotional point of view it’s unfair you know. The other thing is in this culture of dating and seeing somebody, then leave that one and go date another one;  you just learn to become insensitive to other peoples’ feelings and at the end of the day you just turn into a customer looking out for yourself. First time a guy gets dumped he is depressed the next time he is like I am going to be the one doing dumping you know. So he is just like I better not hurt myself rather be dishing out and taking  So you just become more and more inhumane and that leaves you incapable of having a family because at the heart of a family is love and compassion and courtesy and worrying about somebody else .You become bankrupt in those feelings as a  result of these  petty and  shallow relationships.The Deen Show Host: Absolutely. Did you get to see a video that not yet some Muslims made and we say not yet Muslims because everyone has the potential to submit to the one Creator and not HIS creation and that is what a Muslim is. So they did some video on a college campus and the topic was can boys and girls be friends. Did you get a chance to see this video?Nouman Ali Khan: No No I didn’t see it.The Deen Show Host: And they were interviewing and saying hey what do you think that can you just be to the guys can you just be friends with the girls and just like in the end no and its very interesting video. So they see it’s not coming from our perspective but it is obvious truth.Nouman Ali Khan: Yeah.The Deen Show Host: Okay would you say , Islam that is based on complete adherence to what God Almighty the Creator wants us to do is the best of defense from many of these evil vices. You do Islam you avoid alcoholism you do Islam you avoid gambling you do Islam you avoid these heart breaks and all the things that just flip your life upside down. So by doing what God wants us to do is the best self defense and also a prevention better than the cure.Nouman Ali Khan: Yeah I would say that but I would also say that somebody would hear that and counter argument that a lot of Muslims are into these things .They have Islam. Islam lives in people when they have reinforcement .What young people especially need is to surround themselves with other people that are trying to protect themselves too. They are trying to guard their chastity, their dignity, their shame, their religion at the same time. You know you could have only Muslim friends and still be the most messed up person in the world there is plenty of that going around already. So picking your friends carefully and picking friends that will safeguard your own Islam. This is actually the key. Islam itself of course is the solution but Islam lives in people. Islam does not live in books ;it lives in people so you need to find people that are living it and to surround yourself with them .This, is I will argue the best defense. The Deen Show Host: We are going to be right back with more. Take a break here with Nouman Ali Khan here at the Bayyinah Institute on the Deen Show. We will be right back.The Deen Show Host: Back here on the Deen Show with Nouman Ali Khan and we love the people. Islam says love all mankind so we want to share because we care believe me we honestly care. Do we? Nouman Ali Khan: YeahThe Deen Show Host: So we see these things out there obviously. You know they really is as the last and final messenger told the mankind , “if you see an evil change it with your hand if not speak against it or at least hate it in your heart”. We see a lot of these things which are not good for the human beings it upsets you it saddens you so we hope by doing this program that people who listen tcan benefit and  implement some of these advices so they can save themselves from these heart breaks. Women cannot get used and abused by men, men can save themselves from just being an animal out there on the hunt. Why are men like this? Nouman Ali Khan: Allah says in the Quran that the most important desire put inside men was desire for women.The Deen Show Host: Allah says this, the Creator says this.Nouman Ali Khan: Allah says this.The Deen Show Host: So this is true.Nouman Ali khan: And he made a list of things that we are tempted by.The Deen Show Host: What is this list?Nouman Ali Khan: So first I will say it in the Arabic and then in English.”Zuyyina linnasi hubbuashshahawati mina annisa-i walbaneenawalqanateeri almuqantarati mina aththahabiwalfiddati walkhayli almusawwamati wal-anAAamiwalharthi thalika mataAAu alhayatiaddunya wallahu AAindahu husnualmaab” (Beautified for people is the love of that which they desire - of women and sons, heaped-up sums of gold and silver, fine branded horses, and cattle and tilled land. That is the enjoyment of worldly life, but Allah has with Him the best return.” (Al-Imran:14)Desire of or love or temptation that comes out of women ,having sons or manpower that is to say even and piles of horse and gold and silver which just means wealth. We want to have tons and tons  of savings even if we can if we don’t live long enough to spend all the wealth we have we still like to have piles upon piles and we like to have the transaction of cattle (according to classical language) but the cattle was what? It was your business back in the day like people loved having a business and they are discussing their business. What we people talk about in the break? Work, a new technology that is coming out the new trends at the hospital. You know if you are a doctor you are talking about the new medical trends, if you are a tech you are talking about the new update of the software or the new language that is coming out or new trends in the app development center or whatever. This is your An’aam(cattle) and then what is hars? It is the crop. Now what is the cattle used for? It is used to produce the crop so the return on investment is the hars. So people&apos;s love begins with the desire for women ,then sons, then manpower then a lots and lots of wealth then how do you get that wealth; business, return on investment. This was the list that was made in the third Surah of the Quran and at the top of this list what was there? Women. Now if you look at this list people will go through any means to acquire wealth , some of the most corrupt practices in the world today are the result of multibillion dollar industries that don’t care about the right and wrong;  they just care about the bottom line and we are seeing that in the news everyday right. The same if that is the case if there is an urge inside a human being and if there is no guidance then he has no breaks on how he attains that appetite. I compare it to an animal. An animal feels hungry, an alligator feels hungry a lion feels hungry what does it eat? Whatever it can catch ,whatever!. It doesn’t think about the consequences or if it’s going to hurt something else . It has got an appetite it has going to be met. Well if it comes to this temptation in men then if there is no guidance if there is no humanity left then you will do whatever it takes to fulfill that appetite . And you will… it doesn’t matter if it hurts somebody else, doesn’t matter if it corrupts and destroys a society or ruins families. None of that matters. All that matters is your urge. That is the only thing that you see. You don’t see anything else. So I don’t see any difference between people who are addicted to these kind of temptations and people that are multibillion dollar executives who make  these deals which destroy entire villages in the third world because of their bottom line or contaminate water supplies  because they are going to produce  some soda or something worth  billions of dollars of profit. There is no difference between them  and animals ; because at the end of the day you have a desire you fulfill it you don’t care about the consequences. This is why the way we are we are and those desires Allah put in us and HE also gave us the breaks that is what guidance is, it holds you back and keeps you balanced so you don’t turn up into an animal. When the guidance is gone then that’s all you and I are then. The Deen Show Host: Couple of things that I just want to mention before we close.Nouman Ali khan: Yeah.The Deen Show Host: When I asked you about Bayyinah and before that for the … because we really catered to those who know nothing about the purpose of life.Nouman Ali Khan: Yeah.The Deen Show Host: Or out there. Some sister might just have came back home and you know look we keep it real on the Deen Show . So she has come back and our show caught her late at night and she is coming from the strip club she is the striper. The guy is coming from a night club he is smoking weed he is drinking bamboos and now they just tuned in. They watch a couple of shows and they like this idea of just worshiping the Creator and not His Creation. They begin to fall sick of their lust and desires. They want to change their lives but they don’t know from where to start. What advice do you have in just in short?Nouman Ali Khan: The … I mean the fact that they are making time to watch a show like this is a very good sign.The Deen Show Host: Good sign.Nouman Ali Khan: Yeah it’s a very good sign that goodness lies in their hearts and the first starting point would be for any person that immersed in a lifestyle like that, that you should not look what you have done already in the past and you say that it’s too late for me. There is no such thing as “too late” ; There is way that you yesterday could determine what your tomorrow was going to be. You should not let it be the case. Also don’t let your friends and the people around you, determine who you are. You are your own man you are your own woman. You just can’t say everybody surround me is a certain way therefore I have to be this way and this is all what I know of. That’s not what who you are. You are greater than all of those things. You are created for a higher purpose than all of those things. Making time  just for reflection, making time for pursuing searching more, making time to seek out people that can teach you better is probably the first big step anybody can take. If you can find, for example, a local mosque to go and ask some questions, send you questions so you can connect them to people that may be in that area because that needs to happen. To tap into actually living resources , to ask questions about the religion and things like that would be the next healthy step. It would be a good step in the right direction and one thing at a time but really you should not assume that … first of all take the matter seriously as you keep saying it’s an urgent matter it shouldn’t wait so if you are blessed enough to at least be exposed to something about the message at least give it some more time and some more resource and find out if it  really is the right thing and if it is the right thing for you. And the second is to give it to … don’t put this off because you don’t know how long you and I are going to be around so that we can take proactive action. The Deen Show Host: Okay in the last minute that we have , tell us about  your organization, the Bayyinah Institute. Nouman Ali Khan: Bayyinah Institute is a complicated organization which … I’ll simplify it for you. The point of it is two things the vision of it was to make Arabic easy for Muslims to study and for Quran to be made easy for Muslims to study. The point the original purpose of it was to facilitate that education for Muslims in America that was the original goal. Alhumdolillah slowly it is expanding around the world. As the growth of the organization grew so did some of its goals so that it’s not just an introductory education in Arabic and an introductory education in the Quran but actually now the moment we are sitting in the campus is actually now we are having pretty advanced program in Arabic and Alhumdolillah it is the only one of its kind in America where our students are studying for a little over nine months full time and they are studying the Arabic language and In shaa Allah Ta’ala as best as I and my colleagues can teach it ; so that they have a very good sound grounded understanding of the language; enough that they can read the Quran or read Hadith and read the Arabic language or the Islamic text in their original form without translation and understand them in depth.The Deen Show Host: ThieBayyinah word is taken from the Quran. Nouman Ali Khan: The Bayyinah is word of Quran and the way the Prophet (saw) that’s the Hadith right. So that they can have the first hand taste of that because you know something is always lost in translation and some beauty and some depth is always missing and so the point of this training is to give students the power to, at least taste some of that depth for themselves and then the idea actually one of the first expressions that I taught in the program this year I want to share with you is I’ll give you a small example and I will conclude. You are passing by and you see a well and you are not that thirsty back in the day obviously now a days nobody will look into a well but back in the day you kept passing by a well. You don’t think twice. you go on. Then somebody else passes by and says that maybe I should have a look so they take a little like they dip a finger and they taste it a little and they realize this is actually a well and the water in it is the water from paradise from heaven its incredible it is nothing like they have tasted ever before. Now if you had a little taste what you want to do?The Deen Show Host: Want more.Nouman Ali Khan: You want to get more. The guy who never got the first taste to begin with, what will he do? Just go on his way he would not even think twice. The point here is you know to give students a little bit of the taste and if I can do that successfully and my colleagues can do that well then what they will want to do? They will take the second and the third on their own. The Deen Show Host: Absolutely.Nouman Ali Khan: And the people who never embark on this journey wouldn’t ever know what they are missing on. So this the beauty of this language and the beautiful book that Allah has given us. The more we explore it the more beautiful we find it. The Deen Show Host: So people can find you at Bayyinah.com ?Nouman Ali Khan: bayyinah.comThe Deen Show Host: Thank you once again and may the Creator of the Heavens and the Earth may reward you for being with us.Nouman Ali Khan: Thank you for coming and we are really happy to have you here Alhumdolillah and these students are happy to see you and in Shaa Allah we will get time to interact with you afterwards also. The Deen Show Host: In shaa Allah. Thank you very much. And thank you sincerely for being with us here on the Deen Show. It’s not too late until death comes. Death is a reality so take this moment that you have in life the God Almighty has given you and do what the God Almighty wants from you. Ask him for the guidance. HE sent messengers throughout the mankind to guide humanity and they came with the guidance. The last and final messenger for mankind the Prophet Muhammad P.B.U.H. It’s all there. it has been preserved and saved. Quran the word of God is a blueprint for mankind but if you don’t know then how you are going to live it and if you don’t ask how should I receive so do it right now call on God alone not HIS creation we don’t need 999 from you to send you genie in the bottle to send you some lucky charm. No. we just need you to ask the Creator simple request God guide me guide me guide me and HE will facilitate away. Give us a call upon 1800662 Islam if you have few other questions. We will see you next time if God wills. Until then peace be with you.                           
