



Hazrat Baba Tajuddin of Nagpur 

BY DR. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF

 After God-realization accord≠ing to Sufis, some saints are endowed with Shane-Nabuwwat (potentiality of Prophethood) and others possess only Shane-Wilayat (potentiality of saint≠hood). The former class of saints owe a duty towards the world and are the real saviours of mankind. They are known as Kutubs or Sadgurus. The latter, though perfect in the enjoyment of God-realization, have no duty to per≠form towards humanity. Their bodily presence, however, is a source of divine light and bles≠sing which automatically affects and benefits the whole creation. 

The Qutubs or Sadgurus who are the leading lights of the whole hierarchy of saints, are always five in number, and they are referred to by the Sufis as Pan≠jatan (the five bodies), although the laity restrict the usage of the term Panjatan to the Arabian Prophet and his immediate suc≠cesssors. One amongst these five perfect ones belonging to the first quarter of the present century was 

Hazrat BabaTajuddin of Nagpur whose life sketch is given in the following pages. 

    Hazrat Baba Tajuddin was the only child of his parents, born on 27th January 1861 at Kamptee, Central Provinces. At birth he was silent, practically dead, not showing any signs of life. In order to rouse him to life he was branded by fire, on the forehead and temples. This silent entry into the world was quite in contrast with the noise Tajuddin later created therein by the high quality of his saintliness and the quantity of his miracles. 

    The parents of Baba Tajuddin originally belonged to the Madras Presidency, and both the mother and the father were of military extraction. The fatheróMahomed Badruddinóheld the military rank of Subedar in the Madras regiment and this military service brought about a change of abode of the family when the Madras regiment was transferred to 


the British military camp at Kamptee, and it is here that Tajuddin first saw the light of day. 

Strange as it may seem, the inscrutable hand of Providence seldom allows the parents, wife or children of Perfect Masters to live contemporaneously with them or outlive their spiritual manifes≠tation on earth. Explore the myth≠ology of any religion, and it will be found that the majority of Perfect Masters were celibates and the few that were married left no progeny behind, except such ones that enhanced the spiritual reputation of the parents. The obvious explanation for this enigmatic position is that, for perfection connoting the acme of renunciation and non-attachment (Tarko-Tajarrud), even the most noble and chaste feeling of filial duty and parental love is an encumbrance. Hence the divine arrangementóthe automatic clearance of the way for the smooth working of the spiritual mission one is endowed with. Baba Tajuddin 's case, too, is not dissimilar. He became an orphan at a very early age, the father having died at the age of one and the mother while he was nine. 

    Even while at school Tajuddin evinced unmistakable signs of his future spiritual greatness, and the seers of the age could not but remark about it. Once, the much revered saint of the place, Hazrat Abdulla Shah (whose shrine is at Kamptee) happened to visit the school which Tajuddin used to attend. The Saint, on seeing Tajuddin who was six years of age at the time, re-marked, "This boy needs no education; he is already an Arif (possessed of divine gnosis)." Tajuddin's secular education, however, continued up to the age of 15 years during which period he became fairly conversant with Arabic, Persian, Urdu and a little of English. 

Like his forebears Tajuddin also took to a military career, and at the age of 18 years joined the 8th Madras Regiment as a sepoy. This Regiment was for a time posted to Saugor which place will ever remain associated with the turning point in his career, usher≠ing in a new era of spiritual bliss and knowledge. One night, while on guard duty, Tajuddin heard a voice calling 



him by his name. Although it was past midnight, the eerie stillness of the atmosphere and the inky darkness of the night did not scare him. He became curious and began to investigate. The more he followed the direction of the voice, the more it seemed to recede. After a good long trudge in the jungle led by the voice, he suddenly came upon a small habitation occupied by a vener≠able looking old man who seemed to be the only living being in that forlorn and deserted part of the jungle. This old man was none else but the Saint known as Hazrat Dawood Chisti who, without raising his head, asked Tajuddin to get a cup of tea. Nothing daunted, he retraced his steps and managed to get the beverage demanded. When the tea was offered, the Saint sipped it a little and again handed it back ordering Tajuddin to drink away the remnant. No sooner he did this, the least expected happen-edóthe greatest miracle that a saint can perform in the life of a human being was achievedó Tajuddin became God-realized. 

The suddenness of the spiri-tual experience left Tajuddin dazed and stupified. To the world he did not seem to be normal, and the suspicion that he was ment≠ally unhinged grew into convic≠tion when he left the military service for no apparent reason. Tajuddin's grandmother had ar≠ranged for a suitable match for him, but the marriage proposition had to be given up, as being not possible under the circumstances. Everyone around Tajuddin took him for mad, and no suspicion of his spiritual state ever dawned upon them. The grandmother took charge of him and brought him down from Saugor to Kamptee for medical treatment. All indigenous and foreign methods of treatment were tried upon him, but to no purpose. Tajuddin's so-called madness continued just the same. In time the grandmother also passed away, leaving Tajuddin alone, uncared for and unattended in this mad frame of mind. Not one from amongst the relatives was near him at the time, as they all left him to himself finding the malady incurable. Tajuddin thus passed 4 years at Kamptee suffering great pains, 


privations and hardships. 

At this stage one maternal uncle of Tajuddin took pity on him and had him brought over to Chanda where he (uncle) was in service. Here too the best of medical treatment was given, but to no avail. Finding his condition hopelessly incurable, the uncle sent Tajuddin back to Kamptee to breathe away his days as best as he could. 

On his return to Kamptee Tajuddin underwent the severest of ordeals, mental and physical, for nearly two years. He used to pass a good deal of his time in ravines and valleys indulging in the severest of austerities. It is during this period of self-imposed asceticism at Kamptee, that the world was accorded the first glimpses as to the real state of things behind the apparent mad≠ness of Tajuddin. Many mirac≠ulous incidents happening at this time dispelled all doubts; and the jeers and the sneers of the people turned into respect and reverence for his spiritual state. 

The children of the place, however, continued pestering him and pelted him with stones taking him to be a mad man. 

But Tajuddin never showed any resentment nor scolded them. On the contrary he seemed to enjoy the situation by going to the length of collecting the stones thrown at him into small heaps and piles. 

    A belief is current in the East and round which beautiful gems of poetry have been sung by the Sufi poets that the sure sign of divine madness having reached the summit of its achievement is, when the head becomes the target for the stones of children. Accept this or reject, Tajuddin surely fulfilled this condition. It is common knowledge with every≠one that children only dare to be mischievous towards a mad person when they find that the will or power to retaliate is not there. And what better form of divine blandishment and coquetry would the God-mad (who see their own Self as the self in all) enjoy than being stoned by the children?

    The last four years of Baba Tajuddin's stay at Kamptee are full of miraculous incidents of his spiritual career, and naturally people began to crowd upon him. Not relishing this worldly gather≠ing which 



somehow he felt was premature or was interfering with his spiri≠tual work, Tajuddin one day declared to the people around him that he would very shortly be going to a lunatic asylum. True to his words the next day he indulged in a strangely unsophis≠ticated spree which succeeded in landing him behind the four walls of a mad house at Nagpur. The trick that he played was that he walked in a nude condition straight on to the tennis court of an English club where some ladies were playing tennis. They immediately got him arrested by the cantonment police, and the local authorities concerned, tak≠ing into consideration his prev≠ious abnormal life and living, certified him for admission to an asylum for lunatics. Thus Baba Tajuddin passed 18 years in the Government lunatic asylum at Nagpur, and this phase of his spiritual manifestation is replete with happenings of a miraculous nature. These incidents are very intelligently and faithfully record≠ed by Dr. Abdul Majid Khan who was in charge of the asylum for a greater period of Tajuddin's incar≠ceration there. 

    In the asylum itself Tajuddin very willingly conformed to the discipline and the rules of the institution, and even when the officials, becoming aware of his spiritual state, were inclined to giving him a preferential treat≠ment, he would insist on being treated like any one of the other inmates of the place. Manual and physical labour he would per≠form along with the other mad people, but the super-natural phenomenon that was very often witnessed by the officials of the asylum left them dumb-founded. It is said that while carrying a load of material on the head, Tajuddin's load, unlike others, seemed to be resting not on his head, but it would hang a few inches above it in the air. The mad inmates also would be very docile in his presence and would even reverence him. Once a mad man while out at work absconded and was found missing at the time of the evening roll call. Dr. Abdul Majid Khan who was in charge of the institution felt very much perturbed and worried. He approached Baba Tajuddin and related the matter to him who asked him not to worry, as 


the man would return. Surpri≠singly enough the next morning the renegade was seen at the gates of the asylum asking to be ad≠mitted. When asked as to where he had gone, he said that he had been to his native place, and when further questioned as to why he had returned of his own accord, he replied that Tajuddin met him and gave him two slaps reprimanding him to return im≠mediately. 

    News of such miraculous hap≠penings reached the outside world, and people from far and near began to pour into the asylum clamouring for Baba Tajuddin's darshan. The jail authorities were hard put to it to manage the situation which was daily growing unwieldy. In order to check and curtail the crowd of daily visitors, Government even went to the length of levying a nominal charge for admission, but still the number of visitors con≠tinued unabated. 

    One of the most notable visi≠tors to Baba Tajuddin in the asylum was Bi-Amma who needs mention here, as without it this life sketch would be incomplete. From her childhood she develop-ed mystical tendencies and was wholly given to very pious and meditative pursuits which her loving father, himself an unpre≠tentious mystic, helped in foster≠ing and developing. Ultimately it was Hazrat Dawood Shah Chisti, the Murshid (Master) of Baba Tajuddin, who ordered her to visit the latter in the asylum, and which she did. No sooner Baba Tajuddin saw her, he flared up and threw a piece of stone at her shattering all the bangles she wore. After this concrete demon≠stration signifying the annihil≠ation of all her worldly ties, Tajuddin addressed her thus: "I have been waiting for you these twelve years and you have come at last." Bi-Amma continued paying visits to Baba Tajuddin in the asylum and even after his release from the place. Nothing would so easily succeed in put≠ting Tajuddin into a child-like happy mood than the presence of Bi-Amma. In matters of food and drink which others had failed in coaxing him to accept, Bi-Amma would invariably succeed. It was to her only that Tajuddin one day divulged the name of his Piro-Murshid 



(Master), viz., Hazrat Dawood Shah Chisti which fact the world at large till then never knew anything about. 

    In spite of Bi-Amma 's early life of piety and self-denial, Baba Tajuddin exacted from her the full prize in the form of suffering prior to teaching her the name of God. She was made to go through the severest of ordeals in spite of her sex, by being ordered to live in solitude all alone for a number of years in the densest part of a jungle infested with wild animals. Unflinchingly she went through all these trials and eventually succeeded in inducing the divine grace of the MasteróBaba Tajud≠din. 

Without detracting from Bi-Amma's spiritual greatness and accepting in toto the truism that nothing goes to the undeserving, still one is constrained to say that a Perfect Master 's vigilant guid≠ance makes anything and every≠thing possible and easy for the aspirant, provided the will-to-be obedient and submissive is there. No sooner a disciple luckily comes in the selection grade, the divine wisdom of the Master lays down the tests and sees to it that the disciple passes them suc≠cessfully. Some would stretch the point still further and say that even the will to surrender and submit is a gift from the Master, and who can say it is not so? The fact is that the eligibility of the disciple and the grace of the Master are compatibles and cannot long resist each other. As such Bi-Amma became God-realized, and to this day one cannot speak of Baba Tajuddin without remembering her. Many miracles are attributed to her, and her shrine at Waki attracts thou≠sands of visitors and pilgrims every year. 

The spiritual fame of Baba Tajuddin was daily spreading far and wide, and with it the number of visitors to the asylum also increased considerably. Finding the regulations and restrictions of the place entailing a lot of inconvenience to the visitors, the great admirer of Tajuddin, Raja Raghujirao of Nagpur, appealed to the Government for his release. The Government agreed to the proposition provided a security of two thousand rupees was furn≠ished on his behalf. Raja Raghu≠jirao 

willingly gave the security for the requisite amount, and thus Baba Tajuddin's self-invited incarcer≠ation of 18 years in the lunatic asylum came to an end in the year 1907. 

    The question must have auto≠matically suggested itself to some of the readers as to why a Perfect Master like Baba Tajuddin suf≠fered the hardships and dis≠comforts of a lunatic asylum even after God-realization. This is a very interesting point which needs explanation, as it has given rise under similar circumstances to a good deal of misunder≠standing, and it has led even enlightened people into mis≠interpreting and ignoring per≠fection when confronted with it. 

    According to Sufis the saints fall into two distinct catagories, viz., Kasbi (men-God) and Wahbi (God-men). The former, by their self-exertion, raise themselves to the state of Godhood, and the latter are born saintsóthe sure medium for the manifestation of Divinity in their lifetime. The majority of saints belong to the Kasbi class, and their asceticism (Fagah) is the means of their spiritual exaltation. This self- exertion is termed Mujahida which invariably precedes real≠ization. The self-denial (Eesar) of the Wahbi class of saints, whose number is very limited, is meant for the spiritual uplift of others, which duty is divinely ordained and follows God-realization. This legacy of self-realization the Sufis term a s Shahadat (crucifixion) and connotes real Faqiri (per≠fection). Baba Tajuddin 's asylum phase, therefore, becomes preg≠nant with meaning when inter≠preted in the light of the above explanation, and surely the much misunderstood silence of Hazrat Meher Baba extending into fourteen years now is of a piece with the above. 

After his release from the asylum, Baba Tajuddin was removed to the palatial quarters of Raja Raghujirao at Shakerdara, but he refused to stay there. Although Baba Tajuddin very much appreciated the concern of the Raja on his account, he preferred to roam about free in the jungles of Waki all by him≠self.

    After some time Baba Tajuddin settled down permanently at Waki, a suburb of Nagpur, 



and in due course a small colony grew up there which he named as 'Chhota Nagpur'. This Waki phase really inaugurates the public manifestation of Baba Tajuddin 's spiritual mission in life which lasted for nearly eighteen years till his death in the year 1925. 

    As is usual with such spiritual geniuses, Baba Tajuddin evolved his own peculiar and whimsical ways and means of spiritual dispensation for those approach≠ing him for relief and advice. A few departments and institutions that sprung up around his residence and to which he gave suggestive names significant of the spiritual work enacted there are worth mentioning here: 

1 To the west about two furlongs from Baba Tajuddin's seat was a place called 'Hospital' where healing was undertaken. People suffering from physical diseases were asked to attend there. 

    2 Nearly in the same direction is a mango-tree which was styled as the 'School'. Those desiring success in examinations and educational pursuits were re≠quired to report themselves there. 

     3 Another place in the vicinity was known as the 'Court of Justice', where questions of worldly life such as finance, business dealings, breach of law, etc., were dealt with. 

4 Spiritual aspirants were usually granted interviews in the 'Mosque' situated within the pre≠cincts of Baba Tajuddin's resi≠dential area. 

    5 To the north is an open piece of ground called the 'Parade Ground', where Baba Tajuddin used to order some visitors to perform drill which had a spiri≠tual significance. This exercise was meant to train people to fight the battle of life and also to enable them to overcome obs≠tacles standing in the way of their material and spiritual progress. 

These are some of the ways and means whereby Baba Tajud≠din imparted spiritual and mat≠erial relief to mankind, and, if at all, anything they only substan≠tiate and emphasize the plea that the spiritual modus operandi of the Perfect Ones is inscrutable even as the lila (divine sport) of the God they have attained is un≠fathomable. To really understand them is to become one 



like them.  at the time of Baba Tajuddin's  

    The physical existence of Baba  death.  

Tajuddin came to an end on the  Hazrat Meher Baba is indi≠ 

17th of August 1925, and even  rectly connected with Baba  

the elementary world mourned  Tajuddin, and has physically met  

the loss of this spiritual giant of  him once in his lifetime at Nagpur  

the time. Even such a cynical  during his wanderings immed≠ 

paper as "The Times of India",  iately after attaining realization  

Bombay, could not but take  from Hazrat Babajan.  

notice of the news that the stone      The miracles of Hazrat Baba  

deity in the household of Raja  Tajuddin shall form the subject  

Raghujirao was seen to shed tears  matter of another article later  

ï  
