  October 19, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor   IT'S ALL THE WORK OF GOD  (Hebrews 13:20-25)  Now the God of peace, who brought up from the dead the greatShepherd of the sheep through the blood of the eternal covenant, evenJesus our Lord, 21 equip you in every good thing to do His will,working in us that which is pleasing in His sight, through JesusChrist, to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen. 22 But I urgeyou, brethren, bear with this word of exhortation, for I have writtento you briefly. 23 Take notice that our brother Timothy has beenreleased, with whom, if he comes soon, I will see you. 24 Greet allof your leaders and all the saints. Those from Italy greet you. 25Grace be with you all.  The Christ We Have Seen in Hebrews  On March 31, 1996, we began our preaching series on the book ofHebrews. Today, eighteen months later, we end it. For my part, it hasbeen one of the high plateaus of my 17-year journey at Bethlehem. Ihave seen Christ and savored his supremacy over and over again. Ihave come near to him and spoken with him and enjoyed him andworshipped him  &#183; as the final Word of God in these last days (1:2), &#183;as the Creator of the heavens and earth whom angels worship (1:6,10),&#183; as the Pioneer of our salvation who was made perfect throughsuffering (2:10), &#183; as one who became flesh that he might die inour place and free us from the fear of death (2:14f), &#183; as onesuperior to Moses as a son is superior to a servant (3:5f), &#183; asa sympathetic High Priest who opens the way to the throne of grace(4:14-16), &#183; as one who saves for all time those who draw nearto God through him (7:25), &#183; as the Mediator of a newblood-bought covenant to secure that our sins will be forgiven andthe law will be written on our hearts and that God will be our God(8:10-12), &#183; as the one who by his blood purifies ourconsciences from dead works to serve the living God (9:14), &#183; asthe one who put an end to all sacrifices by putting away sin once forall through the sacrifice of himself (9:26), &#183; as the Pioneerand Perfecter of our faith who for the joy set before him endured thecross, despised the shame and sat down at the right hand of God untilall his enemies are made a stool for his feet (12:2; 1:13), &#183; asthe one who suffered outside the gate that he might sanctify thepeople by his own blood (13:12), &#183; as the one who will neverleave us or forsake us but will help us forever by the power of anindestructible life (13:5-6; 7:16).  In these months together in Hebrews, Christ has revealed himselfto us again and again for our encouragement and our hope and ourperseverance, so that we might have strength and love to meettogether and stir each other up to live well and to die well byfaith, which is the assurance of things hoped for.  I want to end this series with an special invitation at the end ofthis service for people to come to the front and receive a prayerthat God would preserve and complete the work he did in your lifeduring this series of messages. I'll mention the seven categories ofpeople I will invite to come so that you can be thinking and prayingabout whether you should come. If God has done one or more of thesethings for you through his word in Hebrews, I hope you will come atthe end of this service. 1) Those who have been converted to Christ,and have been brought to saving faith in him. 2) Those who werestraying or drifting toward destruction and have been awakened andbrought back to a serious pursuit of God. 3) Those who were enabledto renounce some besetting weight or sin and get some new measure ofvictory over it. 4) Those who have been restored in a relationshipthat was broken. 5) Those who came to a major new way of viewing theworld - some significant new insight into the nature of God or hisways - that has changed the way you think. 6) Those who have entereda crisis in your lives and found strength to carry on for Christ'ssake. 7) Those who have heard a call to missions or some vocationalchange for kingdom purposes. I'll mention these again at the end.  Farewell Blessing  But to get us ready for this ending, let's look at this writer'sfarewell blessing. What does he want us to leave with? What does hewant to bless us with and to pray into our lives? And when I say "us"I mean those who, imperfect as we are, and prone to wander, andstumbling daily, nevertheless have seen enough of Jesus to put ourtrust in his promises and our lives in his hands. To you who havedone that - or who will do it as I speak this morning, he gives youthese six things:  1. You have a God of peace.  Verse 20: "Now the God of peace . . ."  He is at peace with himself and at peace with you. O how many ofyou wish you had had fathers who were at peace with themselves! Butthey were tormented. They were divided and torn and frustrated anddouble-minded and distant and angry. The peace of Christ did not rulein their hearts. And they did not bear the peaceable fruit ofrighteousness in the family. There was tension and stress and sadnessand fear and uncertainty, and no sweet, happy, relaxed, secure peace.You wanted that, even if you didn't know it. And you didn't get it.  And the promise as we end the book of Hebrews is: Now you have it.Your Father in heaven is a God of peace. He is at peace with himselfand he is at peace with you. He is like a great ocean, calm inhimself, and he gave his Son to suffer in our place so that we mighthave an eternal family of peace.  2. You have a deathless Shepherd.  Verse 20: "Now the God of peace, who brought up from the dead thegreat Shepherd of the sheep . . ."  Nowhere in this book until this very moment has the writer calledChrist a "Shepherd." But now, as he takes his leave, as it were, andputs us into the hands of another, he says, "You have a Shepherd - tolead you and to protect you. And he is no ordinary Shepherd. He israised from the dead and therefore cannot die again and cannottherefore be defeated by any foe.  Therefore, if you will trust him and follow him, you will be safe.The great danger this book is written to warn against is that wewould drift away from the flock of God and choose another shepherdbesides Jesus. That would be folly. For there is no other who canlead us to green pastures and still waters - to God's right handwhere there are pleasures for evermore.  3. You are bound to God by a blood-bought, eternal covenant.  Verse 20: "Now the God of peace, who brought up from the dead thegreat Shepherd of the sheep through the blood of the eternalcovenant, even Jesus our Lord . . ."  This is a reference back to the new covenant in chapters eight andten. When Christ died, he sealed for God's elect a covenant that willlast forever and will never be broken. It is God's pledge to give useternal salvation (5:9), eternal redemption (9:12), and eternalinheritance (9:15). And what makes it eternal and unspeakablysuperior to the old covenant is that God swears on the blood of hisSon that not only will he keep his side of the covenant, but our sideas well. So the writer says in the fourth place that . . .  4. You have a God who equips you to do his will.  Verses 20-21: "Now the God of peace, who brought up from the deadthe great Shepherd of the sheep through the blood of the eternalcovenant, even Jesus our Lord, equip you in every good thing to doHis will . . ."  His covenant with you is eternal and sure because he does notleave you without resources to do his will. He provides you with whatyou need to keep your side of the covenant, namely, faith that worksitself out in love.  But someone might say, "Oh yes, he gives resources, but we mustput those resources to use. He gives us the word, and the church, andprayer, and suffering, but we must respond in faith to keep our sideof the covenant, and be pleasing to him. So the covenant is only assure as we are strong." But this is not true. Because the writersays, in the fifth place . . .  5. You have a God who works in you what is needed to please him.  Verses 20-21: "Now the God of peace, who brought up from the deadthe great Shepherd of the sheep through the blood of the eternalcovenant, even Jesus our Lord, equip you in every good thing to doHis will, working in us that which is pleasing in His sight, throughJesus Christ, to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen."  He wants to leave us with no mistake and no uncertainty that ourcovenant relationship with him is eternal. So he reminds us that thevery essence of the new covenant, and what makes it new, is that Godkeeps his side, and God keeps our side. He not only equips you withresources for doing his will, he "works in you what is pleasing inhis sight," namely, persevering faith - for "without faith it isimpossible to please God" (11:6). He causes us freely and joyfully touse the resources he gives.  You are secure not because you are strong, but because God issovereign and because God is faithful to his new covenant promises."I will put My Spirit within you and cause you to walk in Mystatutes" (Ezekiel 36:27). All the exhortations to persevere in thisbook God will fulfil in those who are his. This is my only hope to bea faithful minister of the gospel and a Christian until I die.  Finally, in verse 25 he sums it all up.  6. You have the promise of all-sufficient future grace.  Verse 25: "Grace be with you all."  In other words, as I take leave of you, I hand you over to theabundance and power of future grace. The grace of divine peace, thegrace of a deathless Shepherd who guards and guides you, the grace ofan eternal covenant that secures an unbreakable relationship, thegrace of God's commitment to equip us with all the resources we needto do his will, and finally - lest any of his own ever be lost - thegrace of God to work in us what pleases God. This grace be with you.  To Jesus Be Glory Forever and Ever  And so, that is what I want to pray onto you this morning as weclose. I want the Lord to get the glory for what he has done in theseeighteen months of savoring his Son in Hebrews. Did you see thatphrase in verse 20: ". . . through Jesus Christ, to whom be the gloryforever and ever. Amen"? The point of all this grace is that Jesusreceive glory. That is the ultimate point of the book and the Bibleand the universe - the glory of Christ and through him, the Father.  So I think it is right to put some of his work on display thismorning by asking you to come forward. I know that in one sense wecould all come. The word of God preached in the power of the Spirithas good effects in all the children of God. But those I want to comeare these:  1) Those who have been converted to Christ, and have been broughtto saving faith in him. 2) Those who were straying or drifting towarddestruction and have been awakened and brought back to a seriouspursuit of God. 3) Those who were enabled to renounce some besettingweight or sin and get some new measure of victory over it. 4) Thosewho have been restored in a relationship that was broken. 5) Thosewho came to a major new way of viewing the world - some significantnew insight into the nature of God or his ways - that has changed theway you think and pray. 6) Those who have entered a crisis in yourlives and found in the message of Hebrews strength of carry on forChrist's sake. 7) Those who have heard a call to missions or somevocational change for kingdom purposes.  As you come we are going to sing "Knowing You." Bring your worshipfolder with you so that you can sing this song as your song ofconsecration to the Lord as the greatest value in your life, and yourreadiness to go with him outside the camp.  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
