  The situation behind this text is that Israel haddemanded that Samuel appoint a king for them so that they couldbe like all the other nations.  You can see this in 1 Samuel 8. Samuel is old.  His sons Joel and Abijah have become judges inhis place and they are corrupt.  So the elders of Israel cometo Samuel and say (in verse 5):   Behold, you are old and your sons do not walk inyour ways; now appoint for us a king to govern us like all thenations.   Samuel is very displeased and goes to God for counsel. In verse 7 God says,    Hearken to the voice of the people in all that theysay to you; for they have not rejected you, but they have rejectedme from being king over them.   But then in verse 9 God says,   Only, you shall solemnly warn them, and show themthe ways of the king who shall reign over them.   So Samuel tells the people how their kings will taketheir sons and daughters into his service and demand a tenth ofall they have for his purposes.  But he can't talk the peopleout of their desire for a king.  They give their final responsein verse 19:   No!  But we will have a king over us, that we alsomay be like all the nations, and that our king may govern us andgo out before us and fight our battles.   So Samuel anoints Saul king over Israel in chapter10.  In chapter 11 Saul defeats the Nahash and the Amonites, andSamuel calls all the people together at Gilgal to renew the kingdom-- to give Saul an official installation.  Then in chapter 12 comes Samuel's inauguration speech,and it was not exactly what the people wanted to hear!  He doeshave some astonishingly good news for them.  But before he tellsthem he wants to make sure that they know and feel the magnitudeof the evil they have done in wanting to be like the other nationsand being dissatisfied with God as their king.  So in verse 17 he says,    Is it not wheat harvest today?  I will call uponthe Lord, that he may send thunder and rain; and you shall knowand see that your wickedness is great, which you have done inthe sight of the Lord, in asking for yourselves a king.   When God sends thunder and rain, the people fearand confess their sins in verse 19:   Pray for your servants to the Lord your God, thatwe may not die; for we have added to all our sins this evil, toask for ourselves a king.   When the people have been brought to fear and repentof their sin, then comes the good news in verse 20:   Fear not; you have done all this evil, yet do notturn aside from following the Lord, but serve the Lord with allyour heart; and do not turn aside after vain things which cannotprofit or save, for they are vain.  This is the gospel -- even though you have sinnedgreatly and terribly dishonored the Lord, even though you nowhave a king which it was a sin to get, even though there is noundoing that sin or its painful consequences that are yet to come,nevertheless there is a future and a hope.  Fear not!  Fear not!   And then comes the great ground of the gospel inverse 22:   For the Lord will not cast away his people, for hisgreat name's sake, because it has pleased the Lord to make youa people for himself.   What is the basis of the fearlessness of God's peopleaccording to this verse?  First of all it is the promise thathe will not cast them away.  In spite of their sin in wantinga king, the verse says, The Lord will not cast away hispeople.  But that is not the deepest foundation of hope andfearlessness in this verse.  Why will God not cast away his people? The deepest reason given is in the phrase, For his greatname's sake.  The rock bottom foundation of our forgivenessand our fearlessness and our joy is the commitment that God hasto his own great name.  First, he is committed to act for hisown name's sake.  And then, for that reason, he is committed toact for his people.  How does Samuel make that connection for us in thisverse?  Why is it that God's commitment to his own name resultsin not casting away his people?  How does his commitment to hisname produce a commitment to this people?    The last part of the verse gives the answer: Becauseit has pleased the Lord to make you a people for himself. Or to put it another way, it was God's good pleasure to uniteyou to himself in such a way that his name is at stake in yourdestiny.  Or to put it another way, it was God's good pleasureto possess you in such a way that what becomes of you reflectsupon his name.  And therefore, for his name's sake, he will notcast you away.  Now there are two sermons in this verse, this week'sand next week's.  So let me just point to next week's and thenfocus on this week's.  Next week's sermon is entitled, GodHas Pleasure in Election.  God has freely, according tohis own good pleasure, chosen to make Israel a people for himself. That is next week's message.  God delights in the freedom ofunconditional election.  But there is another pleasure of God implied in thisverse, namely, that God has pleasure in his name.  When he choosesa people, it says, he chooses them for himself, so that when heacts to spare them he acts for his great name's sake.  Thereforebeneath and behind God's delight in choosing a people there isa deeper delight, namely, the pleasure God has in his own name. That is this week's message.    Now what does that mean -- that God has pleasurein his name?   It might not mean anything different than whatwe saw three weeks ago, namely, that God has pleasure in his ownperfections, in his own glory.  The name of God in Scripture oftenmeans virtually the same thing as God's glorious, excellent character.   But it often means something slightly different,namely, the glory of God gone public.  In other words, the nameof God often refers to his reputation, his fame, his renown. This is the way we use the word name when we say someoneis making a name for himself.  Or we sometimes say, that's a namebrand.  We mean a brand with a reputation.    This is what I think Samuel means in 1 Samuel 12:22when he says that God made Israel a people for himselfand that he would not cast Israel off for his great name'ssake.  Let me point you to some other passages that bringout this idea of God's reputation or fame or renown.  In Jeremiah 13:11 God describes Israel as a waistcloththat had been chosen to highlight God's glory, but had been foundunusable.  For as the waistcloth clings to the loins of a man,so I made the whole house of Israel and the whole house of Judahcling to me, says the Lord, that they might be for me a people,a name, a praise, and a glory, but they would not listen.  Why was Israel chosen and made the garment of God? That it might be a name, a praise, and a glory. The words praise and glory in this contexttell us that name means renown or reputation. God chose Israel so that the people would make a reputation forhim.  David teaches the same thing in one of his prayersin 2 Samuel 7:23.  He says that what sets Israel apart from allthe other peoples is that God has dealt with them in such a wayas to make a name for himself.  What other nation on earth is like thy people Israel,whom God went to redeem to be his people, making himself a name,and doing for them great and terrible things, by driving out beforehis people a nation its gods?  In other words when God went to redeem his peoplein Egypt and then bring them through the wilderness and into thepromised land he was not just favoring the people, he was acting,as Samuel says, for his own great name's sake (1 Sam. 12:22);or, as David says, he was making himself a name -- a reputation.  Let's go back to the Exodus for a moment.  This iswhere God really formed a people for himself.  For the rest ofher existence Israel has looked back to the exodus as the keyevent in her history.  So in the exodus we can see what God isup to in choosing a people to himself.  In Exodus 9:16 God speaks to Pharaoh a word thatlets him and us know why God is drawing out the deliverance toten plagues instead of making short work of it in one swift catastrophe. This text is so crucial that Paul quotes it in Romans 9:17 tosum up God's purpose in the exodus.  God says to Pharaoh,  But for this purpose have I let you live, to showyou my power, so that my name may be declared throughout all theearth.  The point of the exodus, was to make a worldwidereputation for God.  The point of the ten plagues and miraculousRed Sea crossing was to demonstrate the incredible power of Godon behalf of his freely chosen people, with the aim that thisreputation, this name, would be declared throughout the wholeworld.  God has great pleasure in his reputation.  Did the later prophets and poets of Israel interpretthe Exodus that way?  Yes, they did.  Isaiah says that God's aim in the exodus was to makefor  himself an everlasting name.  He described God as the one . . . who caused his glorious arm to go at the righthand of Moses, who divided the waters before them to make forhimself an everlasting name, who led them through the depths. Like a horse in the desert, they did not stumble.  Like cattlethat go down into the valley, the Spirit of the Lord gave themrest.  So thou didst lead thy people, to make for thyself a gloriousname.  (Isaiah 63:12-14)  So when God showed his power to deliver his peoplefrom Egypt through the Red Sea he had his sights on eternity andthe everlasting reputation that he would win for himself in thosedays.    Psalm 106:7-8 teaches the same thing:   Our fathers, when they were in Egypt, did not considerthy wonderful works; they did not remember the abundance of thysteadfast love, but rebelled against the Most High at the RedSea.  Yet he saved them for his name's sake, that he might makeknown his mighty power.   Do you see the same gospel logic at work here thatwe saw in our text of 1 Samuel 12:22.  There the sinful peoplehad chosen a king and angered God.  But God does not cast themoff.  Why?  For his great name's sake.  Here it says that thesinful people had rebelled against God at the Red Sea and failedto consider his love.  Yet he saved them with tremendous power. Why?  Same answer: for his name's sake, to make known his mightypower.    Do you see that God's first love is his name andnot his people?  And because it is, there is hope for sinful hispeople.  Do you see why the God-centered-ness of God is the groundof the gospel?    Take Joshua as another example of someone who understoodthis God-centered gospel logic and put it to use like Moses did(Deuteronomy 9:27-29; Numbers 14:13-16) to plead for God's sinfulpeople.  In Joshua 7 Israel has crossed the Jordan and enteredthe promised land and defeated Jericho.  But now they have beendefeated at Ai and Joshua is stunned.  He goes to the Lord inone of the most desperate prayers in all the Bible.   O Lord, what can I say, when Israel has turned theirbacks before their enemies!  For the Canaanites and all the inhabitantsof the land will hear of it, and will surround us, and cut offour name from the earth; and what wilt thou do for thy great name?(Joshua 7:8-9)  Do you cry for mercy on the basis of God's love forhis name?  The great ground of hope in all the God-centered servantsof the Lord has always been the impossibility that God would lethis great name be dishonored among the nations.  It was inconceivable. This was bedrock confidence.  Other things change but not this-- not the commitment of God to his name.  But what then are to make of the fact that eventuallyIsrael proved to be so rebellious that she was indeed given intothe hands of her enemies in the Babylonian captivity during thetime of Ezekiel?  How does a God-centered prophet like Ezekielhandle this terrible setback for the reputation of God?  Listen to the word of the Lord that came to him inEzekiel 36:20-23.  This is God's answer to the captivity of hispeople which he himself had brought about:  But when they came to the nations, wherever theycame, they profaned my holy name, in that men said of them, Theseare the people of the Lord, and yet they had to go out of hisland.  But I had concern for my holy name, which the houseof Israel caused to be profaned among the nations to which theycame.  Therefore say to the house of Israel, Thus says the LordGod: it is not for your sake, O house of Israel, that I am aboutto act, but for the sake of my holy name, which you have profanedamong the nations to which you came.  And I will vindicate theholiness of my great name, which has been profaned among the nations,which you have profaned among them; and the nations will knowthat I am the Lord, says the Lord God, when through you I vindicatemy holiness before their eyes.  In other words, when every other hope was gone andthe people lay under the judgment of God himself because of theirown sin, one hope remained -- and it will always remain -- thatGod has an indomitable delight in the worth of his own reputationand will not suffer it to be trodden down for long.   This was the great ground of hope that sustainedthe rise of the modern Protestant missionary movement in the 18thcentury.  David Brainerd, the missionary to the Indians in NewEngland, wrote to a young ministerial candidate in 1747 just afew months before his death, Give yourself to prayer, toreading and meditation on divine truths: strive to penetrate tothe bottom of them and never be content with a superficial knowledge.  Strive to penetrate to the bottom of divine things! Because at the bottom of things you find a granite foundationof hope for victory in the global mission of the church.  Youfind a God whose commitment to the cause of his people is groundednot in his people but in himself.  His passion to save and topurify feeds itself not from the shallow soil of our value butfrom the infinite depth of his own.    At the bottom of all our hope, when everything elsehas given way, we stand on this great reality: the everlasting,all-sufficient God is infinitely, unwaveringly and eternally committedto his great and holy name.  For the sake of his own great namehe will act.  It will not be profaned for ever.  The mission ofthe church will be victorious.  He will vindicate his people andhis cause in all the earth.  Fear not; you have done all this evil, yet do notturn aside from following the Lord, but serve the Lord with allyour heart; and do not turn aside after vain things which cannotprofit or save. . .  For the Lord will not cast away his people,for his great name's sake, because it has pleased the Lord tomake you a people for himself. Amen.  
