The ability to perform miracles does not necessarily connote spirit­uality," is in short the viewpoint of Baba on this much discussed subject. He has explained it elsewhere at length. (Vide "Questions & Answers" p. 28) 
In this age of logic and reasoning, even miracles of amazing character are held at discount by rationalists whose only medium of under­standing things is the human intellect with its limits. Yet faith works wonders that baffle intellect. Although the Master himself gives no importance to this phenomena of his working, miraculous incidents are very often brought about by the depth of feeling and intensity of faith of the devotees, which simply leave the world guessing. But "the greatest of all miracles," says the Master, "is the transformation of one's own self from within." Truely indeed, it is this particular inner experience of the disciples, devotees and others, through the Master's inner spiritual with a faith which is not blind but ever-living, and which goes on deve­loping every new day through a number of other fresh experiences within oneself or witnessed all around in others. 
These inner experiences create within one a faith that grows firmer than a rock and is ever unswerving. It brings within its wake other experiences of amazing nature, which for disciples is merely a matter of course and an everyday ex­perience of a phase of the Master's inner working, but which the world calls 'miracles'. 
On 17th July last, Baba received a letter from Mr. M.R. Dhakephalkar, B.A., LL. B. a disciple of Baba and one of the staunchest old mandali members. He had already had a number of experiences in the past of the Master's inner working and help, always in the nick of time during tense moments when his help and guidance were fervently sought and mostly needed. One of these was most astounding when he 

and a few others of the mandali were actually facing death and gasping for breath on a hill-climb where they had blindly and rashly rushed, and but for the Master's bIessing and help which they aII invoked during those critical moments, with the words "Shri Sadguru Meher Baba Maharaj ki jay", meaning "Hail our Lord and Master Shri Sadguru Meher Baba", and which they momentarily received, they would all have experienced a horrible death and perished in the deep ravines beyond human reach. The news of this miraculous escape of so many souls literally from the jaws of death through the inner help of the Master simply stunned even his own mandali who are used to hearing such news of this wonderful phenomena of his working. 
The incident referred to here today, though different in type, of a life being miraculously saved from drowning, reveals the same wonderful phenomena of Baba's inner help timely given to a disciple in distress, wherever he or she is. Both these are nothing short of “miracles" and form part of a special subject of the "Master's Miracles" to be separately dealt with in these columns later on in details in the words of those who actually passed through these experiences of different kinds. 
I, therefore, refer in passing in these notes to this particular incident of a disciple being saved from drowning, leaving the details to be enumerated by the person himself later. 
AN APOLOGY 
Due to a sudden change of plans at the last moment, the Master has decided to go towards Mysore with over 30 of his group to stay there for a long period and make arrange­ments for a "Spiritual Centre" he wishes to establish on that side. 
As the writer of this page had suddenly to leave Meherabad in connection with this new move, the usual interesting details of the Master's work in Meherabad during the month under review have all to be postponed for the next issue, for which the writer owes an apology to his readers. 

. 
