
  We are here
with the stubborn gray rain and white snow 
  to claim and name once again
our heritage and hope in gathered community.
  We know our failings and our disappointments
but nonetheless we come here freely,
  heartened by the principles and practices 
which call us to savor and save the world.
  And, at the end of our time today
  
(together) And may our reason and our passion keep us true to ourselves,
  true to each other,
  and true to those shared visions of what we can together
  become?.


  The great game is won, 
  and local hearts know uplift and joy.
  The trumpets of war are sounding, 
  and many hearts around the world 
  stew in worry and fear.
  Human hearts brim with feelings, high and low
  even more at holiday times, on days of transition.
  Memories of sadness and happiness bundle the 
  heart in their quilt of emotion. But all of these
  memories are personal and local and singular.
  
  But hopes for peace and a justice that prospers
  are the similar all over the world, no matter the culture, language, religion,
  world-view or station.
  
  To pito O te Henua they say on Rapa Nui,
  Easter Island.
  Szczesliwego Nowego Roku they say in Crakow,
  in Polska, or Poland.
  Saadetler dilerim they say in Istanbul, in Turkey.
  
  Many sounds! Many lands!
  Cold lands, hot lands,
  mountain lands and lake lands.
  
  Masaganang Bagong Taon, they say in Tagalog on the streets of Manila, in
  the Philippines.
  Propero Ano, they say on the sun-warmed lanes of Rio in Brazil.
  Na bloavezh Mat, they say at St. Michel in Breton, the ancient tongue still
  used on the north coast of France.
  
  Full of good wishes! Full of good will.
  Dreams of happiness. Visions of peace for all.
  
  Kurisumasu Omedeto, they say in Tokyo,
  Subha Aluth Awrudhak Vewa, they cry out in Columbo, Sri Lanka.
  Ojenyunyat osrasay! they murmer in Québec among those who still speak
  a smattering of Iroquois.
  Or maybe they say cheerfully, Bon Année! Or even if they speak English,
  Happy New Year.!
  
  And we say it too. May our year be happy, not as a gift owed to us, but because
  we have the courage to live it with honor and honesty.
  May our year prosper us with surprising joy,
  not as a blessing but as an opening in our hearts.
  May each person on the earth know a good year. No matter the language, the
  culture, the station,
  may all human spirits be faithful to their
  dreams of freedom, their visions of peace,
  their celebration of honesty and truthfulness.
  Blessed is the arrival of the New Year,
  which is any day when human beings in any language say yes to life, love,
  freedom, honesty and peace.
  
silence

  And as the New Year begins, may we bless the ones we love, and who have loved
  us, by remembering them into this place and hour,
  by naming them, inside the sanctuary of our loving hearts, or aloud, in the
  midst of this loving community.
  
naming

  Now let the new year begin again at this very moment, a whole new world
  beginning? 
  beginning like music begins?
  with intention, decision, practice and beauty.

  The personal sacrifices of individual adherents of the faith were without
  influence on the nobility in general. Society considered them eccentrics
  and treated the noble visionaries with increasing scorn. Jan Niemojewski,
  (yon nyeh-moh-YEF-ski) Siemianowski, and Brzezinski sold their estates in
  Kujawy in order to distribute the money among the poorer brothers and sisters.
  General opinion, however, laughed at them as eccentrics. Witness one contemporary
  author:
  
We saw at city of Lublin a certain important noble named Niemojewski,
  a most stubborn adherent of this faith, in a simple gray garment, without
  sword, without wallet, without attendant, rebaptized just a few days before.
  The local Cardinal of the Catholic Church, Hosius had long conversations
  with him several times, trying to turn him from this delusion, but he steadfastly
  insisted that the doctrine that he confessed was true?

  So, no longer having a common language with their neighbors who ridiculed
  them, these rational Anabaptists associated mostly with one another?
  
  But their social practice was remarkable nonetheless. Samuel Przypkowski,
  for example, recognizing that his serfs in the villages of Upper Przypkowice,
  were, with him, creatures of one Creator, did not wish that these serfs of
  his, along with their sons and daughters in the villages, should live forever
  in servitude and bondage, according to the general law of the crown. So he
  freed these peasants and serfs and their posterity from all burdens. At the
  same time, he gave these folks permission to leave his land and to dwell
  wherever they will; and moreover he renounced forever his right to prosecute
  them, or at any time to demand their surrender by judicial means. He no longer
  asked to know whom they visited, or where they were going. He set them free
  to live their lives.
  

  I have a small grain of hope-
  one small crystal that gleams
  clear colors out of transparency.
  
  I need more.
  
  I break off a fragment
  to send you.
  Please take
  this grain of a grain of hope
  so that mine won't shrink.
  
  Please share your fragment
  so that yours will grow.
  Only so, by division,
  will hope increase,
  like a clump of irises, which will cease to flower
  unless you distribute
  the clustered roots?. unlikely source-
  clumsy and earth-covered-
  of grace.
  

  I guess you could say I was something of a geek when I was a kid.
  
  Oh, they had other words for it in those days, but "geek" seems to be the
  prevailing word this last decade, so I have a better chance for making myself
  clear. "Geek"
  
  You know. I wore glasses from the age of 4, a reality which no peer wasted
  any time in ridiculing without mercy back in the glorious 50's. So I was
  a geek. I did not want to play Little League, so again I was a geek. And
  most of all, I read weird books?tons of them?from the library.
  You know, weird books, like science fiction or books on yoga. This really
  made me a geek.
  
  When I was eleven, and still a geek, my mother, brother and sister and I
  went on our twice-yearly trip downtown to all get our eyes checked. Somehow
  I wheedled permission from my mother to go to the downtown branch library
  just down the street. I wanted to get some books to pass the time while my
  sister and brother had their eyes dilated and had to sit still for an hour
  or so in the waiting room.
  
  Geek that I was, I went right to the science fiction section and took out
  a few musty books and set them down on the table. I opened the first book
  to the table of contents, and scanned down till I found a story I thought
  I might like.
  
  I found one that looked promising. I read it through, totally captivated
  by its mysterious story. By the time I finished reading it, I realized that
  it was one of those things that I would later deem, as an adult, a "life-changing
  event."
  
  Now of course I have to tell you the story, even if forty odd years has distorted
  it a bit. I assure you I had to reconstruct part of it at least. And of course
  there are those in this room who simply HATE science fiction stories. But
  I must ask you in good faith to hang in there with me. And for those of you
  who are sci-fi fans, and who wish to know the author and title, I can't help
  you. For many years I have tried to find out the author of this story so
  I could re-read it. But to no avail. The great sci-fi author Arthur C. Clarke
  wrote me back that he thought it was "a very fine story indeed," but that
  he hadn't a clue as to who wrote it.
  
  So here is the little story that changed my life one afternoon in a dusky
  downtown library in Detroit.
  
  The time is five hundred years in the future. A great space ship from earth
  is cruising through a solar system far, far away, making planetary charts.
  They find an Earth-type planet inhabited by human being-like creatures. It
  was the same size as earth, had similar continental structure, and even its
  year was almost the same to the day as it orbited around its own sun. It
  had just one moon of similar size to Earth's, too.
  
  The anthropologists on this great space ship note to the captain that people
  on this planet are at a state in their development comparable to the twentieth
  century on Earth. There are major cities and road-ways. But there is pollution
  everywhere. And the whole planet is divided up into competing nation states
  and conflicting languages, religions and cultures. The two largest nations
  have a rudimentary form of atomic energy and are beginning to send communication
  satellites into orbit.
  
  The captain of the space ship decides that contact with this civilization
  is premature. She says to the crew, "It's just too early in their development
  as a civilization. They are still in their very early stages of maturity.
  Worse, they are still on the edge of blowing themselves up with atomic bombs
  or killing each other off with biological weapons, like we almost did. I
  say, better to wait a couple of hundred years, and then come back. Then we
  can meet them, and if they are ready, we can even welcome them into preliminary
  membership in the United Planets Association."
  
  All the requisite reports were made and filed.
  
  And then the space ship went home.
  
  Two hundred years later, a different space ship and a different captain came
  to visit. They had read the reports, and were back to offer the folks on
  this planet, if ready, membership in the United Planets Association.
  
  But as they returned to the site, they were shocked. There had been many
  changes. First, they noted that there were two moons, not one. This really
  confused them. Second, as they got closer to the surface, they could see
  that all the great roads and cities had vanished. In their place, thousands
  of villages, great and small, with gardens and orchards surrounding them.
  No more agribusiness, just local produce. The towers of the cities had crumbled
  back into the earth. There were no signs of radiation either, or germs, no
  signs that the population was just coming back after a terrible war. It looked
  as if they had deliberately dismantled everything that once had been.
  
  Totally perplexed to the point of distraction, the captain decided to land
  and find out what happened. This didn't fit any of the expectations in the
  great books of planetary sociology and anthropology.
  
  So he brings the ship down near the largest village, the only village, in
  fact, that had something which looked like a large public monument made of
  stone.
  
  Some of the villagers stroll up to the ship totally unperturbed, clearly
  not shocked by something so technically advanced as a great ship floating
  down to the surface on a pillar of blue fire. The captain lowers a translation
  device onto the ground and then climbs down himself with members of his crew.
  Through the translation device they converse with the elders of the village.
  
  "Oh," says one of them, "you need to talk with Merit, who is our historian.
  She can tell you why we live the way we do."
  
  So carrying a portable translator, the captain and crew visit Merit, an elderly
  woman with a bright, but also terribly wise, smile. They ask her what happened
  to the cities, the roads, the airplanes and pollution that only two hundred
  years earlier had gilded the planet.
  
  "Oh, that," she smiled. "I think I know what you want to know. Yes, we had
  cities. We also had war and conflict and poverty and rage and lies. We had
  pollution and deforestation. We had hatred between religions and nations.
  But, perhaps unlike your own world which seems to have taken a technological
  bent during your crisis years, we looked inward. We are, captain, an
  introspective people. So we turned our energies toward study and the building
  of computers. We united our world by all agreeing to a single world-wide
  project. That moon you see up there, our second moon, the silvery one, is
  the result of our project.
  
  It is a single computer mind, solid circuitry, over three thousand kilometers
  thick. Into that vast computer we put all the books and music and bibles
  of the ages. We put in our poetry and war diaries, and, in the end, we put
  in electric copies of the mind and memories of every single person alive
  on this world at the time. Then we posed the great Mind two questions. 1.
  Who or what made the universe? and 2,What is the purpose of it? The great
  machine, which we designed to be infallible in reason and passion both, hummed
  for twenty years to answer those two questions. Let me show you the answers."
  
  She led them up the marble monument in the center of town, a temple-like
  affair with columns and a gabled roof. Inside the temple was a table, and
  on the table, a simple computer print out, under glass. "Bring your translator
  over here, captain, and I will read the text so you can hear the answers
  to the two great questions."
  
  She lifted the glass off the printout, and lifted it carefully in her hand.
  "Who or what made the universe?" was the first question. Here's the answer:
  "No one made the universe. The universe just happened." And "What is the
  purpose of the universe?" was the second question. Here's the answer. "The
  universe has no purpose. It just is."
  
  And so, knowing that this is the truth, we asked ourselves why we fought
  so much and struggled so hard, why we amassed such fortunes and worshipped
  our gods so fiercely. We knew that our way of life had been foolish, and
  so, together, we ended it. We tore down our cities. We stopped the pollution.
  We live in peace with the land and with each other. We love each other and
  support each other and share everything we have with each other. We have
  no war, no crime, no beggars, no anger. Do you understand, captain?"
  
  "Yes, I think I do," said the captain, frowning. And within the hour, the
  captain and crew had taken off, deciding to quarantine the planet, lest their
  toxic ideas leave the surface and spread everywhere round the galaxy to ruin
  it.
  
  Now when I first read this story I believed strongly in complex and deep
  religious things. I believed in a two-tiered universe with spirit and matter
  in different places. I believed in an omnipotent God who tampered with history,
  picked favorites, and had a desire that my life would follow some design
  He (and He was a He!) thought best. I believed that much of what I did made
  God unhappy, that the priests had power to change things for the better,
  be it the soul or a wafer of bread. I believed that cruel people would suffer
  in hell or at least purgatory. I believed that Christ had been God on earth,
  that miracles were not strange in the least, and that those damn atheists
  over in Russia were ruining the world.
  
  The sci-fi story I read in the library didn't undo all this concrete religious
  faith just like that. But the logic of the story got me hooked into the
  possibility that maybe things were not as I thought. And, the biggest surprise
  to me in the story was that the simple religious answers to the two questions
  did not make these people on that planet rowdy and cruel, like I had always
  been taught would happen by the nuns. "If there is no God," said Dostoyevsky,
  "then all things are permissible." How often I heard the nuns quote that
  great sentence from the great Russian novelist. But in this story, the
  purposelessness of the universe actually gets people to behave better, not
  worse, more kindly, not more cruelly.
  
  As a minister, and as a citizen with friends outside the church, I often
  hear folks telling me that they are "not religious" because they no longer
  believe in God, or Christ or the Bible, or in the authority of rabbis, priests
  or ministers. They no longer think that sacraments or ordinances or miracles
  make sense. They no longer think that paying dues at the synagogue is sensible,
  and they think that Peter and Paul are both robbers. They tell me that the
  churches, synagogues and mosques are filled with hypocrites and fools who
  believe, in the immortal words of Lewis Carroll, "six impossible things before
  breakfast."
  
  But I wonder, who said religion has to be complicated and filled with impossible
  doctrines in order to be truly religious? Who made up that silly rule? Who
  says that big religions get to define terms and discussions for small religions?
  If I let that happen, aren't I still agreeing that these large churches do
  indeed have the authority I claim no longer to follow? Isn't that a little
  two-faced?
  
  Our ancestors in Poland and Lithuania had a very small religion back in the
  15 and 1600's. They also had simple faith with very thin theological doctrines.
  Because of this, they were lambasted as "atheists" by their peers. They didn't
  think of themselves as atheists, though their view of God was certainly not
  orthodox in the least. They simply called themselves the Minor Church. And
  modern historians call them Socinians after their great theologian Faustus
  Socinus, or Fausto Paolo Sozzini in the original Italian.
  
  They were ridiculed for their practices and beliefs because they were so
  simple, so supposedly unreligious. They didn't believe that Jesus was God,
  just an ethical and most human example for us to follow. They didn't believe
  that God was an omnipotent being in charge of everything, but a growing being,
  limited and not all-knowing. They gave up the sacraments of the church, except
  they allowed themselves a symbolic rebaptism as a way of noting church
  membership, and they celebrated communion in their own way, four times per
  year, promising at their simple table of bread and cup to keep the values
  of "the sermon on the mount."
  
  Yes, the sermon on the mount, you know, that ancient summary by the Jewish
  teacher Jesus of what it looks like when we put the Torah into practice,
  the Torah which tells us in Leviticus, "You shall love your neighbor as you
  love yourselves." Yes, that sermon on the mount. You know:
  
  Love your enemies. Do not return hurt for hurt, but resist humiliation by
  turning the right cheek when your left has been slapped as if you were a
  slave. Give freely to those who ask of you. If a soldier by law forces you
  to carry his baggage for a mile, walk with him two miles instead. You cannot
  at the same time mount two horses, or shoot two bows. You have to make choices.
  Stop fretting about what to wear or what to eat. Only the destitute are truly
  innocent after all. Shaping your life by anger alone is foolish. Peacemakers
  are God's family. No secret is forever?everything is made known in the
  end. The realm of God is here, now, not later. Carry neither sword nor wallet
  on your journey. Do not go around expecting to be waited on. You have to
  ask in order to receive an answer. You have to knock before the door will
  open. The table of God serves everyone except those who refuse to come. Learn
  to love those who are different from you. Judge for yourselves?don't
  wait for me to figure things out for you. Be gentle as doves, yes, but clever
  as snakes. You have heads, use them.
  
  Yes, that "sermon on the mount." The shorter maxims and teachings of Jesus
  gathered up by a later editor and jammed into a few Chapters in Matthew and
  Luke. Jan Niemojewski was one of our famous ancestors who took these ethical
  maxims seriously. He was a well-to-do noble who heard the preaching of the
  minister Martin Czechowic in his city of Lublin, and was deeply changed by
  it. He gave up his fancy clothes and wore a simple gray gown, much like my
  robe, which, 25 years ago, I designed in honor of his amazing decision, and
  because I wanted to know the kind of faith he had in his life, in my life.
  He resigned his judgeship in Lublin because he no longer believed in capital
  punishment and could not in conscience order it. He followed the teachings
  in the "sermon on the mount" thoroughly, refusing to promote war for any
  reason, refusing to be unmoved by the poor or sick or marginalized. He sold
  his huge landholdings in Kujawy to support the poorer members of the
  congregation. And like Przypkowski after him, he set his serfs, aka slaves,
  free, centuries before our Lincoln was born. Socinians like Niemojewski were
  famous for their peaceful conduct, their respectful manners and their love
  of education. They taught hard science, including the science of the heretic
  Copernicus, in their religious colleges. They argued for religious pluralism.
  And the whole time they were ridiculed for their simple faith, by their
  neighbors, damned as atheists, and persecuted.
  
  Socinians, like Niemojewski, had a deep and simple faith. It was not cluttered
  up with all sorts of metaphysical speculations. But Niemojewski was wonderfully
  religious. He was not ashamed of being religious?it was his life, his
  mode of living. He did not let Protestant and Catholic critics dictate the
  terms of the conversation?he did not define himself as "no longer Catholic,"
  or "no longer Protestant," or "no longer theistic," which ultimately are
  reactionary self-identities. No, Niemojewski defined himself by his life
  of peace and justice and love and care. He defined himself, not by ancient
  creeds, Pentecostal emotional release, or other questionable emblems of
  authority, but by his steadfast faith that it was actually possible in this
  world to live out the ethical truth of the gospel without shame.
  
  When I first read about his life, he reminded me at once of those people
  in that sci-fi story I told you, who themselves had discovered a simple faith,
  and lived it. Not a traditional faith or course?just as ours is not
  very traditional either. But it is a faith, that is, a way of moving forward
  in the world with integrity and character and conviction.
  
  Our Socinian ancestors lived simple lives in their villages along the Vistula
  in Poland, or up in Lublin, or on the tree lined streets of Cracow. They
  lived lives of peace, gentility, shared resources and mutual support. Like
  the waitress in the children's story this morning, their way of relating
  to other people was not grand, but consisted of homely practices of ethical
  hope by which they treated each other kindly and lovingly. Some bread, some
  wine, some kindness and truth-telling. These little pieces of hope sustained
  them over the years until the Polish legislature, influenced maliciously
  by Jesuit missionaries, passed laws to run them out of Poland and into exile.
  Like the fragments of hope shared in Levertov's poem, "please take a grain
  of hope from me so that mine won't shrink," like her irises which bloom despite
  growing in the inelegant muddy earth, our religious ancestors grew a fragment,
  a flower of principled and ethical religion in an unlikely and violent era.
  Their simple, lived out faith has always been one of my chief inspirations,
  and that inspiration is probably why I am not the most sympathetic minister
  when someone tells me that he or she thinks our religion is not really a
  religion, because we do not share common metaphysical beliefs.
  
  Ah, but we do share one singular belief. We share the common belief that
  it's possible for people of varying spiritual ideas and practices to weave
  a community of love and support and challenge that enables us all to bring
  a measure of hope to a hurting world. If we did not believe that, this church
  would not, in any way, be possible.
  
  Now, you personally may not turn to the sermon on the mount for your spiritual
  sustenance, like the Socinians did and I still do. You may not like science
  fiction stories from the pulpit or even in the library. You may find history
  wearisome to read. All of that does not matter. What does matter is that
  our lives show our faith to the world so clearly, so evidently, that no one
  ever has to ask that silly old question of us, "What does your religion teach?"
  
  Because, even if they did, all we'd have to say by way of answer is, "Just
  watch."

  Spirit of Life, Great Mystery that I am powerless to name?I at least
  name myself:
  
  I am a child of the earth
  rooted in its dark and rich loam.
  You, however, are probably 
  a lot more like the wind, 
  blowing where you will,
  unseen save when the branches bend.
  So look, I require no miracles of you, no favors,
  no special cancellation of laws on my behalf.
  I only want to be more like you,
  like wind that is free and powerful and gentle,
  like you, not obsessed with where I come from,
  like you, not obsessed with where I am going.
  I want my yes to mean yes, my no to mean no,
  and I want my tongue to praise more and
  cut less. I want to uproot the violent images
  which the social world presses into my heart,
  and replace them with images of children at
  play in the sun. I want to face the unspent wrath
  which breeds in my soul when I do not pay attention to what I feel when I
  feel it.
  I want the beat of my heart to hurt no one.
  I want peace in all cities and in all villages
  and in all hearts and in me. Amen.
  
