




Shri Meher Baba's Tour 

OF NINE DAYS THROUGH CENTRAL INDIA* 
BY PRINCESS NORINA MATCHEBELLI 


The last interview this mor≠ning before luncheon was with a Punjabi gentleman who had arrived, and had travelled a thousand miles to meet Baba. When the aspirant gives evi≠dent sign of the sincerity in longing for the realization of Truth, Baba at once makes Himself available. Baba was unusually pleased to see this man. He was one of the rare and unusual types that have been labouring their way on to the spiritual path through years and years of strife and study. To the man who seeks a direct way with open heart, Baba says: "To those who  meet me with open heart I will reveal myself. "

    The man speaks, "I am the ordinary man with mental tri≠bulations, slave of my own moods and my conflicting desires. My unsettled mind gives me no peace. I have tried meditation and concentration, but I have not found in it peace. I have a wife, children, good service and a happy home, but I am ready to resign my life and my possessions to surrender to God. Will you guide me? My coming here was not a sacrifice, it was the fulfilment of my longing. You are God-man. Do help me." Baba 



took in another life. He listens patiently to the outbreak of that weary heart and said: "All right. You have seen many teachers, you have read many booksónow that you have seen me, try to read me and you will realize your object. Follow my advice. For two days, beginning tomorrow, you shall not eat, nor drink, nor speak. After that you shall receive certain instructions, and these you will carry out faithfully. You will find out that by fasting, not speaking and carrying out my instruc≠tions, you will derive the benefit of an inner experience that you have been longing for. There is nothing to be drawn from the outside, everything is thereóin your self already. I am in your heart. The only thing needed is the opening of your heart, and that I will do. If you follow my instructions implicitly, you will see the Reality. You will see the Reality right in front of you, and you will become con≠vinced of its existence beyond the shadow of doubt." Like a child the man had to repeat every word Baba had said to him. The man ended by saying, "I now know my Master, through Your Grace my life will be fulfilled." 

At 3 p. m. Baba gives signal to be ready for the afternoon visits. This time we are driving through the Hindu quarters, and stop at the house of a wealthy merchant, a beautiful old home decorated with col≠oured stucco. In the centre of the garden stands a huge Banyan tree, the atmosphere is filled with perfume of scented herbs and the intense odour of small pink roses from which the famous rose water is drawn. The loyal host stands at the door, putting the customary garland over Baba's head, pros≠trating his body flat on the ground, passing his forehead on His holy feet. The reception is unusually solemn and silent. The host, with a few of his men friends, no woman being present, sits in a circle around the August Visitor. A servant passes a huge silver dish, filled with dried nuts, to Baba and to all present. The breath-taking stillness is lasting for a few minutes...Baba's work is done ...He rises from His seat giving sign to all to leave. Later when I ask Baba why that man per≠formed a reception for Him in such an unusual manner, Baba answers in a very general matter-of-fact way: "The man is seriously illóI went there to help him." 



Our next stop is at the little cottage of the Theosophical Society. We enter the main room which is almost barren except for the rugs and mat≠tresses with a few cushions laid on the floor. A group of women are standing to the right end of the room, and a group of men to the left. Baba 's coach is placed in the centre. The reception is very formal. A very old gentleman, with an unusually white and long beard and very white long hair falling over his shoulders, inti≠mated to one woman to speak. A nice woman, sort of a middle class type of mother, with the independent free manners of a suffragette, and who, no doubt, was active also in the National Cause, but no doubt a sincere seeker for Truth, delivers a regular speech. Her inspired words which, unfortunately, I could not understand as spoken in Marathi, led up to the very wonderful statement which Baba made on board in Eng≠lish: "We must long, and long more to finally realize the Truthóand that through living and experienceóand for that I give my blessings. " The Perfect Statement is deeply felt by all present, as a reverent stillness follows. Baba takes leave in simple cordial manner.

 We return to the home which has become a house of worship. Baba has difficulty to find His way through the pulling and crushing crowd that is filling the garden and barring the doorway. On this day seven thousand people passed. There stands the same pleading martyr of everyday, holding high with his worship 

'' 

the vision , that through the holy meeting had become a deeper reality. But, this time, the few moments of commu≠nion allowed to them, meant farewell. He embraces them, He holds warm their hearts, He caresses their faces, He pinches their cheeks, He looks deep into their eyes. To some He hands a gift. He takes a handkerchief out of my pocket, holds it for a few seconds in His hands, and passes it on to someone. He takes a child on His lap. He makes no dis≠courseóHe gives no adviceó but loves with that love that no 


man can. Baba's suffering to leave behind these helpless children is visible. Suffering is visible in His beautiful face when He takes on to Himself their burdens. 

The last Feast in Commu≠nion in Love with the Great Giver, before departing, was held in His little room. Again the dear ones of the family including J.., the great loving heart, our small group and the three young women, gather for the last prayeróthe Artióin His august presence. 

At 7-30 p. m. we leave the house. The crowd that fol≠lowed to the station is wond≠erful in its demonstration of Love, in pain of separation. All are there, all those I have described and many more. When Baba departs, He only apparently leaves, as He makes Himself inwardly alive and ever present. "Shri Sadguru Meher Baba Maharaj ki jai": the echo of these words follows the train which disap≠pears into the night. 

At other stations more people arrive who have been informed hurriedly about Baba passing the station at a given hour. Baba's luminous hand reaches out of the window into the hands of those who were to receive His blessing. We could hardly recognize any, as the station was very dimly lighted. Baba quickly disposes of His men body-guards to one side, and stretches out on the bench on the opposite side, for the night's rest, disappear-ing completely under one of the new blankets given in Nagpur, without giving any sign apparently of sleep, but really to do the work in the spheres unknown to us. By five o 'clock the next morning He is up again. 

The day is languorously ris≠ing in pale grey, faintly dis≠closing the landscape which, at that early hour, appears similar to the landscapes all over the world. I see in it the Russian Steppes, the barren curves of the melancholy hills of Assisi dry and indescribably holy, here and there some less comfortable habitation still surrounded by some wild blooming hedge. On the de≠serted roads we see the eter≠nally wandering tribe of souls longing for God, marching on these holy roads that we call dusty and bumpy; but through these bumps and holes the intrepid wanderer 



  

in search of Truth has laboured into the Indian soil since time immemorial, creating unique atmosphere of India that can in no way be compared with any atmosphere in any part of the world. I here wish to insert a touching story I read in the "Times of India". It is indeed the picture idealizing the martyrdom of the heroic pil≠grim searching for Godó labouring his Golgotha through the bumpy and dusty roads of India: 

There was a Hindu, no doubt, one of those who are predestined to become saints. His two grown-up sons were taken ill with a dangerous tropical disease, and were in a hospital eighty miles away from their father 's home. The father in distress calls on his God who had never failed him, and offers in sacrifice to crawl on his bare knees all the way from his home to the hospital where his sons were waiting for grace. His wife and two smaller children followed, because they wanted to share in his crucial strife. Along the road in untold ordeal of physical stress, through hot days and cold nights, his wife was the first to succumb. Mid≠way the two younger children were taken ill and later died; nevertheless the man undaunt≠ed crawled on. Soon his knees began to develop a fatal di≠sease, but even that does not weaken his courage. He stands the untold tortures to the very end. And eventually when he reached the hospital, both his sons had died. 

This tragedy of a soul in search for God, because of the simplicity of its facts, is too great to need any commentary. When we told about this man to Baba, He answered: "Good óthis will help the man to advance on the spiritual Path." In a few hours we will have reached the end of our nine days journey. It is 7 a. m. We arrive at the station called Manmad where the old faithful Chevrolet is waiting to drive us home. Here we separate from our merry companions, Kaka, Chanji, Raysab who have to return to Bombay by the same train. Baba, Jal, Adi and myself proceed by car to "Meherabad" to reach there not later than noon.

    Along the road Baba sud≠denly feels hungry. We stop under a huge banyan tree: the shadow of a single leaf would 


have been large enough for a bed to rest upon. A delicious luncheon prepared in Nagpur is unpacked by Adi. After that Baba invites us all for a little siesta which does not last very long. Baba wants to play. So He invites us all in a humorous mood to play dice, when a man walks alongóapparently very pooróburdened with old bun≠dles. Baba sees the man and suddenly interrupts the game ordering Adi to give him food. Adi has to unpack the baskets which he already, and not without difficulty, had care≠fully packed inside the car. An excellent luncheon of patties, cheese, bread and fruit are pre≠sented to the man with these words: "Shri Sadguru Meher Baba is the Giver." To this the man answers in a natural manner," It is my good fate that I should be fed by Him." 

A few miles further on Baba draws to our attention a temple and also the house nearby where Upasni Maharaj is res≠ting. Furthermore Baba ex≠plains to us that Narayan Maharaj's home is not far from here. The fact that appears very interesting to me is that within an area of four thousand miles, in Central India, the five God-realized Men are living and functioning each in His own individual way; and that in this great spiritual drama, the over≠emphasized importance of the Himalayas did have no greater part to play, as Baba Himself often remarks humorously, than the part of the "stone". 

We arrive at "Meherabad". It is noon. Baba in quick manner disposes of all the ordinary activities that during His absence have accumulated. 

The luggage is packed on the strong heads of the tiny servants waiting at the foot of the Hill. This sweet fold untiring in devotion to serve their Master and us, their affectionate friends, walk silently ahead.

    I walk up to the Ashram on the Hill. The gate is open. The work in Being is revealing. I pass on into the atmosphere of life in feeling. The life in feeling in Being we here realizeó" Peace that passeth all understanding reigns in the Ashram on the Hill." 


