
Question 
How does Tawajjuh (concen­tration of the spiritual force) of a spiritual Master function? There are numerous instances of Sufi saints giving Tawajjuh to an aspirant of the Path. Do you ever give Tawajjuh? If so, when and how? Answer 
Tawajjuh in Sufism is the focussing of the spiritual force by a saint on to a disciple concerned. The current is usually directed to the first of the seven centres of spirituality in the human body, and this is generally admitted to be the heart of man. 
This concentration of the spiritual current on to the heart of the disciple should not be mixed up with hypnotic suggestion. In hypnosts the mind of the subject becomes inert and passive. It is held in subjugation for the time being by the stronger mind of the hypnotiser. In this business, however, there is not a tinge of spirituality imparted or received. 
Differentiated from this, Tawajjuh is purely a spiritual operation which is helpful in rousing the latent spark of divinity already in man, and it is infre­quently indulged in by saints only. 
There are different methods of imparting Tawajjuh; but the most important are: (l) Islahi (corrective concentration), (2) Alqai (subtle or psychic), (3) Ittehadi (unifying) and (4) Qalabi (spiritual). 
1. The Islahi Tawajjuh (correc­tive influence) of the spiritual Master cleanses the heart of the disciple of all mundane desires. The disciple in course of time be­comes more tolerant in outlook, less conservative in ideas and beliefs, and generally settles down into an attitude of "live and let live". In short, the temporary feeling of disgust towards the unfavourable circumstances of the world (defeatism) gradually crystalises into a spirit of complete renun­ciation and resignation (self­acquisition). 

2. 
The Alqai Tawajjuh (psychic concentration) is the next higher step, and is brought into operation when the mind of the disciple is completely purged of all things foreign to it. Under its influence the heart is so very perfectly attuned that it receives instructions and guidance regarding the diffi­culties and the subtleties of the spiritual Path direct from the Master whose physical presence or absence makes no difference whatsoever. 

3. 
Ittehadi Tawajjuh (unifying concentration) is a phenomenon very rarely to be witnessed. This Tawajjuh, if given, results in a complete metamorphosis of the disciple, both spiritual and physical. Here the disciple not only becomes spiritually alike unto the Master, but even physically, as a result of sudden metabolical changes, he becomes an exact rep­lica of the Master's physical form. 


One such instance is on record with regard to the Master Khawja Baqi-Billa of Delhi giving this type of Tawajjuh to an inn-keeper. It is related that Khawja Baqi-Billa happened to receive quite a num- ber of guests all unexpected late in the night. There being nothing to eat in the house, the Saint was worried as to how to play the host towards them. A poor inn-keeper, who was there at the time, observing the perplexity of the Master, offered to do the needful in the matter. The Saint granted him permission. The inn-keeper went to his shop in the town, and, returning with whatever eatables available there, feasted the guests of the evening. At this the Master became extremely pleased with the innkeeper and looking at him said, "Demand anything you like at this moment. I promise to give it to you." The poor innkeeper, not knowing what to ask of the Master, simply said, "Make me like unto your own Self." The Saint was quite taken aback by this request, and tried to persuade him to ask for something else instead, in the form of untold wealth or even a kingdom. The innkeeper replied, "I have said my say and you have given your word." Thereupon the Saint had to give in and retired with the man into a private chamber. Inside in the room the Saint subjected the inn-  

 QUESTION BABA ANSWERS 
keeper to his lttehadi Tawajjuh  4. The Qalabi Tawajjuh (spiri­ 
and when, after half an hour, the  tual concentration) is resorted to by  
Master and the disciple came out  Perfect Masters, and the disciples  
of the room, the people there failed  who are subjected to it, become  
to differentiate between the two.  gradually perfect like the Master in  
The Master and the disciple looked  the course of a few months, years  
even physically alike. The only  or decades. The effect of this  
difference noticeable was that the  Tawajjuh, unlike the first two  
inn-keeper was a little unsteady in  mentioned, is permanent, and once  
his gait.  attained it can never be taken away  
Since this spiritual state dawned  or spoiled by anything morally  
upon the inn-keeper all of a sudden  wrong, such as drink, fornication,  
and unprepared, he could not  theft or a lie. It is this Tawajjuh I  
contain it longer. He expired after  am imparting to my disciples.  
three days.  There is another type of  
Even in the animal kingdom  Tawajjuh which I need mention  
something akin to lttehadi  here. It is called Ifaqiya Tawajjuh  
Tawajjuh is practised. There is an  (restorative concentration). This  
insect in the East called Anjanhari  Tawajjuh is given by a Master to a  
(a species of caterpillar) which  disciple after realization, when the  
never procreates in the ordinary  latter refuses to return to normality  
way by laying eggs. When it is  from the enjoyment of the highest  
about to die, it brings another  state of consciousness. When a  
insect from the fields, and concen­ disciple is required to return to the  
trates upon it by droaning away on  normal state of consciousness for  
the object of concentration for  the performance of the duty  
some length of time, until the  devolving upon him towards  
insect is transformed into its own  humanity, the Master uses this  
likeness—that of a caterpillar. No  Tawajjuh to wean him away from  
sooner this physical transform- the state of the highest divine bliss  
ation is achieved, the original  to the plane of painful duty on  
insect expires.   earth. 
