A Visit from Mom, June

The visit starts out happily enough. Pam is showing her mother the life-size llama she's made out of bubble wrap, mailing tubes and papier-mâché. Marian, who loves crafts and has a well-stocked wood shop, is amused and interested.

The Dalai Lama has been in the news, and Pam jokes that her creation is called "Dolly the Llama."

"Guess what I used for the legs?" Pam asks her mom. Marian hesitates and Pam tells her: upside down TV tables.

Lately, Pam's energy has been running high. She still has trouble carrying out the small tasks of life - whether brushing her teeth or doing dishes. But she has plenty of energy for her artwork.

Now, she is midway in the creation of a religious triptych - which she wants to give to Carolyn - and is logging long hours on her llama.

While her enthusiasm for her work is catching, her energy is beginning to have a manic edge.

When the conversation with her mother turns to her father, Pam's intensity grows. She has tried to reconcile with him, written him letters, but she hasn't gotten anywhere.

"I don't understand why you stand up for him - a man who has treated your daughter this way for 30 years," Pammy shouts.

"He was wrong, Pammy, there's no excuse for his behavior," Marian says.

Lately, Marian has been making a more concerted effort to see Pam. While Howard still does not see his daughter, he no longer makes it uncomfortable for Marian to do so. However, Marian sometimes hesitates because "if she's doing well, I'm afraid I'll rock the boat and if she's not, I'm afraid she'll rock mine ..."

Phil and Martha are also a more regular part of Pam's life. Whenever Phil's family visits from North Carolina, they see Pam. Like her mother, Martha can feel overwhelmed when Pam's illness flares. She prefers it if she has something concrete to do - cleaning Pam's apartment - when she comes to visit.

Pam starts to wonder aloud whether she'll go to her father's funeral and then tells her mother, "I will because I'll want to comfort you. I'm not going to your funeral because I don't want to comfort him."

"I really don't want to talk about this," Marian says. She adds that perhaps she should go out and check on her dog, Procyon, named for Orion's puppy, in the car.

"Please don't go! Please don't go!" Pammy begs. "I didn't mean to embarrass you. I love you!"

Marian stays and the visit is salvaged. Later, Pam says her mother is a wonderful woman who has grown greatly in recent years. Although Pam has spent much of her life angry at her father - she files his books in the Holocaust section on her shelf - it's clear she would like to have him in her life.

She doesn't need an apology she says. Just talking about The Nation together would suffice.

It's little surprise when Pam is hospitalized again. She has been manic and easily irritated, and recently has fiddled with her medications, hoping to lose weight.

Carolyn is going to visit Pam and her apprehensions spill out. As a psychiatrist, Carolyn knows she should be used to visiting psych wards, but when she visits Pam, she comes as a sister. The sister who is OK.

Seeing Pammy, her idol, in two hospital johnnies behind the sunglasses - worn to protect her from evil - is always a shock. "Can you imagine gaining all that weight?" she asks. "It's so unfair - the whole thing."

And there are the burns on Pam's forehead and arms. "It's like those are my arms. How can you scar my arms?"

Harder to understand is why having Pammy in the hospital - Pammy sick again - prompts Carolyn's ancient feelings, the fossilized permanent sense of always being second best. All the discussion over Pammy, with Pammy, the talk of her brilliance. "She's a colorful paperback and I'm the staid leatherbound classic on the shelf. I feel like the ordinary colors standing next to a rainbow."

If she tells this to anyone, they are, of course, startled. And when Carolyn sees Pam in the hospital, sees how little she has, she feels ashamed.

"I started out feeling the universe is divided and then - Geez, I've gotten 95 percent of it.

"I don't blame myself, but it is true that because Pammy got sick, I got a life. Maybe it's true that I would have a life anyway, but it would have been different ... I didn't make her ill, but I profited by her illness."
