 2008-5-4 Iraq.doc 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

on a morning in late spring,
 to celebrate that we are alive together 

now, at this hour, this moment,
 and that the whole earth is filled with people 

like us: sometimes loving, sometimes fearful,
 often powerful, but always mortal. So we say: 

 
Mindful that a growing vision of a just world calls
 us together, that a community of 
commitment, courage and care sustains us, and that 
a life transformed by depth of spirit 
may illumine our way, we have kindled this light as
 the sign of our circle of life and love. 
 
Ceremony of Installation of Dick Dawson 

 
Ministers
:      Before the witness of this assembly, 
       and in the spirit of truth and love, 

       we say: 

 
Wendy:
      that you Dick Dawson, having studied, 
        having prepared, having worked with 

       diligence, and having found both joy 

            in the work and the skills for doing it
 well,  
            are ready. 

 
Mark:
       Having been credentialed by our District, 
            and confirmed by our Trustees, we say y
ou  
           are ready to serve as you have been serv
ing,  
            a member serving members, 

           with a particular focus on ministry to s
eniors.  
 
Wendy:
          We say you are ready to serve as 
       you have been serving, with 

       attention to detail and commitment. 

 
Mark:
      We say you are ready to serve 
       as you have been serving, with an over-brimm
ing  
                        heart and strength of spiri
t. 
 
Words
 from Kay Fisher, representing the Commissioned Lay
 Leader Committee of the 
Ohio Meadville District. Presentation of Certificat
e. 
  

Words of Blessing
 from Eric Dawson, son of Dick and Karen Dawson 
 
 Act of Installation
:  (Members may rise) 
 
And now we, the members of the First Unitarian Univ
ersalist Church of Columbus 
OH, recognizing the path you have traveled and the 
firm commitment of your heart 
and the skills you have honed in these last three y
ears, do hereby install you as a 
Commissioned Lay Leader among us, to be designated 
Chaplain. 
 
Sequence 

 
The redbuds glow 

as lilacs perfume the air  

without holding anything back. 

Here at least. In Columbus. In Ohio. 

But in Argentina, the leaves are falling, 

and blowing crisp down narrow city lanes. 

And in Ghana the sun is relentless,  

the mangoes ripening in its blinding light. 

In Basra, Iraq, a girl is humming herself to sleep.
 In Madras the scent of cumin and ginger 

still spices the air, while the poems of Mirabai, R
umi and Hafiz run in fragments through  
the dreams of sleepers. 

In Chongking, apple blossoms  

open in the northern park. Children 

play at school, for it™s already Monday there. 

In the great central market at Osaka, 

fish thrash silver in icy boxes of seaweed. 

In San Francisco, the morning sun 

paints everything yellow and pink, 

and the light is clear and sharp on the stucco. 

But here, the redbuds glow, and the lilacs 

delight, and the silence arrives on a bellsound 

to offer us enough spaciousness to be amazed.  

 
silence 

 
No matter where you I go in the world, 

I see that people are born, they die,  

they love, they grieve, they fear, they  

remember and they imagine. 

From pole to pole, and round the 

girth of the equator, people live lives 

that are as important to each of them 

as ours are to us.  So let us set a time 

aside to name our loves, our sorrows, 

our memories and our hopes, speaking 

them into the welcoming silence that now  

pools in this room and in our hearts. 

 
naming 

  
Around the world, people sing. They write 

poems that whirl like windmills and lyrics that 

dissolve their loneliness in a luminous call 

to the spirit. Different languages, different tunes
, 
different images–one humanity. One planet. 

One immortal song of which we are all part. 

 
Readings 

 
The First Reading 
is a poem by Jamil Sidqi al-Zahawi, 1863-1936, a ma
n with a career that 
is almost hard to believe. He was the Whitman of Ir
aq, introducing free verse. He was a 
professor at several universities in the Middle Eas
t, he was  elected to parliament twice, served 
on the supreme court in several nations, and was th
e editor in chief of Baghdad™s main 
newspaper. This poem, written toward the end of his
 life, after all of his travels, speaks of his 
love for his land. 

 
The Sky of Iraq 

 
Oh mirror of transparent clarity, sky of Iraq! 

You best of skies, look at me! 

For a long time my heart has loved you 

and adored you. You are like my soul. 

Look at me in the morning when the nightingale sing
s on the high branches of the tree. 
Look at me when the sun disappears, 

always witnessed by the staring eyes of shadows. 

Look at me when creation hides its commotion 

and nature, in the darkness of light,  

only offers the quiet murmur of nearby waters. 

Look at me when the autumn mourns  

its leafless branches, and the gardens lose their f
lowers and their brilliance. 
Look at me secretly, through the broken clouds 

and look at me when I cry 

and look at you with my tearful eyes. 

 
The Second Reading 
this morning is a powerful poem by the Iraqi poet D
unya Mikhail, who  
graduated from the University of Baghdad, but now t
eaches here in the States at Wayne State 
University in Detroit.  This poem was written in 20
00. Note that date:  this was written 
before 
the present war.
  
How magnificent the war is 

How eager 

and efficient! 

Early in the morning 

it wakes up the sirens 

and dispatches ambulances 

to various places  

swings corpses through the air 

 rolls stretchers to the wounded 

summons rain 

from the eyes of mothers 

dig into the earth 

dislodging many thing 

from under the ruins 

some are lifeless and glistening 

others are pale and still throbbing 

it produces the most questions 

in the minds of children 

entertains the gods 

by shooting fireworks and missiles 

into the sky 

sows mines in the fields 

and reaps punctures and blisters 

urges families to emigrate 

stands beside the clergymen 

as they curse the devil 

(while the poor remain 

with one hand in the searing fire). 

The war continues working, day and night 

it inspires tyrants 

to deliver long speeches 

awards medals to generals 

and themes to poets 

it contributes to the industry 

of artificial limbs 

provides food for flies 

adds pages to the history books 

achieves equality 

between killer and killed  

teaches lovers to write letters 

accustoms young women to waiting 

fills the newspapers with article sand pictures 

builds new houses for the orphans 

invigorates the coffin makers 

and gives grave diggers  

a pat on the back 

paints a smile on the leader™s face, 

It works with unparalleled diligence! 

Yet no one gives it a word of praise. 

 
Sermon 

 
With all the election brickbats flying back and for
th, with fingers pointing, and innuendos 
running rife; with gas prices causing heart 

palpitations, and pundits assuring us at every 

 juncture that we are all headed either for 

the end of the world, or a brand new age of 

joy and peace, you just don™t hear as much about  

Iraq these days, do you? 

 
So let me make up for that by talking about Iraq to
day. And suggesting a new approach our 
hearts might take whenever we hear that word, or se
e it written in a paper or magazine. 
 
It™s a pretty old country, Iraq.  Even its name is 
old. Most scholars say it dates back 5000 years 
to one of the city-states in its lowlands, namely U
ruk. A couple of professors suggest that the 
name Iraq is actually a form of the middle Persian 
word that 
means
 ?lowlands,? but even if that 
is true, the name is still a couple thousand years 
old. 
 
But whatever the case, as I said, the country 
itself 
is indeed old. 
Very
 old. The archeology of the 
country is rich, a veritable treasure trove of anci
ent civilizations. Great Babylon is there, the 
New York of the ancient near east, its famous Hangi
ng Gardens now only a pile of barely 
visible ruins.  Nineveh is there too, up north, the
 seat of the great Assyrian Empire. Iraq fills the 
Western Scriptures too– mythic Abraham came out of 
Ur, a great city in the south of Iraq. 
Uruk itself was the fabled city of Gilgamesh, whose
 ancient story was the first example of 
world-class literature. The biblical stories of Ada
m and Eve and Noah are all either biting 
commentaries on that great novel, or versions of it
s powerful chapters. And the famous Tower 
of Babel itself, a phrase that™s part of modern Eng
lish whether you read the Bible or no, refers to 
the great temple tower of the god Marduk. When peop
le visited the ancient city of Babylon, that 
tower stood above every other structure, glowing bl
ue in the sun. Its stupefying loftiness found 
its way into many world mythologies.  

 
In other words, even though we live in the United S
tates, the roots of Iraq are planted in our 
garden too. Deeply. 

 
Baghdad itself was founded in the eighth century as
 the capital of the Islamic Caliphate. Within 
a century it became the largest and most cosmopolit
an city in the world, with over a million 
people, the largest such city since the fall of Ale
xandria. Its universities, markets, schools and  
libraries were famous. 

 
But our arrival in Baghdad five years ago was not t
he first time it has undergone occupation. 
The Mongols beat it into the ground in the 13
th
 century. The city lost the greater portion of both
 
its population and its urban glory. A few centuries
 later, a Turkish speaking Mongol, Timur 
Lenk, known as Tamerlane here in the West, in an at
tempt to restore the then faded Mongol 
Empire, invaded Iraq and pummeled Baghdad again, ex
ecuting over 20,000 in a terrorizing 
genocide. 

 
The Ottoman Era saw Iraq™s fortune restored, if not
 its glory, and for a couple of hundred years 
there was relative peace. Until, during World War 1
, the United Kingdom sent over 400,000 
people to the Ottoman Empire to drive the Ottomans 
out of the area. (!) The land was 
?mandated? to England. 

 
The English helped to install a monarchy, patterned
 largely after their own. After a few decades 
as a kingdom, lasting until 1958, Iraq fell to a se
ries of military 
coups d™etat
. And finally, as you 

 know, not long after the last 
coup d™etat,
 the name of Saddam Hussein rose to international 
prominence partially because of the notoriety of hi
s undeniable human rights abuses. 
 
But during all of this time: great poets, producing
 works no less beautiful than what you heard 
this morning as readings; literature of other kinds
 as well; coveted abstract art; music, including 
pop music, featuring the 
oud
, a kind of lute. And, though it™s a more diffuse w
ay of looking at 
the concept of culture, if you went to Baghdad a fe
w years ago, you would have heard daily 
conversations in the many tea houses found there, a
nd you would have heard stories telling of an 
internationally famous culture of generosity, where
, during Ramadan especially, but at other 
times of the year as well, the poor are invited int
o the homes of the more well-to-do for supper 
and refreshment. 

 
Now Iraq is occupied again. By us. The tea shops ar
e closed. The Baghdad Museum, filled with 
the surviving treasure of Uruk, Ur, Babylon and Nin
eveh, looted completely. Nothing is left. 
The death toll is high–over 4000 of our own young m
en and women, and almost 600,000 of 
their own men, women and children, most of them not
 terrorists or rioters, but people who used 
to enjoy artichokes with their roasted fish on Sund
ay, look up at the powder blue of their 
beloved wide sky and write poetry on Monday afterno
ons, make love during a Tuesday siesta, 
shop for ripe lemons on Wednesday, go to a doctor™s
 appointment on Thursday, pray ancient 
prayers in the mosque on Fridays, and on Saturdays,
 watch a little soccer on TV, with suitable 
shouting, of course.  Saddam and his family, and a 
few other officials of their ilk: undeniably 
terrible. But the rest of Iraq? As far as I can tel
l, Iraqis are not very different from us–good and 
bad and mediocre, loving and fearful and devout and
 doubting and confused and desirous of 
peace, and weary of war. Just like us.  

 
I don™t personally know anyone who champions this w
ar over here anymore. Even those who 
thought it 
was 
a good idea in the beginning. Five years of mayhem 
and misery is more than 
anyone can take. 

 
And my main point in this first part of the sermon 
is this: that any ?occupation? involves at least 
two countries, the occupied nation and the occupyin
g nation. And even if the cities in the 
occupying nation are not destroyed, their populatio
ns decimated, their museums looted, that 
does not
 mean that there is no war here in the occupying na
tion, in the States. It does not mean 
that the war is all over there. That it is far, far
 away. 
 
No. I don™t think so one bit. To borrow a strong me
taphor which the Qur™an more properly uses 
of God, this war ?is as close to us as the vein pul
sing in our own neck. 
Our
 necks. Which are 
here. In Ohio. Right under our heads. And above our
 hearts. 
 
And by saying that, I am not talking about how this
 occupation, this war, is destroying our 
economy, crumbling our infrastructure, raising our 
national debt to such a height that there are 
few economists who think we™ll recover in our lifet
ime.  I am not talking about the 120 billion 
dollars in lifetime-costs for veterans of this war 
coming home wrecked in body or spirit, 
although clearly, all of that is dire news. 

 
I am talking about the war in America. I am talking
 about the fact that our own spirits, souls, 
minds, hearts, selves–use whichever words you will–
.are being occupied just as much as 
Baghdad is occupied. I am talking about the beginni
ng of our spiritual destruction as a nation. 
 
 I was talking to my friend Richard this week who re
minded me that it was Yom Ha Shoah this 
week, the annual remembrance among Jews of the Shoa
h, the Outrage, commonly called The 
Holocaust.  During first half of the 1940s, as you 
well know, some Germans visited destruction 
on other Germans, Jews, Gypsies, disabled folk, Jeh
ovah™s Witnesses, protestors, both 
Protestant and Catholic, and gay men and lesbians. 
And on peoples who lived near Germany: 
Poles, Czechs, Slovakians, Ukrainians–
and even one of our own famous ministers, Norbert 
Capek, of Prague, and Dachau. 

 
After the war was over, and the horrific magnitude 
of the destruction was made known, German 
citizens were thrown into a moral and spiritual cri
sis, symbolized by the question ?What was 
your father, your mother, your grandfather, your gr
andmother, your sister, your brother, you 
–.
doing
 during the war??   For many years, German schools 
avoided that question, and taught 
history only up to World War 1. They simply avoided
 talking about the Third Reich. But then 
something amazing happened. And I learned this dire
ctly from a young German man who 
served as my intern in Hayward, Axel Gehrmann.  Axe
l and I were driving to a minister™s 
gathering in Palm Springs. Six hours where we were 
free to talk at leisure without a deadline in 
sight. So I was bold enough to ask him how Germans 
of his generation were dealing with the 
whole World War 2 debacle. 

 
?Oh, it was tough, but my generation started the tu
rn around. We all, and I mean all of us, read a 
controversial book called Our Inability to Mourn
 written by the psychologists Alexander and 
Margarete Mitscherlich in 1975. They wrote about co
llective behavior in nations, and they 
boldly addressed the whole Hitler era without flinc
hing. They spoke of a lack of shame, a 
lack of guilt, and how such things are rooted in de
pression and disillusionment. This book 
caused a national conversation, which was not much 
covered outside of Germany. But it 
was serious and we left very few stones unturned.  
Older folks faced their pasts, their 
regrets, and came to what can only be called a heal
thy sense of shame instead of the 
unhealthy shame they often experienced in their fam
ilies. There were literally years of 
tears, honesty, confessions, and expressions of pub
lic regret and repentance. Such things 
cannot bring back the dead, of course; we all knew 
that. But it did mark a turn around in 
our national life and consciousness. It affected fo
lks in East and West Germany, in North 
and South, in Bavaria and Westphalia. It was very d
eep work, and thus very difficult, but 
the results of these conversations and challenges s
pread throughout the nation and 
changed us forever. Oh, sure, there are still a few
 stubborn folks and neo-Nazi skinheads 
making a fuss, but their power is negligible. They 
are seen for what they are now, and 
largely ignored by most of us.? 

 
This numbers among the most insightful and moving c
onversations I have ever had. We 
talked for hours and he filled me in on the details
.  But I thought of what he said when I 
talked to Richard about Yom Ha Shoah. 

 
And I thought of what he said when the BREAD clergy
 gathered together this week to 
discuss a book we have been reading together, calle
d Where Have All The Prophets 
Gone?
  And one of us, when he was speaking about this sa
me issue, said the following 
amazing sentence: ?People always forget that it doe
sn™t make any difference whether the 
perpetrators™ violence is called right, wrong, just
ified, cruel, impulsive or deranged: grief 
and mourning and sorrow and tears and repentance ar
e always necessary if the destruction 
is not to become a permanent disfigurement in both 
the spirits of the victims and the 
spirits of the perpetrators.? 

  
And then I thought of Axel™s speech about Germany. 
And I thought how we here in the 
States have never really had a public conversation 
about the violence we have perpetrated 
in our own nation
–the destruction of the Native civilizations, and t
he institution of 
slavery.  

 
And please, it makes absolutely no difference that 
my great, great grandparents were 
herding sheep in the mountains of Italy instead of 
fighting the Civil War. I am an 
American now, fully a part of its history by making
 that claim. 
 
And I think it™s a complete waste of my time, and r
ather escapist, for me to say, ?This is 
not my administration. This is not my war. I never 
thought it was right in the first place.? 
Because the deaths are still mounting, the destruct
ion of Baghdad this time is at a higher 
level than what Tamerlane and the Mongols were able
 to accomplish. Worse than you or I 
can imagine. 

 
I know, of course, there are no easy answers now ab
out the situation in Iraq. I accept that. 
It hurts, but I am a realist.  

 
And, as an idealist as well, I am proud that groups
 like the Unitarian Universalist Service 
Committee, and our own Association President, Bill 
Sinkford, have spoken out plainly on 
this issue, and suggested ways for the ordinary cit
izen to get involved. 
 
But mostly, I think, as I conclude this sermon, of 
this morning™s children™s story, and the 
young boy who testifies that while writing the grac
eful Iraqi word for War, Harb, his pen 
flows easily, whereas he finds stubbornness and res
istance when writing the difficult 
curves and slants of the word for Peace, Salaam. 

 
Exactly. Exactly what Axel confirmed for me. Peace 
is not easy. War is far easier. And 
peace isn™t just the cessation of fighting. It™s th
e 
beginning
: of grief, sorrow, repentance, 
rent garments, mourning and honesty, heart-to-heart
, land-to-land. It™s not just the 
withdrawal of troops from the occupied land. It™s w
ithdrawing them from our occupied 
hearts. Supporting the troops is not wearing a flag
 pin, but committing ourselves to them, 
helping them to recover from the horrors of war, wh
ich rips the soul as well as the body 
into pieces. Thus, I will conclude my sermon this m
orning by affirming that I hope we, as 
a grieving nation, can rewrite, with our lives, wit
h our hearts, with our actions, the 
powerful poem I read earlier by Iraqi poet, Dunya M
ikhail. Instead of beginning 
How 
magnificent the war is! 
Let™s write: How magnificent the peace is! And inst
ead of ending 
it with: war ?
works with unparalleled diligence! Yet no one gives
 it a word of praise,
? let™s 
conclude our poem with ?
Peacemaking works with unparalleled diligence! Yet 
the point is 
not to praise it; the point is to live it.
? 
 
Offering 

 
The offering is the central ceremony of the free ch
urch. By it we affirm that the freedom with 
which we give echoes the freedom we claim for our l
ives, and spiritual growth. Freely we give, 
and freely we receive 

 
Prayer for Peace 

  
Spirit of Peace, 

now we arrive; 

open your door 

to your shelter and your healing. 

Welcome us now 

with warm embrace! 

We™ve been away 

and are ready for your laughter, 

and all your tears, and your hard truth. 

Spirit of Peace, we are here, here we are. 

 
(sung to the tune of Spirit of Life; 

lyric not to be used without permission.) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
