 September 24, 1989    Bethlehem Baptist Church    John Piper, Pastor    
    THE SACRIFICE OF A SHARED LIFE    (Hebrews 13:16)    
    Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today and for ever. Do not   be led away by diverse and strange teachings; for it is well that   the heart be strengthened by grace, not by foods, which have not   benefited their adherents. We have an altar from which those who   serve the tent have no right to eat. For the bodies of those   animals whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high   priest as a sacrifice for sin are burned outside the camp. So   Jesus also suffered outside the gate in order to sanctify the   people through his own blood. Therefore let us go forth to him   outside the camp, and bear the abuse he endured. For here we have   no lasting city, but we seek the city which is to come. Through   him then let us continually offer up a sacrifice of praise to God,   that is, the fruit of lips that acknowledge his name. Do not   neglect to do good and to share what you have, for such sacrifices   are pleasing to God.    
    
    Let me begin this morning by reminding you of something from verse   10. It says, "We (that is, we Christians) have an altar from which   those who serve the tent (that is, the Jewish priests, serving   with the sacrifices at the tabernacle) have no right to eat." What   this means is that Jesus gave himself (7:27;9:14) as our sacrifice   once for all (9:28) on the altar of the cross. He became our   passover lamb (1&yuml;Corinthians&yuml;5:7) and took our place   (2&yuml;Corinthians&yuml;5:21; 1&yuml;Peter&yuml;3:18) and bore   our sins (1&yuml;Peter&yuml;2:24) and became for us a source of   eternal food (John&yuml;6:53f) which meets our deepest needs and   gives us everlasting life.    
    The reason it says in verse 10 that the priests have no right to   eat from this altar is that they have rejected Jesus as their   Messiah and the Son of God. Any one who believes may come and eat.   Jesus said in John&yuml;6:35, "I am the bread of life. He who   comes to me shall not hunger; and he who believes in me shall   never thirst." The only person who has no right to eat is the one   who won't believe and come.    
    So what we saw in verse 10 was the tragic division between the   Christian and Jewish faiths. Jesus came and divided the true and   the false. There are two altars: there is the old altar in   Jerusalem with the old sacrifices; and there is the new altar   outside the gate (v.&yuml;12) where Jesus offered himself once for   all for sin. Jews and gentiles who come to this altar for   forgiveness and for strength find acceptance and hope. Jews and   Gentiles who refuse to come have no right to the altar of life and   will perish in their sins.    
    And so Christianity began, pushed out of Judaism by those who   rejected Jesus as the Christ, but in God's sight heirs of the   promise and possessors of the kingdom (Matthew&yuml;21:43). Now in   verses 13-16 the way of life in this new religion called   Christianity is described. It's a life of joyful sacrifice to the   God of love.    
    There is the sacrifice of suffering. Verse 13: "Let us go forth   with him outside the camp, and bear the abuse he endured."    
    There is the sacrifice of praise. Verse 15: "Through him then let   us continually offer up a sacrifice of praise to God, that is, the   fruit of lips that acknowledge his name."    
    And there is the sacrifice of a shared life. Verse 16: "Do not   neglect to do good and to share what you have for such sacrifices   are pleasing to God."    
    Last week we talked about the sacrifice of praise and stressed   that the number one priority at Bethlehem is the cultivation of   hearts that stand in awe of God so that the sacrifice of praise   will really be fruit of the lips and not works of the law.    
    Today I want us to focus on verse 16, the sacrifice of a shared   life (Priority number two). Very simply, the life of a Christian   is not only to be a worshiping, praising life, but a shared life;   a life of doing good for others and sharing your possessions and   your heart with others. Verse 16 says, "Do not neglect (or forget)   to do good and to share what you have." Then a reason is given for   why we should do this: "For such sacrifices are pleasing to   God."    
    What sort of things does the writer have in mind? I think we can   see if we look back to the beginning of the chapter.   Hebrews&yuml;13:1-3: "Let brotherly love continue. Do not neglect   to show hospitality to strangers, for thereby some have   entertained angels unawares. Remember those who are in prison, as   though in prison with them; and those who are ill-treated, since   you also are in the body."    
    So the kind of thing he means by doing good and sharing would be   hospitality (having people &#151; even people you don't know   &#151; over to your house after Sunday service); visiting people   in prison; caring for any who are afflicted. But of course there   are hundreds of ways to do good for people and to share your life   with people. The point is that people who get their strength and   their wisdom from the altar of the cross, from Jesus Christ, are   people who live for others. They get up in the morning and think   about how they can do the most good for other people today. This   is the sacrifice that they offer to the Lord day after day.    
    And one of the reasons for building a new and wider network of   small groups at Bethlehem is to help cultivate the relationships   where the sacrifice of a shared life can be made in the most   caring and helpful way. Tom will pick up on this at the end of the   service.    
    The text says that such sacrifices are pleasing to God. And I want   to spend the rest of our time pondering why that is, because I   think if you can see why God is pleased with this way of life it   will please you to and make it a joy and not a burden.    
    1. It pleases God first because it honors the death of his Son.   That is, it affirms the reason that Jesus suffered and shows that   his death was effective in its purpose. Verse 12 says, "So Jesus   also suffered outside the gate in order to sanctify the people   through his own blood." Jesus suffered to sanctify you, that is,   to purify you and make you holy and good and loving like he is.   How do you show that sanctification? How do you affirm the   sufferings of Jesus and show that they were not in vain in your   life?    
    Titus 2:14 says, "Jesus gave himself for us to redeem us from all   iniquity and to purify for himself a people of his own who are   zealous for good deeds." So the way to show the truth and power of   the sufferings of Jesus is to be zealous for good deeds. God is   pleased with our doing good and our sharing because it   demonstrates the success and power of the sufferings of his   Son.    
    2. The second reason God is pleased with the sacrifices of doing   good and sharing your life is that they display his   trustworthiness. They show his faithfulness and reliability. How   can good deeds and sharing display the faithfulness of God?    
    You can see how in 13:5: "Keep your life free from the love of   money, and be content with what you have; for (note this word,   "for"; here comes the basis of our freedom from the love of money)   He &#91;God&#93; has said, "I will never fail you nor forsake   you." Now consider the relationship between the love of money and   the ability to do good and share what you have. If you love money,   if your trust for the future and for happiness is in money, then   doing good and sharing will be hindered. So Hebrews says, "Keep   your life free from the love of money," so you will be free to   live for others and not for your own private gain. And how do you   keep your life free from the love of money according to verse 5?   By trusting the promise of God, "I will never fail you nor forsake   you."    
    This means that every time you offer the sacrifice of doing good   and sharing because you no longer depend on money, you show that   you are trusting the promise of God and that God is trustworthy   and faithful. When you can live for others without needing   material payoff, you show that God is your payoff. A life lived   for others is a bright testimony to the worth of God and the   truthfulness of His promises.    
    And God loves to see His truth and worth exalted. So He loves the   sacrifices of doing good and sharing.    
    3. Third, God is pleased with such sacrifices because they are in   a real sense His own work, and He delights fully in the excellence   and beauty of His own achievements. You can see this in 13:20-21.   "Now may the God of peace who brought again from the dead our Lord   Jesus, the great shepherd of the sheep, by the blood of the   eternal covenant, equip you with everything good that you may do   His will, working in you that which is pleasing in his sight,   through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever.   Amen.    
    What this shows is, first, that God equips us with everything good   that we may do his will, and, second, that God works in us that   which is pleasing in his sight. So when I have the faith and the   freedom and the zeal to do good and to share my life with others,   I cannot boast in myself; it is God at work in me. Let him who   boasts boast in the Lord (1&yuml;Corinthians&yuml;1:31).    
    When you have the grace to live for others &#151; to do good and   to share &#151; it is just that: it's GRACE! Paul said in   1&yuml;Corinthians&yuml;15:10, "I worked hard, nevertheless it was   not I, but the grace of God which is with me." And since we know   that God rejoices in all his works (Psalm&yuml;104:31) we know   that He rejoices in the work of grace that gives us the faith and   the freedom and the zeal to live for others. So the third reason   God is pleased with our doing good and sharing is that this is His   work and not just hours. And rejoices in His own handiwork.    
    I think these three reasons that God delights in the sacrifice of   a shared life are the reasons that we should too.    
    1. It is a thrilling thing to know that the way you are living is   proving the success of the sufferings of Jesus. It should be a   great incentive to you that your life can verify that Jesus did   not die in vain. Your good deeds and your shared life are the   triumph of his cross.    
    2. It is a thrilling thing to know that your life is a showcase   (in all your weakness) of the trustworthiness of God and the   reliability of His promises. To bank your hope on God and not on   money or things is a deeply satisfying experience. It feels risky   and vulnerable in one way; but in another way there is a very   profound sense of security that you have chosen the way that makes   known the worth and reliability of God.    
    3. And it is a thrilling thing when your good deeds and shared   life give evidence that you are the very handiwork of God &#151;   that He is at work in you to will and to do His good pleasure, and   that He who began a good work in you will complete it to the day   of Christ.    
    So my prayer is that as you hear Tom Steller describe the small   group vision at Bethlehem you will feel a deep desire to share   your life with others &#151; to do them good, to satisfy your own   soul, and to please your heavenly Father.       Copyright 1989, 1998 John Piper      Piper's   Notes            
