'SPIRITUAL uplift of humanity' has been the One Theme of my life and I was a day-dreamer, night-dreamer, walking-dreamer, wakeful-dreamer and literally a dreamer of dreamers. Yes, though a dreamer I had a sincere yearn­ing to see the Dawn of Light shedding lustre all over the world and serving as the only panacea for all our modern evils—social, economic and political. As soon as I came out of the University I resolved to serve only this great Cause and went through series of apprentice courses to appreciate fully the significance of the statement—'Spiritual uplift of humanity'. During a period of nearly twenty-five years' touring career of a 'Civilized Nomad' I little dreamt that I would see in Shri Meher Baba the God-man, a real fulfilment and a full consummation of my heart's Ideal. 
As a Sri Vaishnava Brahmin occupying a great spiritual hierarchy I was initiated into the great mysteries of the Dravidian Saints and Sages in Realms Divine. Vedic study and Vedantic Research in the Inner Laboratory helped me to compare notes with those Dravidian Saints and Sages and there was no other go for me to adopt but the transcendental method of communion with God to understand, appreciate and act up to the great Cosmic Harmony. Castes, creeds and colours socially served the purpose to a certain extent but they were after all social necessities. Beyond caste, beyond creed and beyond sex; beyond theology and beyond philosophy shines the Light Eternal and a real Communion with That alone raised the aspirant above the pairs of opposites, rooted out selfishness and broadened the outlook of man to embrace 

humanity as his concern and work for its emancipation. All Glory to God. 
Shri Meher Baba comes to Mysore and translates my humble thoughts into Concrete Reality in the 'Universal Spiritual Centre' at Byramangala. Meher Baba is verily Love Incarnate and I have seen with my own eyes how Love in Meher Baba operates as the most efficient Service. The first Indian Guru to preach and act on the great humanistic doctrines of 'Love God and serve His creatures' as the only means of Beatitude was Bhagwan Sri Ramanuja who flourished in the eleventh century 
A.D. A mighty rival of Shri Shankara with his Qualified Monotheism, He let loose the cords that bound intellect to play upon the heart to arrive at Soul-realization and God-realization. Indeed Shri Ramanuja was a perfect combination of Head and Heart with a practical Religion on the transcendental method. He lived 120 years to love God and serve God in the world. 
'God fulfils Himself in many ways' and who knows that Shri Meher Baba's teaching the 'Absolutism' of Shri Shankara harmoniously blends with the 
'Humanism' of Shri Ramanuja, Many of the Mahrashtra Saints tried to effect a compromise between the monotheistic and dualistic schools of thought but the success was purely local. 
Under Divine Dispensation we may now see a possibility in the Divine Game going on at Byramangala of the Extremist Head of Sri Shankara and Extremist Heart of Shri Ramanuja working together for the Glory of God and the emancipation of man on the plains of 'Love and Service'. 
'Knock on the head, the heart opens' is a Reality in the Transcendental Regions. All the Saints and Sages in world have lived to prove it. Therefore we can safely trust that Shri Meher Baba will make his 'Spiritual Centre' the most practical Institution where any man or woman can develop most harmoniously a perfect combination of both head and heart; besides, we are living in an age that can be truly called 'International' and if we have to see the Empire of Humanity we can only expect that the Great Spiritual Leader shall be only a Divine Being who will bring down the Millennium on Earth. 


