Psychiatry and Blame, 1971

When Howard arrives at the Brown infirmary after Pam's overdose, he finds her much worse than he expected. She is clearly psychotic. He sobs when he sees her, but in her confused state Pam thinks he is laughing.

He takes Pam to Yale-New Haven Hospital - which is at the tail end of a benighted era. It is a time when psychiatrists talk about the "schizophrenogenic mother" - the mother who causes her child's psychosis. No one mentions schizophrenia to the Spiros - they don't want to label. To Howard and Marian, the blame seems to be directed at them, particularly Howard. Pam has been so angry at him.

This drives Howard away. He has some experience with mental illness - an aunt suffered with it. Now, he is upset with the psychiatric system and with Pam. "To be blamed for your own illness is bad enough," Howard says years later. "To be blamed for your daughter's illness ..."

Marian, who never trusted psychiatrists to begin with - she grew up believing that they chose their specialty because of their own problems - has her doubts confirmed. The psychiatrists can't seem to help her daughter, her husband, her or the rest of her family.

With no mention of schizophrenia or of any serious mental illness, Marian is convinced that this is just a setback for Pam, a stumbling block on the road to adulthood. Both parents are hoping Pam will get through this and back to Brown soon.

But as the weeks in the hospital turn into months for Pam, Carolyn is flourishing back at Brown. Marian doesn't call her with worrisome updates about Pam. She doesn't demand that Carolyn show up for family therapy sessions at Yale. She lets Carolyn live her life - something for which Carolyn will be forever grateful.

Martha, in the eighth grade, is far more caught up in the family maelstrom. "I learned that the world is a dark place for some folks," Martha says now, "and my role was to try to make it a better place for people."

Often, Martha, now a nurse practitioner living with her two children in Northampton, Mass., was the one who comforted her mother when Marian would return from the hospital in tears.

Phil, then a junior in high school, remembers being baffled by Pam's suicide attempt and thinking that she was acting up on purpose. "I experienced it as irritating," he says, "and we had to go to these silly family meetings and I just wanted everybody to be OK." Phil, who is also a psychiatrist now, lives with his wife and two daughters in North Carolina.

If someone had explained that his sister was seriously ill, he says, he might have reacted differently. As it was, he says, with his parents' attention diverted, he had more freedom than he should have had.

After five months in the hospital, Pam recovers enough to return to school, but decides instead to transfer to Kirkland College. Later, she'll return to Brown, but by then, Carolyn will have left for Sarah Lawrence.

During this time, the sisters phone each other occasionally - mostly to check on schedules. Neither wants to be home when the other is. Pam is functioning, but not well.

Both young women need their own space now. Especially Carolyn. Now that Pam is ill - now that it seems as if she won't be able to lead the life always expected for her - a door has opened for Carolyn. Once so consumed by dance, she suddenly finds herself intrigued by pre-med.

"Hey, there's someone else who's smart in the world," she remembers thinking. "I'll be the person Pammy isn't able to be."
