Sunday, January 3, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And I beheld another BEAST coming up out of the earth; and he had two horns like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon. And he exerciseth all the power of the first BEAST before him, and causeth the earth and them which dwell therein to worship the first BEAST, whose deadly wound was healed" ­ ("And I saw one of his [seven] heads as it were wounded to death; and his deadly wound was healed; and all the world wondered after the BEAST," Rev. 13:3.). ­ "And he doeth great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men, and DECEIVETH them that dwell on the earth by the means of those miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the BEAST;" Rev. 13:11-13.  Beloved, just here let us take note that the earth-dwellers all about us, who pose a continuing and a deadly threat to God's holy pilgrims on their journey to Zion, are themselves victims of a massive Satanic DECEIT, referred to by the early fathers as "the efficacy of error," and referred to by the apostle Paul when he said, "But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, DECEIVING, and BEING DECEIVED." (2 Tim. 3:13). Where the context suggests the antidote to the poison of Satanic DECEPTION, where the apostle says, "But thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, longsuffering, charity, patience, persecutions, afflictions, which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; what persecutions I endured; but out of them all the Lord delivered me. Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." (2 Tim. 3:10-12).  Then comes our text within a text; to wit: "But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, DECEIVING, and BEING DECEIVED." (2 Tim. 3:13). As though the apostle had said, The holy (and only) powerfully effective antidote to Satan's poisonous campaign of DECEPTION ­ Heaven's divine medicine to cure all attempts of Satan to DECEIVE God's Elect ­ lies in a thorough consideration and comparison of the lives and Gospel message of God's messengers versus the filthy lives and heretical doctrines of Satan's messengers. Paul in effect says, Look at me and what I preach, and compare me to these loose-living, lying preachers that abound everywhere. The immediate context of 2 Tim. 3:13 ­ (i.e., "But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived") ­ reveals such to be the case. Look at 2 Tim. 3:10-12; to wit: "But thou hast fully known MY DOCTRINE, MANNER OF LIFE (!), purpose, faith, longsuffering, charity, patience, Persecutions, afflictions, which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; what persecutions I endured; but out of them all the Lord delivered me. Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." A more direct connection between living godly lives in Christ Jesus, and suffering persecution, and potent, objective evidence of one's calling and election being sure ­ could not be made.  As if one could say with conviction, "Brother, if you are not living a holy life for all to see, and preaching a holy doctrine for all to hear, and thereby and therefore being persecuted by all mankind ­ then you have no real Bible evidence that you are saved, and you are on your way to Hell." Hell is said to be "everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels (i.e., his messengers)." Matt. 25:41." These "evil men and seducers who are waxing worse and worse and who are DECEIVING and BEING DECEIVED," are very well described at 2 Cor. 11:1315 as being Satan's ministers; to wit: "For such are false apostles, DECEITFUL workers, transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ. And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light. Therefore it is no great thing if his ministers also be  Sunday, January 3, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  transformed as the ministers of righteousness; whose end shall be according to their works." 2  Cor. 11:13-15. And so, Beloved, when we look with great suspicion on these phony preachers all  around us, and dare to call them demon-possessed hypocrites, and dumb-dogs supposed to be  watchdogs but that cannot bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber, greedy dogs which can  never have enough, and ignorant to boot ­ all according to the Scripture (Isa. 56:10-12) ­ I say  when we call them all these things and many more, we are not only preaching a vital part of a vital  messenger bound to declare unto all mankind "the whole counsel of God" (Acts 20:27); but we  do thereby simultaneously provide an integral part of the antidote to the poison which "evil men  and seducers," through DECEIT, do inject into all mankind. And now we are duty-bound to  declare to all mankind that these hordes of heretic preachers are nothing other, and nothing less,  than SATAN'S OWN MINISTERS, on the authority of 2 Cor. 11:13-15. These creatures live  filthy lives and preach damnable lies. Every last one of them. In sharp contrast to God's righteous  servants of whom the apostle Paul is set forth as the prime example, all as set forth at 2 Tim.  3:10, ("But thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, (etc.)").  These filthy ministers of Satan are further defined and described at such passages as 2 Pet. 2 and Jude; to wit: "Lot was vexed by their filthy manner of life...But chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness." 2 Pet. 2:7-10. But you say, I know there are some out-of-thecloset, outrageously filthy, fags, openly and blatantly pushing filthy sex habits down everybody's throat, marrying the same-sex filth, bragging about golden showers (urinating on each other for sexual gratification), scat (eating each other's feces), bestiality (practicing sex with animals), fisting (ramming a fag fist completely up a fag anus for perverted sexual gratification), etc., ad nauseam, like Obama's Paul Jennings, for instance. But, you say, Everybody isn't vile and filthy like that; I know a lot of fairly decent people who don't do those filthy things. They just say that they are tolerating homosexuals and their conduct as merely another, albeit innocent, lifestyle. They say that Jesus ate with sinners, and they thereupon leap across Grand Canyon to a wholly illogical and sinful conclusion, to wit: That Jesus loves and saves filthy, impenitent fags (!) and, that we, therefore, should condone faggotry, willy-nilly. Beloved, I tell you, that all those people talking that way and thinking that way are just as doomed and damned as the filthiest fag alive. Those preachers and their idiot followers are headed irreversibly to Hell; and preachers who preach it any other way are likewise filthy creatures ­ Satan's ministers ­ bound for a devil's Hell. I don't care who you are. You have taken the mark of the beast. If that means that only WBC members are saved and bound for Heaven ­ SO BE IT. You made the decision. I didn't.  Those who suborn (i.e., suborn, induce another to commit an unlawful act) fags by their sinful enabling of fags are as guilty as fags in every respect. And you are well described and identified by the apostle at Rom 1:32; to wit: "Who knowing the judgment of God," ­ (i.e., who knowing what God thinks and concludes upon adjudication, what God says about sodomy and sodomites), ­ I say, "Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death," ­ (i.e., beyond any question, God, by the plain language of the Bible, and by what He did to ancient Sodom in 1898 BC, as well as other manifest episodes of His wrath as when He erupted Vesuvius and incinerated all the inhabitants of ancient Pompeii in 79 AD ­ about 2,000 years after Sodom's fiery destruction, and which is now about 2,000 years since Pompeii's similar overthrow). Romans 1:32. Both Sodom and Pompeii adumbrated the fiery destruction of the earth at the end of time, and the 2,000-year separations may be significant.  Sunday, January 3, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  When the Lord Jesus will come as a thief in the night; to wit: "But the day of the Lord will come  as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the  elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works ("improvements?") that are  therein shall be burned up. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of  persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness, Looking for and hasting unto the  coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the  elements shall melt with fervent heat?" Oh, yes, Beloved. They all jolly well know the judgment  of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death ­ the Bible, all of history, nature,  and powerful acts of divine providence ­ fairly scream it to all intelligent creatures: GOD HATES  FAGS. FAGS ARE WORTHY OF DEATH. I say, all mankind knows that in God's judgment  (which is the only judgment that counts in the end), filthy fags are worthy of death, according to  the Mosaic Code (theocratic law for the nation Israel); to wit: "thou shalt not lie with mankind as  with womankind; it is abomination." Lev. 18:22. "If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth  with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination; they shall SURELY BE PUT TO  DEATH; their blood shall be upon them" Lev. 20:13.  I say, that all mankind, no matter what they say, knows that fags are worthy of death; and, further, all mankind freely commit the filthy sex acts of the sodomites, AND/OR, "HAVE PLEASURE IN THEM THAT DO THEM." Rom. 1:32. This means they consent with them, enable them, suborn (induce them). When some jackass of an Arminian heretic preaches the blatant lie that God loves the sinner, but only hates the sin, he thereby not only lies on God and His Word, but he encourages every fag in the world to continue his filthy ways, and worse. Our text says, "But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, DECEIVING, and BEING DECEIVED," 2 Tim. 3:13; and I strongly believe that the greatest of all Satan's deceptions, preached far and wide by Satan's legions of liars ­ called Satan's ministers, or the ministers of unrighteousness ­ is the Satanic DECEPTION that God loves everybody, that God loves the sinner and only hates the sin, and since (say they) "God don't make no junk," and since God made fags and dykes to be the way they are; then it's OK to be gay; to wit: "Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush; therefore shall they fall among them that fall; in the time of their visitation they shall be cast down, saith the Lord." (Jer. 8:12)  Beloved. It is the most monstrous DECEPTION of them all, and constitutes the most deadly of serpentine poison, that God loves everybody and Christ died for everybody. It is a horrendous sin, and the old preachers said, flat out, that it was a more grievous sin against God and in the eyes of God than the sin of sodomy itself; because, said they, the man who has no lust for other men driving him, but who nevertheless encourages others in the practice of sodomy, has no plausible justification for his sin; to wit: "the word conveys the idea of positive satisfaction in a person or thing. The charge here brought against the heathen world is, that they deliberately set their seal to such actions (i.e., sodomy sex acts) by encouraging and applauding the doing of them in others. This is the climax of our apostle's charges against the heathen; and certainly, if the things are in themselves (i.e., sodomy sex acts) as black as possible, this settled and unblushing satisfaction at the practice of them, apart from all the blinding effects of present passion, must be regarded as the darkest feature of human depravity."  Sunday, January 3, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  David Brown: "This taints society to the core. To take pleasure in what is sinful and vicious for its own sake, and knowing it to be such, is the last and lowest stage of human recklessness. `the innate principle of self-love,' (says South), that very easily and often blinds a man as to any impartial reflection upon himself, yet for the most part leaves his eyes open enough to judge truly of the same thing in his neighbor, and to hate that in others which he allows and cherishes in himself. And, therefore, when it shall come to this, that he approves, embraces, and delights in sin as he observes it even in the person and practice of other men, this shows that the man is wholly transformed from the creature that God first made him; nay, that he has consumed those poor remainders of good that the sin of Adam left him; that he has worn off the very remote dispositions and possibilities to virtue; and, in a word, has turned grace first, and afterwards nature itself, out of doors." Yet, this knowledge can never be wholly extinguished in the breast of man. So long as reason remains to them, there is a still, small voice, protesting, in the language of our verse, in the name of that God who implanted that still, small voice, "THAT THEY WHICH DO SUCH THINGS ARE WORTHY OF DEATH, NOT ONLY DO THE SAME, BUT HAVE PLEASURE IN THEM THAT DO THEM." (Rom. 1:32) Further, these evil men and seducers, deceiving and being deceived, actually think it's a game to blaspheme God, making sport with their mockings and scoffings of God and His small remnant of messengers on earth, "sporting themselves with their own DECEIVINGS." 2 Pet. 2:13. Recapitulation: Our text within a text today is 2 Tim. 3:13; to wit: "But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived." Satan, through his agents, has injected all mankind with a massive dose of deadly deception (Satanic poison); and the only antidote is the holy and righteous lives and doctrines of God's servants on earth ­ as those holy men and their holy message are contrasted with Satan's filthy and perjurious ministers.  Hence, the immediate context of 2 Tim. 3:13, both before: ["But thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, (etc.)" verse 10]; and after: ["But continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast been assured of, KNOWING OF WHOM THOU HAST LEARNED THEM. And that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus. All scripture is given by inspiration of God (i.e., God-breathed), and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; That the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works," verses 14-17.] I say, when we contrast God's true ministers, their lives and doctrines; with Satan's vile-living garbage, their filthy lives and heretical doctrines ­ we have imbibed the only antidote to Satan's poison of deception.  A mere synopsis of 2 Peter 2 and Jude may suffice to show the filthiness of Satan's ministers, even as they seek to counterfeit the ministers of Christ; to wit: "they are filthy and lawless. ...Chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness ...natural brute beasts...perish in their own corruption...sporting in their own deceivings...eyes full of adultery...wells without water...to whom the mist of darkness is reserved forever...they allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness...servants of corruption ...the dog is turned to his own vomit again; the sow to wallowing in the mire;" describing every last one of Satan's ministers. I love you. Amen.  
