Sunday, January 29, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  Westboro Baptist Church in Topeka is an Old School or Primitive Baptist Church. It has existed in this evil place called Topeka, Kansas for fifty-seven years; and every day of that time "vexed with the filthy manner of life" of the people who populate this place. Listen:  "And God turned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes condemned them with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto those that after should live ungodly; and delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy manner of life of the wicked: for that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds." 2 Peter 2:6-8. This man named Lot, who was Abraham's nephew, lived in Sodom with his family. Lot stands as a prototype of God's elect alive in the earth in every age and in every geographical location. "For that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds." 2 Pet. 2:8. "Dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing;" even so WBC has been here fifty-seven years dwelling among you evil sodomites, adulterers, fornicators, idolaters; who make up the population of this generation. And, our souls have been vexed, seeing your evil deeds, and hearing your evil words and hard speeches; and, we are thus competent and qualified witnesses to testify against you on the judgment day of God Almighty; sometimes called "the day of visitation." Listen:  "Having your manner of life honest among the heathen: that, whereas they speak against you as evildoers, they may by your good works, which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation." (1 Pet. 2:12)  We use great plainness of speech. 2 Cor. 3:12. During the past fifty-seven years, you have spoken against us as evildoers continually. Jude calls this "hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against the Lord." Jude 15. The ultimate irony is seen right here: you fine, self-righteous citizens pride yourselves at being civilized, generous, gracious, broad-minded educated and tolerant; but we have contrary testimony to give about you, and our testimony is competent, material and very relevant. We have dwelt among you; and our souls have been vexed from day to day in seeing and hearing you; seeing your adulterous and idolatrous, crooked and perverse ways; and hearing your hard and slanderous and heretical speeches. Listen: "Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, to execute judgment upon all,"--with overwhelming arguments; compelling evidence against the ungodly-- "of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him." Jude 14-15.  A people of any society act by and through their chosen and acknowledged leaders; that is, their presidents, law makers, and courts. The "hard speeches" referred to by Jude, with respect to which God Almighty threatens punishment, are official speeches. That is, Executive Orders, Legislative Enactments, and Judicial Decrees. And, so it was in ancient Sodom in the days of Lot. And that scenario, my friend, is repeated in every age and in every geographical location from Adam until now. For fifty-seven years now, we of the Westboro Baptist Church have dwelt among you fine people of Topeka and Kansas; and I now tell you with great plainness of speech, that you have vexed our righteous souls from day to day, that is every day of that fifty-seven years, with your ungodly deeds and your hard speeches which you ungodly sinners have spoken against the Lord and against his anointed and against his people and against his truth in the earth. Jude 15. And, we are fully prepared, ready, willing and able as expert witnesses on the subject to give evidence, testimony; competent, qualified and material evidence against you; in the day that God Almighty shall visit you, summons you, arrest you, try you for your sins, and punish you "with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power." 2 Thes. 1:9.  Sunday, January 29, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  We, like Lot, have been seeing and hearing you first hand, eyeball to eyeball; thus constituting direct evidence for fifty-seven years. We know you and your leaders very, very well. We have seen your sodomites, your adulterers, and your fornicators whom you have elected and appointed to be your judges; political, governmental and religious leaders. And we have carefully heard and read their hard speeches that they have ungodly spoken against us in their laws, their sermons, and their judicial decrees. Because God's elect alive on the earth at any given time and place thus see and hear the ungodly deeds and hard speeches of the sinners among whom they dwell, they are often called "seers" and "watchers." Listen: "For they served idols ... Yet the LORD testified against them by all the prophets, and by all the seers, saying, Turn ye from your evil ways, and keep my commandments and my statutes, according to all the law which I commanded your fathers, and which I sent to you by my servants the prophets." (2 Kgs. 17:12-13) Simply put, God's elect alive in the earth accurately see and perceive what the heck is going on. Hence they are called "Seers;" S-E-E-R-S. Put another way, they have understanding of the times in which they live because they see things as God sees them. Listen: David's mighty men "had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do;" and they were "expert in war, and could keep rank: and they were not of double heart." 1 Chr. 12:32-33. And, their words alone will never fall to the ground. Listen: "And Samuel grew, and the LORD was with him, and did let none of his words fall to the ground." (1 Sam. 3:19)  My friend, you will hear billions of words in your lifetime; from politicians, preachers, salesmen, the news media, and the judges; but God's word for it, all such words will fall to the ground: which, in a Bible metaphor, simply means they are nothing but hot air that will come to nothing. Only the words of God's elect, David's mighty men, derived from the oracles of God Almighty himself, will not fall to the ground. These hot air merchants that presently govern this generation, are frauds. They deserve to be selling used cars where their lies would not be so harmful. But you ignoramuses have made them your governors, lawmakers and judges. And, it was on their watch that sodomy was made respectable and that the word of God was made hateful, and that the mysterious curse of AIDS smote this world, and that the courts of this world were shut tight to the poor.  Hear that: these pygmies, these effeminate moral dwarfs, that you have elected, appointed and otherwise allowed to run your government; including the courts, the press and the churches; it was on their watch that the gays came out of the closet, that the courts were closed to the poor, that the word of God was trashed, and that the Almighty smote this world with the AIDS curse, and that millions upon millions of innocent, unborn babies were murdered.  While they were busy writing their silly, perverted laws, and unrighteous judicial opinions, and obscene news stories and editorials; filling the very air we breathe with billions of lying words; the Almighty God was writing "Ichabod" over their house. The glory of God has departed from you. Ichabod: the glory has departed. 1 Sam. 4:21. Listen: "Hear now this, O foolish people, and without understanding; which have eyes, and see not; which have ears, and hear not: ... This people hath a revolting and a rebellious heart;" and among them are wicked men whom they have made leaders and judges; "they are waxen fat, they shine" with pride and arrogance "yea, they overpass the deeds of the wicked: and judge not the cause" of the poor, "and the right of the needy do they not judge. Shall I not visit for these things? saith the LORD: shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?" Jer. 5:21-29. Listen: "Judges and officers shalt thou make thee in all thy courts, which the LORD thy God giveth thee: and they shall judge the people with just judgment. Thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou shalt not respect persons, neither take a gift: for a gift doth blind the  Sunday, January 29, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous. That which is altogether just  shalt thou follow, that thou mayest live." (Deut. 16:18-20)  This passage powerfully teaches that all human judges and government officials must be selected on the bases of their moral strength and righteous nature. This godforsaken world managed to fill virtually all judicial and official positions with amoral sodomites, adulterers and fornicators; who are famous for attributes of ignorance, moral weakness, effeminacy, and sexual perversion. And, this passage powerfully teaches that all human courts and governmental positions are exclusively and peculiarly the province and prerogative of God Almighty himself. Listen: "Judges and officers shalt thou make thee in all thy courts, which the LORD thy God giveth thee." (Deut. 16:18)  Hear that! The courts and the governmental offices belong to God Almighty; not to the judicial pygmies and officials that presently occupy them. Hear that! The legislative seats belong to God Almighty; not to the mongrel moral perverts that presently fill them. Hear that! All executive positions, elective and appointive; national, state, county and city; are the exclusive property and prerogative of God Almighty; not the gang of weak, effeminate hirelings who presently hold them. Listen: "Righteousness exalteth a nation: but sin is a reproach to any people." (Prov. 14:34)  And, this passage powerfully teaches that the foremost and primary obligation of any human government, acting by and through its courts and other officials, is to do justice to the poor and the needy, and to vindicate the divinely imposed rights of the poor and the needy; scrupulously avoiding the gifts of the rich and the strong and scrupulously avoiding the respect of persons in the decision-making process. Listen: "Thou shalt not wrest judgment." That is, twist it from the hands of the poor and the needy. "Thou shalt not respect persons, neither take a gift." Which only the rich and powerful are able to bestow. "For a gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous. That which is altogether just shalt thou follow, that thou mayest live." (Deut. 16:19-20)  And, do you quarrel with me about the proposition that the poorest, weakest, most helpless of all human organisms is the unborn child in the mother's womb? Listen to me you really, really smart people: you put these intellectual freaks and moral cowards in office; and you are responsible for their conduct; and it was on their watch and on your watch that this world began to systematically, sanction murder of multiplied millions of innocent babies. And the godless son of Belial who wrote the opinion of the Supreme Court in Roe v. Wade; which is another example of the ungodly speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against the Lord; this man was invited to this evil city to be honoured for his evil deeds, all at Topeka taxpayers' expense; and this man--this evil man-- was roundly applauded and cheered at a nearby tax-supported University. This perfectly fits the character of this evil, reprobate city to do such a thing. Even as it is altogether appropriate that Topeka, of all geographical locations on earth, should bear the zip code of 666--the mark of the beast. Rev 13:18. And it is altogether appropriate that the same nearby tax-supported University, that warmly entertained and honoured the wicked author of the Roe v. Wade opinion, should arrogate unto themselves and be universally known as "the Ichabods."  My friend, you might as well be known as Judas Iscariot as to be known as "Ichabod" in the Bible vernacular. You should read the Bible origin of that name, "Ichabod." You should study the Bible etymology of that word, "Ichabod." If you have any fear of God, if you have any regard for the scriptures whatsoever; you will be compelled to the view that any group of people that would willingly and deliberately call themselves, "Ichabod;" and that would willingly and deliberately allow themselves to be stamped and branded billions of times with the mark of the beast--666--is  Sunday, January 29, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  a reprobate people, a doomed people, a damned people. And such, my friend, is the people that  make up the population of Topeka and Kansas.  Such conduct, indeed, is "after the working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that are perishing; because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie: and that they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." 2 Thes. 2:9-12. This passage provides the only satisfactory and rational explanation for the condition of this evil place.  God Almighty has sent this generation strong delusion, that they should believe a lie: that they all might be damned because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, and because they believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. 2 Thes. 2:11-12. A decree has gone forth from the Almighty; a judicial stroke hath smitten the inhabitants of this world; a judicial blinding of the mind. Listen: "And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion." (2 Thes. 2:11)  My friend, only those whom God has finally abandoned and from whom the glory of God has finally and forever departed are called "Ichabod" in the scriptures. 1 Sam. 4:21. And only those who have conceded their final impenitence and doom from God Almighty himself take the mark of the beast--666--and thereby advertise themselves as worshippers of Satan and not worshippers of the living and true God. Rev. 13:18. And, only those who are grovelling in the darkness of total and final despair, looking death in the face, and shortly to fall into the hands of the living God for final judgment and everlasting punishment, consult the witch of Endor and the soothsayers and the sorcerers; all of which culminates in modern psychiatry. 1 Sam. 28:7.  And, only that people and that society, who already have about them the smell of fire and brimstone--that certain odour and ambiance of the damned--will deliberately join the company of Pharaoh and King Herod in the slaughter of the innocents and welcome and honour at taxpayers' expense the black-hearted and black robed so-called Supreme Court Justice who wrote and signed off on the opinion in Roe v. Wade, which was nothing but a death warrant for multiplied millions of unborn babies to date. Ex. 1:16 and Mat. 2:16. And, each of these fearful items conflux or come together nowhere else in the inhabited earth and at no other time in human history, except here at Topeka, Kansas, and now in these last days. And, it is certainly no coincidence that Topeka, Kansas, should be the acknowledged world capital of psychiatry: that satanic system of pseudoscience or as the Bible says: "science falsely so called" (1 Tim. 6:20); which pretends to search the human mind or heart; a thing which the Bible declares to be the exclusive function of God himself. The inhabitants of this city, and most certainly the governmental and religious leaders of this city, are all tainted and tarred by the brush of psychiatry.  It was on your watch that Topeka became the world capital of psychiatry. Psychiatry is a system of open-mouthed blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name and his church and them that dwell in heaven. Rev. 13:6. The fountain-head of psychiatry is a little Austrian Jew named Sigmund Freud; an admitted sexual pervert and a self-confessed drug addict, who was apparently high on cocaine and/or heroin a considerable part of his adult life. Listen: "And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies." (Rev. 13:5)  Modern psychiatry is nothing other than that certain sorcery denounced in the scriptures and prophesied as coming to a high pitch in the last days. Rev. 18:23 and 21:8. Modern psychiatry, sinful living, and false religious systems go hand-in-hand.  I love you. Amen.  
