 Summer Kitchen:  On Transformation 
August 22, 2010 
Rev. Mark Belletini 
 Opening Words
  
 We are here 

 on a warm summer™s day 
 to worship, to celebrate the Gift of life itself 
 with the practices of our beautiful heritage:
  spirited words, silence, story and music; 

 reason, passion, proportion, kindness & love. 

And so, we pledge to journey together along the way
s of truth and affection, as best as 
we can name them now or may learn them in days to c
ome; that we and our children 
may be fulfilled, and that we may speak to our worl
d in words and lives of peace, 
justice and goodwill." 
The Sweetest Sound–.A Ramadan Story   

This story comes from Afghanistan and is very old. 
  
Once there was a old King who liked to ask riddles.
 He particularly liked to ask riddles of his 
four grown children. Sometimes the King knew the an
swer. Other times he didn™t. But he asked 
those riddles just to hear what his grown-up daught
ers and sons would say. 
One day, just before the beginning of Ramadan, the 
ninth month of the Muslim calendar when 
everyone stops eating during the sunlight hours, th
e King asked his four children, "What is the 
sweetest sound you have ever heard?" 

The first child, a son, immediately said, "Oh, dadd
y, that is such a simple riddle. The sweetest 
sound is the sound of a flute." 

The second child, a daughter, disagreed. "Yes, the 
sound of a flute is sweet. But I think the 
sweetest sound is the sound of a harp." 

The third child, another son, declared, "The flute 
and the harp do make sweet sounds. However, I 
have heard a violin. And that is, by far, the sweet
est sound." 
The King looked at his fourth child, a daughter, wh
o merely smiled. The King noticed the smile 
and said "Hmm, it looks as if my fourth child is no
t yet ready to give an answer. I will wait." 
Days passed. The month of Ramadan started. The King
 stopped asking riddles and spent more 
time thinking about things, as is the custom during
 Ramadan. You see, during the month of 
Ramadan, all Muslim adults refrained from eating an
d drinking between daybreak and sunset. 

 This is called ?a fast? and it™s a basic teaching o
f Islam. The fast serves many purposes. First, the 
time and energy normally spent preparing food and e
ating can be spent thinking about things 
deeply, which is called prayer. Second, the fast re
minds those who have plenty to eat of how it 
feels to be hungry; you want to make sure that no o
ne else is hungry when you yourself know 
what hunger is. Charity is another central teaching
 of Islam. Third, the fast helps teach people 
about what it is they really want, once they get pa
st the habit of eating three or more times a day 
without thinking about it.   

After sunset each day, the fast is broken by a meal
, called Iftar. Often people invite friends over 
to eat. 

So it was not unusual when the daughter who had not
 answered his question invited the King, 
their mother the Queen, and her two brothers and he
r sister over for the Iftar one evening. When 
everyone arrived, they were quite surprised. They w
ere brought into the dining room, but there 
were no platters of food on the table, just empty p
lates and silverware. Nor could they smell any 
cooking smells from the kitchen. They didn™t know w
hat to think. 
Just then, a man came in playing the flute. It was 
a sweet sound. He was followed by a woman 
playing the harp, then by another man playing the v
iolin. Finally, the three musicians played 
together, some very beautiful music. The music was 
loud, which covered the sounds of their 
growling, hungry bellies. 

Finally, his smiling daughter came in, carrying a s
imple covered pot and a ladle. She uncovered 
the pot, dipped the ladle into the pot and filled a
 bowl with a delicious spicy soup called Harira. 
The ladle hit the edge of the soup bowl, and King s
miled broadly and said, "Yes, yes, my smiling 
daughter. I get it now. The sweetest sound is the s
ound of a spoon ringing on a bowl of soup 
when your stomach is growling. The most delicious m
eal you will ever eat is the meal that you 
eat when you are
hungry." 
Sequence 

Here
 we are.  Here 
we
 are. Here we 
are.
  Here we are.  Not in Shanghai™s best late night e
atery. 
Not in Paris, the blue light of evening cooling the
 cobblestones. Not in New York, with the 
Times on our lap in the park. Not in Akron at the U
niversalist church there. But here. This very 
place. This room. No other. 

 
Now
 we are. Now 
we
 are.  Now we 
are.  
Now we are, not when the famous teacher saw his own
 
reflection in the Lake of Galilee. Not when Susan B
. Anthony set the world of the mind on fire. 
Not when Rumi spoke the light of his verse to illum
ine love as if for the first time. But now. 
Right now. No other time. 

 
That
 we are.   That 
we 
are.  That we 
are.  
That we are is the beginning and end of our religio
us 
life, the wellspring of all of our questions, the s
tone on which our answers are shipwrecked, the 
match that kindles the light of our compassion, and
 the ever authoritative summons to a silence 
that restores us to our strength, our sighs, our su
bmission to reality, and our soulfulness. 
 
 silence 

 
Here we are, carrying with us all that we were, all
 the hearts we have touched and who have 
touched us over the years. We remember those among 
them whom we especially remember 
today, now, in this place, whispered allowed if tha
t pleases you, or imagined silently within, if 
that is your pleasure.  

 
naming 

 
Here we are, bathed in a filtered late August summe
r light. Here and now. And rising within us, a 
deeper light, the light of our hopes, our intention
s, our dreams, our pledges and promises. And 
that light is going to shine–. 

 
The First Reading 
is a poem by
 Sandra Mortola Gilbert called
 The Summer Kitchen. In Italian, 
Sicilian, Greek and many other Mediterranean famili
es, as well as in a few other cultures, a 
summer kitchen is a second kitchen in the basement 
or cellar of a house where all the incredible 
bounty of the garden can be processed and canned an
d turned into sauces in a cooler 
environment than the upstairs kitchen. 

 
In June when the Brooklyn garden boiled with blosso
m, when leaflets of basil lined the paths 
and new green fruitless fingers of vine climbed the
 airy arbor roof, my Sicilian aunts withdrew to 
the summer kitchen, the white bare secret room at t
he bottom of the house. 
 
Outside in the upper world, sun blistered the brick
s of the tiny terrace where fierce 
socialist
 uncles chain-smoked Camels and plotted politics; ni
eces and nephews tussled among thorny 
blood-colored American roses; a pimply concrete bir
dbath-fountain dribbled ineffectual water 
warm as olive oil. 

 
Cool and below it all, my aunts labored among great
 cauldrons in the spicy air of the summer 
kitchen:  in one kettle tomatoes bloomed into sauce
; in another ivory 
pasta
 leaped and swam; 
on the clean white table at the center of the room 
heads of lettuce flung themselves open, and 
black-green poles of zucchini fell into slices of y
ellow like fairy tale money. Skidding around the 
white sink in one corner the trout that Uncle Chris
topher brought back from the Adirondacks 
gave up the glitter of its fins to the glitter of 
Zia
 Francesca™s powerful knife. 
 
Every August day 
Zia
 Petrina rose at four and stood at the sink. Her qu
ick shears flashed in the 
silence, separating day from night, trunk from bran
ch, leaf from shadow. As the damp New 
World sunrays struggled to rise past sooty housetop
s, she™d look suddenly up with eyes black as 
the grapes that fattened in the arbor: through one 
dirt-streaked window high above her she could 
see the ledge of soil where her pansies and geraniu
ms anchored. Higher still, in tangles of heat, 
my uncles™ simmering garden grew, like green steam 
swelling from the cool root of her kitchen. 
 
The Second Reading
 is a brief except from a story sent to me by the au
thor, Abdellah Taia. He 
gave me permission to quote it in this morning™s se
rvice.
  
 
 We had broken our fast about two hours earlier. Nig
ht had fallen. And Hay Salam was 
abnormally quiet.   

My mother, M™Barka was sleeping soundly. 

Ramadan was an exhausting month for her. But in spi
te of the exhaustion of fasting, she insisted 
on preparing sweetmeats every day, crêpes, 
harira
 of course, a soup she liked very acidic, made 
with lots of tomatoes and lemon juice. Once, my sis
ters would willingly have helped her to make 
every day of the sacred month a spiritual and gastr
onomic feast, an endless ceremony. Now, the 
house was empty. Three floors utterly devoid of peo
ple. Everyone had left to go somewhere, to 
some other town, some other country, another world,
 with strangers, people I would never know 
and would never really accept. At home now, there w
as only my mother, my little brother 
Mustapha, whom we saw very little, and me. 

Sermon 

 
My friend John came by this week with the bounty of
 his large garden. A plastic bag swollen 
with tomatoes colored like a perfect sunset; an eve
n huger plastic bag stuffed with six kinds of 
aromatic basil, and a smaller sack with sleek cayen
ne peppers, all red-orange and shiny. 
 
When my mother used to take in the bounty of my gra
ndparents™ gardens during the summer, she 
always brought it all downstairs to the ?summer kit
chen,? the stove found in the cool basement 
where huge vats of 
sugo
, or sauce, and broth, could simmer for hours witho
ut steaming up the 
already humid house. Sandra Gilbert™s echoes my mem
ory in her poem: 
in one kettle, tomatoes 
bloomed into sauce; in another ivory 
pasta
 leaped and swam; 
 
My grandparents™ gardens are long gone. But I am lu
cky enough to have friends like John who 
supply me with comparable amounts of produce all su
mmer long; so I too now stir sauces in 
large pots, like Gilbert™s Sicilian aunts. But now,
 with the advent of air-conditioning, my summer 
kitchen is the same as my rest-of-the-year kitchen.
 I don™t need a cool basement any more.  
 
So yesterday I spent hours picking the stems off to
matoes, and throwing them into a pot so I 
could slowly transform them into three-months™ wort
h of 
sugo 
as I simmered them for hours 
with garlic and wine. It took hours to take the lea
ves off the woody stems of the basil by hand. 
Despite the ease of modern food processors, there u
ltimately is no ?easy way out.? Transforming 
raw, perishable food into lasting, rich nourishment
 just takes time. 
 
M™Barka, in Abdellah Taia™s story, also used to spe
nd a lot of time transforming raw ingredients 
into delicious food. Despite the fact she was fasti
ng all day for Ramadan, she cooked the 
chickpeas, lentils and caraway all day, adding, he 
tells us, the souring agents of lemon juice and 
tomatoes to really finish the 
harira
 soup up nicely. No rush there. 
 
Gilbert™s aunts cooked all day. M™Barka in Morocco 
cooked all day. The aunts did not fast. 
M™Barka did. But both finally brought their familie
s to the table for a delicious feast where 
community could be deepened and memories were made 
holy.  The Sicilian aunts didn™t 
celebrate Ramadan, and M/Barka didn™t celebrate the
 feasts of Italian saints, but both parties 

 knew a lot about patiently transforming raw ingredi
ents into nourishment for body, soul and 
spirit. M™Barka™s family was a lot smaller now too,
 Abdellah says. Many rooms were empty. But 
she still made sweetmeats for Ramadan. 

 
The children™s story this morning, about Ramadan, g
ives reasons for fasting, a practice that 
baffles many non-Muslims. Remember? ?The fast serve
s many purposes. First, the time and 
energy, normally spent preparing food and eating, c
an be spent thinking about things deeply, 
which is called prayer. Second, the fast reminds th
ose who have plenty to eat of how it feels to 
be hungry; third, the fast helps teach people about
 what it is they really want, once they get past 
the habit of eating three or more times a day witho
ut thinking about it.? 
 
Now this idea of fasting all day to gain consciousn
ess of poverty and hunger may seem to be a 
very different from those Sicilian aunts in their s
ummer kitchen, cooking–and nibbling–all day 
long. But the fact is, almost all Italian immigrant
s who came to this country, during the great 
days of immigration in the first three decades of t
he last century, came here because they knew 
hunger in Italy. Their bellies growled there becaus
e they were born in poverty. To this day, the 
great chef Mario Batali describes many of the class
ic dishes he cooks as ?cucina povera?–which 
means not the 
summer
 kitchen, but the 
poverty
 kitchen. My grandmother, for example, grew up 
so poor that her family couldn™t even afford wheat 
flour to make pasta, so they knocked 
chestnuts down off the trees in the hills, roasted 
them, cracked them open laboriously, and then 
ground the chestnuts into flour to make 
tagliatelle,
 or noodles. They were not vegetarians but 
they ate a vegetarian diet–they could not 
afford
 meat, using it only on Christmas or Easter. 
In my household, shaped by this 
poverty culture
, you never threw anything away. You made 
broth with the carrot tops you cut off, the leaves 
of the celery, the leftover bones. The poor learn 
how to transform ordinary, unglamorous things into 
dishes that not only nourish, but astonish.  
And not just the Italian immigrants, but many immig
rants have learned this art, the art of 
transforming fragility into strength, and leftovers
 into feasts.    
Transformation
 is a word found in a variant form in our church Vi
sion statement. It goes like 
this: ?We envision together a world 
transformed
 by justice.? There is also a form of the same 
word in our Mission statement: ?We are here to reli
nquish the safety of our unexamined 
privilege for the freedom to engage in 
transforming
 justice.? 
Let me unpack those two uses. They are not saying t
he same thing. The first says that, together, 
we can see a world transformed, that is improved, m
ade nourishing, made whole–
by
 justice, 
which we promise to help to nurture. 

But the Mission statement is deliberately more ambi
guous. The phrase ?the freedom to engage in 
transforming justice? can be interpreted fairly in 
several different ways. But the way that speaks 
to me this morning is this: I think it™s saying tha
t any justice work we do helps to transform 
us
. It 
changes and deepens 
us
.  Sometimes I worry that religious progressives li
ke us, like some 

 political progressives I know, think, way in the ba
ck of their heads, that they can bring justice to 
the world because they are 
already
 just. They™ve been privileged with education, they
 say, and 
that™s a GOOD privilege. Sometimes around Unitarian
 Universalist churches I hear things that 
make it sound as if some of us think that theologic
ally we are way ahead of the game. We™ve 
conquered our fears, prejudices, bad habits, and li
ve conscious, beautiful rich and fair lives 
which we are now glad to help others to achieve.  

I am not so sure that is the case, at least with me
. I had a difficult summer, for all sorts of 
reasons, as I wrote about plainly in the newsletter
 last week. I hardly think I have conquered my 
fears, have transcended anger and prejudice, or hav
e arrived at the doorstep of perfect justice. I 
don™t think I live far out on the theological edge,
 way ahead of all those benighted folks who still 
use ?out-dated? language, nor do I think that ritua
ls like ?fasting? or practices like prayer, or 
sacraments, or sacred storytelling, are best left i
n the past for everyone. 
I think our Mission statement asks us to relinquish
, that is, ?fast? from, any self-congratulation, 
any feeling that don™t have to struggle ourselves, 
day by day, hour by hour, with our own 
transformation, our own, if you will permit me the 
metaphor, ?cooking.? 
The Zen Buddhist teacher Dogen, all the way back in
 the year 1273, understood this when he 
wrote a book called 
How to Cook Your Life
. He was not giving recipes for 
harira
 soup, or basil 
pesto
, neither of which dishes he had ever heard of. But
 rather, he was writing a book about 
human
 transformation, in the pursuit of justice. He was 
using ?cooking? as a metaphor, just as I 
have this morning. He wrote (and this is my own sum
mation, using actual phrases from his 
book), ?It™s best to think about how to serve the c
ommunity first, and stop worrying about 
comparing yourself to others, or living so as to am
ass the most toys, fame or privilege. These 
only lead to a false sense of self. It is vital to 
take care of the world in which we live out our 
lives. In doing so, we ourselves are transformed. I
t is the monastery cook who teaches us about 
what transformation is like. The community cook tre
ats all food with equal respect, counting no 
food as more glamorous or more valuable than any ot
her. In the same way, we would treat all 
experiences with equal respect, as equal parts of o
ur lives. In the same way, we would treat all 
parts of ourselves with equal respect, recognizing 
that our real lives consist of every single part 
of our experience, the so-called good and the so-ca
lled bad, and that no wise person can claim to 
separate them out.? 

M™Barka and the Sicilian aunts had undoubtedly neve
r heard of Dogen either, or Zen Buddhism. 
But I think their cooking stories ring with the sam
e possibilities for personal transformation. 
Transformation, you see, is something that is going
 to happen anyway. Produce will change 
whether you cook it or not. It will rot. Metamorpho
sis is endless already. And not just with food. 
You still living in the place in which you lived as
 a baby? No? Your great grandparents still 
living? No? Change. Transformation. Do you look lik
e you did when you were 14? No? How 
about when you were 20? Or for some of us, 50? 

The religious issue for me here is not transformati
on in an of itself, but being deliberate about 
what kinds of transformation
 we
 want to cultivate. Choosing which way the transfor
mation will 

 occur. Our published church vision tells us that ou
r intention around transformation has to do 
with co-creating a world of ?racial and ecological 
justice? where we ?confront inequity and the 
effects of oppression.? And our Mission statement s
uggests we ourselves 
might be transformed
 by working, day after day, year after year, slowly 
and carefully and patiently, on such a vision. In 
the words of Dogen, we might cook our own lives by 
allowing ourselves to be transformed. In 
the image of Ramadan, we might ?fast? from the habi
t of our own easy privileges, so that we 
might actually really notice those who are routinel
y denied privilege; some of them may have 
been in this room all the time and no one ever noti
ced. Or in the poem about the summer kitchen 
the poet concludes, ?Higher still, in tangles of he
at, my uncles™ simmering garden grew, like 
green steam swelling from the cool root of her kitc
hen.? In other words, the cooking in the 
basement kitchen, the tedious but delicious work of
 transformation, actually ultimately 
co-
creates
 the green, yellow and red abundance blossoming in 
the garden upstairs there in the 
sunlight. Our justice work and creation itself are 
of a piece, a circle if you will. 
I wanted to talk about an Islamic practices a bit t
his morning because, as you know, there are 
many people upset about a Muslim religious center b
eing built two full blocks away from what is 
called Ground Zero in New York. I can™t find any ev
idence that it™s a mosque, despite what 
Sarah Palin and Newt Gingrich say; it™s a community
 center. And there 
is
 a mosque even closer 
already. And anyway, does anyone imagine that Musli
ms are not at the actual site of Ground 
Zero praying for the people they lost that dread da
y?  
So much of what I hear being spoken on the air-wave
s just strikes me as a sad and painful 
commitment to injustice and to dishonesty. I want n
o part of such a religious or political vision 
of the world. In the midst of this painful clamor a
nd noise, I claim the more moving and reliable 
religious struggle our church Mission and Vision li
fts up–a ?transforming justice? that, in 
transforming me, also begins to revision the world 
and reverences both truthfulness and fairness. 
I want to join with you to see the deeper unwritten
 vision behind our own written statement: the 
one where we might all be invited to sit down at la
st around a common table. The one where we 
can each choose to fast– fast from our anger, and o
ur prejudices, and our distorted 
characterizations all day long, and then share a tr
ansforming feast that nourishes us body, soul 
and spirit, all genders, all colors, all sexualitie
s, all cultures, all ages. 
Me, I™ll be cooking sauces and pestos for days, as 
I said at the beginning. For that I am thankful 
–to John™s generosity, to the earth which lifts up 
our food, and to my grandmothers who taught 
me how to transform raw perishable food into lastin
g nourishment. But beyond that, I am 
thankful for a church vision and mission which asks
 me to allow 
myself
 to be transformed, and 
trusts me to use that transforming experience for t
he common good. 
No matter the season, no matter the time, Summer, F
all, Winter, Spring–let™s cook together, 
shall we? 

Offering 

 
Aestival Ghazal: The Table 

 
 You stretch out before me, you endless blest table.
 I never built you; I found you while on a quest, ta
ble. 
 
Nothing on you, not a simple cloth, barren table. 

No plate, no glass, no rose of Sharon, table. 

 
Oh how ready I am to taste of your feast, table. 

I hunger for the perfect nurture on your board rele
ased, table. 
 
Sweet summer fruits still fall on brown earth™s tab
le. 
But I long for more: a welcome and birth table. 

 
O summer sun, shine on my dream of hunger ended at 
that universal table. 
And you, keep me famished till that great reversal,
 table. 

