MEHER BABA JOURNAL Volume 1, No.7 May 1939
A Monthly Publication of the "Meher Editorial Committee"
An Avatar Meher Baba Trust eBook July 2015
All words of Meher Baba copyright © 2015 Avatar Meher Baba Perpetual Public Charitable Trust, Ahmednagar, India
Source and short publication history: The Meher Baba Journal, a monthly magazine, was published from 1938 to 1942. This eBook reproduces the original edition of the Meher Baba Journal published by the "Meher Editorial Committee" (Meherabad, Ahmednagar, India).

eBooks
at the Avatar Meher Baba Trust Web Site
The Avatar Meher Baba Trust's eBooks aspire to be textually exact though non-facsimile reproductions of published books, journals and articles. With the consent of the copyright holders, these online editions are being made available through the Avatar Meher Baba Trust's web site, for the research needs of Meher Baba's lovers and the general public around the world.
Again, the eBooks reproduce the text, though not the exact visual likeness, of the original publications. They have been created through a process of scanning the original pages, running these scans through optical character recognition (OCR) software, reflowing the new text, and proofreading it. Except in rare cases where we specify otherwise, the texts that you will find here correspond, page for page, with those of the original publications: in other words, page citations reliably correspond to those of the source books. But in other respects-such as lineation and font-the page designs differ. Our purpose is to provide digital texts that are more readily downloadable and searchable than photo facsimile images of the originals would have been. Moreover, they are often much more readable, especially in the case of older books, whose discoloration and deteriorated condition often makes them partly illegible. Since all this work of scanning and reflowing and proofreading has been accomplished by a team of volunteers, it is always possible that errors have crept into these online editions. If you find any of these, please let us know, by emailing us at frank@ambppct.org.
The aim of the Trust's online library is to reproduce the original texts faithfully. In certain cases, however-and this applies especially to some of the older books that were never republished in updated versions-we have corrected certain small errors of a typographic order. When this has been done, all of these corrections are listed in the "Register of Editorial Alterations" that appears at the end of the digital book. If you want the original text in its exact original form, warts and all, you can reconstruct this with the aid of the "register."
The Trust's Online Library remains very much a work in progress. With your help and input, it will increase in scope and improve in elegance and accuracy as the years go by. In the meantime, we hope it will serve the needs of those seeking to deepen and broaden their own familiarity with Avatar Meher Baba's life and message and to disseminate this good news throughout the world.

Contents  

S H R I    M E H E R    BA BA    ON     
                  T H E    R E M O VA L    O F    S A N S K A R A S    ( PA R T    I I )                                                             1   

AN  AWAKENING  

R a n o    G a y l e y    ( N e w Yo r k )   

   14  

SPIRITUAL  ANECDOTE  

Ahmed  Abbas  Khak  

16  

P O E M S   

Dineshnandini  Chordia  

20  

S H R I    M E H E R    B A B A    A N D    U N I V E R S A L    R E L I G I O N      

Dr.  C.  D.  Deshmukh        M . A.,  Ph.   D.  (London)  

22  

I M P R E S S I O N S    ( PA R T    I I )   
T H E    M A S T E R ' S    H A N D   
Q U E S T I O N    B A B A    A N S W E R S    S U F I    T H O U G H T S   
T H E    VA I S H N A V I T E    S A I N T S    OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA   AND  THEIR  HAGIOLOGY  
S P I R I T U A L    J O U R N E Y    W I T H    A    M O D E R N    G U R U    YO U    M U S T    B E L I E V E    I T      
M A N Z I L - E - M E E M   
H E A R T    O F    M Y    H E A R T   

Will  Backett  (London)   Kemali   Dr.  Abdul  Ghani  Munsiff   Dr.  Abdul  Ghani  Munsiff   C .    V.    S a m p a t h    A i y a n g a r   
Elizabeth  C.  Patterson  
R .    B .    K a l e    Abdul  Kareem  Abdulla   Malcolm  Schloss  (Hollywood)  

27   30   31   32   33  
37  
46   49   53  

N O T E S    F R O M    M Y    D I A R Y      

F.H.  Dadachanji  

54  

"I  have  come  not  to  teach  but  to  awaken"                                                                                                                                                                                    - S H R I    M E H E R    B A B A   
  

SHRI MEHER BABA

VOL. 1

MEHER BABA
JOURNAL
MAY 1939

NO. 7

Shri Meher Baba on The Removal of Sanskaras ( Part II)

(THE DISPERSION AND EXHAUSTION OF SANSKARAS)

  In   the   last   article,   I   have   explained   those   methods   of  

removing   sanskaras   which   depend   chiefly   on   the  

principle  of  negating  the  positive  sanskaras  which  veil  

the   Truth   from  

NEGATION OF SANSKARAS IS ATTAINED THROUGH

consciousness   and   prevent  
self-illumination   for   which  
the   whole   creation   came   into   being.   All   these  

CONTROL

methods   of   negating   the  

positive   sanskaras   are  

ultimately   based   upon   the   control   of   the   body   and  

mind.   The   control   of   the   habitual   tendencies   of   the  

mind   is   much   more   difficult   than   the   control   of   the  

physical   actions.   The   fleeting   and   the   evasive  

thoughts   and   desires   of   the   mind   can   be   curbed   only  

with   great   patience   and   persistent   practice.   But   the  

restraint   of   mental   processes   and   reactions   is  

necessary   to   check   the   formation   of   new   sanskaras  

and  to  wear  out  or  unwind  the  old  sanskaras  of  which  

they   are   expressions.      Though   control   might   be  

difficult  to  start  

  

2                                                    MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

with,   through   sincere   effort   it   gradually   becomes  

natural  and  easy  of  achievement.    

Control  is  deliberate  and  involves  effort  as  long  as  

the   mind   is   trying   to   decondition   itself   through   the  

removal  of  sanskaras,  but  after  it  is  released  from  the  

sanskaras   it   becomes   spontaneous,   because   the   mind  

is   then   functioning   in   freedom   and   understanding.  

Such   control   is   born   of   strength   of   character   and  

health   of   mind;   and   it   invariably   brings   with   it  

freedom  from  fear  and  immense  peace  and  calmness.  

The  mind  which  appears  feeble  when  it  is  wanton  and  

uncontrolled   in   its   functioning   becomes   a   source   of  

great   strength   when   it   is   controlled.   Control   is  

indispensable   for   the   conservation   of   the   psychic  

energy   and   economical   use   of   thought-force   for  

creative  purposes.  

  If,   however,   control   is   purely   mechanical   and  

aimless,   it   defeats   its   own   purpose   which   is   to   make  

possible  the   free   and   unconditioned   functioning   of  

the   mind.  The   control   which   has   true   spiritual   value  

does   not   consist   in   the     mechanical   repression   of  

thoughts     and   desires,   but   is   the   natural   restraint  

TRUE  CONTROL  IS   CREATIVE  SELF-
ADJUSTMENT  IN  THE  
LIGHT  OF   PERCEIVED  VALUES  

exercised  by  the  perception   of   positive   values  
discovered   during   the  
process  of  experience.  True  
control   is,   therefore,   not   merely   negative.   When  

some   positive   values   come   within   the   ken   of  

consciousness,  their  claims  for  being  expressed  in  life  

generate   psychic   response   and   energy   which  

ultimately  remove  all  the  mental  tendencies  stand-  

  

  

                                          THE  REMOVAL  OF  SANSKARAS                                        3  

  

ing   in   the   way   of   a   free   and   full   expression   of   those  

values.   Thus   the   tendencies   for   lust,   greed   and   anger  

are   removed   through   the   appreciative   recognition   of  

the  value  of  a  life  of  purity,  generosity  and  kindness.  

The  mind  which  gets  accustomed  to  certain  habits  

of  thought  and  response  does  not  find  it  easy  to  adjust  

itself   to   these   new   claims   of   its   own   perceptions  

owing   to   the   inertia   caused   by   the   impressions   of  

previous   modes   of   thought   and   conduct,   and   this  

process   of   readjustment   in   the   light   of   true   values  

takes   the   form   of   what   we   call   controlling   the   mind.  

But   this   control   is   not   a   mechanical   or   forcible  

twisting   of   the   mind.   It   is   an   effort   of   the   mind   to  

overcome   its   own   inertia.   It  is  fundamentally  creative  

and  not  negative  in  its  purpose,  for   it   is   an   attempt   of  

the   mind   to   arrive   at   self-adjustment   in   order   to  

release  the  expression  of  the  true  values  of  life.  

          Creative   control   becomes   possible,   because  

the  source   of   light   is   within   everyone,   and  

though  self-illumination    is    prevented    by    the    veil    of    

THE  DISPERSION   AND  EXHAUS- TION  OF  OLD   SANSKARAS   THROUGH   SUBLIMATION  

sanskaras,  it   is   not   all   darkness   even   within   the   boundaries   of   ordinary   human   consciousness.   The   ray   of   light   which   leads   it   onward  consists  of  the  sense  for   true  values  and  guides  man  with   varying   degrees     of   clarity  

according  to  the  thickness  of  the  veil  of  sanskaras.  The  

process  of  the  negation  of  sanskaras  is  at  the  same  time  

the  process  of  understanding  the  true  values.  

  

  

  

  

  

4                                                    MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

Spiritual   progress   is   thus   characterised   by   the   dual  

aspect  of  renouncing  the  false  values  of  the  sanskaras  

in   favour   of   the   true   values   of   understanding.   The  

process   of   replacing   the   lower   values   by   the   higher  

values  is  the  process  of  sublimation  which  consists  in  

diverting   the   psychic   energy   locked   up   in   the   old  

sanskaras  towards   creative   and   spiritual   ends.   When  

the   psychic   energy   which   is   locked   up   in   the   sanskaras  

is  thus  diverted,  they  get  dispersed  and  exhausted.    

      The   method   of   sublimation   is   the   most   natural   and  

effective   method   of   breaking   through   the   grooves  of  

old  sanskaras,  and  has  the  special  advantage  of  having    

THE  PROCESS  OF  
SUBLIMATION  IS  
SUSTAINED  BY   UNFAILING  
INTEREST  

an  unfailing  interest  for      the   aspirant   at   all   stages.   The       method   of   mere   negation   without   any   substitution   is   sometimes   likely   to   be   boring,   and   might   seem   to  

lead   to   vacuity.      But   the   method   of   sublimation  

consists   of   replacing  lower  values  by  higher  ones,  and  

is,   therefore,   at   every   stage   full   of   absorbing   interest,  

and   brings   an   ever-increasing   sense   of   fulfilment.  

Psychic   energy   can   be   sublimated   into   spiritual  

channels   through   (1)   Meditation,   (2)   Selfless   service  

of  humanity  and  (3)  Devotion.  

        Meditation   takes   the   form   of   deep   and   constant  

concentration   on   the   ideal   object.   In   such  

concentration  on  the  ideal  object  the  soul  is  conscious  

only   of   the   object   of   meditation,   and   it   completely  

forgets  its  mind  as  well  as  the  body,  so  that  no  

  

  

  

  

                                          THE  REMOVAL  OF  SANSKARAS                                        5  

  

new    sanskaras    are    formed  and  the  old  ones    are    dis-  

MEDITATION:   ITS  NATURE   AND  PURPOSE  

persed  and  exhausted  through  the  
psychic   activity   of   dwelling   on   the   object   of   concentration.   Finally,  
when   there   is   complete   disap-

pearance   of   sanskaras,   the   soul   as   individualised   is  

dissolved   in   the   intensity   of   concentration   and   merged  

in  the  ideal  object.  

        There   are   many   forms   of   meditation   according   to    

the   aptitude   of   different   persons.   The   imaginative    

genius  of    persons  who    have    to    labour    hard  is  often      

FORMS  OF   MEDITATION  

dried   up   due   to   overwork.   For   such   persons   the   form   of   meditation   which   is   most   suitable   consists   in  

disconnecting   oneself   from   the   thoughts,   and   then  

looking  upon  these  thoughts  and  the  body  objectively.  

After   the   aspirant   is   successful   in   regarding   his  

thoughts   and   his   body   with   complete   objectivity,   he  

tries   to   identify   himself   with   the   cosmic   Being   through  

constructive  suggestions  like  "I  am  the  Infinite",  "I  am  

in   everything",   "   I   am   in   all".   Those   who   have   vivid  

and  lively  imagination  can  try  intensive  concentration  

on   some   point.   But   fixing   the   mind   on   some   point  

should   be   avoided   by   those   who   have   no   liking   for   it.  

Ordinarily  the  psychic  energy  of  the  mind  is  scattered  

through   its   diverse   thoughts;   and   meditation   on   a  

point  is  very  salutary  for  the  mind  to  gather  itself  and  

settle   down.   But   it   is   a   mechanical   process,   and,  

therefore,   lacks   creative   and   blissful   experiences.  

However  in  the  initial  stages  this  form  of  meditation  

  

  

  

  

6                                                    MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

might   be   used   as   a   preparation   for   other   more  

successful  forms  of  meditation.  

The   more   successful   and   deeper   forms   of  

meditation   are   preceded   by   deliberate   and  

constructive  thinking  about  God--the  Beloved.    Medi-  

MEDITATION  ON  
THE  PERSONAL   AND  IMPERSONAL  
ASPECTS  OF  GOD  

tation   on   God   is   spiritually  
most   fruitful.   God   can   become   the  object  of  meditation    either  
in   his   impersonal   aspect   or   in  
his  personal  aspect.  Meditation      

on   the   impersonal   aspect   of   God   is   suitable   only   for  

those  who  have  a  special  aptitude  for  it.  It  consists  in  

focussing  all   thoughts  on  the  abstract  and  unmanifest  

existence   of   God.   On   the   other   hand,   meditation   on  

the   personal   aspect   of   God   consists   in   centering   all  

thoughts   upon   the   form   and   the   attributes   of   God.  

After   intensive   meditation   the   mind   might   want   to  

settle  down  not  on  the  object  of  meditation  but  on  the  

steadiness  of  the  expansive  peace  experienced  during  

meditation.   Such   moments   are   the   natural   result   of  

the   fatigue   of   the   faculty   of   imagination,   and   they  

should  be  effortlessly  encouraged.  

          Meditation  should  be  spontaneous  and  not  forced.    

In   the   moments   of   the   surging   up   of   the   divine    

impulses  imagination  should  be  let  loose  and  allowed                                                  

OBSTACLES  IN   MEDITATION  

to   soar   high.   The   flight   of   imagi- nation   should   be   controlled   only  
by   the   set   purpose   of   becoming  

one   with   the   infinite.   It   should   not   be   allowed   to   be  

influenced   by   the   currents   of   the   diverse   feelings   of  

lust,  greed  or  anger.  

  

  

  

                                          THE  REMOVAL  OF  SANSKARAS                                        7  

  

Success   in   concentration   comes   only   gradually,   and  

the   novice   is   likely   to   be   disheartened,   because   he  

does  not  get  satisfactory  results  in  the  beginning.  The  

disappointment  which  he  experiences  is  itself  often  a  

serious  obstruction  to  begin  the  meditation  of  the  day  

and   persist   in   it.   Other   obstacles   like   idleness   and   ill  

health  might  also  be  found  to  be  difficult  to  overcome;  

but   they   can   be   got   over   by   having   fixed   and   regular  

hours   for   meditation   and   steady   practice.   Early  

morning   or   at   sunset   the   quiet   condition   of   nature   is  

particularly   helpful   for   meditation;   but   meditation  

might  be  undertaken  also  at  any  other  suitable  time.  

Solitude   is   one   of   the   essential   conditions   of  

attaining   success   in   meditation.   In   the   world   of  

thought    there  is  a    constant  intermingling  of  thought-  

THE  IMPORTANCE   OF  SOLITUDE  FOR   MEDITATION  

forms   and   thought-colours.  
Some      mighty   ideas   have   a  
tendency   to   strengthen   the   mind   by   facilitating   integra-

tion,  whereas  some  frivolous  thoughts  are  dissipating.  

The   mind   is   either   attracted   or   repelled   by   these  

diverse   thoughts   in   the   mental   environment.   It   is  

advisable   to   avoid   altogether   the   influence   of   these  

variegated   thoughts   in   order   to   get   established   in  

one's   own   ideal   of   thought.   And   for   this   purpose  

solitude   has   an   immense   possibility.   Solitude   means  

economy   of   psychic   energy   and   increased   power   of  

concentration.   Having   nothing   extraneous   to   attract  

or   repel   the   mind   you   are   drawn   inwards   and   learn  

the  art  of  opening  yourself  to  the  higher  atmos-  

  

  

  

  

8                                                    MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

pheric  currents  which  have  the  potency  of  giving  you  

strength,  bliss  and  peaceful  expansiveness.  

While   meditation   on   the   personal   and   impersonal  

aspects   of   God   requires   withdrawal   of   consciousness  

into  the    sanctuary  of    one's    own  heart,  concentration  

SELFLESS   SERVICE  

on   the   universal   aspect   of   God   is   best  
achieved   through   the   selfless   service   of   humanity.   When   the   soul   is   completely  

absorbed   in   the   service   of   humanity,   it   is   completely  

oblivious   of   its   own   body   or   mind   or   their   functions  

as   in   meditation,   and,   therefore,   new   sanskaras   are  

not  formed.  Further  the  old  sanskaras  which  bind  the  

mind   are   shattered   and   dispersed.   Since   the   soul   is  

now   centring   its   attention   and   interest   not   upon   its  

own   good   but   upon   the   good   of   others,   the   nucleus   of  

the   ego   is   deprived   of   its   nourishing   energy.   Selfless  

service   is,   therefore,   one   of   the   best   methods   of  

diverting  and  sublimating  the  energy  locked  up  in  the  

binding  sanskaras.  

          Selfless   service   is   accomplished   when   there   is   not      

the   slightest   thought   of   reward   or   result,   and   when      

there  is  complete  disregard  of  one's  own  comfort  or      

IMPLICATIONS   OF  SELFLESS   SERVICE  

convenience   or   the   possibility   of   being   misunderstood.   When   you   are  wholly  occupied  with  the  wel-     fare   of   others,   you   can   hardly  

think   of   yourself.   You   are   not   concerned   with   your  

comfort   and   convenience,   or   your   health   and  

happiness.  On  the  contrary  you  are  willing  to  sacrifice  

everything  for  their  well-being.  Their  com-  

  

  

  

  

                                          THE  REMOVAL  OF  SANSKARAS                                        9  

  

fort   is   your   convenience,   their   health   is   your   delight,  

and   their   happiness   is   your   joy.   You   find   your   life   in  

losing   it   in   theirs.   You   live   in   their   hearts,   and   your  

heart  becomes  their  shelter.  When  there  is  true  union  

of   hearts,   you   completely   identify   yourself   with   the  

other   person.   Your   act   of   help   or   word   of   comfort  

supply   to   others   whatever   might   be   lacking   in   them,  

and  through  their  thoughts  of  gratitude  and  good  will  

you  actually  receive  more  than  what  you  give.  

        Thus   through   living   for   others   your   own   life   finds    

its   amplification   and   expansion.   The   person   who    

leads    a    life    of    selfless    service    is,    therefore,      hardly                                                      

FREEDOM  AND  
FULFILMENT  
THROUGH   SERVICE  

conscious   of   serving.   He   does   not    
make   those   whom   he   serves   feel   that  they  are  in  any  way  under  his  
obligation.   On   the   contrary,   he  
himself   feels   obliged   for   being  

given   a   chance   of   making   them   happy.   Neither   for  

show   nor   for   name   and   fame   does   he   serve   them.  

Selfless   service   is   completely   achieved   only   when   in  

serving  others  a  man  derives  the  happiness  of  himself  

being   served.   The   ideal   of   selfless   service   frees   him  

from   the   sanskaras   of   the   craving   for   power   and  

possession,  or  self-pity  and  jealousy,  or  the  evil  deeds  

actuated  through  selfishness.  

Selfless   service   as   well   as   meditation   are   both  

spontaneous   when   they   are   inspired   by   love.   Love   is,  

therefore,    rightly    regarded  as  being  the  most    impor-  

LOVE  

tant   avenue   leading   to   the   reali- zation   of   the   Highest.   In   love   the  

soul  is  completely  absorbed  in  

  

  

  

10                                                  MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

the   Beloved,   and   is,   therefore,   detached   from   the  

actions   of   the   body   or   mind.   This,   therefore,   puts   an  

end   to   the   formation   of   new   sanskaras   and   also  

results   in   the   undoing   of   old   sanskaras   by   giving   to  

life   an   entirely   new   direction.   Nowhere   does   self-

forgetfulness   come   so   naturally   and   completely   as   in  

the   intensity   of   love.   It   has,   therefore,   been   given   the  

foremost   place   among   the   methods   which   secure  

release   of   consciousness   from   the   bondage   of  

sanskaras.  

Love   comprehends   in   itself   the   different   advan-

tages   belonging   to   the   other   paths   leading   to  

emancipation,        and  is  in  itself  the  most  distinguished    

THE  PURIFYING  
EFFICACY  OF   LOVE  

and   effective   Path.   It   is   at   once   characterised   by   self-sacrifice  
and   happiness.   Its   uniqueness  
lies   in   the   fact   that   it   is  

accompanied   by   an   exclusive   and   whole-hearted  

offering   to   the   Beloved   without   admitting   the   claims  

of   any   other   object.   So   there   is   no   room   for   the  

diversion   of   psychic   energy,   and   concentration   is  

complete.   In   love   the   physical,   vital   and   mental  

energies   of   men   are   all   gathered   up   and   made  

available  for  the  cause  of  the  Beloved,  with  the  result  

that  it  becomes  a  dynamic  power.  The  tension  of  true  

love   is   so   great   that   any   foreign   feeling   which   might  

intervene   is   at   once   thrown   out.  So   the   expulsive   and  

purifying  efficacy  of  life  is  unparallelled.  

There  is  nothing  unnatural  or  artificial  about  love.  

It   subsists   from   the   very   beginning   of   evolution.   At  

the  organic  stage  it  is  crudely  expressed  in  the  form  of  

cohesion  or  attraction.  It  is  the  natural  affinity  

  

  

                                          THE  REMOVAL  OF  SANSKARAS                                  11  

  

which   keeps   things   together   and   draws   them   to                          

each  other.    The    gravitational    pull      exercised    by    the    

LOVE  IS  PRESENT  
THROUGHOUT   CREATION  

heavenly   bodies   upon   each   other   is   an   expression   of   this  
type   of   love.   At   the   organic  
stage   love   becomes   self-illu-

mined   and   self-appreciative,   and   plays   an   important  

part   from   the   lowest   forms   like   the   amoeba   to   the  

most   evolved   form   of   human   beings.   When   love   is  

self-illumined   its   value   is   intensified   by   its   conscious  

sacrifice.  

The   sacrifice   of   love   is   so   complete   and   ungrudg-

ing   that   it   has   all   to   give   and   nothing   to   expect.  The  

more    it  gives  the  more  it  wants  to    give,  and    the    less    it                                  

LOVE  IS  EXPRESS- ED  THROUGH  
CONSCIOUS  
SACRIFICE  

feels   for   having   given.   Ever  
increasing   and   never   failing   is  
the   stream   of   true   love.   Its  
simple  expression  is  its  simple   giving   over.   The   complexities  

of   the   Beloved   are   a   concern   of   its   best   attention   and  

care.   Endlessly   and   remorselessly   it   seeks   to   please  

the   Beloved   by   a   thousand   ways.   It   falters   not   to  

welcome   suffering   in   order   to   satisfy   but   one   wish   of  

the   Beloved   or   to   relieve   the   Beloved   of   the   slightest  

pain   of   neglect   or   indifference.   It   would   gladly   pine  

and  perish  for  the  sake  of  the  Beloved.  Careworn  and  

tormented   it   waits   not   to   attend   to   the   very   body  

which   houses   and   nourishes   it.   It   brooks   no   com-

promise,   and   the   Beloved   is   a   concern   of   its   lifetime.  

The   tabernacle   of   love   bursts   under   unmanageable  

restlessness,   and   gives   a   birth   to   the   streams   of   love  

and  supreme  sweetness,  until  the  

  

  

12                                                  MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

lover   breaks   through   his   limitations   and   loses   himself  

in  the  being  of  the  Beloved.  

When   love   is   deep   and   intense,   it   is   called   Bhakti  

or  devotion.  In  its  initial  stages  devotion  is  expressed  

through        symbol      worship,      application      before      the    

THE  DIFFERENT  
STAGES  OF   DEVOTION  

deities   and   reverence   and  
allegiance   to   the   revealed   scriptures  or  the  pursuit  of  the  
Highest   through   abstract  

thinking.   In   its   more   advanced   stages,   devotion  

expresses   itself   as   interest   in   human   welfare   and   the  

service  of  humanity,  love  and  reverence  for  saints  and  

allegiance   and   obedience   to   the   Spiritual   Master.  

These   stages   have   their   relative   values   and   relative  

results.   Love   for   a   living   Master   is   a   unique   stage   of  

devotion,  for  it  eventually  gets  transformed  into  Para-

bhakti  or  divine  love.  

Para-bhakti   is   not   merely   intensified   Bhakti.   It  

begins  where  Bhakti  ends.  At  the  stage  of  Para-bhakti,  

devotion    is    not    only    single-minded    but    is    accomp-  

PARA-BHAKTI  

anied   by   extreme   restlessness   of   the  heart  and  a  ceaseless  longing  to  

unite   with   the   Beloved.   This   is   followed   by   lack   of  

interest  in  one's  own  body  and  its  care,  isolation  from  

one's   own   surroundings   and   utter   disregard   for  

appearance   or   criticism,   while   the   divine   impulses   of  

attraction  to  the  Beloved  become  more  frequent  than  

ever.   This   highest   phase   of   love   is   most   fruitful,  

because   it   has   as   its   object   a   person   who   is   love  

incarnate   and   who   can,   as   the   Supreme   Beloved,  

respond  to  

  

  

  
                                          THE  REMOVAL  OF  SANSKARAS                                  13     
the  lover  most  completely.  The  purity,  sweetness  and  
efficacy   of   the   love   which   the   lover   receives   from   the  
Master   contributes   to   the   insuperable   spiritual   value   of  this  highest  phase  of  love.  
  
(To  be  continued)  
           
  
  
     
  
  
     
  
  
     
  
     
  
  
     
  
  
     

  

An  Awakening  

By  RANO  GAYLEY  (NEW  YORK)  

  

  

T h e    m o s t    o u t s t a n d i n g    come  and  an  interview  granted.  

moment   in   my   life   was   the  

I   spent   several   restless   hours,  

m e e t i n g    w i t h    S h r i    M e h e r    suddenly   becoming   rather  

Baba.  

nervous  at  the  thought  of  meeting  

I t    w a s    b y    c h a n c e ,    s o    i t    someone   to   know   so   little   about,  

seem ed   at   the   tim e,   that   I   and  that  yet  in  some  strange  way  

f i r s t    h e a r d    o f    S h r i    B a b a    I   seemed   drawn   to.   The   moment  

through   a   friend   of   Madame   came,   I   stepped   into   the   room,  

B ..   i n    Pa r i s .   N eve r    h av i n g    and   everything   around   faded.   All  

been   what   some   would   call   I   saw   was   one   whose   beauty   of  

spiritually-minded   and   having   expression  defied  description  and  

h a d    n o    l e a n i n g s    t o w a r d s    who   looked   at   me   with   much  

"ism s"   of   any   k in d,   the   gentleness   and   kindness   that   it  

phrase   of   Shri   Baba,   "I   have   imprinted   itself   indelibly   in   my  

c o m e    n o t    to    te a c h    b u t    to    memory.  I  knew  then  that  were  I  

awaken",   struck   something   never   to   see   Shri   Baba   again,   I  

resp on sive   in    my   heart .   It   had   received   something   that  

was   like   a   tiny   seed   dropped   would   remain   with   me   for  

by   the   wayside.   Whether   it   always.  

had   fallen   on   fertile   soil   or   not  

Nine   months   elapsed   before  

was  yet  to  be  seen.  

seeing   Shri   Baba   again.   During  

Having   heard   that   Shri   Baba   that   time   I   thought   of   Him,  

would   be   in   London   in   the   especially   when   I   put   my   pencil  

fall   of   1933,   I   decided   to   go   to   paper,   as   He   had   told   me   that  

there,   hoping   to   have   the   He   would   help   me   with   my  

privilege   of   meeting   Him,   firmly   painting   and   drawing.   It   was  

believing   that,   if   it   were   the   indeed   so,   for   I   did   many   things  

time   for   me   to   meet   Him,   I   that  I  had  never  done  before,  and  

would.  

all   because   His   guiding   influence  

On   arrival   difficulties   arose,   was  there.  

but    these  were  shortly    over-  

Shri  Baba  returned  to  the  

     

     

  

                                                                                                        AN  AWAKENING                                                                                                     15  

     

     

West  in  the  spring  of  1934.  I  was   having   told   someone   to   do   a  

with  Him  for  ten  days  in  Zurich.  It   certain   thing,   he   or   she   shifted  

was   there   that   I   really   began   to   the   duty   on   to   someone   else   or  

realize   what   it   was   to   come   in   did   not   carry   out   the   Master's  

contact   with   a   Perfect   Master.   A   instructions  to  the  letter.  

slow   process   of   breaking   up  

Being  with  Shri  Baba  seems  to  

started  to  take  place  in  my  being.   lend   colour   to   everyone   and  

As   when   spring   comes   and   the   everything   that   surrounds   Him.  

iceberg   shifts   and   slow1y   starts   All   types   are   His   followers,   and  

to   melt   and   give   way,   so   the   some   who   under   ordinary  

barrier   that   I   had   built   within   circumstances   one   would   have  

myself   began   to   disappear,   and   a   nothing   in   common   with,   yet  

new   understanding   came   and   because   of   their   united   love   to  

with   it   a   great   love.   The   more   I   Him,  one  sees  with  different  eyes.  

was   with   Shri   Baba,   the   more   I   One's   whole   outlook   on  

knew   that   my   one   object   in   life   everything   is   seen   through   Him.  

was  henceforth  to  follow  Him  and   One   becomes   happier.   Before   it  

to   serve   Him   to   the   best   of   my   seemed  one  just  existed.  

ability.  

Many  times  I  have  been  asked  

The   last   two   years   I   have   if   I   did   not   feel   strange   with   Shri  

spent   in   close   contact   with   Shri   Baba  as  He  does  not  speak.  It  is  to  

Baba,   both   in   the   West   and   here.   my  heart  and  soul  that  He  speaks,  

Only   those   who   have   been   close   and   for   that   there   is   no   need   of  

to   the   Master   can   realize   how   the  tongue.  

intense   a   life   it   is   and   how   hard  

The  love  one  has  for  Shri  Baba  

and  strict  the  discipline  can  be.  

overcomes   all   obstacles,   and   to  

The   ways   of   a   Perfect   Master   give   up   all   for   love   of   the   Master  

were   sometimes   very   difficult   to   is   no   hardship,   for   one   gives   up  

understand,   but   when   one   has   nothing  and  gains  all.  Baba  is  the  

complete   faith   and   love   one   just   essence   of   Love,   and   through   His  

needs   to   obey,   for   the   Master   Love  one  becomes  purified.  

takes   care   of   everything.   Many  

When   one   comes   to   Baba  

times  I  have  seen  things  go  wrong   one's  life  becomes  his  to  do  

and          all          because          Shri          Baba    

  

     

  

16                                                                                                      MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL                                                                                                      

  

  

with   as   he   wishes,   and   at   that   one   accepts,   knowing   time   will  

point   difficulties   arise.   One   is   reveal  the  reasons  of  the  Master's  

made   to   consciously   recognise   devious  ways.  

one's   faults   and   failings,   so   that  

The   Love   of   the   Master   needs  

little   by   little   they   can   be   no   miracles   to   keep   its   faith  

annihilated.   One   must   put   one's   whole  and  unswerving.  

heart  into  whatever  one  is  doing,   "  The  express  image  of  the  

whether  it  be  important,  trivial  or  

word  'Divine'  art  Thou!    

menial,   and   above   all   learn   to   The  mirror  of  all  regal  loveli-  

become  detached  from  its  results.  

ness  art  Thou!  

Many   times   one's   faith   is   put   With  Thee  in  this  world  

to   the   test,   for   the   Master   will   do  

naught  of  itself  exists  ;    

things  which  might  be  contrary  to   Search  where  we  will,  we  

one's   way   of   doing.   No  

surely  find  all,  all  is  Thou!"  

explanations  are  given,  and  

--HAFIZ.  

     

     

Spiritual  Anecdote  

BY  AHMED  ABBAS  KHAK  
     

It   is   said   that   a   certain   person   borrowed   some   money   from  

gave   him   the   following   three   suggestions   to   act   up   to   if  

"Lookman"*.   After   some   time   he   necessary.   At   the   end   of   the   first  

wrote   to   Lookman   that   he   was   very   busy   and   that   he   could   not  

stage   of   his   journey,   he   (Look- man's   son)   would   arrive   at   a  

find   a   trustworthy   man   with   certain   banyan   tree   under   which  

whom   he   could   send   the   money.   He   suggested,   however,   that   it  

he   should   take   care   not   to   sleep;   and   on   reaching   a   big   city   at   the  

would  be  better  if  his  son  came  to   end   of   the   second   stage,   he   receive   the   money.   Lookman     should  

decided        to      send        his      son      and         

   *A  philosopher  said  to  have  lived  in  the  time  of  David  and  author  of  Arabian   fables  ,  verses  and  proverbs.  

SPIRITUAL  ANECDOTE                                                                                17  

  

retire   into   the   nearest   jungle   for   competent   and   thoroughly   ac-

rest,   instead   of   taking   abode   in   quainted   with   the   route   hap-

that   city;   and   finally   at   his   pened  to  meet  him,  he  may  follow  

destination,   i.   e.,   the   debtor's   his   advice.   The   old   man   assured  

house,  he  should  not  take  shelter   him   that   he   had   thorough  

under  his  roof  at  night.  He  further   knowledge   of   the   route,   and,  

said   that   if   he   happened   to   come   therefore,   he   should   not   hesitate  

across   a   competent   guide,   more   in  listening  to  his  advice.  In  short,  

experienced  than  himself,  he  was   both   of   them   spread   their  

at   liberty   to   take   his   advice   and   beddings   under   that   tree   and  

act  up  to  it.  

went   to   sleep.   At   about   midnight,  

Thus   forewarned,   the   boy   a   big   snake   climbed   down   the  

started  on  his  journey.  He  had  not   tree.   The   old   man,   who   was  

gone   far   when   he   met   an   aged   awake,   killed   it   and   covered   it  

traveller   who   asked   him   as   to   with  the  shield  he  was  carrying.  

where   he   was   going.   On   learning      In   the   morning   they   decided  

from   him   his   destination,   the   old   to  proceed  on  their  journey.  Since  

man   replied   that   he   was   bound   nothing   untoward   had   happened  

for   the   same   place   and   would   be   overnight   and   the   tree   had  

glad   to   accompany   him.   So   they   afforded   him   great   comfort,   the  

proceeded   together.   When   they   boy   thought   that   his   father's  

arrived   at   the   first   halting   place   advice  not  to  stay  under  that  tree  

where   the   banyan   tree   was   had   no   meaning.   The   old   man  

standing,   the   old   man   said   that   who   could   read   the   boy's   mind,  

they   would   rest   under   that   tree   seeing   that   the   boy   was   losing  

for   the   night   to   escape   from   wet   faith   in   his   father,   informed   him  

weather.   The   boy   replied   that   he   of  what  had  happened  during  the  

was   advised   by   his   father   not   to   night,   and   pulling   out   the   dead  

take   shelter   under   that   tree.   The   body  of  the  snake  from  under  the  

old   man   enquired   if   that   was   the   shield  held  it  before  his  eyes.  The  

only   thing   his   father   had   said,   to   boy   felt   much   relieved.   The   old  

which  the  boy  replied  that  he  had   man   then   asked   him   to   cut   the  

also      told      him    that    if    some    one   head   of   the   snake   and   keep   it  

   with    him;    for    he    said,    "A    thing  

     

     

  

18                                                                                    MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

preserved  often  proves  useful,  be   next   morning   the   boy   emerged  

it  the  venom  of  a  snake."  The  boy   from   the   palace   safe   and   sound.  

complied   with   it,   and   they   both   The  king  was  greatly  pleased.  

proceeded  on  their  journey.  

After   a   short   stay   there,   the  

When   they   arrived   in   the   boy   and   the   old   man   started   on  

capital   city,   their   second   halting   their   journey,   and   when   they  

place,   the   old   man   proposed   that   finally   arrived   at   their  

they  pass  the  night  there.  The  boy   destination,   the   old   man  

did  not  object  to  it,  and  they  went   proposed   to   stay   in   the   house   of  

and   stayed   in   an   inn.   It   was   the   the   debtor.   The   boy   did   not  

custom   of   the   place,   that   object,   as   he   had   grown   wise   by  

whenever   a   young   stranger   experience.   The   debtor,   to   avoid  

chanced   to   arrive   in   the   city,   he   paying   the   debt,   thought   that   it  

was   perforce   married   to   the   was   a   good   opportunity   to   kill  

king's   daughter   by   order   of   the   both   of   them.   He,   therefore,   after  

king;   but   the   next   morning   he   exchanges  of  common  courtesies,  

was   invariably   found   dead.   asked   them   if   they   would   like   to  

Incidentally   the   king   was   sleep   inside   the   room   or   outside  

informed   of   the   youth's   arrival,   it.   The   old   man   replied   that   the  

and   the   youth   had   to   appear   weather   being   sultry   they   would  

before   him,   who   immediately   got   like   to   sleep   outside   in   the   open  

him   married   to   the   princess.   The   air.   Thus   during   the   night   they  

old   man,   however,   advised   the   sojourned   outside,   while   the   two  

boy   to   put   the   head   of   the   snake   sons   of   the   host   slept   inside   the  

on  the  fire,  and  make  the  princess   room.   At   about   midnight   the   old  

inhale   the   smoke   rising   from   it,   man   awoke   his   companion,   on  

before   he   retired   with   her   to   the   the  pretence  of  feeling  uneasy  on  

bed  chamber;  and  the  boy  did  so.   account   of   cold   blast,   and  

The  princess  was  suffering  from  a   suggested   that   they   should   go  

malignant   disease   of   the   womb,   into   the   room   and   request   the  

and   which   meant   sure   death   for   two   sons   of   the   host   sleeping  

the   bridegroom.   Through   the   there   to   exchange   places   with  

effect   of   that   remedy,   however,   them.   The   boy   approved   of   the  

she  was  cured  of  that  malady,  and   plan,  and  they  managed  to  prevail  

     

  

  

SPIRITUAL  ANECDOTE                                                                                19  

  

upon  the  sons  of  the  host  to  sleep   various   incidents   of   his   journey  

outside,   while   they   made   to  his  father,  and  enquired  of  him  

themselves   comfortable   inside   as   to   who   the   old   man   was.   His  

the  room.  

father   said   that   it   was   the  

After  some  time  the  host  came   Prophet  Khizr.*  

to   execute   his   sinister   design   and  

To   a   layman   this   story   would  

unhesitatingly   killed   those   sleep- make   an   interesting   reading;   but  

ing   outside.   In   the   morning   he   to   understand   the   spiritual   value  

found,  to  his  great  consternation,   of   this   tale   and   arrive   at   the   true  

that  he  had  unwittingly  killed  his   moral   of   it,   one   may   interpret  

own   sons.   He   could   not   do   Lookman   as   (Asle-Usul)   the   Real  

anything  but  keep  quiet  over  this   Source;  the  traveller  as  (Salik)  the  

affair,   for   it   was   his   own   doing   spiritual   aspirant;   the   stages   in  

which   knew   no   remedy.   On   the   the   journey   as   the   different  

other   hand,   for   fear   of   being   phases  through  which  a  Salik  has  

exposed   by   his   guests   who   were   to   pass   (Manzil);   the   old   man   as  

in  the  know,  he  thought  it  wise  to   (Pir-e-Kamil)   the   Perfect   Master;  

pay   up   the   debt   and   see   them   the   snake   as   (Nafs)   the   devil   or  

depart   as   early   as   possible.   On   low   desires;   the   princess   as  

receipt   of   the   money,   the   boy   (Dunya)   the   sensual   world;   the  

with  the  old  man  left  the  place  for   house   of   the   debtor   (Khana-e-

home.   The   old   man   took   leave   of   Maqruz)   as   the   physical   world;  

the  boy  exactly  at  the  place  where   the   debtor   as   human   being;   the  

he   had   first   met   him,   with   a   sons   of   the   debtor   as   the   people  

request   to   remember   him   to   his   of   the   world   and   money   (Mal)  as  

father.   The   boy   asked   him   his   love  of  God  (Ishq-e-Ilahi).  

name  to  which  he  replied  that  his  

In   short,   a   spiritually   minded  

father  knew  him  well.  On  arriving   person   will   find   enough   food   for  

home,      the      boy      related      all      the     one's   thought   in   this   tale,   simple  

   yet  pregnant  with  meaning.  

  

  

  

  

*A  mysterious  sage  endowed  with  immortality,  as  a  result  of  drinking  the  

water  of  life.  He  is  said  to  enter  into  conversation  with  wandering  Sufis  and  

impart  to  them  his  God-given  knowledge.  

  

Poems  
BY  DINESHNANDINI  CHORDIA  
     
Iconoclast,  hesitate  not  to  break  idols  that  have                                                                                                                             grown  old,  
Stop  not  to  burn  mosques  that  dispense  discord;   Destroy  with  thy  hammer  strokes  the  arched  vault  of                                                                                                                                 ancient  ritual  and  custom,   But  break  not  the  Idol  of  human  Freedom  which  is                                                                                                                                                                             Divinity  itself  !     
*      *      *      *      *     
Who  has  strewn  the  multi-coloured  flowers  on  this                                                                                                                                                           unfrequented  path  ?   The  snow-covered  mountain  tops  are  illumined  by  the                                                                             vermilion  colored  light  of  the  setting  sun;   The  water-birds  are  cooing  in  the  honey  sweet  lotus                                                                                                                                                                                                                     forest,   And  the  turquois  waters  of  the  still  tarn  are  reflecting                                                                                                                                                                         Nature  at  her  best.      In  the  hour  of  evening  worship  I  sing  aloud  my  Lord's    
songs  to  the  accompaniment  of  the  Tambura,  filling     with  music  divine  the  quiet  sky,  and  then  vanish     forth  from  here  like  a  meteor  leaving  a  momentary     trail  of  light  behind  !      None  has  so  far  endeavoured  to  reach  this  secluded  beauty     spot,  and  whosoever  attempted  to  get  to  it  perished     in  the  way  --                    

                                                                                                                            POEMS                                                                                                                        21  
  
Who  has  scattered  these  sweet  smelling  flowers  on  this                           maiden  path.                                                                                                        *      *      *      *      *     
In  the  life-giving  light  of  the  saffron  tinted  dawn,  when     the  stars  became  faint  with  fear,  you  said,  "I  love  you."     
When  my  bee-black  musk  perfumed  hair  became  snow-white     and  the  palsy  stricken  body  quivered  like  the  mimosa  plant     you  said,  "I  love  you."     
When  my  rose-bud-like  lips  turned  blue  with  the  feverish     kiss  of  Death  and  the  love-darting  eyes  became  glassy,  you     said,  "I  love  you."                                                                                                              *      *      *      *      *  
   Waste  not  thy  time,  my  worshipper,  in  worshipping  me,     as  I  do  reward  not  those  who  pour  their  heart's  offerings  at     my  feet.      Be  not  bankrupt,  my  devotee,  in  installing  my  Idol  with     all  the  old  ritual  in  the  new  temple,  as  my  blessings  help  not     one  to  flourish  in  the  world.      Sing  not  my  praises,  O  poet,  as  I  am  not  the  mistress  of   the  divine  Siddhis.              Waste  not  thy  time,  my  worshipper,  in  worshipping  me.        
     
  

Shri  Meher  Baba  

and  Universal  Religion  

(BY  DR.  C.  D.  DESHMUKH,  M.  A.,  Ph.  D.,  Lecturer,  Morris  College,  Nagpur)

  

We   are   living   in   an   age   which   is   characterised   by   the   interming- ling   of   diverse   civilizations   and   cultures.   Most   of   them   find   their   inspiring   spirit   in   some   historical   religion.   The   historical   religions   may   in   principle   be   divided   into   two  types:  Both  the  types  require   (1)   faith   in   the   existence   of   something   higher   than   the   individual   self,   and   (2)   the   recognition   of   its   claims   upon   him.   But   they   differ   in   one   important   respect.   In   the   first   type,   this   higher   principle   is   looked   upon   as   a   perfect   and   infinite   personality   or   God   (as   in   Christianity).   And   in   the   second   type   the   higher   principle   is   regarded   as   being   some   impersonal  goal  or  law  (  as  in  the   case   of   Buddhism).   These   two   types  of  religion  are  also  found  to   intermingle   with   one   another   in   varying   proportions   (as   in   the   case   of   the   different   folds   of   Hinduism).  Further,  both  types  of   religion  require  something  more              

than   the   bare   allegiance   to   this   higher   principle.   They   also   sanction   and   require   the   in- dividual   to   perform   duties   towards   the   great   society   of   which  he  is  a  member.  
Along   with   these   types   of   outlook   which   have   been   our   legacy  from  the  past,  there  is  also   widely   current   an   outlook   which   does  not  claim  to  be  religious  and   derives   its   inspiration   from   science  rather  than  from  religion.   It   recognises   the   innumerable   sufferings   of   humanity,   and   wishes  to  avoid  them  by  securing   cooperative   and   connected   action.   And   it   is   content   to   leave   heaven   and   angels   to   themselves.   This   outlook   has   gained   such   wide   popularity,   because   it   contains   some   elements   of   value   from   which   it   derives   its   vitality.   And  the  future  Universal  Religion,   as   anticipated   by   the   Teaching   of   Shri  Meher  Baba,  will  incorporate   in   itself   the   elements   of   value   which    are    present    not    only    in  
        

                                  SHRI  MEHER  BABA  AND  UNIVERSAL  RELIGION                   23  

  

the   great   historical   religions   but   are   peculiar   to   the   different  

also  in  this  `scientific'  outlook.  

peoples   of   the   world.   And   the  

Let  us  first  examine  the  sense   futility   of   the   proselitysing  

in   which   Universal   Religion   is   propaganda   which   has   been  

possible.   Realization   of   God,   vigorously   carried   on   by   the  

which   gives   the   individual   a   followers  of  different  religions  for  

secure  basis  for  an  integrated  and   centuries   should   be   sufficient   to  

harmonious   life,   is   purely   a   convince   us   about   the   impos-

personal  matter,  and  it  cannot  be   sibility  to  secure  for  this  aspect  of  

imposed   on   the   individual   religion   universal   acceptance.  

through   any   social   institutions.   That  is  why  Shri  Meher  Baba  does  

No   amount   of   external   insti- not   attach   any   importance   to  

tutional   instruction   can   guaran- dogmas,  beliefs,  creeds  or  rituals.  

tee  to  the  individual  the  synthesis  

It   is   neither   desirable   nor  

of   values   and   the   poise   between   possible   for   any   one   historical  

reason  and  love  which  it  involves.   religion   to   become   universal   by  

God   has   to   be   realised   by   the   extirpating   other   religions.   The  

individual   through   an   inner   Universal   Religion,   as   fore-

awakening  and  an  earnest  search   shadowed   in   the   Teaching   of   the  

and  effort.  Institutions  at  best  can   Master,   will   synthesise   and   not  

serve   as   tools   for   interchange   of   merely  blindly  reject  the  values  of  

experience.   But   God-realization   the   various   historical   religions.  

always   remains   a   personal   The   historical   religions   are   all  

matter.   All   that   can   be   done   paths   towards   the   Truth.   But   the  

through   social   effort   is   the   tragedy   about   their   actual  

creation   of   an   atmosphere   which   functioning   has   been   that   they  

will   facilitate   such   realization.   It   have  tended  to  become  more  and  

cannot  be  directly  made  universal.   more   exclusive,   and   thus,   in   the  

            In  so  far  as  religion  consists  of   long   run,   have   denied   the  

certain   dogmas,   beliefs,   creeds   universal   and   comprehensive  

and   rituals,   it   has   no   potentiality   vision   of   their   founders.   Truth   is  

to   become   universal.   This   aspect   not   an   exclusive   prerogative   of  

of   religion   is   directly   derived   any   one   religion,   and   the   coming  

from  the  diverse  traditions  which   Universal  Religion,  therefore,  

     

     

  

24                                                                                MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

cannot   take   a   hostile   or   derive   its   inspiration   from   the  

patronizing   attitude   towards   any   shadowy   prospects   concerning  

historical   religions.   What   we   the   other   world,   but   will  

require  is  a  more  catholic  attitude   essentially  be  a  Religion  of  Life.  It  

which  would  not  only  tolerate  all   will   not   exclude   any   of   the  

shades   of   opinion   on   religious   intrinsic   values   of   life,   but   will  

topic,   but   which   will   actively   try   comprehend   within   its   scope   all  

to  understand  and  appreciate  the   scientific,   artistic   and   cultural  

diverse   points   of   view.   Religion   pursuits.   It   will   leave   every  

should   not   divide   man   and   man,   individual   completely   free   to  

as  it  has  tended  to  do  in  the  past,   realize   God   in   his   own   way.   The  

but   it   should,   on   the   contrary,   be   Paths  will  always  differ  according  

a   cementing   power   that   holds   to   individual   temperaments   ;   but  

together   people   of   diverse   each  Path  will  ultimately  lead  the  

opinions.  

individual   to   the   Goal   which   is  

Shri   Meher   Baba   does   not   universal,   although   the   reali-

seek  to  establish  a  new  sect,  thus   zation   of   that   Goal   will,   as   we  

adding   to   the   number   of   sects   have   seen,   always   remain  

already  existing  in  the  world,  but   personal.  

will   be   truly   comprehensive.   In  

The   Universal   Religion   of   the  

the   light   of   his   Teaching,   the   future   is   not   comparable   to   the  

individual  will  not  live  for  the  self   achievement   of   a   result   like   the  

alone,   nor   will   he   live   for   any   establishment   of   an   empire.   It  

narrow  sect.  But  he  will  live  a  life   will   not   be   some   definite   event  

of   love   which   knows   no   after   the   occurrence   of   which  

distinctions,   and   he   will   try   to   men   may   again   go   to   sleep.   It  

realize   the   common   good,   not   would   merely   release   the   Divine  

because   of   any   ties   of   common   Life   and   Energy   which   today   is  

mythology   or   a   set   of   rituals,   but   locked   up   in   most   human   beings.  

because   of   a   clear   recognition   of   After   this   release   life   will   still   go  

the   unity   of   all   individuals   in   the   on   as   ever,   renewing   itself   every  

infinite   life   of   God.   Love   for   God   moment.   It   will   be   truly   creative,  

and   love   for   man   will   constitute   unoppressed   by   the   frozen   past,  

the   animating   spirit   of   this   or  by  the  unknown  future.  And  it  

Universal  Religion.  It  will  thus  not   will  be  infinitely  rich  and  full,  

     

  

                                  SHRI  MEHER  BABA  AND  UNIVERSAL  RELIGION                   25  

  

because   humanity   will   have   reflect   upon   its   causes,   and   set  

attained   to   perpetual   youth.   This   ourselves   to   discover   ways   of  

eternally   self-refreshing   spirit   is   avoiding   any   such   future  

the   very   main   spring   of   the   catastrophes.  

Creative  Religion  of  life  which  the  

In   our   times   the   whole   world  

Master  brings.  

has   really   become   one.   There   is  

The   way   for   inheriting   this   economic  and  spiritual  action  and  

spiritual   gift   of   Shri   Meher   Baba   reaction  between  all  its  parts,  and  

is,   however,   beset   with   it  is  impossible  to  ignore  this  fact.  

innumerable   difficulties.   The   A   nation   or   a   race   can   no   longer  

world  as  it  is  today  is  full  of  chaos   be   regarded   as   being   a   self-

because   of   warring   sections   of   sufficient   and   isolated   unit.   Our  

humanity  which  has  been  divided   individual   and   social   activities  

on   the   basis   of   (1)   classes,   (2)   must,   therefore,   be   organised   on  

nationality,   (3)   race,   (4)   religion   the   basis   of   co-operation   rather  

and   (5)   culture.   We   thus   find   than  of  competition.  We  must  put  

throughout   the   structure   of   the   forth   our   united   efforts   for  

modern   world   innumerable   counteracting   the   old   ideas   of  

pernicious   distinctions   which   are   narrow   patriotism   and   petty  

based   upon   economic,   social,   loyalties,  and  carry  on  a  vigorous  

political   and   cultural   competition.   propaganda   in   favour   of   the  

The   only   way   out   of   this   chaos   is   recognition   of   the   claim   which  

to   transcend   these   narrow   the   whole   human   brotherhood  

differences   through   Universal   has   upon   us   all.   We   can   thus  

Love.  The  urgent  need  for  solving   create   a   general   sense   of  

this   world-problem   has   international   responsibility.   The  

impressed   itself   upon   us   by   the   real   problem   lies   in   the   urgent  

tragic   catastrophe   of   the   last   need   for   forming   intelligent   and  

Great   War   which   was   like   a   healthy  world-opinion,  and  this  is  

tremendous   conflagration   which   a   Herculian   task.   There   will   be   a  

threatened  to  consume  the  whole   need   for   innumerable   organi-

world   by   its   flames.   The   legacy   zations   and   service-leagues,   in  

which  the  Great  War  gave  to  us  is   every   part   of   the   globe,   and   the  

not,   however,   all   evil.   After   the   activities   of   these   organizations  

closing    of    the    War,    we  began  to   will  have  to  be  co-ordinated,  so  as  

     

  

26                                                                                MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

to   secure   harmonious   and   are  burdened  by  the  dead  weight  

effective   action,   planned   by   of   meaningless   traditions.   Their  

reason  and  inspired  by  love.  There   vision   is   limited   by   the   social  

will   be   a   need   for   setting   afoot   a   distinctions   to   which   their   minds  

number   of   movements   or   have   got   accustomed.   They   have  

currents   of   vitalizing   thought,   so   been   caught   up   in   grooves   and  

that   by   and   by   the   whole   of   they  have  lost  the  capacity  to  face  

humanity   will   become   conscious   the   problems   of   life   with   a   fresh  

of  its  unity  as  an  organic  whole.  It   and  an  unbiased  mind.  The  young  

is   true   that   all   the   historical   men   and   women   are   free   from  

religions   have   been   attempting   this   burden   and   limitation.   They  

the   same   stupendous   task.   But   are   in   a   position   to   face   modern  

their   efforts   have   obviously   not   problems   of   life   with   an   attitude  

been   crowned   with   success.   The   which   is   both   critical   and  

amount   of   selfless   zeal   and   constructive.   And   if   they   set  

enthusiasm   as   well   as   the   themselves   to   this   task   in   the  

unflickering  faith  in  life  which  are   right  spirit,  they  will  conserve  all  

required  for  achieving  unification   the  elements  of  value  which  have  

of   humanity   can   only   come   from   been   inherited   by   us   from   the  

the   inspiration   derived   from   a   past,   and   also   absorb   the  

living   Perfect   Master   like   Shri   vitalising   Gospel   of   Shri   Meher  

Meher  Baba.  

Baba.  

Unification   of   humanity,  

In   the   present   distressing   and  

however,  is  not  our  only  problem.   gloomy   atmosphere   which  

We   have   to   attempt   much   more   envelops   humanity   today,   our  

than   this,   viz.,   the   rejuvenation  of   only  hope  lies  in  Shri  Meher  Baba.  

the   modern   world.   The   whole   of   It   is   true   that   we   are   confronted  

humanity  will  have  to  go  through   with   many   volcanic   and  

a  kind  of  spiritual  rebirth  in  order   disruptive   forces   of   mutual   fear  

to   inherit   the   new   life   for   the   and  hatred  which  work  for  chaos.  

dispensation   of   which   the   New   But   nothing   is   impossible   for   a  

Avatar   of   Shri   Meher   Baba   has   generation   of   young   men   and  

come.   This   spiritual   rebirth   may   women   whose   imagination   is  

be   difficult   for   the   older   fired  by  the  vision  of  the  Truth  as  

generation,  because  their    minds  

revealed  

     

  

                                                                                                  IMPRESSIONS                                                                                                          27  
  
by   the   Master.   Inspired   by   the   We   have   to   promote   an   outlook  
ideal   of   selfless   service,   they   can   which   will   not   merely   be   consis- apply  their  energies  to  the  task  of   tently   pacifist   but   will   positively  
counteracting   these   forces   of   be   quickened   by   the   spirit   of  
disruption.   This   work   is   comp- active   love   for      humanity   as   a  
arable   to   the   action   of   Ulysses   whole.   The   ship   of   humanity   will  
who  got  bound  in  "Aeol's  Bag,"  all   thus   arrive   at   the   completion   of  
the   winds   except   that   which   was   its   pilgrimage   by   realizing   a   to  take  his  ship  to  its  destination.     Comprehensive   and   Universal  
   Religion  of  Life.  
     
        
Impressions*  
BY  WILL  BACKETT  (London)     
Some   who   came   had   been   acknowledge    Him  as    their    supreme   seekers   for   many   years,   and   spiritual   Guide.   Other   more   sophis- previously   met   other   well-known   ticated   souls   wrapped   in   orthodox   teachers   from   the   East,   and   were   creeds   were   brought   to   Him   in   the   greatly   influenced   by   them.   Still   enthusiasm   of   our   early   efforts   to   many   difficulties   remained   for   them,   spread   the   good   news   of   Baba's   and  in  seeking  Baba's  Grace  they  had   coming   to   all   and   sundry.   The   to   acknowledge   how   He   awakened   inevitable   result   followed   in   some   the   inner   life   still   more   within   them,   such   cases   after   the   first   passing   enabling  them  to  face  up  with  greater   impressions   of   meeting   Baba;   for   power   to   the   difficulties   in   life.   This   then   the   power   of   the   old   creed   happened   to   several   who   did   not   would   reassert   itself   and   darken   the   accept        Him        as        Avatar        or        even     mind   again,   obliterating   for   the   time  
   being  the  effect  of  meeting  Baba.  But                              *  Continued  from  April  1939  issue     

28                                                                                MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

His   inner   work   would   proceed  

The   child   felt   His   presence,  

steadily   in   such   a   case,   bringing   and   on   reaching   home   for   the  

out   a   clear,   deeper   appreciation   first  time  stretched  out  his  lower  

of  the  spiritual  Truths  behind  the   limbs,  by  their  own  power,  on  his  

person's   creed,   cutting   away   little   bed,   and   slept   soundly   for  

much   that   was   unessential   and   some   hours.   His   improvement  

misleading   in   its   creed   and   continued   gradually,   so   that   he  

ceremonial.  

was   able   to   go   to   school,   play  

This   change   was   not   always   with   his   own   ball   and   mount   the  

confined   to   the   party   who   met   stairs   to   his   bedroom   by   himself.  

Baba,   but   penetrated   through   This   improvement   has   been  

Him   to   the   friends   and   relatives   permanent.  

who   knew   nothing   of   Baba,  

There   was   another   case  

harmonizing   and   transforming   where   the   parents   had   been  

their   lives,   after   even   fifty   years   greatly   troubled   with   their   son's  

of  discord.  

ill  health  and  weakness  which  did  

Some   instances   of   bodily   not   yield   to   the   best   medical  

healing  occurred  through  contact   treatment.   Baba   gave   them   His  

with  Baba  at  the  office--on  those   Grace  at  Mary's  request,  and  they  

two   occasions   when   He   met   the   went   home   and   touched   the   lad,  

people   in   large   numbers.   One   thinking   of   Baba   as   He   had   told  

little   lad   had   had,   at   least,   ten   them.   They   assured   me  

serious   operations   and   could   not   afterwards   that   they   had   done  

stand   alone.   His   parents   were   what   they   were   told   and   really  

determined   that   no   more   oper- touched   the   child,   although   they  

ations   should   be   done   and   said   they   had   forgotten   they   had  

brought   him   to   Baba   for   His   done   it   and   the   details   of   the  

blessing   without   thought   of   any   incident.   The   child's   condition  

physical   results.   Baba   embraced   gradually   improved,   and   after  

the   child,   and   then   gave   me   eight   months,   we   learned   from  

simple  instructions  to  see  the  lad   them,   that   he   was   playing   rugby,  

on   a   certain   date   in   about   nine   and   his   physical   and   mental  

months,   which   happened   to   be   development   were   above   the  

his   birthday,   unknown   to   me.   I   average.      The   curious   point   here  

was   to   take   him   a   rose   leaf   for   is  that  they  

him  to  eat.  

  

     

                                                                                                  IMPRESSIONS                                                                                                          29  

  

had   forgotten   Baba's   original   sanskaras        that      remained      from  

instruction   to   touch   the   boy   and   that  earlier  period  of  my  life.  

to   think   of   Him   while   doing   so,  

Baba   received   details   of   our  

but   nevertheless   they   were   sure   activities  at  the  office  by  a  weekly  

they   had   done   so.   Evidently   the   letter,  which  we  knew  He  used  as  

cure  did  not  impress  their  minds,   a   link   between   us   and   Himself,  

and   they   did   not   associate   the   and  in  His  replies  He  would  often  

subsequent   change   in   his   health   send   individual   messages   to  

to  Baba's  inner  working.  

correspondents   and   callers.  

How  clearly  Baba  saw  the  past   These   messages,   channels   of   his  

was  illustrated  in  my  own  case  by   Grace,   were   marvels   of   gentle-

His   harmonizing   me   with   an   old   ness,   love,   understanding   and  

friend   whom   I   had   not   seen   for   power.   They   witnessed   to   Baba's  

nearly   thirty   years.   We   had   contact   with   each   separate  

parted   on   principle   owing   to   person  apart  from  what  had  been  

religious   differences.   After   conveyed   in   our   London   letters,  

returning   from   Baba   I   just   so   individual   was   their   character  

happened   to   catch   the   eye   of   my   for   each   distinct   person   con-

old   friend   on   a   very   crowded   cerned.  

railway   station.   Something  

The   opportunity   to   live   with  

passed   between   us   in   that   look,   Baba   in   India   and   meet   his  

bridging  the  gulf  of  thirty  years  in   devotees   there   and   watch   His  

a   moment.   Subsequently   I   got   work   so   closely   has   brought   me  

into   closer   touch   to   tell   my   old   nearer   to   the   inner   object   of   His  

friend   of   Baba   who   gave   His   work   for   me,   to   realize   and  

Grace  to  both  of  us,  clearing  away   experience  the  Divine  Love  which  

the   differences   upon   which   our   He   ever   radiates.   That   Love  

original   friendship   had   been   which   He   forever   pours   forth   to  

wrecked,   and   giving   deep   all   is   beyond   words   to   convey,  

meaning   to   all   that   was   and   involves   complete   surrender  

happening  now.  

of  all  else,  so  that  no  obstacle  may  

Thus  did  Baba  clear  away  the     remain   to   impede   the   outflow   of  

   His  Grace.  

     

  

  

  

The  Master's  Hand  
BY  KEMALI          
'Tis  Baba's  hand...   And  in  His  palm  the  universe  evolves  from  sphere  to  sphere.     In  subtle  form  He  moulds  and  guides  us.  We,  His  children,     Are  the  tools  with  which  He  works  to  purify  and  make  anew     This  vast  expanse,  so  in  our  world  will  be  a  peace  past  
        understanding,   A  lasting  peace  which  all  can  share.  His  hand  in  tenderness  
  shows  us  the  way   And  those  who  feel  the  urge  will  closer  grow.  
'Tis  Baba's  hand....   With  power  and  strength,  yet  delicately  formed  in  grace,   No  human  hand  can  guide  and  speak  with  every  gesture.  No  stroke     Is  lost.  The  whys  and  wherefores  thus  explained  lead  us  to  God.   Oh,  those  who  tempest  toss'd  upon  life's  sea  will  safe  in  
harbour  feel  if  they  but  call   To  Him  who  always  hears  before  their  cry.  "I  am  for  all,"  
He  said,  but  we  must  have     The  faith  sublime  to  keep  us  in  this  bliss.  
'Tis  Baba's  hand...   So  filled  with  love,  He  never  turns  aside  a  heart  which  at  
His  feet  succumbs.   He  never  fails  to  understand  the  pain,  the  anguish  of  that  soul  
before  it   Yearns  for  Him--as  last  resort.  His  hand  doth  bless  and  raise  
our  selves   That  we  may  live  in  Him  and  know  the  Oneness  of  such  bliss  
divine   As  only  Baba  can  bestow.  Truly  doth  happiness  abound     When  perfect  Love  is  found  in  Baba's  hand.        
     

Question  Baba  Answers  

SERIES  BY  DR.  ABDUL  GHANI    MUNSIFF  

  

  

Question  

expresses   towards   all   creation.  

For   an   aspirant   to   the   Path   in   To   him   nothing   is   attractive   or  

search   of   a   Murshid   (Master)   is   repulsive:   Good,   bad;   saint,  

there   any   infallible   method   of   sinner;   beauty,   ugliness;   wisdom,  

recognizing  a  Perfect  Master?  

idiocy;   health,   disease   are   all  

Answer  

different  modes  and  moods  of  his  

Spiritual   attainment   to   the   own   manifestation.   When  

planes   one   may   not   satisfactorily   embodied   Perfection   loves,  

allocate  or  discriminate.  All  those   fondles,  feeds  any  living  creature,  

from   the   first   to   the   sixth   plane   it  feels  and  enjoys  as  if  it  is  loving,  

come   under   the   general   category   fondling  and  feeding  its  own  Self.  

of  "advanced  souls"  more  or  less.   In   this   state   no   vestige   of  

But   when   luckily   one   comes   into   "otherness"  is  left.  

contact   with   Perfection,   it  

The   second   point   is   the  

represents   unmistakable   signs   undeniable   atmosphere   of   bliss  

for   a   seeker   of   Truth   who   is   that   Perfection   radiates   in   its  

patient  and  sincere.  

immediate   vicinity   and   which   a  

There   are   three   important   visitor   cannot   help   feeling   or  

factors   that   are   characteristic   of   noticing.   A   Perfect   Master   not  

the   state   of   Perfection.   First,   only  enjoys  infinite  bliss,  but  also  

Perfection   is   not   only   "Oneness   experiences   universal   suffering.  

with   God"   but   the   continued   and   The   poignancy   of   suffering,  

uninterrupted   experience   of   however,  is  nullified  and  subdued  

Oneness   in   everything.   A   Perfect   by   the   overwhelming   joy   or  

Master  continuously,  without  any   feeling   of   bliss.   Hence,   Perfection  

break,  experiences  or  realizes  his   outwardly   always   appears  

own   Self   as   the   Self   in   all.   This   blissfully   calm   and   unperturbed  

inner   experience   objectively   in   the   face   of   every   kind   of   pain,  

manifests  itself  in  the  spontaneity     persecution  and  penury.  

of  Love  that  such  an  one  feels  or  

The  third  most  outstanding  

     

  

  

  

  

  

32                                                                                MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

   characteristic   of   Perfection   is   its   power   to   adapt   itself   to   any   level  

   with   the   illiterate   and   ignorant.   Just   as   a   Master   of   Arts   delivers  

or   strata   of   humanity.   It   is   as   nonchalant   on   a   throne   as   it   is  

or   teaches   English   in   a   different   way   to   a   beginner   than   to   an  

obviously   indifferent   and   undisturbed   in   a   gutter.   It   is   impecunious   with   the   poor,  

undergraduate,   similarly,   a   Perfect   Master   adapts   himself   to   the   level   of   the   one   whom   he  

extravagant   with   the   rich,   lordly   with   kings,   wise   with   the   learned  

wants   to   uplift   spiritually.   Each   one   to   its   meed   and   everyone   to  

and    naively  simple    and    innocent     its  aptitude,  is  the  perennial  plan      of  personified  Perfection.  

           
     

Sufi  Thoughts  

Versification  BY  DR.  ABDUL  GHANI  MUNSIFF     
Non-existence  is  existence  and  existence  is  nothing;     Forgetfulness  is  salvation  and  salvation  is  nothing.  

Time--space,  can  ne'er  compass  the  Absolute,  the  Infinite;    

As  against  that,  what  is  NOT,  that  which  IS  is  nothing.  

Nothingness  is  everything  and  everything  is  nothing;    

The  secret  anent  creation,  besides  this  is  nothing.  

To  think  "TO  BE"  as  reality  is  nothing  but  delusion;    

Barring  this  to  the  wayfarer,  the  obstacle  is  nothing.   Mastery  in  servitude,  is  "NOT  TO  BE",  Oh  Niyaz,   The  meaning  of  ONENESS  with  God,  beyond  this  is  nothing.  

     
     

     

  

The  Vaishnavite  Saints  of  Southern  India   and  their  Hagiology*  

THE  LIVES  OF  THE  TRIAD  

i. ST.  POYGAI  AZHVAR  

ii. ST.  PUDATT  AZHVAR  

iii. ST.  PEY  AZHVAR  

BY  C.  V.  SAMPATH  AIYANGAR  

  

These   were   contemporaries.   I   pitfall   is   ambition,   or   that  

have  stated  that  the  word  Azhvar   treason-inducing   vice   which  

means   "sunk   deep   in   God-love."   makes   Shakespeare   put   into   the  

What   does   this   mean?   A   saint   is   mouth   of   the   patriot   Brutus   the  

one   who   is   intoxicated   with   the   following   speech:   As   he   was   my  

love   of   God;   in   him   there   is   benefactor   I   loved   him,   but   as   he  

nothing   like   spiritual   ambition.   was   ambitious,   I   slew   him.'   Thus  

Spiritual   I-ness   is   worse   than   God   slays   the   ambitious   or   those  

worldly   I-ness.   A   great   thinker   who   attach   undue   or   sole   virtue  

said   that   the   danger   of   "spiritual   to   their   own   efforts   with   which  

intumescence"   was   more   God,   they   think,   can   be  

dangerous   than   "worldly   pride   ".   purchased."  

The   late   Partha-sarathy   Yogi,  

So   says   the   New   Testament:  

therefore,   truly   observed,   "Even   "For  he  that  is  called  in  the  Lord,  

after   the   pitfalls   of   avarice   and   being  a  bond-man,  is  the  freeman  

amorousness   have   been   escaped,   of   the   Lord.   Likewise   he   that   is  

there   remains   a   pitfall   which   is   called  being  free,  is  the  bondman  

more   dangerous   still,   namely   of   Christ."   The   whole   thing   was  

ambition,   with   which   false   ideas   put   in   a   nutshell   by   Hadis   thus:   "  

of   greatness,   too,   have   been   My   servant   draws   nigh   to   me   by  

associated  by  large  numbers  even   pious   deeds   till   I   love   him,   and  

of   the   comparatively   better   when  I  love  him,  I  am  his  eye,  his  

classes  of  mankind.    This  greater  

tongue,  his  foot,  his  hand,  

     

     

  

*Continued  from.  April  1939  issue.  

  

  

  

34                                                                                MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

     

and   by   me   he   sees,   hears,   talks,   Poygai   Azhvar.   The   third   Peya-

walks,  and  feels."  This  is  "wisdom   Azhvar   was   born   in   Mylapore,  

love"   to   use   the   beautiful   which   is   a   portion   of   the   city   of  

expression   of   St.   Nammazhvar.   It   Madras.   He   was   born   a   day   later  

means   "Love   to   God   by   than  the  second  Azhvar.  

completely   surrendering   oneself  

The   first   was   also   called   Saro-

to  the  will  of  God."  And  the  will  of   muni,   because   he   was   born   in   a  

God  is  to  work  without  relaxation   tank.   The   third   was   called  

for   the   evolution   of   His   Universe   Bhranta-Yogi   (mad   with   love   of  

(Gita.   Chap.   III,   Shlokas   22   and   God).  As  a  great  writer  says,  these  

23).   The   Lord,   therefore,   says,   were   three   spiritual   flowers   that  

"Do   thou   always   perform   actions   were   sent   to   perfume   the  

which   are   obligatory,   without   mundane  atmosphere.  They  were  

attachment."   (Ibid-Shloka   19).   In   perfect   in   three   spiritual  

fine,   loving   service   to   God   in   His   essentials:   Jnana   (Knowledge   of  

great   work   of   evolution   is   the   God),   Bhakti   (Love   to   God)   and  

"all"   of   saints.   Such   was   the   Dispassion   (non--attachment).  

service  of  our  Azhvar  Triad.  

Their   lives,   therefore,   serve   as  

Tradition   tells   us   that   Poygai   splendid   examples   for   those   who  

Azhvar   (the   first   of   the   Triad)   wish   to   drink   the   manna   of  

was   born   in   a   holy   tank   in   spirituality   in   this   maya   world.  

Kanchipuram   (the   modern   Their  only  food  was  Love  of  God.  

Conjeevaram,   which   is   about   45   As   St.   Nammazhvar   said:   "In   Thy  

miles   south   of   Madras),   in   milk  of  Grace,  grew  I  ripe."  Verily  

Dvapara   age,   Siddhartha   year,   he   who   can   drink   the   milk   of   His  

Asvayuja  month.  It  is  said  that  the   Grace   is   the   true   saint.   That   is  

second   Saint   Pudatt-Azhvar   was   why  it  is  truly  said  that  saints  are  

born   out   of   a   Madhavi   flower   gods   on   earth.   The   great   devotee  

(Gartnera   Racemosa)   in   Nanjiyar  used  to  say,  "Whenever  I  

Mallapura   (now   known   as   saw  a  saint,  a  devotee  of  the  One  

Mahabalipuram,  which  is  south  of   God  (Vishnu),  and  I  fell  at  His  feet  

Madras).   He   was   a   day   younger   with  my  head  touching  

than    

  

     

     

     

     

                            THE  VAISHNAVITE  SAINTS  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA                                                      35  

     

them,  I  felt  as  if  I  ate  my  fill,  as  if   the   first   heard   this   he   let   the  

my  hunger  vanished  ."  Do  not  we   second   in.   Before   they   settled  

feel  so  in  the  presence  of  our  dear   themselves   in   that   snug   abode,  

Baba?  That  is  why  it  is  said  in  the   the   third   Yogi   came   there.   The  

immortal  Gita  :  

two   who   were   in   said   that   there  

"  When  it  is  night  to  all,  

was   no   room   for   a   third.   Bhranta  

the  saint  is  awake;   Yogi   then   retorted   that   if   there  

When  they  are  awake,  

was   room   for   two   to   sit,   there  

it  is  to  him  night."   must   be   room   for   three   to   stand.  

The  New    Testament  says  :    

On   hearing   this   the   third   was   let  

"  But  the  sensual  man  perceiveth   in.   There   the   three   great  

not   those   things   that   are   the   Messengers  of  God,  His  elect,  met,  

spirit   of   God,   for   it   is   foolishness   and  these  felt  that  something  was  

to  him."  In  the  words  of  the  Gita,    

forcibly   squeezing   itself   between  

"   houseless   and   strong   willed   ",   them   in   a   place   where   there   was  

these  three  chosen  messengers  of   hardly   any   room   for   a   fourth  

God   went   from   place   to   place   person.   They   all   were   very  

with   the   banner   of   spirituality   in   anxious   to   see   the   "stealing  

their   hands   for   the   benefit   of   stranger"  with  a  lamp.  Which  was  

those   who   would   listen   (   ay,   for   that  lamp?  The  first  Saint  sang:  

the   benefit   of   all   ).   Once   the   first  

"The   solid   land   the   lamp,   its  

Saint  was  in  Tirukkovitur  (a  town   girdling   liquid   the   oil,   and   light  

in   the   South   Arcot   District,   the   shining   sun.   And   thus   I   shall  

Madras   Presidency   ).   He   was   discover  the  stealing  stranger."  

overtaken   by   heavy   rain,   and  

The  second  said  :  

took   shelter   in   a   small   crevice.  

"With  love  the  lamp,  longing    

The   second   saint   happened   to  

the  oil,  

pass   that   side,   and   asked   if   there  

The  frenzied  heart  the  wick,    

was  room  for  one    in  that  crevice.  

the  soul  melted,    

The   first   replied   that   there   was  

The  light  of  wisdom,  light  I    

room   for   only   one.   Then   the  

to  Narayana  

second   retorted   that   if   there   was  

In  meet  Tamil,  I  know  so    

room  for  one  to  sleep,  there  must  

well."  

be    room  for  two  to    sit.    When      

The  third  blessed  Saint  said  :  

     

     

        

36                                                                                MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

     

"Lo  Her--Mercy--I  see;  and  

(Andadi   is   a   poem   with   Andadi  

His  form  of  Gold  I  see;   verses.   Andadi   is   a   rhyme   in  

And  Their  sun  effulgent  hues  

which   the   last   syllable,   word   or  

blending,  indeed  I  see;   words  of  one  stanza  is  the  first  of  

Proud  daring  Discus,  and  

the   succeeding.   This   word   also  

friendly  Conch  I  see;   means  "the  first,  the  last-God.")  

All  this,  this  blessed  day,  in  

All   these   hymns   brim   with  

Him  the  Ocean-hued."     Knowledge   of   God,   Love   of   God  

These  "Lamps"  our  blessed  Saints   and  Vision  of  God,  but  in  each  one  

lighted,   and   there   they   saw   the   of   these   elements   predominates.  

Motherhood   of   God   and   Father- These   three   works   tell   the   world  

hood   of   God.   They   saw   the   how   to   realize   the   One   who  

Beatific   Vision.   The   first   then   appears   Many.   It   is   by   unequi-

sang  :  

vocal   Love   that   this   can   be  

i    The  first    Tiru-v-Andadi  

attained,  says  the  Lord  of  the  Gita.  

and  the  second,   And   these   three   Elect   Saviours  

ii  His  second  Tiru-v-Andadi  

have   clearly   shown   the   Path   by  

and  the  third,   their   own   lives   and   the   three  

      iii  His  third  Tiru-v-Andadi.        

immortal  works  (Prabandhas).  

   "Blessed  be  the  Azhvar  Triad"  

     

  

  

(To  be  continued)  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

      Spiritual  Journey   with  a  Modern  Guru  

By  ELIZABETH  C.  PATTERSON  

     

     

The   East   preserves   its   ancient   byway.   The   spiritual   path   to   God  

traditions   as   living   realities   and   its   spiritual   memories   as   facts  

has   ever   a   counter   reflection   in   the  material  world.  

that   can   today   happen   again.   One   of   the   traditional   actualities  

To   try   to   relate   something   of   an  unusual  journey  taken  in  these  

reverenced   since   remote   eras   is   that   of   the   spiritual   relationship   of   Guru   (Master)   and   chela   (disciple).   While   we   of   the   West   have  generally  little  cognizance  of   the   matter,   the   precedent   of   this   tradition   has   been   brought   to   us   through  the  five  great  religions  of  

recent   times   with   a   modern   Guru   through   the   spiritual   centres   of   India,   it   can   at   best   be   but   a   limited   telling,   as   his   unlimited   realms   of   spiritual   working   are   beyond   human   apprehension,   and,   even   on   the   material   plane,   no   one   disciple   can   possibly   take  

universal  acceptance,  all  of  which   interestingly   enough   have   the   Orient  as  their  background.  These   scriptures   respectively   give   evidence  of  the  closeness  of  bond   between   Master   and   disciple,   as   well   as   their   journeyings   together.   The   great   Gurus   taught   and   trained   their   circle   not   so   much   by   teaching,   as   through  

part   in   all   the   Master's   manifold   activities.   His   journeyings   sow   the   seeds   of   spirituality.   Time   conceals   much   what   a   Master   does,   but   reveals   in   its   true   light   what   a   Master   is,   for   his   very   being   makes   every   act,   however   seemingly   commonplace   at   the   moment,   an   abiding   reality   beyond  time  and  place.  

their   own   radiant   example   of   perfected   living   on   this   earth  

Particularly   for   Westerners   to   visualize   something   of   this  

while   journeying   along   Life's   highway  and       

spiritual   tour,   its   needs   must   be   pictured   against   the   background   of  the  eternal  East,  

     

     

  

38                                                                                MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

though   it   is   but   a   focal   point   for   kindred         tradition   and   culture.  

the   regenerating   seeds   of   Therefore   one   finds   today   a  

spirituality   to   be   planted   for   tremendous   wealth   of   religions  

coming   times,   at   this   period   of   and   cultures   that,   despite   the  

materialistic   harvest.   Sadguru   passing   of   ages,   are   not   dead   or  

Meher   Baba's   approach   to   any   found   only   through   excavation,  

people   or   any   subject,   whether   but   still   are   a   vital   part   of  

Eastern   or   Western,   is   modern.   everyday   life   of   the   people.   One  

Truth  is  ever  new.  

feels   the   infinite   possibility   in  

India,  the  scene  of  this  present   India   that   what   was,   still   is.   The  

spiritual   journey,   is   the   great   unbroken   link   with   humanity's  

Aryan   Mother,   and   her   children   past  is  still  being  forged.  

are   manifold.   In   fact   I   believe   her  

Before   Christ   walked   this  

to  be  the  primordial  ancestor  that   earth,   spirituality   had   flowered  

rocked   the   cradle   when   the   five   several   times   in   India   through  

races   of   mankind   were   in   their   Avataric   manifestations   that   left  

infancy.  No  doubt  because  of  this   their   inspiration   and   imprint  

close   relationship   of   races   in   clearly   traceable   to   this   day.  

India,   not   any   one   native   to   her   Thousands   of   years   of   fervent  

soil   today   considers   any   religious   striving   could   not   fail  

difference   in   races   as   such,   for   among  the  people  to  in  turn  bring  

they  are  all  Indian,  though  dating   fruits,  and  today  there  exist  some  

back   from   various   invasions   of   of  the  greatest  spiritual  saints,  as  

this  vast  land  which  has  a  way  of   well  as  religious  rogues.  "There  is  

eventually  absorbing  its  conquer- in   India   the   highest   and   the  

ors--as   a   mother   wins   back   her   lowest,  "Sadguru  Meher  Baba  has  

children.   Although   every   country   told  his  disciples.  

has   its   divisions   in   some   form   or  

Part   of   the   reason   for   this  

other,  so  India  is  divided  through   present   spiritual   journey,   the  

its   religions   and   sub-divisions   of   modern   Master   has   stated,   is   for  

religions.   Each   conqueror   him   to   personally   encounter  

brought   with   him   his   own   saints   and   evolved   souls   whom  

religion,   and   it   became   trans- he   already   knew,   but   wants  

planted   into   the   Indian   soil,   and,   personally   to   contact   at   this  

along    with    it,      was      brought      its   particular  time.  He  

     

                              SPIRITUAL  JOURNEY  WITH  A  MODERN  GURU                                                  39  

     

has   further   stated   that   the   Himalayas--all   according   to   his  

importance   of   saints   is   that   they   spiritual   design.   Details   and  

point   so   many   to   God.   All   schedules   are   unimportant   when  

spiritually   minded   people   cannot   we   travel   with   a   Master   who   is  

but   agree   that   the   world   today   the   centre   of   the   universe   of   our  

never   needed   the   beneficial   spirit.   Whether   one   goes   or  

influence   of   saints   more   than   whether  one  stays,  Life's  wheel  to  

now.   All   true   saints   function   us  has  the  same  great  hub.  We  are  

together  as  one,  in  divinity.  

aware   that   our   journey   in   reality  

Another   part   of   the   reason   of   is  inward  in  Truth,  although  Baba  

this   journey,   which   comes   about   gives   it   a   symbol   of   outward  

as   an   automatic   natural   result,   is   expression.   The   bus   is   heavily  

for   the   Master   to   train   his   laden   with   luggage   and   some  

disciples,   and   prepare   them   for   cooking   equipment,   which   the  

his  greater  work  to  come.    Giving   Eastern   and   Western   disciples   at  

a  description  of  various  events  in   the  outset  consider  necessary  for  

some   detail   which   occurred   on   travel   through   the   cool   of   winter  

the   tour   of   t   h   e   spiritual   centres   and  the  heat  of  summer,  which  in  

of  India,  it  might  be  useful  to  here   India   follow   one   another   in   swift  

quote  from  my  diary:  

succession.  

Early   in   the   morning   of   the  

Anticipation   holds   sway   as   all  

8th  of  December  1938,  we  left  the   crowd   into   the   motor   bus   and  

ashram  at   "Meherabad  "   with   the   depart   exactly   at   the   moment  

Master--twenty-two   of   us--in   a   designated   beforehand   by   Baba.  

motor   bus   specially   designed   for   Those   at   the   ashram   for   whom  

this   extensive   tour   throughout   other   plans   of   work   are   to   be  

India.  None  of  the  disciples  know   carried  out  wave  good-bye  to  the  

the   Master's   plans,   other   than   Master   with   deep   feeling,  

Hyderabad   (Nizam's   Dominions)   although   knowing   that   his  

being   our   first   place   of   stay,   and   internal   guidance   is   ever   with  

that   we   may   be   gone   for   as   long   them   no   matter   the   distance  

as   six   months   travelling   from   separating.   The   first   stop   for   the  

Central   India   to   points   which   night   is   at   Sholapur,   in   a   Rest  

might        eventually        include        the     House   near   the   railroad   station.  

   Owing  to  the  

     

     

40                                                                                MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

     

heavy   luggage   load,   which   was   their  cut  barks,  to  catch  the  sweet  

later   lightened,   motoring   is   slow   juices,   and   occasionally   some  

and  we  arrive  late.  As  we  were  to   very   large   irrigated   rice   fields,  

start   early   next   morning   it   was   with   water-buffalos   drawing   the  

thought   best   by   Baba   that   the   cultivators   in   their   slow   though  

bedding-rolls   on   top   of   the   bus   majestic   pace.   Approaching   near  

should   not   be   unpacked,   so   we   to   Hyderabad,   the   Mahomedan  

slept  as  well  as  we  could,  on  a  few   City   dating   back   to   the   great  

tables,   large   chairs   or   on   the   Mogul   times,   it   was   in   the   rocks  

floor,  with  only  our  over-coats  to   themselves,   especially   the  

cover   us   in   the   coolness   of   a   enormous   rounded   ones   pin-

December   night--an   indication   nacled   on   the   adjacent   hill-tops,  

that   the   trip   was   not   going   to   be   that   one   could   perceive   the  

only   a   "   bed   of   roses   ".   Baba,   antiquity   of   the   surroundings.  

however,   in   his   inimitable   way,   Long   before   the   Mogul   period  

looks   to   everyone's   feelings,   these  stone  giants  stood  sentinel,  

moods,   and   health,   as   the   great   however.  

Engineer   of   Life   keeps   ever   the  

The   Master's   party   were   due  

mechanics  of  living  in  order.  

to   be   guests   of   the   ex-Prime  

   Next   day   we   continue   into   Minister  of  Hyderabad,  but  owing  

Hyderabad   State,   and   after   to   triple   circumstances,   one   of  

passing   the   border,   we   picnic   which   was   the   occurrence   of  

along   the   shore   of   a   river.   Baba   plague   for   the   first   time   in   the  

who   enlivens   every   situation   history  of  the  village  adjoining  his  

makes  us  feel  gay  and  responsive   estate,   arrangements   are   hastily  

to  nature  around  us,  although  the   made   to   stay   on   another   of   his  

country  is  merely  rocky  land,  and   estates   that   had   been   closed   for  

many  were  feeling  the  crampness   some  time.  The  dwelling  being  an  

from   a   crowded   bus.   Some   antique  palace  originally  used  for  

differences   in   scenery   from   the   Mahomedan   women   observing  

great   plateau   draw   our   attention   purdah  custom,   it   is   thought   that  

along   the   way,   and   every   now   this   place   will   give   Baba   and   his  

and   then   we   see   groves   of   toddy   party   the   privacy   he   has  

palms    with      vessels      hanging      to     requested   for   the   sojourn.   While  

   the  

     

  

                              SPIRITUAL  JOURNEY  WITH  A  MODERN  GURU                                                  41  

     

Master   did   want   a   place   with   mind:   "Those   who   dwell   in  

seclusion,   particularly   for   the   marble   halls   and   ancient   palace  

special  group  of  women  disciples,   old   in   story."   The   unusually   gay  

whose   spiritual   training   is   and   mirthful   spirit   of   Baba   soon  

inward,   who   are   travelling   with   causes   all   to   respond,   and   the  

the   party,   He   also   wanted   for   his   place   is   ringing   with   life   and  

spiritual   work   to   be   near   the   laughter.   Presently   the   gracious  

centre   of   the   City's   humanity.   In   wife   of   the   official   deputed   for  

fact   when   we   see   this   country   our   reception   brought   to   us  

estate,   beautiful   as   its   gardens   caldrons   of   hot   food   from   her  

are,  we  recall  Baba's  words  prior   own  home,  and,  after  meeting  the  

to   starting   on   the   journey,   that   Master,   spontaneously   volun-

for   his   work   he   wanted   to   be   for   teered   to   continue   to   supervise  

the   first   period   of   stay   in   a   big   cooking   arrangements   for   the  

city.  But  the  master  makes  use  of   entire   stay   of   the   party,   which  

all   circumstances,   unfavourable   each   day   thereafter   she   brings  

and   favourable,   and   in   the   end   over  personally.  

the   result   comes   about.  

Events   with   the   Master   move  

Surprising   fruits   become   a   quickly,   and   the   next   morning   he  

natural   consequence   when   all   is   off   in   the   motor   with   the  

actions   are   done   selflessly,   as   a   official,   and   by   10   a.   m.   they   had  

Master   has   completely   already   returned,   and   Baba  

transcended   the   ego   and   works   announces  to  us  that  we  are  all  to  

only  for  the  good  of  the  whole.  

move   that   very  afternoon,  as  the  

It   proves   that   only   one   night   residence  of  the  Nizam's  brother,  

we   are   to   spend   in   this   ancient   which   at   present   is   unoccupied  

palace   which   is   devoid   of   all   and   is   located   not   far   from   the  

furnishings,   though   it   is   offered   heart   of   the   city,   but   with   a  

that   furniture   would   be   brought   seclusion   of   a   large   garden,   has  

the  next  day.  This  night,  however,   been  put  at  the  Master's  disposal  

is   made   memorable   by   the   eerie   for   the   sojourn.   Nevertheless   to  

feeling   one   often   senses   in   a   say   there   is   plenty   of   room   for  

dwelling   of   antiquity,   and   the   such  a  large  party,  some  others  of  

lines      of      the      poet      came    to      my     which   have   subsequently   arrived  

   by  train.  Also  Maho-  

     

     

42                                                                                MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

     

med,   who   has   been   meanwhile   who   are   personally   interested   in  

brought  over  from  the  ashram  for   spirituality   in   its   broad   aspect,  

the  "God-mad"  at  Meherabad  and   and  blue-prints  for  the  Centre  are  

is   a   special   type   of   spiritually- designed   by   one   of   the   disciples,  

dazed   soul,   whom   the   Master   who   has   recently   come   from  

considers   an   important   link   with   Switzerland   where   he   is   a   noted  

future  work  along  this  line  which   landscape   architect.   The  

will   be   continued   throughout   the   possibilities   of   establishing   in  

trip.  

Hyderabad   are   discussed,   and   to  

At   the   commencement   of   a   this   end   trips   were   taken   to  

journey   outwards   details   stand   various   sites   that   might   be  

out   in   one's   mind,   and,   as   time   adaptable  for  the  Master's  unique  

goes   on,   the   sum   total   of   future   plans   the   full   spiritual  

conveniences  and  inconveniences   significance   of   which   time   will  

overcome   their   importance.   Just   unfold,   though   even   the   outer  

so  it  is  as  one  travels  the  spiritual   frame-work   is   now   so  

path,   the   prospect   constantly   interestingly  unusual.  

widens  and  details  of  material  life  

One   day   the   Master   is   on   one  

are   absorbed   into   the   greater   of  these  site  trips,  with  the  official  

whole.   This   we   find   as   our   and  several  others,  in  search  of  a  

journey  continues.  

location,  and  at  a  particular  point  

The   stay   in   Hyderabad   might   between  two  lakes,  which  is  quite  

be   termed   a   time   of   stirring   by   wild   land,   Baba   indicated   that  

the   Master   more   than   outward   this   would   be   a   suitable   site   for  

working.   During   this   period   one   his  intended  future  Centre.  On  the  

also   feels,   as   well   as   sees,   the   return  to  our  dwelling,  the  official  

indications   that   the   Master   is   tells   one   of   our   group   that  

preoccupied   with   internal   although   this   place   which   they  

spiritual   work.   However,   for   the   chanced   to   pass   that   day   is   wild  

first   time,   concrete   plans   are   and   rocky,   he   believes   he   knows  

drawn   up   of   importance   for   the   why   Baba   had   a   preference   for  

Master's   future   International   this   particular   site.   Baba   had  

Spiritual   Centre.   Daily   confer- commented   that   it   was   "rich   in  

ences   are   held   with   various   spiritual   atmosphere".   The  

interested    officials    of      the      State   official  re-  

     

     

                              SPIRITUAL  JOURNEY  WITH  A  MODERN  GURU                                                  43  

   called   a   tradition   that   had   been   handed   down   from   generation   to   generation   in   the   locality,   though   little   known   except   by   the   few   who   lived   thereabouts.   The   legend  runs  somewhat  as  follows:   Two   thousand   years   ago   there   was  a  Saint  who  was  a  disciple  of   Christ,   and,   after   the   Crucifixion,   this   Saint   journeyed   to   the   East   arriving   eventually   in   the   particular   region   seen   that   day   and   singled   out   by   Baba.   The   ancient   Saint   was   the   type   of   spiritual   being   known   as   Kutub,   and   it   is   said   that   "once   a   Kutub   chooses   his   seat,   he   never   changes."   This   region   was   then   a   jungle   that   chanced   to   be   the   favourite   hunting   grounds   of   the   then  Ruler,  and  word  was  quickly   sent   out   to   this   stranger   to   move   on.   But   the   Saint   refused   to   leave   the   seat   that   he   had   chosen.   The   Ruler,   hearing   this,   became   enraged   and   sent   out   armed   guards   to   forcibly   remove   him;   yet  still  the  Saint  refused  to  move   and  disarmed  the  guards  with  his   saintly   words   and   demeanour.   They   reported   the   facts   to   the   Ruler   and   he   sent   still   another   armed  guard,  because  no  one  was   allowed   on   his   favourite   hunting   preserve     

   --be   they   holy   or   unholy.   When   the  second  time  his  men  returned   without   being   successful   and   with  the  story  that  they  dared  not   touch   this   saintly   stranger,   the   Ruler   became   curious,   and   the   next   time   he   went   hunting,   he   decided   to   see   this   man   for   himself.   The   legend   runs   that   the   Ruler   was   so   impressed   that   he   gave   word   that   he   could   remain,   and   eventually   the   Saint   became   to   him   a   spiritual   guide.   It   seems   that  Christ  had  given  to  this  Saint   the   holy   gift   of   His   own   shirt   which  the  Saint  brought  with  him   and   always   wore.   After   years   of   holy   meditation   in   this   jungle   place,   it   was   time   for   the   Saint   to   leave   his   body.   So   he   passed   the   shirt   of   Christ   on   to   his   young   disciple,   with   the   implicit   instructions   that   the   holy   relic   should   never   leave   the   spot.   Shortly   after   the   Saint   died,   the   Ruler   also   died,   and   wars   ensued   in   the   district.   So   the   young   disciple   left.      But   remembering   the   words   of   his   Guru   he   first   buried   the   holy   shirt   deep   in   the   ground   beneath   the   seat   where   the   Saint   had   sat   for   so   many   years.  
While  Baba  himself  did  not  

  

44                                                                                    MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL

     

refer   to   the   legend,   he   told   his   parts,  the  Master  has  the  bus  turn  

disciples   afterwards   that   the   site   around  near  the  base  of  the  steep  

which   he   had   seen   that   day   was   steps   leading   up   to   the   abode  for  

spiritually   prepared   soil,   and   saints.  Here,  seated  humbly  at  the  

ways  were  stirred  to  obtain  it  for   base  was  a  man  looking  much  like  

the   Master's   Spiritual   Centre   by   a  pilgrim  lost  in  contemplation  of  

the  people  of  Hyderabad  who  had   divinity,   who,   Baba   said,   was  

become  so  interested  in  the  great   truly   a   spiritual   soul,      well  

project.  

advanced  on  the  Path.  The  Master  

A   fact   that   indicates   more   gave   this   man   a   glance   which  

clearly   that   this   ancient   State   is   seemed   to   cause   a   light   of   rare  

rich   in   spiritual   history,   is   that   happiness   to   pass   across   the  

there   is   a   street   in   Hyderabad   countenance   of   the   seated   figure  

City   called   the   "Street   of   the   who   visibly   showed   an  

Saints".   Here   the   past   spiritual   expression  of  recognition.  

lineage   lies   buried,   and   it   is   a  

The   Master   had,   previous   to  

constant   place   of   pilgrimage   by   arrival   in   Hyderabad,   told   his  

various   religions.   The   present   disciples  that  there  is  a  true  saint  

Nizam   is   spiritually   minded;   also   living   in   the   ancient   city.   Out   of  

many   of   his   predecessors   were   interest   some   of   these   disciples  

notedly   so,   and   have   always   had   question   a   few   local   people   who  

spiritual   advisers   to   the   Throne.   seem   well   versed   in   the   spiritual  

Outside  of  the  City  are  two  places   history   of   the   place,   but   they   are  

of   interest,   located   on   high   very   reticent   about   the   matter,  

opposite  hills,  one  of  which  is  the   although   one   admitted   there   is   a  

great   and   picturesque   palace   Woman   Saint--though   impos-

reserved   for   the   King   Emperor   sible   to   find.   Shortly   before   our  

when   he   should   visit   Hyderabad   departure,   the   Master,   who  

State,   and   the   other   is   the   rocky   knows   all   saints,   sent   out   one   of  

abode   for   visiting   saints,   his   disciples   who   for   years   had  

pinnacled   high   against   the   blue   led   an   ascetic   life   under   Baba's  

sky.   spiritual   direction   to   search   out  

When   making   the   tour   with   the   Saint.   Baba   often   uses  

his    disciples      one      day      to      these     disciples   to   establish   a   contact,  

   and  they  are  sent  out  

     

     

                              SPIRITUAL  JOURNEY  WITH  A  MODERN  GURU                                                  45  

  

without   any   specific   information   which   they   do   with   deference.  

as   to   the   whereabouts,   but   Later,   upon   seeing   the  

inevitably   they   seem   to   walk   photograph,   I   was   struck   by   her  

right   to   the   place.   This   Woman   expression   of   the   eyes   like   a  

Saint,   it   seems,   lives   in   the   female   John   the   Baptist.   Her  

poorest   and   most   crowded   part   stature   was   rigid,   with   hair  

of   the   city,   in   an   obscure   back   matted,   and   she   wore   only   a   lion  

court-yard.   She   is   in   a   state   of   cloth.   Her   face   inclined   toward  

super-consciousness,  

rarely   heaven,   blazed   with   the   fire   of  

functioning   on   the   gross   plane.   spiritual  intensity.  

Although   constantly   surrounded  

Shortly   afterwards,   the  

by   crowds   of   devotees   seated   Master,   declaring   that   he   has  

quietly   around   her,   she   does   not   finished   the   spiritual   work   that  

give   advice   or   guidance--but   he  had  come  to  do  in  Hyderabad,  

India   knows   well   the   beneficial   gave   the   signal   that   we   were   all  

influence   of   spiritual   being   and   leaving   the   following   day,   after  

does   not   lay   the   stress   on   mere   only   ten   days   sojourn.   The  

doing,   as   Westerners   are   hap   to   surprise   to   the   disciples   and   the  

consider   as   prime   importance.   outsiders   who   had   become   so  

Baba  himself  did  not  find  need  to   interested   in   the   Master's   plans  

visit   this   Saint,   but   sent   with   the   for   the   Spiritual   Centre,   was   due  

aforementioned   disciple   two   of   to   the   fact   that   the   plans   seemed  

his  Western  disciples  on  a  second   maturing,   and   materially  

day.  Those  around  the  Saint  were   speaking   it   seemed   an  

averse   to   foreigners   approaching   inopportune   time   to   leave.   Yet  

her,   but   in   her   peculiar   way   she   Masters,  as  we  surely  know,  have  

beckons   the   three   disciples   of   a   universal   vision   which  

Baba's  to  be  seated  near  her,  and   comprises   the   whole   scheme   of  

strangely   enough   permits   the   things   and   not   only   the   part.  

Westerners    to      photograph      her,   Events  in  time  bring  this  out  even  

   to  the  eyes  of  ordinary  mortals.  

     

  

  

  

(To  be  continued)  

  

You  Must  Believe  It  

BY  R.  B.  KALE  

Once,  while  Bhagwan  Vishnu  was   question   was   half   uttered.   Narad  

resting  and  chatting  with  the  sage   felt   very   much   disappointed   and  

Narad,   the   latter   asked   Shri   related   the   happening   to   Shri  

Vishnu   why   all   the   shastras   Bhagwan.  

(religious   scriptures   )   attach   so             Lord   Vishnu   spoke   words   of  

much   importance   to   Sant- solace   to   Narad   and   urged   upon  

darshana   (the   sight   of   saints).   him   to   continue   his   quest   which  

Evading   a   straight   answer,   Shri   was  likely  to  yield  him  an  answer  

Vishnu   asked   Narad   to   go   to   a   to   his   question.   On   this   occasion  

particular   jungle   and   put   the   Narad   was   directed   to   the   house  

question  to  a  lizard  he  would  find   of   a   patel  (headman)   of   a   certain  

there.  

village   and   was   told   to   put   his  

          Narad,   in   obedience   to   Shri   question  to  the  newly  born  colt  of  

Bhagwan's   orders,   went   to   the   a   mare   in   the   household.   Narad  

jungle   specified,   and   finding   the   was  scared  at  the  prospect  of  the  

lizard   mentioned,   put   the   previous   experience   being  

question   uppermost   in   his   mind.   repeated,   and   voiced   his   fears   in  

The   lizard,   instead   of   giving   an   the  matter  to  Shri  Bhagwan.  Lord  

answer   as   foretold   by   Shri   Vishnu  asked  Narad  if  he  had  full  

Vishnu,   suddenly   dropped   down   faith   in   him,   and   on   getting   a  

dead.   Narad   was   very   much   reply   in   the   affirmative,  

bewildered,  and  returning  to  Shri   admonished   him   to   carry   out   his  

Bhagwan,   communicated   all   that   orders  faithfully.  

h  ad  happened.  

          Narad  went  to  the  house  of  the  

          Shri   Bhagwan   asked   Narad   to   patel   as   ordered,   and   the   latter  

forget   the   incident,   and   this   time   being   very   religious-minded,  

he   asked   him   to   approach   a   received  the  sage  very  kindly  and  

parrot   in   another   part   of   the   reverentially.   After   a   little   rest  

jungle.   Like   the   lizard,   the   parrot   and   refreshments,   the   patel  

too,   at   the   very   sight   of   Narad,   respectfully   inquired   as   to   what  

dropped    down    dead    before    the     had  brought  the  august  feet  of  the  

   sage  to  his  humble  dwelling.  

     

  

  

  

                                                                                              YOU  MUST  BELIEVE  IT                                                                                        47  

     

Narad   replied   that   he   had   come   not   likely   to   forgive   me.   There   is  

with   the   particular   object   of   no   chance   of   my   coming   out  

seeing   the   newly   born   colt   about   alive."   On   being   assured   of  

which  he  had  heard  so  much.  The   success   and   protection   by   Shri  

request   was   simple   enough   and   Bhagwan,   Narad   left   once   again  

was   easily   granted.   No   sooner   on  his  divine  quest.  

Narad   saw   the   colt,   it   expired   at  

Narad   approached   the   king  

the   very   sight   of   him.   The   patel   who   happened   to   be   a   lover   of  

was   greatly   upset   at   the   loss   but   saints,   and   was   received   right  

took   it   philosophically,   as   due   to   royally.   After   entertaining   the  

just   a   stroke   of   ill   luck   or   sage   sumptuously   the   king  

accident.   Narad,   escaping   himself   inquired   as   to   what   more   he  

as   best   as   he   could   from   the   could   do   to   please   the   saintly  

awkward   situation   by   uttering   a   guest.  Narad  expressed  his  desire  

few   words   of   sympathy   and   to   see   the   newly   born   prince,   at  

solace   to   the   patel,   retraced   his   which   the   king   felt   very   much  

steps  hurriedly  to  the  Master.  

flattered   and   honoured.  

Bhagwan   Vishnu,   who   knew   Immediately   the   king   escorted  

everything,   offered   comfort   and   the   sage   into   his   harem   and  

encouragement   to   Narad   by   showed   the   baby   lying   in   the  

saying,   "You   have   attempted   golden  cradle  suckling  the  toes  of  

thrice   but   failed,   for   no   fault   of   the  feet.  

yours.   Try   once   again   by   going   to  

Narad   felt   much   relieved   to  

the   newly   born   child   of   a   find  the  baby  alive  at  the  sight  of  

particular   king   of   a   neighbouring   him   and   put   him   the   question   he  

kingdom.   This   child   will   furnish   was   out   to   seek   an   answer   for.  

you   the   answer   you   seek."   Narad   The   baby   in   the   cradle   only  

felt   very   much   frightened   at   the   looked   at   him   listlessly   and  

possible   outcome   of   this   new   smiled.   He   repeated   the   question  

venture,   and   made   bold   to   say,   thrice   and   every   time   he   was  

"Sire,   it   was   easy   enough   for   me   answered   by   a   nonchalant   smile.  

to  extricate  myself  from  previous   Getting   exasperated   Narad  

predicaments;  if  the  baby  were  to     addressed   the   baby   thus,   "Why  

die    at  the  sight  of  me,    the    king  is   do   you   smile?   Can't   you  

   understand  

     

  

48                                                                                    MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

me?   Why   don't   you   reply   to   my   living  the  life  of  a  parrot,  and  that  

question?"  

enabled   me   to   be   reborn  

On   hearing   this,   the   baby   was   immediately  in  the  form  of  a  colt.  

miraculously   endowed   with   the   While   I   was   a   colt,   you   again  

power   of   speech.   At   first,   the   appeared   before   me,   and   the  

baby   indulged   in   a   hearty   laugh,   blessed   meeting   has   resulted   in  

and   then   said   to   Narad,   "Your   my   attaining   the   present   human  

question   has   already   been   form   that   you   now   see.   Such   is  

answered   by   me."   On   being   the   effect   and   spiritual   benefit   of  

further   pressed   to   explain,   the   Sant-darshana!"  

baby   said,   "The   explanation   is   so  

If   mere   Sant-darshana   (sight  

very   simple.   You   yourself   are   a   of  saints  )  means  all  that  is  stated  

saint,   and   luckily   in   my   life   on   above   and   enables   one   to   skip  

earth   as   a   lizard   I   got   your   over   numerous   evolutionary  

darshana   (sight)   which   enabled   forms  and  stages,  then  what  must  

me   to   avoid   many   forms   and   be   the   potency   of   Sat-sang  

rebirths   in   the   course   of   my   (company   of   saints)?   Blessed  

evolutionary   progress.   I   at   once   indeed   are   those   who   are  

assumed   the   form   of   a   parrot.   I   voluntarily   roughing   life   in   the  

again   was   blessed   with   your   company  of  the  perfect  Master  of  

darshana  while    

the   time,   Shri   Meher   Baba.

  

  

  

THE SAYING OF SHRI MEHER BABA
A man becomes wise by practising, not by preaching virtue. Ability in advising others about virtue is no proof of saintliness, nor is it a mark of wisdom.



Manzil  -  e  -  Meem*  

BY  ABDUL  KAREEM  ABDULLA  

     

In  the  sense  that  bhakti-yoga,             The   ghamela   is   an   iron   pan  

karma-yoga,   dnyana-yoga   and   generally   used   by   coolies   to  

raja-yoga   are   a   set   of   definite   carry   heavy   loads   of   hard  

direct   and   continuous   actions   of   substances  over  their  heads,  and  

a   particular   type   for   a   particular   since   heaps   of   half-torn  

period   towards   the   elimination   buildings   had   either   to   be  

of   the   false   and   essentially   non- removed   or   repaired   and  

existing   objectives   occupying   approaches   prepared   to   the  

human   consciousness   and   same  through  hills  and  fields,  the  

utilizing   the   consciousness   ghamela   was   the   most   promi-

towards   the   realization   of   the   nent  tool  in  operation.  As  such  it  

one   and   only   Truth   in   existence,   travelled   hundreds   of   times  

those   who   lived   with   Baba   at   every   day   with   full   load   on   the  

Ahmednagar   in   the   year   1924   neatly   brushed   heads   of   the  

remember   the   months   of   April   intellectuals   including   the   one  

and  May  of  that  year  as  a  period   who   owned   both   the   land   and  

of  "ghamela-yoga".  

the  ghamelas.  

For  them,  this  was  a  period  of  

In   this   light,   the   life   lead   in  

intense   physical   labour   for   full   the   Manzil-e-Meem   at   Bombay  

eight   hours   everyday   with   the   during  1922  can  well  be  called  a  

exactitude  and  punctuality  of  the   spell  of  kitchen-yoga  for  R.  M.  He  

hard   labour   in   jails.   The   casual   was   not   only   in   charge   of   the  

use   of   this   labour   was   made   kitchen   and   held   responsible   for  

towards   creating   the   colony   proper   supplies   and   mainten-

which  is  now  called  "Meherabad"   ance   of   all   foodstuff,   but   he   had  

near  Ahmednagar.  The  work  was   also   to   cook   single-handed   for  

necessarily   carried   out   with   the   group.   If   he   succeeded   in  

shovels   and   pick-axes   in   general   providing   the   meals   punctually,  

and  the  ghamela  in  particular.  

that   merely   showed   that   he  

   carried  out  his  honorary  

     

  

*Continued  from  April  1939  issue.  

  

50                                                                                    MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

duty   as   well   as   the   others   living   and  result  in  surplus.  

in   the   Manzil.   But   when   he   stuck  

Compared   with   R.   M.,   S.   K.  

to  the  huge  fire-places  amidst  the   provided   a   distinct   contrast.   S.   K.  

heat   in   Bombay   to   the   end,   for   was   probably   the   youngest  

nearly   one   year,   in   spite   of   being   member   in   the   group   and  

the   oldest   member   amongst   the   possibly   the   most   care-free.   He  

group   which   was   mainly   had   just   completed   his   school  

composed  of  young  men,  it  can  be   career   and   was   due   to   join   a  

said   that   he   did   the   duty   to   the   college.   But,   instead   of   that,   he  

extent   of   devotion.   Since   he   also   was   ordered   to   serve   as   an  

succeeded   in   satisfying   the   apprentice   in   an   automobile  

different   and   varied   tastes   and   workshop.   Although   he   did   not  

evoked   constant   appreciation   know   at   the   time   that   this   would  

from   one   and   all,   that   showed   lead  him  in  the  future  to  build  an  

that  the  work  was  carried  out  by   excellent   automobile   organiza-

him   with   a   sense   of   love   and   tion   of   his   own,   he   dabbled  

regard  for  those  whom  he  served   cheerfully   in   oil   and   grease,   and  

so  well.  

did   not   mind   making   a   mess   of  

The   fact   that   entitles   him   to   himself   under   motor   cars   under  

these   lines   was   the   double   "fire"   repairs.   Naturally   inclined   to   live  

that   he   had   had   to   face   during   in   the   "present"   and   not  

this  period.  The  fire  he  cooked  on   interested   in   the   deeper   ques-

paled   into   insignificance   against   tions  of  life  and  its  consequences,  

the   constant   "fire"   of   a   personal   he   was   also   apparently   left   much  

day   and   night   supervision   from   alone  by  Baba,  and  thus  the  life  in  

Baba   who   always   insisted   that   the   Manzil   for   him   was   compar-

the   food   prepared   had   atively   tame   excepting   for   the  

necessarily   to   be   fresh   for   each   special   order   that   he   was   not   to  

meal,   it   had   to   be   sufficient   speak   with   and   meet   friends   and  

enough   to   satisfy   the   ever   relations   outside   the   premises.  

fluctuating   appetites   of   the   This   simple   little   rule   soon  

inmates   to   the   full,   and   at   the   proved  for  him  to  be  a  big  task  to  

same   time   it   was   not   to   exceed   perform.  

the  actual  requirements  

One   evening,   a   previous  

   school  chum  happened  to  come  

  

  

                                                                MANZIL-E-MEEM                                                                                        51                                      

  

across   S.   K.   in   a   railway   train.   impression   that   he   had   gone  

Naturally   the   friend   greeted   him   stark  mad  !  

very   warmly,   but   it   was   enough  

R.   A.   was   one   of   the   married  

to   freeze   S.   K.   who   remembered   members   in   the   group,   and   as  

the   order   and   acted   accordingly   such  he  was  occasionally  allowed  

by   avoiding   a   mutual   to   contact   and   communicate  

recognition.   For   a   while   the   with   his   family   members   in   the  

friend   was   silenced,   perhaps   moffusil.   Once   he   received  

thinking   that   he   had   made   a   information   that   his   only   son  

mistake   and   that   it   was   only   a   was   laid   ill   at   home   and   that   he  

case   of   a   remarkable   remembered   him   too   much.  

resemblance.   But   since   under   Knowing   that   his   wife   was   also  

such   circumstances   even   a   in   a   delicate   state   of   health   at  

stranger  is  apt  to  respond  in  one   that   time,   R.   A.   became   all   the  

way  or  the  other,  the  friend  could   more   anxious   when   he   did   not  

not   help   closely   watching   S.   K.   get   further   news   for   days  

who   had   necessarily   to   avoid   together.   He   was   naturally  

speaking   to   or   looking   squarely   looking   forward   to   the  

in  the  face  of  his  friend.  Within  a   permission   to   go   home,   and   felt  

few   minutes   quite   a   scene   was   averse   to   take   part   in   the   usual  

created   in   the   railway   evening   recreations.   He   used   to  

compartment.  To  the  amazement   return   to   the   Manzil   in   a   listless  

of   the   other   fellow   passengers   frame  of  mind  after  finishing  the  

the   friend   burst   into   a   sudden   day's   work.   That   particular  

appeal,   "I   am   sure   you   are   the   evening   a   new   game   of   marbles  

same  S.  K.,  but  what  is  the  matter   was   being   played   on   the   Manzil  

with   you,   old   chap?   Why   don't   playground   under   brilliant  

you   speak   with   me?   S.   K.,   you   electric   lights   specially   arranged  

must   recognize   me,   we   were   for   the   occasion,   and   everyone  

together   in   the   school   ..."   appeared   to   be   enthusiastically  

Fortunately   the   train   soon   absorbed   in   the   game.   R.A.  

reached  the  destination,  and  S.  K.   turned  up  as  usual  by  7  p.  m.  and  

literally   flew   out   of   the   carriage   appeared   unusually   grave   in   the  

at   the   first   possible   opportunity,   gay  atmosphere.  

leaving  the  poor  friend  under  the    

While  reporting  to  Baba  on  

     

     

  

52                                                                                    MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

return   to   the   Manzil   within   the   joined  the  field  and  mechanically  

specified   hour   in   the   evening,   as   began   to   handle   the   marbles.   As  

a   rule   everyone   met   with   a   soon   as   he   carried   out   the  

cheerful   response.   R.   A.   found   instructions,   he   was   recalled,  

Baba  as  usual  in  a  cheerful  mood   and   the   fateful   telegram   was  

watching   the   newly   introduced   handed   over   to   him   to   read.   The  

game   with   great   interest.   But   he   message   read   that   R.   A.   had  

got   a   mild   shock   when   Baba   another  son  and  that  all  was  well  

became   grave   on   seeing   him.   with  his  family!  

Without   the   expected   word   or  

The   special   instruction   for   A.  

gesture   of   cheer,   Baba   turned   to   K.   was   to   have   no   connection   or  

D.   G.   and   asked,   "Shall   we   tell   communication   of   any   kind  

him   now?   "   D.   G.   replied   in   an   under   any   circumstances   with  

equally   serious   tone   that   it   was   three   certain   members   in   the  

better   to   disclose   the   news   after   group   without   there   being   any  

dinner.   Following   a   pause   of   apparent   reason   at   all   for   this  

deep   suspense,   once   again   Baba   unique   restriction.   But   all   the  

addressed   D.   G.,   "I   think   better   same   the   instruction   had   to   be  

let  him  know  about  the  telegram   carried   out   to   the   letter   without  

now,"  and  without  waiting  for  an   giving   offence   to   the   parties  

answer  from  D.  G.,  R.  A.  was  told   concerned   and   without   adopting  

point   black   that   his   son   had   any   outward   sign   in   connection  

passed   away.   Before   R.   A.   could   with   this   injunction.   Conse-

hardly   recover   from   the   shock,   quently   A.   K.   had   necessarily   to  

he   was   immediately   ordered   to   mix   with   equal   freedom   with   all  

join  the  game  and  play  marbles.  

those   who   lived   in   the   Manzil  

For   a   moment   R.   A.   was   too   and   at   the   same   time   maintain  

dazed   even   to   move,   but   he   was   just   that   hair-breadth   distance  

fortunate   enough   to   obey   the   from   the   three   persons   concern-

command   forthwith.   With   the   ed.  

electric   lights   swimming   before  

In   effect   this   order   not   only  

his   eyes   and   the   players   meant   for   A.   K.   a   question   of  

appearing   to   be   shadows   in   a   physical   restraint,   but   it   also  

horrible  nightmare,  R.  A.  

naturally   proved   to   be   a   source  

   of  mental  discipline  

     

     

                                                                              HEART  OF  MY  HEART                                                                                      53  

  

when   carried   out   with   mechan- could   and   would   write   all   their  

ical  precision.  

experiences,   the   Manzil-e-Meem  

For   B.   F.   it   was   a   life   of   would  just  appear  to  have  been  a  

complete  renunciation.  He  had  to   stage   on   which   each   individual  

dispose   of   all   his   various   played   an   entirely   different   role  

businesses   lock,   stock   and   from   the   other,   simply   because  

barrel,   and   join   the   Manzil   with   they  all  believed  in  Baba  and  his  

just  clothes  and  personal  belong- two   great   Masters,   Hazrat  

ings.  

Babajan   of   Poona   and   Shri  

While   R.   K.   provided   another   Upasni  Maharaj  of  Sakori,  both  of  

contrast,   inasmuch   as   he   got   whom   gave   but   one   prophetic  

engaged  to  marry  during  his  stay   injunction,   "Follow   Merwan,   do  

in  the  Manzil.  

as   he   says,   the   time   will   come  

In   spite   of   the   same   one   when   he   will   make   the   world  

collective  life  led  in  the  Manzil,  if   dance  to  his  tune."  

all  those  who  lived  there  

  

     

  

Heart  of  my  Heart  

TO  SHRI  SADGURU  MEHER  BABA   BY  MALCOLM  SCHLOSS  (Hollywood)  
   Heart  of  my  heart  !  Soul  of  my  soul!     Life  of  the  life  of  the  cosmic  whole!   Breath  of  my  breath!  Voice  of  my  voice!   Lover  in  whom  all  our  hearts  rejoice!     Star  of  the  evening!  Sun  of  the  day!   Song  in  the  heart  that  is  happy  and  gay!     Heart  of  my  heart  !  Soul  of  my  soul!   Know  that  I  love  Thee,  what'er  Thy  role!                                                                                         

Notes  from  my  Diary  

F.  H.  DADACHANJI  

  

BHOPAL  STATE  

masts,   observed   and   marked   out  

From  Ajmer,  our  party  moved   by   Baba   en-route   and   also  

eastward   again   and   came   to   searched  out  from  different  parts  

Bhopal,   near   Central   Provinces.   of  the  country  surrounding  here,  

Here   again,   we   lived   the   same   were  ordered  to  be  brought  here.  

life   of   activity   in   quiet   and   Emissaries  of  the  Master's  group  

seclusion,  for  about  a  week.  Baba   are   sent   out   in   different  

was   mostly   busy   with   the   masts,   directions   on   this   hazardous  

searched   out   from   the   task.  In  the  scorching  heat  of  the  

surroundings.   Our   sojourn   here   summer   season,   they   move  

was   also   kept   strictly   private,   about   in   the   places   and  

and   all   mail,   telegrams,   cables,   directions  indicated  by  Baba,  and  

etc.   were   received   and   delivered   a   number   of   these   masts   are  

care   Station   Master,   Itarsi,   a   gathered   and   kept   in   special  

junction   on   the   G.   I.   P.   Railway,   quarters   rented   for   them   in   a  

57   miles   away.   A   member   of   the   quiet   locality   and   corner   of   the  

group   was   specially   deputed   on   cantonment  area  in  Jubbulpore.  

this   duty   to   travel   to   and   from  

For   the   world   outside   which  

Itarsi  daily.  

has   hardly   any   idea   of   spiritual  

CENTRAL  PROVINCES  

Masters   and   their   works,   all   this  

Seemingly,   nothing   of   may   seem   so   strangely  

particular   importance   trans- insignificant,   and   very   naturally  

pired,   and   we   moved   on   to   our   too!   For   while   the   world  

next   station,   Jubbulpore,   to   have   conditions   are   in   such   turmoil  

another   long   stay   there   for   the   and   every   new   day   brings   some  

Master's   special   work   with   the   startling   revelations   of  

masts,   as   also   for   some   aggression   and   oppression   by  

important   work   in   connection   one   power   over   another   for  

with   the   establishment   of   a   greed   of   self,   when   the   seething  

Spiritual    Centre.      A      number      of     masses   of   humanity   the   world  

   over   clamour   for   every   penny   or  

   a  piece  of  bread  in  

     

     

  

  

                                                                              NOTES  FROM  MY  DIARY                                                                            55  

     

desperation   for   the   struggle   of   ious   utterances   and   expressions  

existence,   and   when   mankind   of   what   they   see   and   feel,  

naturally   expects   a   Master   like   however   faint,   of   the   life   beyond  

Baba   to   work   up   some   wonders   the  gross,  have  a  significance  too  

or  miracles  to  bring  peace  to  the   deep   for   our   ordinary  

struggling   humanity,   his   silent   understanding.   It   must   all   be  

work   in   quiet   corners   of   the   seen   to   be   believed.   And   the  

earth   with   these   "derelicts   of   great   importance   Baba   himself  

humanity  "  whose  existence  is  of   gives   to   this   particular   work,   to  

practically   no   importance   or   the   exclusion   of   other   things,  

consideration   for   the   world-- adds  much  to  its  import.  

very   naturally   would   not   appeal             I   cannot,   therefore,   close   this  

to   those   who   cannot   penetrate   chapter   without   giving   our  

the   great   spiritual   import   and   readers   an   idea   of   the   typical  

significance   of   works   connected   traits   of   these   masts,   searched  

with  Masters.  However,  there  are   out   and   given   personal   care   and  

in   the   world   those   who   do   attention   by   Baba   in   Ajmer,  

believe   that   whatever   the   Bhopal,   Jubbulpore   and   the  

Masters   of   Spiritual   Perfection   country   around.   "I   love   these  

do,  has  great  significance,  as  it  is   Lovers   of   God,"   he   repeated  

always   for   the   spiritual   benefit   remarkedly,   "they   know   nothing  

and   uplift   of   humanity,   and   this   of   the   world;   they   are   so  

particular   work   of   the   Master   at   blissfully   indifferent   even   to  

the   moment   to   such   spiritually- their   bodily   needs...All   for   their  

dazed   souls   has   a   special   Love   of   God,   when   the   whole  

significance.   To   those   of   our   world  craves  and  cries  for  maya  (  

group   who   have   actually   lust,   greed,   etc.   )   and   rushes   to  

witnessed   and   even   participated   each   other's   throats   for   its  

in   these   activities   with   the   dear   gratification."    

Master,  all  this  is  a  revelation--a   THE   MASTER'S   WORK   WITH            

glimpse   into   the   realm   of   Reality  

THE  SPIRITUALLY  ADVANCED  

where   life   has   true   and   eternal                 THOUGH  DAZED  SOULS  

value.   The   surprisingly   varying   One   of   these   "Lovers   of   God"  

traits   of   these   masts,   and   the   who   lived   in   Ajmer   for   years  

child-like,    innocent    and  myster-   near   the   Khawja   Saheb's   dargah  

   (tomb)  was  very  far-  

  

  

56                                                                                  MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

advanced.   Baba   confirmed   to   drink   and   absolutely  

this,  and  said  that  he  was  nearest   neglected  and  avoided  by  all  who  

to  the  goal--in  the  sixth  plane  of   knew   him   for   his   indifference  

consciousness.   He   was   well- and   negligence   even   in   his  

known   all   over   there   and   vocation   of   plying   a   hired   cab.  

actually   worshipped   by   But   even   such   seemingly   useless  

thousands  residing  in  Ajmer  and   persons   are   also   utilized   by   the  

others   visiting   this   holy   place   of   Master   for   his   work,   especially  

pilgrimage   (   due   to   the   Khawja   where   even   his   mandali  found   it  

Saheb's   dargah   and   the   highly   difficult   to   manage.   In   fact   this  

spiritual   influence   which   the   tongawalla  himself  seemed  to  us  

great  ancient  Saint  still  holds).  It   as   a   "half-mast",   and   we   would  

may   be   interesting   to   note   that   have  liked  the  Master  to  give  him  

this  particular   mast  was  brought   the  bath,  before  all  others!  

by   our   tongawalla   (cabman),   a  

When   one   morning,   this  

notorious   drunkard,   but   very   typsy   tongawalla   brought   this  

good   of   heart   and   quite   the   type   mast   to   Baba   hours   later   than  

of  man  required  for  our  work.  He   the  time  he  had  himself  given,  he  

was   the   first   to   jump   in   with   his   explained  that  it  took  him  a  very  

cab   when   one   of   the   mandali   long   time   to   go   about   in   search  

(close   group   of   the   Master's   of   this   particular   one   wanted   by  

disciples)   went   to   Ajmer   for   Baba,  as  he  was  not  on  the  usual  

preliminary   inquiries,   and   ever   spot.  Then  again  it  was  after  two  

since   was   linked   and   called   for   hours   of   mild,   loving   talks   and  

our   work.   His   abrupt   or   chance   persuasions   and   very   tactful  

coming   into   contact   with   our   handling   that   he   could   manage  

group  and  active  participation  in   to   bring   the   babasaheb   (as   they  

our   campaign   for   the   search   of   called   the   mast   there)   to   Baba.  

the   masts   in   Ajmer   is   again   He  was  kept  by  the  Master  in  his  

indicative   of   one   of   Baba's   ways   own  room.  "He  is  merged,  not  in  

of   working---of   finding   the   right   God   but   in   seeing   God  

man   for   the   work   intended   and   (Divinity)--say   lost   in   it,'  

having   his   work   done   through   explained  Baba.  He  is  tall,  rather  

persons  like  this  one,  addicted  

slender  in  build,  with  a  

  

  

  

  

                                                                              NOTES  FROM  MY  DIARY                                                                            57  

  

long  face  and  a  dazed  expression,   and   lets   them   have   their   own  

but   with   eyes   that   sparkle   and   way   when   they   are   obdurate  

express   so   much.   His   smile   until   they   are   quiet   and   come  

which   is   constant   is   the   smile   of   round  again  of  their  own  accord.    

a   soul   lost   in   search   of   some-

The   mast,   just   brought   in,   at  

thing   inexplicable,   unattainable,   first   hesitated   to   come   in   and  

and   having   found   it,   feels   dazed.   even   wanted   to   go   away,   but   the  

Truly   he   is   a   mast,   but   of   a   very   patient  and  loving  persuasions  of  

mild   type,   meek   like   a   lamb,   the   Master   and   his   faithful   band  

mechanically   following   the   of   workers   and,   above   all,   his  

words   or   directions   of   those   own   personal   touch   eventually  

around   him,   resisting   or   reconciled   him   to   the  

hesitating   only   at   times   in   surroundings,   and   he   submits   to  

certain   moods,   when   the   the  Master's  directions.  After  the  

reconciliation   of   the   higher   bath,   he   is   given   a   new   white  

consciousness   in   which   he   is   kafni   (robe)   which   transforms  

with   the   normal   consciousness,   him   physically   into   quite   a  

is   difficult.   Lost   in   the   ecstasies   different   being.   Not   only   is   his  

they   enjoy   of   the   higher   physical   appearance   thus  

consciousness  of  the  planes,  they   altered,   but   his   mental   outlook  

feel   greatly   disturbed,   and   often   also   seems   to   have   undergone   a  

cry   when   told   to   do   certain   great   change.   After   the  

things   by   men   of   earth--which   beneficent  bath,  the  blankness  in  

pulls   them   down   and   brings   his   look   and   eyes   is   replaced   by  

about   a   conflict   of   the   higher   an   awareness   of   being   in   the  

consciousness   with   the   lower.   presence   of   someone   who,   he  

That   is   why   Baba   repeatedly   feels,   is   divine   beyond   concept-

orders   and   sees   that   there   is   no   tion.   It   seems   to   be   more   than  

coercion   or   force   brought   on   the  fulfilment  of  life's  desire  and  

them   by   any   of   his   mandali  who   years   of   longing,   and   the   search  

are   assigned   various   duties   to   for   the   Beloved   seems   now   to  

wait   and   watch   on   them   and   have   ended.   Although   he   can  

serve   them   in   various   ways   neither  speak,  much  less  explain,  

under   his   directions.   He   himself   in   his   state   of   mental   blankness  

is  so  infinitely  patient  with  them,   of  the  

     

  

  

58                                                                                  MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

physical   plane,   his   eyes   and   welcome  to  him  as  these,  who,  in  

expression  speak  volumes.  

the   spiritual   intoxication   of   their  

Later   Baba   personally   feeds   advanced   state,   are   lost   to   the  

him   with   rice,   dal   and   bread,   in   world   outside   and   even   to   their  

his   own   room.   At   such   times,   physical  selves.  That  is  why  Baba  

when  Baba  feeds  these  masts,  no   remarked  in  the  presence  of  this  

one   else   is   allowed   to   remain   in   mast,   "Nothing   makes   me   so  

the  room.  He  does  it  all  alone.  He   happy   as   the   sight   of   these   real  

is,  through  this  food  that  he  puts   heroes."   How   true!   He   never  

into   their   mouths,   feeding   them   feels   as   happy   when   surrounded  

with   the   Divine   nectar,   filling   by   thousands   who   worship   him  

their  souls  with  the  Divinity  that   devotedly  than  in  the  presence  of  

the  Master  radiates!  

these   masts.   Certainly   a   world   of  

A   few   days   after   this   mast   riches   is   worth   nothing   if   it   be  

arrived,   once   while   he   was   not   utilized   towards   the  

resting,  Baba  sat  near  him  to  give   amelioration   of   the   needy.  

his   spiritual   touch   by   gently   Nothing   gives   one   such   sublime  

trying   to   press   his   feet.   What   a   happiness  as  spontaneous  giving  

humble   gesture   by   a   Master   of   to   those   who   truly   need,   and   no  

Perfection!  But  for  true  lovers  of   doubt   Baba   feels   so   happy,  

God,   he   does   it   and   feels   very   sharing  his  divine  life  with  these  

happy   doing   it!   Although   true   "lovers"   who   need   it   and  

eternally   happy   himself   in   His   could   be   benefitted.   Crowds   in  

supreme   state,   seldom   is   that   Jubbulpore   during   the   tour   did  

happy  expression  as  visible  as  on   not   interest   him   as   much   as   did  

such   occasions   when   he   so   these   select   few   lovers   of   God.    

lovingly   stoops   to   serve   these   "These   are   very   useful   medium  

"derelicts   of   humanity   "   and   for   me   to   work   through   on  

administers  his  divine  treatment   higher  planes,"  he  explained.  

and   touch   to   those   who   truly  

When   we,   on   our   ordinary  

need  and  are  helped  and  pushed   human   plane   of   consciousness,  

forward.   The   Divine   Beloved   feel   such   delight   at   the  

always   likes   lovers   of   Divinity,   recognition   of   Baba's   Divinity   by  

and      none      such      would      be      so     these   masts,   how   happy   must  

   they  themselves  feel  in  his  

     

     

  

  

                                                                              NOTES  FROM  MY  DIARY                                                                            59  

     

Divine  Presence!  And  how  happy   something   sublime   and   divine  

does   the   Master   feel   when   such   that   he   sees   and   feels   in   him!  

an   one   recognises   him,   however   And   when   the   Master   is   out   or  

faintly!  

away   or   otherwise   engaged  

Asked   as   to   whom   he   had   elsewhere,  sitting  all  alone  in  the  

come,   the   mast   replies   at   once,   Master's   room,   in   his   ecstatic  

"Malik   ke   pas   aya,"   meaning   "I   mood,   he   chants   some   mystical  

came  near  the  Malik  (Master)."  

lines   or   sings   some   divine   songs  

Again   when   Baba   tried   to   to  give  vent  to  his  inner  feelings.  

press   his   feet   tenderly,   he   had   a   One   of   the   typical   lines   of   these  

smile   on   his   face   and   murmured   mystical   verses   will   give   our  

very   gently,   "Malik,   ayasa   mat   readers  an  idea  of  his  true  state:  

karo,"   "   Master,   pray   don't   do  

Jisne  diya  hai  derd-e-dil,  

this."   Even   from   his   planetory  

Uska  Khuda  bhala  kare;  

heights   of   subtle   regions,   the     meaning,   may   God   bless   him  

struggling   soul's   consciousness   who   has   given   this   pain   of   the  

feels   disturbed   at   the   Perfect   heart   (pangs   of   separation),   i.   e.,  

Master   humbling   before   him   in   even   the   One   (Beloved)   who   has  

this   gesture!   From   such   dizzy   made   my   heart   bleed   with  

heights   of   consciousness   (of   the   suffering  (for  separation)  may  be  

sixth   plane)   to   be   conscious   of   blessed  by  the  Almighty!  

the   ordinary   worldly   formalities,  

Once   during   the   beneficial  

and   to   possess   a   sense   of   bath,  he  abruptly  touched  Baba's  

reverence   for   One   higher   than   feet   with   his   right   hand   and  

oneself,  is  wonderful  indeed!  

hurriedly   raised   it   to   his  

Like   a   patient   in   a   delicate   forehead   as   a   gesture   and   mark  

condition,   he   is   tenderly   of   worship.   This   seemed   simply  

nourished   and   kindled.   His   mechanical,   since,   the   very   next  

reticence   disappears   gradually,   moment,   he   appeared   to   forget.  

and   he   meekly   submits   to   stay   But   the   fact   of   his   making   this  

with   the   Master,   eat   and   drink   gesture,   though   unconsciously,  

from   the   Master's   own   hands,   indicates   a   sign   of   recognition,  

and  feels    strangely    conscious  of     however   dim   or   faint,   even   on  

   the  higher  planes,  by  souls  so  

     

  

  

  

60                                                                                  MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

far-advanced   as   this,   of   the     dekho,   Shankar   aya--bhago,  

Master's   state   of   Perfection   and   Bhagwanka   darshan   ker   lo"--  

super-consciousness   which   only   meaning,   "Oh   Look!   Shankar  

highly   evolved   consciousness   (one   of   the   Hindu   gods)   is  

could   fully   understand   and   here!   Run,   hurry   up!   Have  

grasp.   And   the   fact   of   this   Bhagwan's   (God's)   darshana!"  

recognition   of   a   Spiritual   All   eyes   were   on   Baba   instant-

Master's   perfection   rather   than   aneously.   Some   stared   at   him   in  

the  daily  recognition  of  things  on   blank   gaze;   others   made   typical  

the   physical   plane,   all   the   more   gestures  or  expressions  as  a  mark  

proves   the   true   heights   which   of   recognition   of   a   higher  

they  have  attained.  

being   worthy   of   respect   or  

Nowhere  does  Baba's  Divinity   reverence   which   they   gave   in  

reveal   itself   as   more   inspiring   their   own   way.   The   whole  

than   in   these   acts   of   service   to   scene   was   enacted   in   a   few  

the   truly   needy   Lovers   of   God   seconds,   and   Baba   proceeded  

whom   the   world   of   maya,   in   its   further   with   the   party   taking  

ignorance,   has   mercilessly   rounds  in  certain  quarters.  

neglected.   These   are   sights   only   to   be   seen   to   be   believed--a   regular   feast   for   the   eye   of   a   devotee   to   see   the   beloved   Master   work   and   play   his   divine   game   of   give-and-take   with   the   true  Lovers  of  God  I  
FURTHER  INCIDENTS  OF  THE   MASTER  WITH  THE  MASTS   Once,   when   Baba   and   two   of  
his  mandali  went  out  in  search  of   these   masts   in   a   tonga   (cab)   in   the   streets   and   locality   around   the   Khawja   Saheb's   dargah   in   Ajmer,  one  of  these  masts,  all  of  a   sudden   in   an   ecstatic   mood,   began        to      shout        aloud--  "Are       

Another   whom   Baba   parti- cularly   pointed   to   one   of   his   mandali   to   be   brought   over   to   him,   when   told   by   the   disciple,   "Baba   has   sent   for   you   and   wants   you   to   go   to   him,"   he   cried   out,   "   Dhanya   hai   ham   ko,"  meaning,  "  Hail  myself !  "  i.  e.,   I   am   the   most   fortunate   to   have   the   rare   privilege   of   being   invited   in   the   presence   of   a   Perfect   M aster.   Baba   order- ed   a   silver   coin   to   be   given   to   him,   which   he   accepted   blankly.   This   is   symbolic   of   Baba's   preliminary   contact.   He   was   subsequently   brought   over   to   Baba,  washed,  clothed,  

  

  

                                                                              NOTES  FROM  MY  DIARY                                                                            61  

     

fed   and   then   sent   on   like   some  

are   heroes,   who   have   courage,  

others.  

patience,  who  could    

     One   of   these   masts,   traced  

suffer....Love  is  the  real  thing  !  "  

during   the   search   in   Ajmer,   when      These   spontaneous   outbursts  

asked   to   come   to   Baba,   said   at   of   a   true   lover   of   God   who   has  

first,   "Love   is   the   best   and   practically   lost   himself   in   it   and  

sublimest   thing   of   all."   He   knows  nothing  but  that,  speaks  of  

repeated   this   a   number   of   times,   the   true   qualities   of   Love   Divine.        

almost   after   every   other   sentence   Those   who   talk   of   Love  

he   spoke.   In   one   of   those   gay   superficially   and   want   it   cheap  

moods,  typical  of  these  spiritually- and   easy   may   learn   much   from  

intoxicated   souls,   he   went   on   one  who  has  an  actual  experience  

uttering   something   which   was   of  this  kind.  

eloquent   and   full   of   spiritual      The   peculiar   characteristics   of  

import,   on   the   subject   of   Ishk-e- some   of   the   masts   gathered   and  

Hakiki  (the  Love  Divine  ):  

brought   over   to   Baba   in   Bhopal  

"I   gave   my   heart   (love)   away   to   were   quite   in   contrast   with   the  

One,   but   that   One   (Beloved)   above--at   times   blissfully   happy,  

disappeared   ever   since   I   saw   at   other   times   quite   frantic   and  

him   first......I   searched   for   him,   even   aggressive   to   the   men  

all   these   years,   but   he   couldn't   around.   One   of   these,   named  

be   traced.....Eventually,   how- "Lettuce  ",  a  regular  visitor,  would  

ever,   I   found   him...I   found   him,   come   and   go   when   he   liked   any  

here,  today  !"  

time   during   the   day   and   even  

Here,  he  stopped  for  a  while.  

during   late   hours   of   the   night.   He  

Then   raising   his   head   again,   as   if   would   lie   down   at   ease   for   hours,  

ready   to   deliver   another   sermon,   murmur   or   chant   something   too  

continued:  

sweet   for   words,   but   when   out   of  

"To  love  is  no  easy  task......      mood,   would   become   quite  

Those   who   are   used   to   another   person,   and   would   not  

easygoing   life   or   fond   of   hesitate   even   to   make   assaults   or  

luxuries,   should   not   go   in   for   it.   go   to   the   extent   of   throwing  

Love  is  not  meant  for  such.    

missiles   or   whatever   came   to  

Love  is  meant  for  those  who  

hands.   In   one   of   these   frantic  

   moods,   hearing   some   persons  

   discuss  

  

  

62                                                                                  MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

the   present-day   world   conditions,   moment  this  "self"  creeps  in.  Lust  

especially   the   European   crisis,   he   and   greed   for   power   or   for   name  

blurted  out  in  no  equivocal  terms,   and   fame   rule   supreme,   and   the  

"Ye   sabko   ukhad   denge--sidha   kar   very  moment  a  noble  aim  with  the  

denge,"   meaning,   "all   these   life   is   started,   it   is   thwarted.   It   is  

mischief-mongers   and   miscreants   the   same   all   over   the   world   in   all  

will   be   eventually   wiped   off   and   the   spheres   of   life,   whether   in  

everything   will   be   set   right   "-- religion   or   in   politics.   It   seems   a  

words   too   significant   for   world   wave   of   personal   selfish   element  

crisis   that   are   ahead.   These   in   every   branch   of   life   activities  

pungent   remarks   are   full   of   has   come   over,   sweeping   in   its  

import,   which   mean   to   convey,   in   surge   all   the   best   that   human  

clear   and   precise   terms,   that   the   character  could  give--those  noble  

great   powers   that   have   been   characteristics   of   human   nature  

working   behind   all   this   apparent   that  go  to  make  man  divine.  

chaos,   which   is   but   the   external      Explaining   the   various  

phenomena   of   the   internal   expressions   of   ecstasy   as  

working  of  the  Powers  that  be,  are   demonstrated   by   these   masts,  

now   up   to   destroy   all   the   Baba   once   said,   "They   feel   so  

undesired   elements   that   tend   to   happy  with  Baba,  because  they  see  

mar   the   progress   of   human   Baba   and   know   who   Baba   truly  

evolution   towards   a   higher   is--a   thing   which   you,   with   your  

destiny.   These   impurities   of   self- human   eye,   cannot   see.   The  

interest,   lust   and   greed   must   be   special   eye   that   sees   this   Divine  

removed   before   things   could   be   Form   of   Baba   is   quite   another.  

set  right.  

With   these   eyes   of   yours,   you   see  

   Baba  has  always  been  stressing   these   playthings   of   maya   --these  

this   most   vital   point   that   the   root   "toys   ",   table,   chair,   etc.   The  

of  all  unhappiness  throughout  the   internal   eye   that   sees   through   all  

world   is   self-interest.   A   life   or   these   and   sees   God   alone   is  

movement,   started   with   the   best   altogether  different."  

of   motives   and   interests   for   the  

NEWS  IN  GENERAL  

service    of  humanity,  is  spoiled    the      Baba's   long   absence   from his  

   headquarters  at  "Mehera-  

  

  

  

  

                                                                                                          NOTES  FROM  MY  DIARY                                                                                  63      bad'',   Ahmednagar,   ever   since   he   the   person   not   even   accepting   embarked   on   the   present   tour   in   drinking   water   for   eighteen   long   India,   November   last,   has   been   a   days   at   a   stretch,   the   condition   cause   of   no   small   anxiety   for   his   eventually   went   to   a   climax.   The   numerous   disciples   and   devotees.   person   is   reduced   to   a   living   They   are   craving   for   just   a   skeleton   unable   even   to   lift   the   darshana   or   meeting   even   for   a   hand,   the   whole   body   became   moment.  Many  a  difficult  problem   entirely   stiff   and   rigid,   like   a   solid   in   life   has   been   kept   pending   his   piece   of   lifeless   framework.   The   arrival   and   advice.   Those   whose   Master   had   to   intervene.   The   call   longing   for   a   personal   meeting   of   love   had   to   be   responded.   have   been   too   keen   and   deep   are   Leaving  all  the  group  and  even  his   in   a   state   of   continuous   agony   as   important   work   with   the   masts  in   known   only   to   themselves.   One   of   Jubbulpore,   the   Master   has   to   go,   these,   for   the   love   of   the   Beloved   undertaking   a   long   journey   in   Master   and   suffering   acutely   these   hot   summer   days.   He   sees   owing   to   separation   for   such   a   the   person.   His   august   presence   long   time,   voluntarily   took   to   a   and   loving   persuasions   eventually   "fast   unto   death",   causing   grave   succeed.   He   personally   admini- anxiety  to  all  around  in  the  family.   sters  a  few  drops  of  fruit-juice,  the   A   regular   series   of   telegrams   has   first   liquid   food   to   enter   the   been   exchanged   daily   between   person's  throat  after  eighteen  days   Baba  and  the  family  of  the  person   of  a  severe  fast!  The  poor  family  is   fasting,   whose   persistent   efforts   relieved   of   a   severe   tension   after   and   loving   persuasions   to   pour   in   days   of   anxiety,   and   although   even   liquid   food   for   days   have   resistence  was  offered  again  in  the   proved  futile,  until  they  have  been   beginning  after  the  Master  had  left   eventually   compelled   to   seek   to   accept   any   food,   the   person   Baba's   advice   and   help.   And   even   came   round   quick1y.   The   Master   Baba's   orders   to   take   at   least   had   set   the   ball   rolling,   and   the   liquid   food   have   been   resolutely   person  now  takes  even  solid  food.   refused.  The  fast  being  too  severe,      Incidentally,   Baba   took   this      opportunity  to  visit  Nasik,                             

  

64                                                                                  MEHER  BABA  JOURNAL  

  

Ahmednagar,   Meherabad,   Poona,   Various   plans   are   suggested,   and  

Talegaon  and  Bombay,  to  meet  his   the   Master's   final   decision   is  

disciples   and   devotees   anxiously   anxiously   awaited   by   all  

awaiting   for   his   darshana   for   so   concerned,   whether   to   establish  

long.   It   was   a   hurried   trip--all   this  Centre  at  Mandla  as  originally  

these   places   being   visited   within   proposed,   or   at   Jubbulpore,   or   at  

five  days.  

both  these  places,  separately.  

   The   question   of   establishing   a      Some   interesting   talks   and  

Spiritual   Centre   on   this   side   has   discourses   are   given   by   Baba  

still        been        under      consideration.     during   this   period,   which   we  

   propose  to  publish  later.  

     

  

  

  

                     T H E    S AY I N G    O F    S H R I    M E H E R    B A B A   
      Do   not   get   disheartened   and   alarmed   when   adversity,   calamity,   or   misfortunes   pour   in   upon   you.   Thank   God,   for   He  has  thereby  given   you   the   opportunity   of   acquiring   forbearance   and   fortitude.   Those   who   have  acquired  the  power  of  bearing  with  adversities  can  easily  enter  the   Spiritual  Path.  
                                      

   M E H E R    B A B A    J O U R N A L   
A    M O N T H LY    P U B L I C A T I O N   
E l i z a b e t h    C .    P a t t e r s o n ,    M a n a g i n g    E d i t o r    a n d    P u b l i s h e r    f o r    t h e    " M e h e r    E d i t o r i a l    C o m m i t t e e "    " M e h e r a b a d " ,    A h m e d n a g a r,    I n d i a   
MEHER  EDITORIAL  COMMITTEE   C.  V.  Sampath  Aiyangar,   (Late  of  Madras  Judicial  Service)   Dr.  Abdul  Ghani  Munsiff,   Princess  Norina                                       Matchabelli,     Adi  K.  Irani,   Elizabeth  C.  Patterson,   Estelle  Gayley,   F.  H.  Dadachanji,   Abdul  Kareem  Abdulla.  
Contributions   of   manuscripts   will   be   welcomed,   and   it   is   requested   that   they   should   be   typed.   No   m a n u s c r i p t    w i l l    b e    re tu rn e d    u n le ss   a c c o m p a n ie d    by    a    se lf- addressed   stamped   envelope.   All   communications   regarding   same   should   be   addressed   to   Princess   Norina   Matchabelli,   Li te ra r y    M a n a ge r,    Meher   Baba   Journal,   "Meherabad",   Ahmednagar,  India.  
Enquiries   concerning   subscriptions   and   notice   of   change   of   address   should   he   addressed   to   Estelle   Gayley,   S e c r e t a r y.    Meher   Baba   Journal,   "Meherabad   ",   Ahmednagar,  India.  
Postal   Money   Orders   and   cheques   should   be   made   payable   to   Adi   K.   Irani,   Treasurer,   Meher   Baba   Journal,   "   "Meherabad",  Ahmednagar,  India.  
S U B S C R I P T I O N    R AT E S   
Twelve  months  (including  Inland  or  Foreign   postage  )  I n d i a    Rs.  3;  E n g l a n d    sh.  8;  U .    S .    A .    $    2.   (Single  copies  ;  6  annas,  or  1  shilling,  or  25  cents.  )

Register of Editorial Alterations
Contents page, column 2, entry 1, change "RanoGayley" to "Rano Gayley" Contents page, column 2, entry 9, change "Aiyanar" to "Aiyangar" Page 4, para 2, line 10. vaccuity to vaucity Page 7, para 2, line 12, change "in" to "in" Page 26, column 2, para 1, line 9, "unbiassed" to unbiased Page 40, column 2, para 1, line 14, change "surroundings" to "surroundings." Page 57, column 1, para 1, line 15, "reconcilliation" Page 59, column 1, para 1, line 3, change ".an" to "an" Page 59, column 1, para 3, line 14, "wordly" should be "worldly" Page 64, last section, change "adversity' " to "adversity,"

