The Way and the Goal
Volume 1, No.12
December 25, 1970 A publication of "The Society for Meher Baba"
© The Society for Avatar Meher Baba 121 W. 72nd, New York, NY
An Avatar Meher Baba Trust eBook August 2013
All words of Meher Baba copyright © 2013 Avatar Meher Baba Perpetual Public Trust, Ahmednagar, India
Source and short publication history: During the 1970s, Dr. Kenmore held meetings in New York City on Saturday nights at 121 W. 72nd St. His talks were taped and meticulously transcribed by a group of ardent followers. There were 19 issues of The Way and the Goal published in all, from January 25, 1970 to May 25, 1984. Volume 2 issue 6 was in progress but never materialized. The Way and the Goal was gratuitously mailed in newsletter format.

eBooks at the Avatar Meher Baba Trust Web Site   
The Avatar Meher Baba Trust's eBooks aspire to be textually exact though non-facsimile reproductions of published books, journals and articles. With the consent of the copyright holders, these online editions are being made available through the Avatar Meher Baba Trust's web site, for the research needs of Meher Baba's lovers and the general public around the world.
Again, the eBooks reproduce the text, though not the exact visual likeness, of the original publications. They have been created through a process of scanning the original pages, running these scans through optical character recognition (OCR) software, reflowing the new text, and proofreading it. Except in rare cases where we specify otherwise, the texts that you will find here correspond, page for page, with those of the original publications: in other words, page citations reliably correspond to those of the source books. But in other respects­such as lineation and font­-the page designs differ. Our purpose is to provide digital texts that are more readily downloadable and searchable than photo facsimile images of the originals would have been. Moreover, they are often much more readable, especially in the case of older books, whose discoloration and deteriorated condition often makes them partly illegible. Since all this work of scanning and reflowing and proofreading has been accomplished by a team of volunteers, it is always possible that errors have crept into these online editions. If you find any of these, please let us know, by emailing us at frank@ambppct.org.
The aim of the Trust's online library is to reproduce the original texts faithfully. In certain cases, however­and this applies especially to some of the older books that were never republished in updated versions­we have corrected certain small errors of a typographic order. When this has been done, all of these corrections are listed in the "Register of Editorial Alterations" that appears at the end of the digital book. If you want the original text in its exact original form, warts and all, you can reconstruct this with the aid of the "register."
The Trust's Online Library remains very much a work in progress. With your help and input, it will increase in scope and improve in elegance and accuracy as the years go by. In the meantime, we hope it will serve the needs of those seeking to deepen and broaden their own familiarity with Avatar Meher Baba's life and message and to disseminate this good news throughout the world.

     
Meher Baba Lays Down the Gauntlet ­ Minneapolis Talk
© 1971 Dr. Harry Kenmore

Dr. Kenmore: How many of those present are hearing about Meher Baba for the first time?
Pat Cook (repeats): How many of those present are hearing about Meher Baba for the first time? (Pause) Just a few-about a half a dozen, Doctor. Dr. Kenmore: Then most of them are old-timers it seems? Pat: Pretty old-timers.
Dr. Kenmore: Pretty old. Let us rise please for the Avatar's Prayer. I like to begin each meeting with Meher Baba's Prayer. It's a universal prayer-the finest I have heard. And that will set the tone for our meeting.
(The Avatar's Prayer)

When I heard this Prayer for the first time in 1956 at Baba's Sahavas (intimate company with the Master) in Myrtle Beach, I felt that it was my prayer. I went back to New York and memorized it. After Baba returned to India, a letter came asking all those who had met Him on His world-wide tour to write a letter to Him. I sent my brief note in the Spring of 1957 saying that the only thing I wanted to do at the time was to say that prayer before Him in person as well as His Prayer of Repentance. On December 2, 1956, in India, Meher Baba met with a serious automobile accident which He had prophesied would and must happen. In this accident He fractured His right hip joint, and this pelvic fracture crippled Him for some time. In November 1957, I appeared on the scene in India after having volunteered my services to try to mend an otherwise irreversible condition of this fractured pelvis.* Remember, it was in the Spring that I had written the letter expressing my one desire to recite the Avatar's Prayer before Baba. Now it was November when I went to India to treat Baba. On the fourth day of treatment, while Baba was resting on the portable treatment table I had specially brought to India for use in my work, He said, "Now say the Prayer." Fortunately, I remembered it, and He was very deeply affected by the way it was said. He said, "I have heard this prayer said many, many times, but I have never heard it said this way. It's touched my heart very deeply." And since then I have become Baba's malvi, His priest. Whenever I appeared on the scene, in India, He would call upon me to say this prayer as well as The Prayer of Repentance. And I was delighted to do it, not because it gave me an opportunity to say it before Him, but because it was usually followed by an embrace from Him. I guess that, at the moment, I was looking for that little reward which I should not have, but I did just the same.
* Dr. Kenmore had heard by way of a Family Letter of a plan to take Baba to a chiropractor in Calcutta. He was concerned that Baba should get proper care. As a chiropractic physician who had specialized in the area of difficulty that Baba was undergoing, Dr. Kenmore immediately wrote to Baba offering his services. Soon after Baba cabled for Dr. Kenmore to come. On that particular visit Dr. Kenmore spent a month with Baba in India treating Him several times a day.

1

Now, what is this Meher Baba all about? Why are we beating the drum about Meher Baba? Why is He becoming increasingly important in the Western world? Haven't we got enough "isms", enough material that has come down to us through the centuries that appears to be adequate for our intelligence? Isn't this material enough to give us the vision that is necessary to make this life worthwhile? Evidently, it is not enough. And Meher Baba has seen to it that this material handed down through the ages is inadequate for mankind's need in our era.
It's very difficult to conceive that Meher Baba is the Lord of the universe. Meher Baba was a man, but He is the God-man. He is God who became a man. You say that's impossible. Well, I didn't think it was impossible, because three years before I met Meher Baba in person, I had been searching for the answer to the mystery of life. I was searching because I was not getting answers. There were many more questions than there were answers. One day when I returned from the south after spending a week in very intensive contemplation and meditation** on my own, I sat down in my office in a chair in front of the bookcase and I went into a brown study. And out of this brown study came this revelation, that if God is Almighty Power, if He's omnipotent, (people don't know what the phrase Almighty Power means, it took me seven years to understand what the phrase Almighty Power means, what omnipotence really is) if He's Almighty Power and He's omniscient, and knows absolutely everything; He knows how to create mankind; He knows how to create the universe with His omniscience and His omnipotence; He can create mankind, then with the same omniscience and omnipotence He knows how to create Himself as a man­no difficulty! This I realized three years before I met the God-man in human form. It wasn't very difficult for me to accept the fact that God could become man. I was convinced of the fact that man could become God. At the time I thought Jesus was a man who had become God, but it was the other way around. After learning of Meher Baba I found that Christ was also the same God that Meher Baba is, but He manifested as the God-man in a different area of the world under a different name and under different circumstances. The God-man also appeared as Mohammed in Arabia and raised the level of education and knowledge and ambition of that nation as well.
But why do we have a God-man? If there were not a God-man, nothing in this creation would make sense. Absolutely nothing would make sense. The God-man is the Creator who returns in person to take charge of the affairs of the universe that He set in motion with His creativity. And He has come down to see what He has made. He's come to personally enjoy His creation and personally suffer in the ignorance that must take place with His creativity. You see, He represents Everything. God is Everything. And what He has created is nothing. It's a shadow of His Omnipotence. And a shadow is something that is in darkness. Darkness is ignorance, and it is this ignorance and darkness that God must dispel in order to know Himself. He must come through
** Every Easter Vacation before learning about Meher Baba, Dr. Kenmore would take a hotel room in Florida and
spend days in meditation.
2

ignorance in order to get to Knowledge.
"WHO AM I?"
When a baby is born, this baby is totally and completely ignorant. It knows absolutely nothing. It gains information about its environment through a learning process that's long and tedious, and the cumulative knowledge that it gathers as it grows up in physical stature leaves this child to wonder about the environment it is in. It looks about. Everything around it knows how to take care of itself. Nature knows how to live. It knows how to create and reproduce itself. It doesn't require information from anything or anybody. It seems that only man requires information as to how to get along with himself. The animal world doesn't have to go to school to learn about itself. The bird kingdom and the fish in the sea don't have to go to school to learn about themselves. The trees and the reptile life know how to take care of themselves. Only man, it appears, doesn't know how to take care of himself. When a child is born, it must start from absolute zero in its knowledge to gain some as it grows up. Then, when it grows up, it begins to have a lot of opinions about the world it is in. In spite of so many opinions and philosophies that it cultivates and develops, isn't it amazing that the stars­all of these millions and millions of constellations­know how to float in space with a mathematical exactitude that's staggering? These stellar bodies don't require any information in order to know how to float in space with mathematical exactitude. They have been doing it for millions of years and they didn't have to ask this baby that's just grown up and is looking around its environment, wondering where it came from and where it's going. Now this child that has assumed full physical stature continues to ask itself the question, "Who am I? Who am I?" The Persian word for God means, "Who?" "Who am I?" There is an original question, and it must have an answer.
Once Meher Baba was approached by a nephew of a school principal in Poona who whispered a question into His ear. Meher Baba tapped the right hand of the chair He was sitting in and said, There is a question that all of us ask throughout Eternity, "Who am I?" And then between this question which is the original question asked by all of the populations of the world throughout Eternity in Maya, in illusion, there are millions and millions of questions and answers until finally, He said tapping the left arm of the chair, Here is the answer at this end, "Who am I?" On the right side, "Who am I?" and the answer to the question on the left side is 'I am God.'
This is the reason why we are gathered here today­ in order to find the answer, the real answer to the real original question. Meher Baba has come as Avatar, the God-man to give us this answer and also gives us the modus operandi with which to discover it. Philosophy will not give the answer. Meher Baba says that philosophy has absolutely no value whatsoever unless that so-called philosophy or the philosopher that initiated the philosophy has the experience of Godhood. Without that experience, philosophy has absolutely no value. Now, when people were banded

together in the old days into tribes and then into kingdoms, they were led by Perfect Masters. The Perfect Masters were kings in the days of yore. Thousands of years ago they ruled the kingdoms of the world. They were men who had become God. They were men who had not only succeeded in coming through the trek of evolution, but also succeeded in making an involutionary trek back to the original place where they had come from Godhood. That is the aspiration of all souls who live in human form­to return to their ancient homeland which is Godhood, which is unity with the Real Self and the unity with the Self of the One Self. These Perfect Masters knew everything. They were in complete control in consciousness and awareness of their Infinite Power and Knowledge and Bliss. They knew everything that was going on. In those days the people of the kingdom felt very secure and were happy because they knew they were getting the right guidance and the full protection of the king who was the Perfect Master. And in those days, if anyone had a gripe in the kingdom, they could come to the palace gates. Alongside was a huge gong, and they would take a mallet and bang this gong asking for audience with the king. Nobody would dare use this mallet unless they had a really serious gripe with the king or with the running of the kingdom. There were many who came and asked many questions, and they always received an answer to their fullest satisfaction. And after the Perfect Masters left the scene, those that appeared as kings were simply imitations of the Perfect Mastership. They were not equipped with the Infinite Knowledge, Power and Bliss of the Perfect Masters who were the Real Kings, the Real Beloveds of those days. All that was set up were imitation kings to guide us, and now of course in the world we have imitation leaders who are leading the world.
Meher Baba, as Avatar, as God-man, has set the pattern of life of this whole world of illusion. One of the masts (a mast living in India is a God-absorbed, Godintoxicated person who is completely oblivious of the physical world. He lives in the subtle or in the mental planes, and he is trapped in these planes in his onward march toward Reality, toward union with his real Self. He is entrapped by Love for the benefit of Love because the only thing he is aware of is this wonderful brilliance which is leading him on towards his Divine Beloved.) This particular mast said to one of the Mandali, the Intimate Disciples who were tracking masts down to bring them to Meher Baba for special work, that, "All of the presidents of the world, all of the prime ministers of the world were put there by your Emperor. Do you know that the man that you follow is the Emperor of all emperors? Do you realize the significance of it? Do you know how fortunate you are to be in His employ?" This mast had never met Meher Baba, yet he knew because he was advancing toward the Divine Beloved in the person of Meher Baba. He was advancing toward Him to live with him forever in Reality. We live in the world of illusion we call Maya. It's a shadowy non-existent existence. But he knew that Meher Baba was the Lord of the universe. And he said as much to them that everything that happens in this world of illusion is already premeditated, prefabricated. It is pre-made by the Avatar of the

universe. The Avatar or God-man is the Creator of this universe. He comes in person to see to its affairs and to map out the affairs of the world for centuries to come. He arrives on the scene every 700 to 1400 years. Meher Baba came as Avatar, as Zoroaster, as King Rama, as Lord Hari Krishna, as Gautama Buddha, as Jesus the Christ, as Mohammed, and now as Meher Baba. Meher Baba has said, "I was Rama, I was Krishna, I was this one, I was that one. Now I am Meher Baba." In past years He has always been ignored, forgotten. But now He has come again as Meher Baba. To give you His exact words, "I am the Ancient One whose past is worshipped and remembered, whose presence is ignored and forgotten, and whose future advent is anticipated with great fervor and longing." When He arrives, He is ignored. They pass Him by. Only after He leaves the world's scene, do they take up the principles and precepts, study them, become enthusiastic about them and then want to follow Him. It seems that authenticity is always given to the repetitiousness of antiquity. The more and longer one is dead, the more authentic he becomes it seems, and the more people want to believe in him. But now, you see, it's going to be made a little different. It's going to be made easy because we should remember that Meher Baba was not just a man. Meher Baba was the Incarnation of Love that appeared amongst us here on earth, and this is the Love that He has generated. He has planted the seeds already, and it will come into flower and bear fruit as the years go on. This Love that He was is the one Thing that was most striking about Meher Baba. He didn't sit like Gautama Buddha and give hours and hours of discourses in order to satisfy the intelligentsia of that day. That's what that era needed. This era needs something else, and what it lacks mostly is Love.
LOVE AND LOVE
Love can only be gotten in the form of affection from human to human. But this Divine Love can only be given by the One who is Divine­and Meher Baba was that Divine Man who could give this Love. The most striking thing about Meher Baba when you came into His presence was this feeling of Love. It represented a purity. It had something that you never felt in any other human being. I recall a story of a man who had an eleven-year-old son who loved his father very much. This man knew this, and he had a meeting with Meher Baba, and Meher Baba had this wonderful affinity that transfixed him. It almost paralyzed him and made him weak just looking into the eyes of Meher Baba. It just melted him down, and he wanted to see whether or not the son that loved him very much could have an expression that would be similar in love to what he had seen in the face of Meher Baba. He went home and sat down before his son and said, "Son, do you love Daddy?" The boy said, "Oh yes, very much, more than anything in the world." The man said, "Will you look at your Daddy. Look at me and show me how much you love me. See how much love you can show me that you can express. Look at me to prove to me how much you love me." And of course all an 11 year-old kid could do was just look at him. He didn't know anything about love. No child knows about love. If it expresses
3

affection or an affinity for the one who takes care of it day and night and looks after it, it naturally has the kind of love that is quite immature. Someone once said that the love that says, I love you because I need you is an immature kind of love. The mature kind of love is one in which the lover says, I need you because I love you. That's when you begin to grow up. And that is the reason why Meher Baba has come­to give love forthrightly and overtly for the first time in the history of mankind. God has come to this earth to give Love to a world He feels is ready to receive it. Humanity is mature enough to receive and accept His Love. Until this time, when God came to earth, you were told in the atmosphere of fear and ignorance to worship Him, to believe in Him. In the days of Mohammed they said, Believe or die. If you don't believe in Mohammed, you are already dead. Because you are already dead, what difference does it make? The one who is already dead to the existence of God, is not alive. They were already dead. It didn't matter.
The message is the same in every Avataric period, but when it is given in the idiom of that period, then it will be most understood. The more you try to cognize and understand a past Avatarhood from which the religions we know about have emanated, the less you are going to understand about God or yourself. Meher Baba has come to give us Love. He has given it to us because we are mature enough to receive it. We must be aware that this Love has been set loose in this world, and that we are to receive it. We are to look at His photograph. We are to look at motion pictures of Him. We are to read about Him and think about Him, get together and talk about Him. When you think of Meher Baba more and more, suddenly, one day, a feeling will be generated inside of you, and this feeling that you will feel will be that of Love. It's the kind of Love that a man cannot receive from a woman, and a woman cannot receive it from a man. No matter how deep the affection may be in the interpersonal relationship between the sexes, this is not the Love that you will feel coming from Meher Baba the Godman who is also the Love-man. As you think about it deeply, it will communicate something to that feeling portion of the mind which is the heart. Something in the heart will be generated. Something will stir. Something will move. Something will become awakened in you because Meher Baba is that One, the Real One who exists in all of us, but is asleep. He has come to awaken Himself in you. He, as God, is asleep in all of us. God lives in all of us and in each of us as Soul. This Soul has become lost in the worldliness of ignorance of mental activity­the mind. The mind is the ego and the seat of all of the impressions that man has gathered through his life on earth in form. These impressions have accumulated through all the various forms of nature from rudimentary stone until reaching the full consciousness of man in the human form. And it is this Knowledge, this Wisdom, this Infinite Knowledge, that is lying dormant in every human form that Meher Baba has come to awaken. He exists there, asleep, as God. The acorn, as we open it, we must admit, has the potential of becoming an oak tree. But when you look at the tiny acorn, as is, you would ask, how can this become an oak tree?
4

But, if you were to put it into the ground and give it the kind of environment that is necessary to make it grow, it would become the ultimate in its destiny which is an oak tree. We as human beings are like the acorn. That acorn is lying asleep within us as the Real Self­as Almighty God­as Meher Baba, the unmanifest. Meher Baba as the Manifest has come into the world as Godman in order to awaken that acorn, not potential, but that acorn ultimate which is One with the Real Self. This ultimate is the individual Godhood of each of us where we will be able to escape the shackles of illusion, thinking of ourselves as being little personality selves in competition with each other. We must escape illusion in order to know ourselves as our Real Selves, as Almighty God. We must escape illusion, escape the ignorance and the suffering, escape all of the experiences of opposites which have chained us to this earth making us think all the time that we are human beings when actually we are divine spiritual beings. The purpose of being in a human form is to have as our goal becoming one with God.
FREEDOM FROM ALL BONDAGE
One of the Perfect Masters, Hafiz, who was a Persian poet at the same time and who was also one of the favorite poets of Baba, whom Baba quoted time and time again has given a beautiful description of God-Realization­a lovely description. In this descripttion of God-Realization he has issued a call to the human to give up his senseless meanderings about and to buckle down to the real business of life which is Life itself. This is what Hafiz says about God-Realization: "Yesterday; early in the morning, I obtained my Freedom from all sorrow, and in the darkness of the night I got the purity of Eternal Life in my egoless state. He gave me my Real Individuality, and I got purity from the wine in the cup of illumination. What a glorious night it was and what a blessed morning when I received the pass for the highest­when I saw the Beloved and got mad and bewildered with Love. I was given the knowledge of beginning and end. It is not surprising that I obtained my object for I received my due. Then in the mirror of beauty, I saw my own face and got Knowledge of my own Existence. The worship of my Master proved alchemy. I became the dust of His feet and got to this state. When the lover gets merged in the snare of the Beloved's tresses, he says, I have obtained my Freedom from all bondage." This is a beautiful description of what happens to the little self, the personality self, the worldly self, the materiallyconcerned self when it goes deep within itself­dives in there in order to discover and find the Real Self, to discover God within. It requires the interposition of no one. It is a game that exists between the lover, the one who decides to embark upon the search in love and the Real Beloved. In this instance the Real Beloved is God. God now has come to us as the Divine and Real Beloved. He has not come to us as a man sitting up there in the sky. He is not anyone to whom we prostrate ourselves. He isn't anyone before whom we must do tricks like a monkey in order to get rewards He is not a Santa Claus­nothing like that. He is the Real Beloved whom we must really fall in

love with. One who embarks upon the search becomes a Lover. One feels this love for the Beloved intensely. The more intense it becomes, the more fiercely it burns­the more one feels the separation from this Beloved and the more the longing increases and in order to close the gap of this separation. The more we burn, the more we pine. And the more we yearn for union with this Real Beloved in Love, the more intense becomes this game and this search until one day the Grace of the Avatar falls upon one and His Grace will then give to one something and then that something is received. Grace, Meher Baba says, is that which is given and that which is received. When this Grace falls upon one, the lover then receives this cup of wine­this last cup of Love. Wine is a symbol of Love in Persian poetry. And when one drinks this wine of Love, then suddenly everything that one thought amounted to something one finds becomes nothing, and the only thing in life that is worthwhile is this union with one's Beloved. EVERYTHING takes possession of one, and one becomes this EVERYTHING. One becomes love, one becomes lover, and the lover discovers that he was both the lover, love and the Beloved in one­that it was He, God, who had become lost in the wilderness of ignorance to suddenly find, discover and realize his Real Self. It is then that this illusory existence disappears, and we take possession of the Existence that we were always searching for. Everything that we have become attached to in this world are simply the false every things we fall in love with. We are really searching for the Real Love. Not finding the Real Love, we become in love or in affection or have an affinity with all of these false every things. It can be with one's children, one's wife, one's sister, one's mother, one's sweetheart, one's country, one's family­so many things, small things, things, things. Actually these small things are substitutes for the real lack, for the Real Thing that we are looking for and that is God within us. That is the Real Self that exists in Reality. By becoming

detached from these false every things and becoming attached to the one Real Thing the acme of happiness will be generated in our lives. This acme of happiness is the Real Beloved whom we find on the inside. It's an inside journey. When we become attached to this Real Love that's inside, then we secretly make this journey inside deeper and deeper within ourselves raising the level of consciousness away from the things that we are attached to in illusion on the outside and having more meaningful in our lives the things that are inside­the Real Value, the Real Thing. We are in search of the Real Thing. That's the Thing that we want. That's what we want to take possession of, and we want this Thing to take possession of us. The Real You, that Real Self is asleep in us. It must become awake in union with the Reality of the Real Thing which is God. God is the Beloved, the Real Self, the Ocean of Everything, the Acme of Divinity which is the Allness and the Everything of life itself. It is Existence with a capital "E". And Existence personified has come again amongst us in the form of Meher Baba whom I like to term as being the pinpoint of. physical manifestation of the Infinite. He allows us through His Grace and Compassion to see this Perfect Man, this God-man who is perfect in all things­the Personification of Love, of Truth, of compassion, of patience­every attribute you can name, He is that.
'REINCARNATION: WHAT KIND OF A WORD IS THAT?'
Those that knew Him knew that He was perfect in all things, and He was the Master of every situation Nothing floored him, and He was completely independent. Everything bent to His Will, and everything will bend to His Will. He occupies a place everywhere and in everything. Nothing moves without His Will.. A leaf will not move, a blade of grass will not move without His will because He is that leaf, He is that blade of grass. He is everything. You ask, "How can that be?" It is because the Creator that created the creation is in that creation; He is that creation, and He is a part of and the whole of everything that He has made. He is in it. He is it. The things that are in the creation do not belong to the things that have been created. The things in the creation belong to the Creator that made them. The Creator made them, they belong to Him. They do not belong to the things that have been created. What has been created has received this initial momentum of movement, of action from the Creator. And when the Creator has finished with the movement and with the activity of those beings that He has created in His game, His Tamasha, His show, He removes them from the scene of the stage. We call this death. When He removes them, He does not get rid of them, but He brings them to a "waiting-room of eternity" where He prepares them for another part on His stage of world action. And then He reincarnates them into another human form. But people say, "Reincarnation, what kind of a word is that?" Reincarnation takes place whether you believe it or don't believe it. One doesn't have to believe in the law of gravity. It operates on you whether you believe it or don't. If we were to bring a savage amongst us and talk to him about the
5

law of gravity, he wouldn't know what the law of gravity is. But it's operating on him whether he has cognizance of its existence or he doesn't. It operates in the world whether you believe it or not. It doesn't require your belief. It's there. When you accept the fact that there is a law of gravity and begin to make use of it, then you are willing to believe that its existence is cognizable. Reincarnation also is a process, an activity, that happens irrespective of what your belief is. This is the gap in Western thinking. We don't know what reincarnation is. It's like a dirty word. There have been so many misconceptions about it. People ask, dumbfounded, "Well, wow, uh, uh, you mean you retrogress? You become an animal? You become this? You become that?" This has nothing to do with it. Once the Soul, which is God, has come through the trek of evolution and attained a human form, it never turns to any subhuman form. Instead it remains in the human form, taking new human forms, reincarnating lifetime after lifetime in order to increase its knowledge about the existence of the Soul, its Real Self, so that ultimately, it can become one with its own Divinity, and realize itself as a Divine Being. That's the only reason for reincarnation.
In 1849 when Charles Darwin presented his theory of evolution at the Royal Academy of Science in London, all but one denied, condemned and rejected his theory of evolution. Now in 1939, nearly 100 years later, in that same Royal Academy of Science in London, they took another vote on Darwin's theory of evolution, and all but one affirmed and accepted his theory of evolution­a total and complete reversal. The theory of evolution is now comprehensible to all educated people. They don't deny it. Charles Darwin concerned himself with the evolution of forms. Meher Baba is concerning Himself with the evolution of consciousness in these forms.
THE FULL ANSWER
The most rudimentary form of consciousness that God has, as Soul, exists in stone. Soul exists in stone. You know, they found that there is a very definite molecular activity in stone. The molecules are very elementary in their composition, but they are there just the same. There is an almost imperceptible movement in the fabric of stones. Stone represents the first, finite form God as Soul, takes in order to know Himself. When He exhausts the impressions of that particular form, He moves on up to a higher form with a little more consciousness which is the mineral form. In this manner the Soul progresses from stone to mineral to plant to worm to fish to bird to animal until it finally arrives in the human form. Now, if it were not for the fact that impressions were gathered in the evolutionary trek through the taking on of these forms, God, as Soul, would have known Himself as God upon attaining the human form. But, instead, in taking the human form, he knew himself with full consciousness as man. Now His task is to eradicate all of the impressions that gave him material knowledge in His trek through evolution. Now, as man, he must reject these impressions and realize that he wasn't any of
6

these forms­that instead, He is God. He has to have the answer to the original question, "Who am I?" And He must come up with the answer, "I am God." Now this is Meher Baba giving the saga very simply and very clearly. The Soul then has to go through millions and millions of lifetimes in human form in order to reject the information; the impressions, that it received in its mind as being everything except God. Because actually it is God that has become trapped in His own ignorance by attaching Himself to the mind and to all of the impressions that keep Him from the answer to the question, "Who am I?": "I am God."
The job now is to get the full answer, and the only way man will get that answer is through the love of Meher Baba. One must tum inward upon himself and become conscious and aware that there are subtle or psychic realms, spheres and worlds. One must become aware of the subtle body and unconscious of this physical body. Then one must vault oneself into the mental spheres. That is the last inroad that one has to tear away from which is still in the world of duality­the world of opposites­before one advances into the realm of one's Real Self which is Godhood or Divinity. Man in the physical world must tum within in order to finally know himself. He must take his gaze away from the physical world. One should be involved with the activities of the world, but in the spirit of detachment. One should be attached to the real job of developing a knowledge of what is inside of one through love in Meher Baba. One must finally reject the world in detachment by becoming fully attached in love to Meher Baba who is one's Real Self. One emerges out of this duality of suffering and pleasure, pleasure and pain, the ups and downs, the tormenting turmoil, conflict and confusion which is identified with this world of duality known as maya or illusion.
Now this understanding is what Meher Baba has come to give the Western world. He has given it to the Western world in its own idiom. Mankind can receive a new vision, a new life, a new indoctrination which is the real indoctrination and the genuine meaning­ fulness that life has to offer from the books that He has left behind such as God Speaks, the Discourses, and The Everything and the Nothing. There are also the books written about Meher Baba by His followers such as The God-Man, and Sobs and Throbs. as well as the many numerous single, isolated discourses and declarations that He has left behind, mankind will know why it is here, where it has come from, and where it is going. Meher Baba is not interested in the development of one's ultimate because one's ultimate destiny is Godhood. He tells one how, and He will tell one again and again that one will earn one's livelihood by the sweat of one's brow, but to earn one's Godhood, one will have to do it with the blood of one's heart. So it means one has got to give time to this. One has got to give it consideration. One has got to put it into practice. One has got to do this business of real living inside of oneself by rejecting the world and detaching oneself while in the midst of activity in the world. One doesn't leave the activities. One doesn't go into an ivory tower­it isn't that at all. One remains where one is in the world, but one does not become attached to the things that one is doing.

Know that they are only temporary­that they are ephemeral. Know that they are only phenomenal. They are going to be here today and gone tomorrow. When one really goes for the last time, in this body, all of it is left behind. Nothing is taken. So, what have you put in the cup of eternity that you have to fill? What have you put in the cup of your heart? How have you filled it? Because when you go into this "waiting-room of eternity", you will have to relive all of the impressions and the experiences you have had here on earth. If the experiences have mostly been in your consideration of the Divine, your consideration of God, your consideration of love, of compassion, of goodness, of Meher Baba who is the personification of all these attributes, why then you will live even tenfold this wonderful happiness that you have indulged in in your pursuit with love in Meher Baba. You will live it ten times happily there in the "waiting-room", preparing to come back again as another human being to relive again and to find and rediscover what the real purpose of life is.
BETWEEN YOU AND GOD
Don't wait for other lifetimes. Do it here and do it now because now is the time­now is the only time. Meher Baba has deliberately caused this confusion in the world to happen. Let me say once and for all, you can yearn for a brotherhood of man, but you are not going to have it. You can't have a brotherhood of man, because maya has always meant conflict, confusion, and misunderstanding. You can think of a brotherhood of man as an ideal, but that is not the Ideal. The Real Ideal is only for the few who are going to extricate themselves from the herd of ignorance. Such an individual will realize that the only thing in life that is worthwhile is going to be for that particular individual to extricate himself from the herd and carry on this search alone. Remember, the majority is always wrong. The minority is always right. Then, as the years go by, just as in the case of Charles Darwin and the theory of evolution, the minority opinion becomes the majority conviction. The individual must extricate himself from the herd. He feels this divine desperateness. He must have an answer to the mystery of the secret of life. He enjoins himself to take this step in a search that is to be conducted inside himself. It is a silent, it is a quiet search, and he carries it on alone. But really he doesn't do it alone; he is doing it with the help, with the divine assistance of Meher Baba who is the Incarnation of Love, the very Incarnation of Almighty God Himself. He holds out this love for one to accept, and one gets this feeling; one gets this conviction as time goes on. With this love, one carries on the search deeper and deeper, and then it suddenly takes on a burning that becomes a living fire inside. It literally scorches one, and in response to this vast feeling of separation that one feels, one must unite with the Real and the Divine Beloved. And with union with the Divine Beloved one finds one's Real Self­the answer to all existence. So, the brotherhood of man is simply an ideal that those who are least inculcated with feelings of greed and of self-interest would unite under. They seek to unite under this banner and to establish this brotherhood of

man which will never occur because it cannot, because maya is what it is­the principle of ignorance. Ignorance must prevail in this world because that is the very nature, the very warp and woof of maya. Maya is the principle of ignorance. It must continuously operate in this world as ignorance. In the world of duality the opposites of experience must persist and pervade through all of the activities associated with being of this world. It can't be any different. Maya can never become God because maya is always the shadow of God. It is the individual who is asleep as God existing in maya as non-existence who must become awakened to realization that one must escape and become free from the bondage of this principle of ignorance. One must take hold of this Knowledge in the person of Meher Baba. He is Love personified, and He will lead one into this Infinite Knowledge, one's original existence. This is the only way an individual can become free of the principle of ignorance. Meher Baba can burst you out of the cage of maya. Religions will not give it to you; philosophies will not give it to you; because in this call that He has issued, there must be no interposition between God the Beloved and the lover. There must be interposed no priest, no minister, no clergy, no theological individual. It is the individual in having a feeling of this divine desperateness, a feeling that Baba calls, who must make a decision to become a lover of God. One discovers this love and discovers Meher Baba as one's Beloved, and then the business now is to become one with this Divine Beloved. And no one must come between the lover and this implicit and determined resolve. This is the beauty of what Meher Baba has to give. This is not a religion. This is Truth. We know that there are so many in the world today that claim that they have the truth, this is the truth, that is the truth. Well, Meher Baba is not only saying that He is Truth personified, but He is laying down the gauntlet telling you that Truth, which you really are, you must become. And this requires an effort on your part. With the help of love in the person of Meher Baba, you will become this Truth; you will become this Love. You will actually become Existence because that's what Truth is. From this ignorance you will go to Knowledge, and no more will you ever be entrapped in this world. No more will you have to return in a human form because you will have left it forever. It will be gone forever. You will then exist in Existence as Infinite Knowledge, Bliss, and Power. You will then be aware and know yourself as the knower of Truth, and Truth itself. The happiness and the bliss that is part and parcel of this knowing will be yours forever. This is the reason Meher Baba has come as Avatar of the age.
Shall we throw the meeting open to questions? Q. What kind of advice would you give to people
who are searching for God through the use of drugs? Now let us stop kidding our selves. People are not
searching for God when they take drugs. They are not even on a search. They are simply taking a poison. Let us understand to begin with, when you use the word drug you are using the word poison. A drug is a poison. Why? A drug is different from food in that a drug is not incorporated into the tissue protoplasm of
7

your cellular structures. A drug is a poison. It irritates and renders noxious and toxic the tissues of your body. It is circulated through the whole body, but mostly it can injure brain tissues. How can you be looking or searching for God? What is God? Literally just sit down and try to figure out what is going to happen when you take a poison inside your organism? What are you going to find­nothing but irritation. Now accidentally it tends to irritate certain tissues of the brain which sends you into a state of hallucination. That isn't God! I mean if God can be had in a drug, in a pill or something like that, well forget about God. God just ain't no God when He is in a pill. That's all. You are not going to find in a pill Almighty Power­the Power that created the Universe.
Where did this pill come from? It comes from a hunk of vegetation. It simply comes out of the ground where it is grown. It is one of the lowest forms of life in the evolutionary cycle. It comes from vegetation. Then man in a laboratory concocts it and makes it into a pill or a liquid. Will you think about it. Well how can this junk ever in the whole wide world ever be associated with something concerning God! Trace it back. Where did it come from? It's grown as a plant. That's all. How in hell can one expect to find God through a plant! Now, when it is absorbed into your organism it's a drug. It's a highly concentrated physical material, and it has only one property­to irritate and poison your tissues.
It certainly doesn't give you a sense of peace of mind. It doesn't give you contentment. It doesn't make you stronger. Your resolves about life become weaker. They become disconnected. You can't think a thought through. You become less patient. You become more impatient, more irritated because you are suffering from the effects of toxicity which is poisoning. You find that many things don't register. One and one don't make two. To one on drugs one and one will always equal 3, 4, 5 and 6. The easiest one in the world to always fool is yourself. You never kid anybody else but yourself. And if you think taking a drug means that you are searching for God, well you are simply searching for a phoney kind of a kick which is so temporary and so perishable that in order to get a better and better kick as it slips from you, you have to increase the intake of the poison. And increasing the intake of the irritation and the toxicity means that you will have to climb out of a bigger and bigger hole and a bigger and bigger pit that you are digging for yourself. But you will never find that anybody in the history of mankind will ever discover anything related to Godhood with the use of a drug.
You don't get an expanded consciousness in taking a drug. Supposing you go to the theatre to see Lawrence of Arabia or Ben Bur and as you are watching the picture the screen suddenly enlarges, and it almost feels that you are in the midst of a battle scene. It's almost as if you are part of the battle. Why you didn't get an expanded consciousness. The image was simply bigger. It came closer and the very closeness and bigness gave it such clarity that you felt that your awareness became expanded. But it is the same awareness. Nothing is really changed. The only
8

thing that changes is the dimension of the picture.
That's all. But you are still separated from the picture. The illusion is such that when the screen suddenly widens, it seems that you became part of the battle in Ben Hur. You are in there, and it gets very exciting, see. It's a different dimension. Some may come out of this thinking they have got a new awareness; don't you see? They think it's a great thing. It is comparable to the irritation of the silent areas which have to do with subtle planes of consciousness. Yes, there is an awareness when you are really on the planes. Then you are using your subtle body which is not of a physical nature. You can walk across the street and know that that car is not going to hit you and walk right through it. But the subtle body does it. That's a non-material body, not a physical body. But the one on drugs is hoodwinked, when those centers are irritated, into believing that he can walk across the street and the car won't hit him, but it does. And he's dead. He's gone. You see why? He gets the feeling that he can fly.

When you have achieved through your own efforts the third plane of subtle plane consciousness, or the fourth plane, sure you could fly through the air like a bird without wings, because you have the infinite power of God at your command. But you've earned that, you have developed and cultivated that, through love, you see. That power doesn't belong to you until you've earned it. You must acquire it with the blood of your heart. And it means that you can't use an extraneous agent in order to give you the possession of this, because it's like saying that if all thoughts were Cadillacs, all of us would ride in them. If a guy thinks that he's going to find God through a drug you understand, then, well, hell, all of us would be Gods and there's no need for living in this human form. All of us would simply sit down and keep taking the drug, but we would all wind up in the waste basket of delusion. You are in the waste basket of delusion. And all you will ever find is just your poor low-down disillusioned miserable self. You haven't advanced anywhere­ wondering where your next meal is going to come from. When you trace this idea about drugs and God back to its source, you must remember that this pill came from a plot of vegetation and it was simply concocted in the laboratories designed by willful men, working to get a profit, taking advantage of deluded individuals, and this profit enriches them and makes them have many delightful laughs up the sleeve at the expense of the pill- taker.

Associate Editors

Robert Ganz, Chuck Magro Larry Greenberg, Beth Ganz Alan Berger, Michael Levy

Composition & Design

Mary Marino, Chris Riger Larry Karrasch

Published by the the Society for Avatar Meher Baba 121 West 72 Street
New York, New York 10023

Subscription $5.50 per year (12 issues). Single copy In U.S. and Canada, 50 cents.
Material contained in this publication should not be reproduced in any form without written permission from the Editor.

