  June 1, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor    WHAT FAITH KNOWS AND HOPES FOR (Hebrews 11:1-3)  Doing What Love Demands, No Matter What  As we begin our exposition of Hebrews 11, we need to see why it'shere and what it has to do with your life. Go back with me five weeksand six verses to Hebrews 10:34. You may remember that someChristians were imprisoned and the others made the hard decision toidentify with them and risk their property and their lives. Verse 34tells what happened. "You showed sympathy to the prisoners, andaccepted joyfully the seizure of your property, knowing that you havefor yourselves a better possession and an abiding one."  This is the kind of life the whole book of Hebrews is aiming toproduce - a life that looks at the high price of love (the seizure ofour property, perhaps, or the some other kind of abuse or calamity,Hebrews 13:3-6,13), and then accepts that possibility joyfully anddoes what love demands, no matter what. That's the life Hebrews isaiming at. All the glorious truth we have seen about Christ -    &#183; giving himself once for all as a finalsacrifice for our sins (9:14),   &#183; perfecting us for all time by a single offering (10:14),   &#183; giving us a clean conscience by his own blood (9:14;10:22),   &#183; being our sympathetic high priest before God (4:14-16),   &#183; interceding for us day after day in heaven (7:25),   &#183; putting his laws in our minds and writing them on ourhearts,   &#183; being our God (8:10),   &#183; remembering our sins no more (8:12),   &#183; promising never to leave us or forsake us (13:5-6)    - all this great truth that we have been reveling in for over ayear is aimed practically at making us into this kind of people.People who risk property and life in order to bring the love of Godto others. People who do not look for comforts and ease and securityas a necessary thing in life. People who are free from the Americanassumptions of style and safety and wealth and leisure. People whoknow there is one life to live and only what's done in the name ofChrist and for the eternal good of others will count in the end.  The Foundation of Risk-taking Love  And what verse 34 makes clear is that the way such a life comesabout is by an unshakable hope in God beyond this life. "You acceptedjoyfully the seizure of your property, knowing that you have foryourselves a better possession and an abiding one." The power to bejoyfully sacrificial in the path of love is "knowing that you have abetter possession beyond the grave." If you don't live by this greatconfidence, you will be continually thinking about how much you arelosing out every time you make a sacrifice for others. But if thislife is a brief preparation for eternal joy - a "better possessionand abiding one" - then you are free to risk your life and yourproperty in this world because, as Paul said in Romans 8:18, "Thesufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared withthe glory that is to be revealed to us."  So the whole book of Hebrews is written to give foundation to thehope that is the foundation of a life of radical, risk-taking,sacrificial love.  What more can he say than he has already said to help us have thishope so that we live out this radical love? Chapter 11 is the answer:he can give us examples of people who have laid hold on the futurereward of joy with God in such a way that it makes a great differencein their lives here and now. That's what chapter 11 is. It is meantto deepen your confidence in God's promises so that you turn from thefleeting pleasures of sin and live out the radical kind of love thatcomes from having your hope in God (compare Colossians 1:4-5).  The Power to Sacrifice and Love Joyfully  So chapter 11 begins with a definition of faith that links it withhope and then goes on to show how this hope gave power for all kindsof radical obedience. Let's read the text (Hebrews 11:1-3):  Now faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction ofthings not seen. 2 For by it the men of old gained approval. 3 Byfaith we understand that the worlds were prepared by the word of God,so that what is seen was not made out of things which are visible.  So the first important thing to see here is that the power tosacrifice and love and joyfully accept the seizure of your property,which we saw in 10:34, is called "faith." Faith is the assurance ofthings hoped for - that is, faith is the confidence that "you have abetter possession and an abiding one." There's the link between thelife of sacrificial love in 10:34 and the hall of fame in chapter 11.Chapter 11 is a catalogue of people who illustrate that this kind offaith - the assurance of things hoped for - really makes a differencein life.  Assurance and Conviction  So the first task we have in this new chapter is to understandmore exactly what faith is. That's what verse 1 gives us - a twofolddefinition of faith. Let's look at both parts, one at a time: "Nowfaith is (1) the assurance of things hoped for, (2) the conviction ofthings not seen."  There is more here than meets the eye at first. The word for"assurance" in the first definition ("the assurance of things hopedfor") and the word for "conviction" in the second definition ("theconviction of things not seen"), are unusual words and very difficultto translate into English. You may remember the old King JamesVersion: "Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, theevidence of things not seen." These words "substance" and "evidence"are, in fact, very serious and important translations. What is thereality behind these two words and these two definitions of faith?  This is not merely academic. Just ask yourself this question: doyou have faith? How do you know you have faith? What is faith, sothat you can know you have it? What hangs on whether you have faithor not? You can see that this question is immensely practical andrelevant to your life. "Conviction" or "Evidence"?  Let's start with the second definition first: "Faith is theconviction or (the evidence) of things not seen." The word for"conviction" or "evidence" is not used anywhere else in the NewTestament. Outside the New Testament, its normal use is "proof" or"argument" or "evidence" - something objective - about the worldrather than subjective about how we feel about the world.  But what about the meaning here in verse 1? Most translators don'tuse the old word, "proof" or "evidence," because it doesn't seem tomake sense. How can faith be evidence or proof? Faith needs evidence,doesn't it? But let's look at the illustration of this definition offaith in verse 3. Verse 3 is directly related to this definition offaith as "the evidence of things not seen." It says, "By faith weunderstand that the worlds were prepared by the word of God, so thatwhat is seen was not made out of things which are visible."  Do you see the connection? Verse 1 says "faith is the evidence ofthings not seen," and verse 3 says that faith understands that theworld - what is seen - was made out of what is not seen - the word ofGod. So verse 3 is a specific illustration of the definition of faithin verse 1b.  Here's the question: How do we know that God made the world out ofnothing that is seen? Not only were we not there when it happened,but, even if we had been there, we would not have been able to seethe act of creation, because you can't see the word of God. So howcan we know or "understand" that the worlds were made by the word ofGod? How can we know that "what is seen was made out of thingsinvisible" - namely the word of God?  Verse 3 answers, "by faith." "By faith we understand that theworlds were prepared by the word of God." Now this starts to sound alittle more like the old King James translation of verse 1 might makesense after all. If "faith is the evidence of things not seen," thenit might make sense to say, "By faith (by evidence) we understandthat the worlds were prepared by the word of God." But if we take thenewer translation ("faith is the conviction of things unseen") andsay, "By conviction we understand that the worlds were prepared bythe word of God," then it just sounds like we are reasoning in acircle: I have the conviction that God created the world, therefore Iunderstand that he did create the world. And I understand that hecreated the world, therefore I have the conviction that he createdthe world.  How is Faith "Evidence"?  So the crucial question is: How is faith "evidence" of thingsunseen, namely, that God created the world by his word? I take myclue from the one other place in the New Testament where God'sinvisible attributes are said to be "clearly seen" by man, namely,Romans 1:20. "Since the creation of the world [God's] invisibleattributes, his eternal power and divine nature, have been clearlyseen, being understood by what has been made." The word "understood"here in Romans 1:20 is the same as the word as in Hebrews 11:3, "Byfaith we understand that the worlds were prepared by the word ofGod."  So there in Romans 1:20 it says, "we understand the invisibleattributes of God by what has been made." And here in Hebrews 11:3 itsays, we understand the invisible word of God behind creation byfaith. Romans 1:20 seems to say that the evidence that God made theworld is the things made - they clearly point to a Maker. Hebrews11:3 seems to say that the evidence that God made the world is faith.Now think about this for a moment. What shall we make of it? Here'swhat I make of it. Faith - at least in part - is the spiritual seeingor perceiving of the fingerprints of God on the things he has made.Now the fingerprints of God on the things he has made - the order,the beauty, the greatness, the "irreducible complexity" (as MichaelBehe says, in Darwin's Black Box) - are the evidence that God madethe world. But so is the seeing of these fingerprints a kind ofevidence. It's just the other side of the coin. If you ask me, "Howdo you know Focus on the Family has a headquarters in ColoradoSprings," I will say, "I saw it on Tuesday." My seeing is evidencethat it is there.  I think that is the way faith is the evidence of things unseen. Weall look at the same fingerprints, but some see and some don't. Thosewho see have the evidence - the testimony - in themselves. How canthat be?  Color and Chaos or a Deeper View?  Here is an analogy at the physical level. A few years ago one ofthe rages was hidden 3-D images. These are pieces of art that, on onelevel, are one thing, but at another level are something quitedifferent. At first glance all you see is the surface presentation.But if you let your eyes focus more deeply, or more distantly, youmay see a train or a boxing kangaroo or a globe not only appearing,but actually standing up off the page. Now some people stare at thesepages for several minutes and see nothing but color and chaos. Butothers almost immediately see the head of Beethoven or a lamb. Ifsomeone says, "How do you know a lamb is there?" the answer is, "Isee it." Your seeing is the evidence. They may not see it, but thatwon't change your mind.  Now this is what it is like for some to look at God's creation.Some see color and chaos. Others have a deeper view and suddenlyGod's fingerprints come into focus. What evidence can they offer?They see it. It is as undoubted as a lamb in a 3-D image. No one cantalk you out of it.  You may ask, "Should that be called faith?" Didn't Paul say (in 2Corinthians 5:7), "We walk by faith and not by sight"? How can faithbe "sight"? Paul meant that Christ is not present physically on earthto see with physical eyes, but is in heaven. He did not mean thatthere is no spiritual perception of God's reality. Hebrews 11:1 says,"Faith is the conviction - or better, the evidence - of things notseen." And then the writer illustrates this in verse 3 when he saysthat "we understand by faith" that God created the world. In otherwords, faith is not just a responding act of the soul; it is also agrasping or perceiving or understanding act. It is a spiritual actthat sees the fingerprints of God. This does not mean that youbelieve them into being. That would be wishful thinking - the powerof positive thinking. That is not authentic faith. Real faith isbased on real Truth. It looks deeply at the world God has made -looks through it, so to speak - and by the grace of God, it sees theglory of God (as Psalm 19:1 says) standing forth off the creationlike a 3-D image.  The Substance of Things Hoped For  Now that leaves us just a few minutes to focus on the other partof the definition of faith in verse 1: "Now faith is the assurance -or the substance - of things hoped for." It may be that all thismeans is that faith is a deep confidence that the promises of Godwill come true so that we bank on them. That would be enough to freeus from the fears and greed and worldliness that block the flow ofradical, risk-taking, sacrificial love. If we have a strongconviction that God will care for us and bring us to glory andfulfill all his promises to us forever, then we will be free fromself-indulgence and free for serving others.  But I think it means more - or maybe this is just a way of fillingup this meaning with all that's really here. The word "assurance"here can mean "nature" or "substance" or "reality" or "essence" inother places, for example, Hebrews 1:3 ("exact representation ofGod's nature"). If that is what is meant here, then we should thinklike this.  What could the "substance" or "nature" of things hoped for mean? Ithink it could mean that faith apprehends the goodness and thesweetness of what God promises so clearly that this goodness andsweetness are substantially present in faith. In other words, faithgrasps - lays hold of - God's preciousness so firmly that in thefaith itself there is the substance of the goodness and the sweetnesspromised. Faith doesn't create what we hope for - that would be amere mind game. Faith is a spiritual apprehending or perceiving ortasting or sensing of the beauty and sweetness and preciousness andgoodness of what God promises - especially his own fellowship, andthe enjoyment of his own presence.  Faith does not just feel confident that this is coming some day.Faith has spiritually laid hold of and perceived and tasted that itis real. And this means that faith has the substance or the nature ofwhat is hoped for in it. Faith's enjoyment of the promise is a kindof substantial downpayment of the reality coming.  Taste and See  This is what happens when the Gospel is preached. It is what ishappening right now for many of you. The word of God is spoken -broken like sweet bread and poured out like refreshing water - andthe spiritual taste of your heart is awakened, and you know thatthere is more here than the mere opinion of a man. Just like it saysin Hebrews 10:34, you "know that you have a better possession and anabiding one."  In summary then faith is a kind of spiritual tasting of what Godhas promised so that we feel a deep, substantial assurance of thingshoped for; and faith is a kind of spiritual seeing of the invisiblefingerprints of God in the things he has made. By the one we knowGod's power and wisdom to make us, and by the other we know hisgoodness and grace to save us.  So I say with Psalm 34:8,  O taste and see that the LORD is good; How blessed is the man whotakes refuge in Him!  
  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
