  May 19, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor   
       WHO WILL RULE THE WORLD TO COME?   Hebrews 2:1-9     
      Jesus is Superior to Angels    As you turn to the text let me remind you about what we have seenin chapter 1. The writer says that in former times God spoke invarious ways through the prophets but in these last days he hasspoken to us by a Son, namely, Jesus Christ (Hebrews 1:1-2). Jesus isGod's final and decisive Word to the world. He inaugurates the "lastdays" because after him there is no third period of revelation.Everything God has to say from here on to eternity he says in Jesus.If there is fuller revelation, it will be clarification,amplification and application of the Jesus already revealed inhistory and in the New Testament.  The writer stresses the utter superiority and uniqueness of Jesusover angels because angels had played a crucial role in mediating theword of God in the Old Testament (Hebrews 2:2). So the writer wantsto make sure we do not say, "Well, if God spoke through angels in theOld Testament and spoke in these last days through his Son, then hisSon is a great angel." "Wrong," the writer says. Jesus is not a bigangel. He is the radiance of the glory of God and the exactrepresentation of God's nature. He is God the Son (Hebrews 1:8) and,as such, angels worship him (Hebrews 1:6) and do his bidding (Hebrews1:14).    
      God Did Not Subject to Angels the World toCome    The conclusion the writer draws from this exalted place of Jesusin the universe as God's final word to the world is found in Hebrews2:1. So here is where we will pick up our reading.  For this reason we must pay much closer attention to what we haveheard, lest we drift away from it.   2 For if the word spokenthrough angels proved unalterable, and every transgression anddisobedience received a just recompense, 3 how shall we escape if weneglect so great a salvation? After it was at the first spokenthrough the Lord, it was confirmed to us by those who heard, 4 Godalso bearing witness with them, both by signs and wonders and byvarious miracles and by gifts of the Holy Spirit according to His ownwill. 5 For He did not subject to angels the world to come,concerning which we are speaking. 6 But one has testified somewhere,saying, "WHAT IS MAN, THAT THOU REMEMBEREST HIM? OR THE SON OF MAN,THAT THOU ART CONCERNED ABOUT HIM? 7 THOU HAST MADE HIM FOR A LITTLEWHILE LOWER THAN THE ANGELS; THOU HAST CROWNED HIM WITH GLORY ANDHONOR, AND HAST APPOINTED HIM OVER THE WORKS OF THY HANDS; 8 THOUHAST PUT ALL THINGS IN SUBJECTION UNDER HIS FEET." For in subjectingall things to him, He left nothing that is not subject to him. Butnow we do not yet see all things subjected to him. 9 But we do seeHim who has been made for a little while lower than the angels,namely,   Jesus, because of the suffering of death crowned withglory and honor, that by the grace of God He might taste death foreveryone.  Our focus this morning is on verses 5-9. Notice that this passagebegins with the word "for." "For" or "because" means that he isgiving a basis or defense of what he just said: "For He (= God) didnot subject to angels the world to come." What he had just said wasthat our salvation is so great and so well attested that it is follyand dangerous to neglect it and drift into indifference. Why? "ForGod did not subject  to angels  the world to come concerningwhich we are speaking."  How does that make sense? Don't neglect your great salvation," For      God did not subject to angels the world tocome." What's at stake here is who rules the world to come. To whom is  the age to come subjected? And the answer to this tells ussomething crucial about how great our salvation is, so that we willnot neglect it but give all the closer heed to it.  Keep in mind here that when Hebrews 2:3 speaks of a "greatsalvation" it is referring not only to all that Christ did by hisdeath and resurrection to purify us from our sins (Hebrews 1:3), butalso to all the effects of that in the age to come. We know thisbecause in Hebrews 1:14b the writer says that we "will inheritsalvation." In other words we experience part of it now in thepurification of our sins and reconciliation with God, but there ismore -- O so much more -- that we are yet to inherit. And that iswhat verses 5-9 talk about.  So when verse 5 speaks of "the world to come," it means the worldof our final salvation -- the time and the place and therelationships of glory and perfection after Jesus comes a second timeand establishes his everlasting kingdom of righteousness and joy. Sowe can paraphrase like this: don't neglect your coming greatsalvation, because (as verse 5 says) in the coming world it is notangels who will have everything in subjection to them -- it is notangels who will rule, but . . . But who?    
      Neglecting So Great a Salvation    Who will rule? What is the answer to that question which makes oursalvation so great we would be utter fools to neglect it for merepower plays in this life, or mere possessions, or mere family? Jesustold a parable one time about God's great salvation and how peopleneglected it (Luke 14:16-20):  "A certain man was giving a big dinner, and he invited many; 17and at the dinner hour he sent his slave to say to those who had beeninvited, 'Come; for everything is ready now.' 18 But they all alikebegan to make excuses. The first one said to him, 'I have bought apiece of land and I need to go out and look at it; please consider meexcused.' 19 And another one said, 'I have bought five yoke of oxen,and I am going to try them out; please consider me excused.' 20 Andanother one said, 'I have married a wife, and for that reason Icannot come.'"  This is the classic picture from Jesus of what it means to"neglect so great a salvation." And notice they are all good things:a piece of land, a yoke of oxen, a wife. And for that, salvation isneglected and lost.  Now in Hebrews 2:5-9 the writer is helping us not to do that. Heis laboring with the means appointed by God to save us -- namely,with words. He is saying, Don't neglect this great salvation. Don'tneglect what Christ has purchased for you and what is coming to youin the world to come. For in the world to come it is not to angelsthat God subjected all things.    
      To Whom Has he Subjected All Things?    But to whom then? And how is this part of our great salvation?  Verses 6-8 give his answer. Not to angels . . .  But one has testified somewhere [referring to Psalm 8:4-6],saying, "WHAT IS MAN, THAT THOU REMEMBEREST HIM? OR THE SON OF MAN,THAT THOU ART CONCERNED ABOUT HIM? 7 THOU HAST MADE HIM FOR A LITTLEWHILE [or "a little"] LOWER THAN THE ANGELS; THOU HAST CROWNED HIMWITH GLORY AND HONOR, AND HAST APPOINTED HIM OVER THE WORKS OF THYHANDS; 8 THOU HAST PUT ALL THINGS IN SUBJECTION UNDER HIS FEET. Forin subjecting all things to him, He left nothing that is not subjectto him.  Who is it then who rules the world to come? In Psalm 8 thispassage refers to human beings in general:  "What is man that you remember him? Or the son of man, that youare concerned about him? You have made him a little lower than theangels . . ."  All this refers to the seeming insignificance ("What is man?"),and at the same time the amazing majesty of man ("You have made him alittle less, or for a while less, than angels"). David in this Psalmis celebrating the majesty of God by calling attention to the factthat man, who is created in God's image, is appointed to be the rulerover his creation -- "You have put all things in subjection under hisfeet" (v. 8).    
      To Humans or to Christ?    Is this what the writer of Hebrews means by these verses? Or is hetaking the words of the Psalm and referring them to Christ? Is hesaying that  man in general      is the ruler ofcreation under God, or is he saying that  Christ  is the rulerof creation? Or is there some interplay here that involves both?  My approach is to assume that the New Testament writers built onthe Old Testament meaning of the Psalms (and other books) unlesssomething in the context forces me to think otherwise. So let's trythat and see if it makes sense out of this passage. I think it does.  The flow of thought would go like this. Hebrews 2:1-4 says that weshould be tremendously vigilant over our minds and hearts so that wedon't drift away from the Word of God (1:2; 2:1) and neglect ourgreat salvation (2:3) which is coming to us as an inheritance (1:14),if we hold fast to our confession of hope (3:6, 14; 4:14; 10:23) firmto the end.  Then verses 5-8 say that salvation is indeed very great and worthembracing with joy and perseverance because God did not subject thecoming world of our salvation to angels but to humans -- to us. Thisis why our salvation is so great and immeasurably valuable -- becausein this salvation we are destined for something unspeakably great --we are destined to have all that is in creation put in subjectionunder our feet. It will all one day serve us completely for a goodand joyful end.    
      But All Things Are Not Subjected to ManNow    There is one massive problem. The writer mentions it at the end ofverse 8: "But now we do not yet see all things subjected to him." Ithink the "him" here still refers to "man" -- the human beingsreferred to in Psalm 8. So the tension builds. How is this problem tobe solved? Man is to rule creation under God, but we do not see himruling.  First the writer tells us to be alert and careful to treasure ourgreat salvation. Then, secondly, he says that the reason he says itis so great and valuable is that in the age to come God has promisedto subject the whole creation to his redeemed (saved) people, not toangels. That hope is part of our great salvation -- that somedaythose who have held fast to their great salvation will be revealed asthe sons of God and all creation will serve them rather than ravagethem the way it does now. They will be victorious over the naturalworld rather than victims of its floods and hurricanes and tornadoesand diseases and death. But then he says, very realistically, in thethird place, wherever you look in the world today, that is not whatyou see (end of verse 8): all things are  not  subject to man.Psalm 8 is not now fulfilled in man.  On the contrary, man is subject to the creation in dreadful ways.We try to persuade ourselves that we are masters of our fate, andthat since we can make airplanes and radios and televisions andcomputers and cellular phones and lasers and antibiotics andartificial heart valves and pacemakers and fertilizers and corneas --that we are indeed now the rulers of creation, that all things aresubjected to us  now .    
      Man Is Subject to Death    There are many problems with this persuasion. The most glaring one-- the one that concerns the writer of Hebrews most is  death .Whatever we have been able to conquer as human beings, we have notconquered death. It triumphs everywhere. It strikes babies andteenagers and young adults and mid-lifers and older people. It scoffsat our medicines and surgeries and diets and vitamins and exerciseprograms. When all is said and done, rocket scientists die.Politicians die. Doctors die. Professors die. Nobel prize winnersdie. The rich die and the poor die. The good die and the evil die.Farmers die. Bankers die. Carpenters die. Computer programmers die.And preachers die.  Death is  not  subject to man. And therefore nothing      is ultimately subject to us, because itis only a matter of time till it will all be taken away from us, andwhat we thought we had mastered will be ripped out of our hands.That's what this writer is painfully aware of at the end of verse 8.The Psalm says that man has a great destiny as the ruler of thecreation. This is part of our great salvation. But the reality is weare not conquerors now; we are carcasses -- all of us.  So what does the writer then say to rescue our great salvation andthe meaning of Psalm 8? Verse 9 gives his answer. Make sure you seeit in connection with verse 8 at the end:  "But now we do not yet see all things subjected to him [that is,to man, because, for example, death is so rampant]. 9 But we do seeHim who has been made for a little while lower than the angels,namely,   Jesus, because of the suffering of death crowned withglory and honor, that by the grace of God He might taste death foreveryone."  In other words, we don't see Psalm 8 fulfilled in ourselves yet.But what we see is Psalm 8 fulfilled in Jesus. We are still subjectto death and all kinds of weaknesses and futilities. But Jesus hasnow passed through weakness and death, and is crowned with glory andhonor. He is seated in power at the right hand of God and all hisenemies are subjected to him as a footstool for his feet (1:13).    
      Jesus Tasted Death for Everyone    So how is this part of a great salvation for  us ? How doesthis relate to  our  fulfilling the great hope of Psalm 8 when we  will triumph over death and God will put creation insubjection to our rule?  The answer is seen in the words at the end of verse 9: Christ cameand suffered and died, " that by the grace of God He might tastedeath for everyone ." In other words, Christ was the first man tobe restored to the magnificent destiny of Psalm 8. He was crownedwith glory and honor over all creation. But he does not enter hisglory by himself. Verse 10 says that he "is bringing many sons toglory" -- the glory of Psalm 8. Our great salvation is that, unitedto Jesus,  we  will experience the fulfillment of Psalm 8 aswell. Jesus is the great forerunner of our salvation. What hashappened to  him  will happen to  us . Because he tasteddeath for us, we can be sure that we will share his rule overcreation.  The first man -- the first Adam -- sinned and was subjected tofutility and death. The second Adam, Jesus Christ, defeated death andrestored the hope of Psalm 8 for all who are in him. You, Christian,who do not neglect this great salvation, you will reign with Christ,and all things will one day be put in subjection to you. All thingswill serve your great good. All things, without any mixture of painor sorrow or regret will manifest the glory of God  to  you and through  you as you rule with Christ.  What then shall we do? Put your faith in the promise of this greatfuture grace -- that what you see in Christ today will someday beyour portion. Fix your eyes on Christ, not on the pain and futilityand frustration and sickness and death of this age. They will nothave the last word. Christ has conquered death and all the sin andpain that leads to death. Think on him. Consider him. Look to him.  And say to cancer and paralysis and sightless children andairplane-eating Everglades and child-shooting fathers -- say to everyunsubjected enemy -- "Psalm 8 is my destiny! In Christ Jesus allthings will one day be put under my feet, and I will rule with him inglory for ever and ever." Believe that and say that -- in the face ofevery calamity and every frustration in life. Because it is true.Jesus has made it true.   Come fix your eyes on Christ and see The glory that you soon will be.   Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
  
