  My subject this morning is risk and the cause ofGod.  I define risk very simply as an action that exposes someoneto the possibility of loss or injury.  If you take a risk youcan lose money, you can lose face, you can lose your life.  Andwhat's worse, if you take a risk, you may endanger other peopleand not just yourself.  You may lose their money.  Their lifemay be at stake.  Will a wise and loving person then ever take a risk? Is it wise to expose yourself to loss?  Is it loving to endangerothers?  Is taking risks is unwise and unloving?  Maybe.  But maybe not.  What if the circumstancesare such that not taking a risk will result in loss and injury? It may not be wise to play it safe.  And what if a successfulrisk would bring great benefit to many people and its failurewould bring harm only to yourself?  It may not be loving to chosethe comfort of security when something great may be achieved forthe cause of God and for the good of others.  Why is there such a thing as risk?  The reason thereis such a thing as risk is that there is such a thing as ignorance. If there were no ignorance there would be no risk.  Risk is possiblebecause we don't know how things will turn out.    This means that God can take no risks.  He knowsthe outcome of all his choices before they happen.  And sincehe knows the outcome of all his actions before they happen, heplans accordingly.  His omniscience rules out the very possibilityof taking risks.  But not so with us.  We are not God; we are ignorant. We don't know what will happen tomorrow.  God does not tell uswhat he intends to do tomorrow or five years from now.  EvidentlyGod intends for us to live and act in ignorance and in uncertaintyabout the outcome of our actions.  He says to us, for example, in James 4:13-15,  Come now, you who say, Today or tomorrow wewill go into such and such a town and spend a year there and tradeand get gain; whereas you do not know about tomorrow.  Whatis your life?  For you are a mist that appears for a little timeand then vanishes.  Instead you ought to say, If the Lordwills, we shall live and we shall do this or that.  You don't know if your heart will stop before thisservice is over.  You don't know if some oncoming driver willswerve out of his lane and hit you head on as you go home.  Youdon't know if the food in the restaurant may have some deadlyvirus in it.  You don't know if a stroke may paralyze you beforethe week is out.  You don't know if some man with a rifle willjust start shooting at you at the Southdale Mall.  We are notGod.  We do not know about tomorrow.  And therefore risk is built right into the fabricof our finite lives.  You can't avoid risk even if you want to. Ignorance and uncertainty about tomorrow is our native air. All of our plans for tomorrow's activities can be shattered bya thousand unknowns whether we stay at home under the covers orride the freeways.  My burden this morning is to help explode the mythof safety, and to somehow deliver you from the enchantment ofsecurity.  Because it's a mirage.  It doesn't exist.  Every directionyou turn there are unknowns and things beyond your control.  And the tragedy is that in the deceptive enchantmentof security (where we take risks for ourselves everyday withoutknowing it!) we are paralyzed to take any risks for the causeof God, because we are deluded and think it may jeopardize a securitywhich in fact does not even exist.   The way I hope to explode the myth of safety andto disenchant you with the mirage of security is to simply goto the Bible and show you that it is right to risk for the causeof God.    Our text is 2 Samuel 10 especially verse 12.    The Amalekites had shamed the messengers of Israeland made themselves odious in the sight of David.  To protectthemselves they had hired the Syrians to fight with them againstthe Israelites.  Joab, the commander of David's forces, foundhimself surrounded with Amalekites on one side and Syrians onthe other.  So he divided his troops, put his brother Abishaiin charge of one group and took the other himself.  In verse 11, which we have looked at before, theypledged themselves to help each other.  Then came this great wordin verse 12:   Be of good courage, and let us play the man for ourpeople, and for the cities of our God; and may the Lord do whatseems good to him.   MAY THE LORD DO WHAT SEEMS GOOD TO HIM!  What does that mean?  It means that Joab had madea strategic decision for the cities of God and he did not knowhow it would turn out.  He had no special revelation from Godon this issue.  He had to make a decision on the basis of sanctifiedwisdom.  He had to risk or run.  He did not know how it wouldturn out.  So he made his decision and he handed the results overto God.  And this was right.  It is right to risk for the cause of God.  Consider another example with me, this time fromthe book of Esther, chapter four.  You recall that there was aJewish man named Mordecai who had been carried away into the Babylonianexile.  He had a younger cousin named Esther whom he had adoptedas a daughter because she was an orphan.  She grew up to be beautifuland eventually was taken by king Ahasuerus to be his queen.  Haman, one of Ahasuerus' chief princes, hated Mordecaiand all the Jewish refugees and persuaded the king to decree thatthey be exterminated.  The king did not realize that his own queenis a Jew.  Now what did Esther do?  She knew the law that anyonewho approached the king without being called would be put to deathunless he lifted his golden scepter.  She also knew that her people'slives were at stake.  In 4:13-14 Mordecai asked her to take therisk and approach the king on behalf of her people and the causeof her God.  Verses 15-16 give Esther's answer.   Then Esther told them to reply to Mordecai, Go,gather all the Jews to be found in Susa, and hold a fast on mybehalf, and neither eat nor drink for three days, night or day. I and my maids will also fast as you do.  Then I will go to theking, though it is against the law; and if I perish, I perish.   IF I PERISH, I PERISH.  What does that mean?  It means that Esther did notknow what the outcome of her act would be.  She had no specialrevelation from God on this issue.  She had to make a decisionon the basis of sanctified wisdom and love for her people.  Shehad to risk or run.  She did not know how it would turn out. So she made her decision and handed the results over to God. If I perish, I perish.  And this was right.  It is right to risk for the cause of God.  Consider one more example from the Old Testament,from the book of Daniel, chapter 3.  Again the setting is Babylonand the Jewish exiles.  The king is Nebuchadnezzar.  He sets upan image of gold and commands that when the trumpet sounds allthe people will bow down to the image.  But Shadrach, Meshachand Abednego did not bow down.  They worshipped the one true Godof Israel.  So in verse 15 Nebuchadnezzar threatens them andsays the if they do not worship the image they will be throwninto the fiery furnace.  Verses 16-18 give their answer:  Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego answered the king,O Nebuchadnezzar, we have no need to answer you in thismatter.  If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliverus from the burning fiery furnace; and he will deliver us outof your hand, O king. But if not, be it known to you, O king,that we will not serve your gods or worship the golden image whichyou have set up.  This is sheer risk.  We believe our God willdeliver us.  But even if he doesn't, we will not serve your gods. They did not know how it would turn out.  They said virtuallythe same thing Esther said, If we perish, we perish. And they handed the outcome to God the same way Joab and Abishaidid: And may the Lord do what seems good to him. And this was right.  It is right to risk for the cause of God.  Now consider the great New Testament risk taker,the apostle Paul.  First, let's go to Acts 21.  Paul is on hisway to Jerusalem.  He had bound himself in the Holy Spirit (19:21)to go to Jerusalem.  He had collected money and he was going tosee that it was delivered faithfully.  He gets as far as Caesarea, and it says in 21:10that a prophet named Agabus came down from Judea, bound his ownhands and feet and said, Thus says, the Holy Spirit, 'Soshall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man who owns this girdleand deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.'  When the believers hear this they beg Paul not togo.  Here is his response in verses 13,  What are you doing, weeping and breaking my heart? For I am ready not only to be imprisoned but even to die at Jerusalemfor the name of the Lord Jesus.  Then, in verse 14 Luke says, And when he wouldnot be persuaded, we ceased and said, 'The will of the Lord bedone.'  In other words, Paul believes that this trip to Jerusalemis necessary for the cause of God.  He does not know what wouldhappen there.  Arrest and affliction for sure.  But then what? Death?  Imprisonment?  Banishment?  No one knew.  So what dothey say?  On one thing they can agree, The will of theLord be done!  Or as Joab said, May the Lord do whatseems good to him.  And this was right.  It is right to risk for the cause of God.  In fact, Paul's whole life was one extraordinaryrisk after another.  He said in Acts 20:23, The Holy Spirittestifies in every city that imprisonment and afflictions awaitme.  But he never knew in what form they would come, orwhen they would come, or by whom they would come.    Turn with me to 2 Corinthians 11:24ff.  Paul wrotethis letter before the events of Acts 21 that we just read.  Sohe had decided to risk his life in Jerusalem with the full knowledgeof what it might be like.  Look what he had endured -- all ofit as a result of taking risks for the cause of God:   Five times I have received at the hands of the Jewsthe forty lashes less one.  Three times I have been beaten withrods; once I was stoned.  Three times I have been shipwrecked;a night and a day I have been adrift at sea; on frequent journeys,in danger from rivers, danger from robbers, danger from my ownpeople, danger from Gentiles, danger in the city, danger in thewilderness, danger at sea, danger from false brethren; in toiland hardship, through many a sleepless night, in hunger and thirst,often without food, in cold and exposure.  And apart from otherthings, there is the daily pressure upon me of my anxiety forall th churches.   What does this mean?  It means that Paul never knewwhere the next blow would come from.  Every day he risked hislife for the cause of God.  The roads weren't safe.  The riversweren't safe.  His own people, the Jews, weren't safe.  The gentilesweren't safe.  The cities weren't safe.  The wilderness wasn'tsafe.  The sea wasn't safe.  Even the brethren weren't safe --some were false!  Safety was a mirage.  It didn't exist for theApostle Paul.    He had two choices: run or risk.  And he answeredin Acts 20:24, I do not account my life of any value noras precious to myself, if only I may accomplish my course andthe ministry which I received from the Lord Jesus to testify tothe gospel of the grace of God.  He never knew what theday would hold.  But the cause of God beckoned.  And he riskedhis life every day.  And this was right.  It is right to risk for the cause of God.  What happens when the people of God do not escapefrom the enchantment of security?  What happens if they try tolive their lives in the mirage of safety?  Do you remember thetime it happened?  It is recorded in Numbers 13 and 14.  It is less than three years since the people of Israelcame out of Egypt by the power of God.  Now they are on the bordersof the promised land.  And in 13:1 the Lord says to Moses, Sendmen to spy out the land of Canaan, which I give to the peopleof Israel.  So Moses sends Caleb, Joshua and ten other men.  After forty days they return with a huge clusterof grapes hung on a pole between two men.  In verse 30 Caleb says,Let us go up at once, and occupy it; for we are well ableto overcome it.  But in verse 31 some of the others said,We are not able to go up against the people; for they arestronger than we.  Caleb is unable to explode the myth of safety.  Thepeople are gripped by the enchantment of security.  They murmuragainst Moses and Aaron in 14:2 and decide to go back to Egypt-- the great mirage of safety.  So Joshua tries to free them from their stupor inverses 7-9,  The land, which we passed through to spy it out,is an exceedingly good land.  If the Lord delights in us, he willbring us into this land and give it to us, a land which flowswith milk and honey.  Only, do not rebel against the Lord; anddo not fear the people of the land, for they are bread for us;their protection is removed from them, and the Lord is with us;do not fear them.  But not even Joshua could explode the myth of safety. The people were drunk in a dream world of security.  And theytried to stone Caleb and Joshua.  And that was wrong.  It is wrong not to take risks for the cause of God.   Is that because God promises success to all our venturesin his cause?  No.  There is no promise that every effort for thecause of God will succeed, at least not in the short run.  Johnthe Baptist risked calling a spade a spade when Herod divorcedhis wife to take his bother's wife, Herodias.  And John got hishead chopped off for it.  And he had done right to risk his lifefor the cause of God.  Paul was beaten and thrown in jail in Jerusalem andshipped off to Rome and executed there two years later.  And hedid right to risk his life for the cause of God.  And how many graves are there in Africa and Asiabecause thousands of young missionaries were freed by the powerof the Holy Spirit from the enchantment of security, and thenrisked their lives for the cause of God among the unreached peoplesof the world!  And now what about you?  Are you caught in the enchantmentof security, paralyzed from taking any risks for the cause ofGod?  Or have you been freed by the Holy spirit from the mirageof Egyptian safety and comfort?  Do you men ever say with Joab,I'll try it!  And may the Lord do what seems good to him!? Do you women ever say with Esther, I'll try it!  And ifI perish, I perish!?  And what about our church and our future?  Is thereany lesson here for us as we look out over the next 12 and halfyears to the year 2000?  These are the questions I want to talkabout next week.  
