Sunday, October 24, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "For ye, brethren, became followers of the churches of God which in  Judea are in Christ Jesus; for ye also have suffered like things of your  own countrymen, even as they have of the Jews; Who both killed the Lord  Jesus, and their own prophets, and have persecuted us; and they please  not God, and are contrary to all men; Forbidding us to speak to the  Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their sins alway; for THE  WRATH is come upon them to the uttermost." 1 Thes. 2:14-16.  What particular "wrath?" is referred to? do you suppose? Probably the WRATH spelled out in the  28th chapter of Deut., flowing from the disobedience and consequent divine curses upon the Jews; to wit: "But it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to  observe to do all his commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day; that all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee;" ­ (Bang! All these curses have come upon the Jews and have overtaken the Jews;) ­ "Cursed shalt thou be in the city, and cursed shalt thou  be in the field. Cursed shall be thy basket and thy store. Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body,  and the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep. Cursed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and cursed shalt thou be when thou goest out. The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke, in all that thou settest thine hand unto for to do, until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly; because of the wickedness of thy doings, whereby thou hast forsaken me." Dt. 28:15-20.  Beloved, think about it. It just doesn't get any worse in the divine cursing and wrath department; just as it doesn't get any better in the Lord's blessing department above. And please take notice  that the scope and variety and quantity of curses flowing from the wrath of a highly offended God,  are several times more numerous than His blessings.  "So will I make my fury toward thee to rest, and my jealousy shall depart from thee; and I will be quiet, and will be no more angry. Because thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, but hast fretted me" ­ (i.e., drove my wrath to a state of red-hot rage) ­ "in all these things; behold, therefore I also will recompense thy way upon thine head, saith the Lord God." (Ezek. 16:42,43)  We at Westboro Baptist Church have had many occasions to closely observe the modern Jew in the light of the Bible, and we are prepared to testify that there was more than ample evidence for God to fill up their sins alway, and for THE WRATH of God to come upon them to the uttermost. Earlier this month in New York a team of loved ones from WBC were set upon by filthy, violent, vile, Christ-rejecting Jews ­ assaulting them and damaging their property ­ as our loved ones sought to preach God's Word to them. Throughout the world the Jew is hated and despised, and is the butt-end (target) of mockings, jokes, and taunts and jeers ­ all because of the indelible stamp of God's curse upon the Jew; to wit: "The Lord shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart" (Deuteronomy 28:28) ­ (i.e., mental and emotional dysfunctions, and psychological pathologies and disorders of every kind. All of which identifies the Jew in much the same way sodomites are identified by the prophet Isaiah; to wit: "The show of their countenance doth witness against them; and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their soul! For they have rewarded evil unto themselves." [Isaiah 3:9]).  It is a matter of the countenance. Guilt is writ upon their countenance that they crucified Christ; and are sullenly impenitent about the blood of the Lord Jesus being on their hands; ergo: it is impossible but that they please not God, and are contrary to all men, and do spend their lives and their resources attempting to choke the Gospel and persecute faithful Gospel preachers: "For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, WHO HOLD THE TRUTH IN UNRIGHTEOUSNESS" (Romans 1:18) ­ i.e., these evil men choke the  Sunday, October 24, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  Truth of God, smother the Truth of God in their heresies and their filthy lifestyles. Claiming to be  the custodians of the Talmud (i.e., The Old Testament), they bring it to no effect by their Satanic  traditions:  "But he answered and said unto them, Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God by your tradition? ... Thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition. Ye hypocrites, Well did Isaiah prophesy of you, saying, This people (the Jews) draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoreth me with their lips; but their heart is far from me. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. And he called the multitude, and said unto them, Hear, and understand." (Matt. 15:3-10)  That the Jews are directly and primarily responsible for the death of our dear Lord Jesus, there can be no reasonable doubt. On the dreadful morning of the Crucifixion, we read: "When the morning was come, all the chief priests and elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death;" ­ (Just as Satan entered Judas, even so Satan took possession of every level of the leaders of the Jews, bent upon one purpose; to wit: To put the Lord Jesus to death.) ­ "And when they had bound him, they led him away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the governor." Beloved. From that very moment, to His Crucifixion, the Savior was in a state of cruel detention at the hands and/or will of the Jews. Further, it was Jewish money that was bargained and paid for the scurrilous betrayal of our dear Lord; to wit: "Then Judas (the Jew), which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver (Jew money) to the chief priests and elders (Jewish rulers of the Jews), Saying, I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood. And they said, What is that to us? see thou to that. And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and departed, and went and hanged himself. And the chief priests took the silver pieces, and said, It is not lawful for to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood. And they took counsel, (here we have Jewish religious leaders, seeking legal advice from Jewish lawyers about disposition of Jewish funds being returned to the common Jewish religious treasury), and bought with them the potter's field, to bury strangers in. Wherefore that field was called, The field of blood, unto this day." Matt. 27:1-8.  Hitherto the Jews are directly and primarily responsible for the shed blood of Jesus Christ, forasmuch as the leaders of the Jews (i.e., the high priests and elders) have commenced the fraudulent prosecution of the Lord Jesus before Pontius Pilate; to wit: "And Jesus stood before the governor ... AND WHEN HE WAS ACCUSED OF THE CHIEF PRIESTS AND ELDERS (leaders of the Jews), he answered nothing. Then said Pilate unto him, Hearest thou not how many things they witness against thee?" Matt. 27:11-13. Rabble-rousing, murderous, lying Jew riff-raff. Further evidence that Jews killed Jesus arises in the incident involving Barabbas; to wit:  "Now at that feast the governor was wont to release unto the people a prisoner, whom they would. And they had then a NOTABLE PRISONER, called BARABBAS. Therefore when they were gathered together, Pilate said unto them, Whom will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus which is called Christ? FOR HE KNEW THAT FOR ENVY THEY HAD DELIVERED HIM." (i.e., Pilate knew that the Jews had no case against Jesus, and he surmised that if he gave them a face-saving way out, maybe they would take it ­ such as picking Jesus over the thieving murderous Barabbas ­ after all, Pilate's wife had just delivered him an urgent message:) "Have thou nothing to do with that just man; for I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of him." Matt. 27:15-19. But the stubborn, blood-thirsty Jews said, NO; egged on by the Jewish leaders; to wit: "But the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude THAT THEY SHOULD ASK BARABBAS AND DESTROY JESUS (!)(!)(!)" Matt. 27:20. And these modern Jews have the stinking smell of the criminal Barabbas about their persons, and the blood of the Lord Jesus Christ on their hands. "The governor answered and said unto them, Whether of the twain  Sunday, October 24, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  will ye that I release unto you? They said. BARABBAS." (Bang!) Right there ­ if nowhere else ­  THE JEWS KILLED JESUS (!)(!)(!) "Pilate saith unto them, What shall l do then with Jesus  which is called Christ?" (I digress here to point out that every child of Adam reaching maturity is  faced with this question, connected to the words of the old hymn; to wit: "Jesus is standing in  Pilate's hall ­ friendless, forsaken, betrayed by all; Hearken what meaneth the sudden call ! What  will you do with Jesus? What will you do with Jesus? Neutral you cannot be; Some day your heart will be asking; What will He do with me?") "Pilate saith unto them, What shall I do then with  Jesus which is called Christ? They all say unto him, LET HIM BE CRUCIFIED." Matt. 27:20-  22.  "And the governor said, Why, what evil hath he done? But they cried out the more, saying, LET HIM BE CRUCIFIED." (Matt. 27:23)  Here you see that the Roman governor wanted to release the Lord Jesus, finding no fault with Him. But the Jews, howling and screaming for blood, threatened a riotous tumult if the Roman authorities did anything with Jesus Christ except crucify him. An honest reading of the Biblical account of the Crucifixion of Jesus Christ will convince any candid person that THE JEWS KILLED JESUS. Then follows how it came to pass that the Jews bound themselves and their posterity by an awful blood oath, acknowledging that they not only killed Jesus and were aware of the eternal consequences thereof, but that they were willing ­ EVEN EAGER ­ that their posterity should partake fully of the guilt. Reading the Holy Ghost account, one almost hears a Satanic Jewish pride in having a part in the murder of the Son of God; as though the old Jew puffs out his chest with pride, as he brags for his part in the vile homicide, and then adds, "Nothing could make me prouder than for my posterity to join hands with me and all other Jews who killed Jesus;" to wit:  "When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a tumult was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person; see ye to it. Then answered all the people, and said, HIS BLOOD BE ON US, AND ON OUR CHILDREN." (Matt. 27:24,25)  What a hellish business was contracted that day in old Jerusalem. Nor should we ever let the Jews forget that they killed Jesus ­ until the times of the Gentiles be come in, and our eyes have seen for themselves that 144 thousand penitent and forgiven Jews stand with the Lamb ­ the Lord Jesus Christ ­ on Mount Zion, having His Father's name written in their foreheads. Rev. 14:1. These born-again Jews are further identified in chapters 7 and 14 of the Revelation; to wit:  "These are they which were not defiled with women; for they are virgins. These are they which follow the Lamb withersoever he goeth. These were redeemed from among men, being the first-fruits unto God and to the Lamb. And in their mouth was found no guile; for they are without fault before the throne of God." (Rev. 14:4,5)  We at Westboro Baptist Church do not swallow the lie foisted upon the gullible, that somehow Jews can be saved without repenting and taking Jesus Christ as the only Way, Truth and Life. Jerry Falwell, Pat Robertson, Roly-Poly Hagee from San Antonio, and other so-called evangelicals ­ cut political deals and make political alliances with Christ-rejecting Jews, and in so doing pretend a way of salvation without Christ. We remind all such, "Neither is there salvation in any other; for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved." Acts 4:12. You filthy Jews may be able ­ for lucre ­ to hoodwink Falwell and the fundamentalist boys. But you will never be able to get by Westboro Baptist Church UNTIL WE FIRST SEE SOME BITTER JEWISH MOURNING, some penitential Jewish tears, and a spirit of grace; to wit: "And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications; and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn." (Zech. 12:10)  Sunday, October 24, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  Get it straight, Mr. Jew! You are going to bow the knee to Jesus Christ, accept Him and worship Him as the only begotten Son of the living God; or you will split Hell wide open when you die. It is the job of Westboro Baptist Church to tell you the truth ­ the Lord has called us and empowered us to do that job ­ and we intend to do that job whether you Jews in Brooklyn or anywhere else like it or not. Don't you understand what we are telling you? You are going to Hell ­ every last one of you ­ unless you bow your arrogant Jewish knee and kiss the feet of the Lord Jesus Christ. Psa. 2:9-12; to wit: "Thou shalt break them (i.e., all impenitent Jews who die without Christ) with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel. Be wise now therefore, O ye kings;" ­ (And, if kings, why not all mankind?) ­ "be instructed, ye judges of the earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. KISS THE SON, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him." Psa. 2:9-12. You Jews are now cursed of God, and you are a joke to all mankind, a hissing, a proverb, a byword; to wit:  "The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke, ...And thou shalt become an astonishment, a proverb, (a gibe, a taunt) and a byword, among all nations whither the Lord shall lead thee." (Deut. 28:20,37)  You Jews have broken faith and covenant with the Lord your God after all His goodness to you; because of which He has poured out His wrath upon you; and, rather than repent, you Jews have added insult to injury, in that you have rejected and murdered your only Messiah; to wit:  "Ye men of Israel, hear these words; Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you by miracles and wonders and signs, which God did by Him in the midst of you, as ye yourselves also know; Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, YE HAVE TAKEN, AND BY WICKED HANDS HAVE CRUCIFIED AND SLAIN; Whom God hath raised up, having loosed the pains of death; for it was not possible that he should be holden of it." (Acts 2:22-24) And the gentle, dying Stephen said to the murdering Jews, thirsting for his blood, "Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost; as your fathers did, so do ye. Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and they have slain them which showed before of the coming of the Just One; OF WHOM YE HAVE BEEN NOW THE BETRAYERS AND MURDERERS." Acts 7:51,52. Jesus plainly told the Jews that their true father was not Abraham, nor God, but Satan; and that they were liars and murderers like their father, Satan. Jesus also plainly told the Jews that if they did not believe in Him, they would die in their sins and go to Hell; to wit:  "Then said Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and shall die in your sins; whither I go (i.e., Heaven), YE CANNOT COME." (Jn. 8:21)  WBC hereby warns every Jew now living, that if you die in your sins without Christ, you will go directly to Hell, and you will remain in Hell fire throughout eternity! Falwell, Robertson, and Texas Roly-Poly Hagee, et.al., ­ all lied to you; to wit: "I said therefore unto you, that ye shall die in your sins; FOR IF YE BELIEVE NOT THAT I AM HE, YE SHALL DIE IN YOUR SINS." Jn. 8:24. Of course Jews killed Jesus, and modern Jews are not the least bit interested in repenting and mourning for their sins. Yo! Mr. Jew! Kiss the Son, or He will crush you. You have very little time until you see Him in the clouds.  "Behold, he cometh with clouds, and every eye shall see him, they also which pierced him; and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. Even so, Amen." (Rev. 1:7)  I love you. Amen.  
