How I Met Them And What 
They Told Me 


BY ABDUL KAREEM ABDULLA 

    The world is always changing. Every split second a change takes place in every part and particle in existence. In some cases the change is prominent, in many cases it is scarcely perceptible. But all the same, a change in all beings is an incessant process in nature. This applies equally to mind as well as to matter, since beliefs, ideas, theories and opinions are no less being shuffled and reshuffled all the time. And yet a change is the last thing that the world can stand fairly and squarely. Mankind has to be hammered or humoured to accept any new departure in life. 

    Although history is hoarse shouting from the house tops the inevitability of the change in all mundane laws in keeping with the ever changing situa≠tions in the world, and Masters have from, time to time, clearly drawn the distinction between the form and substance of all religious laws, and humanity  has an inveterate and grim tendency to cling to the prevalent customs, formalities and rituals, as if they were as eternal as some of the laws that govern day and night, life and death, right and wrong, and love and hate. Consequently the moment a man does something contrary to the established practices and popular routine, a hue and cry is at once raised as if the whole structure of society was about to topple down to pieces. 

    Some eighteen years ago, when Hazrat Babajan of Poona and Shri Upasani Maharaj of Sakori had not yet made the formal declaration about Baba, when he was still popularly called 'Merwanseth' and only a handful of friends whispered about him as Baba, one afternoon the change of all changes came about quite simply and inostensibly in my life, which was till then materially and spiritually quite insignificant. 

We were traveling from Bombay to Poona, and in the 



third class compartment of the moving train Baba was pleased to offer me two options. I do not remember the exact words, but the purport was that either I could ask him for any boon for m y material benefit, o r promise to carry out his orders literally in all matters hence-forth if I preferred spiritual betterment. I was advised to think well and take my own time before giving a reply. I was also warned that complete surrender meant a difficult life ahead. 

Electing to follow Baba in letter and in spirit there and then, the first order immediately given to me was to get disassociated from all public active≠tiesósocial, political and religious the very next day. It was a difficult task to carry out, as I was one of the office-bearers of about half a dozen public institutions at that time, and, therefore, had to find successors, complete the accounts and hand over charge of all within a few hours. I succeeded in all this without detriment to any individual or institution, but I had to be relent≠lessly resolute in refusing to postpone my decisions on any account, and could not satisfy the curiosity of friends and relations as to why I was in such a desperate hurry to carry out the peculiar plan on that particular day. But what I had not bargained for were the forced smiles, foreboding frowns, nods of disapproval and suggestive shrugs of the shoulder from most of the people concerned. 

Shortly following my resignation from public activities, I had orders to arrange disposal of my business, and prepare to leave the place with which I had twenty-five years of family con≠nections, without knowing where I had to go and what I had to do next. In fact, every little detail had to be settled in a particular way and on a particular day. 

I caused no harm or loss to anyone, and I did not fail in making good my obligations to my family and friends; but I had often to disregard formalities, customs and rituals when these clashed with my duty, and, above all, I could not quite explain the whys and wherefores of all my actions. But this was enough to shock the slaves to the routine of everyday life who could not tolerate the liberties I was 



taking with society in trampling upon its 'eternal' rules and regulations with its insignificant details. 

Within one month I found I had brought the hornet's nest about my ears and felt the surrounding world completely estranged from me. Some took pity on me for having lost my bearings, some attributed sinister motives to all that I did, and, on the whole, I became the laughing stock of the town but with a new world of wonderful possibilities opened up before me in which the life of the average human being just appeared to be a fleeting shadow chasing after shadows, so I did not mind the gibes and jeers flung at me from all corners. What I could not help feeling was the bleak loneliness of a solitary life. 

It was amidst this fateful transition that there came about my first mystical meeting with a saint. Probably it was the last Saturday in January or the first Saturday in February 1922 when, at about 3 p.m. I received a note from one of my previous colleagues in public life. I t was a very short communication scribbled with pencil on a small piece of paper. "Will you please come and see me as I want to see you, but I do not know why I want to see you." 

With curiosity pitched high I called on my friend and found him sitting in his study simply killing time. I was soon disarmed of any ulterior motive behind that simple note when my friend explained, "I just felt I should see you and so I wrote that note. Perhaps it is due to the long time that we have not met. Now that you have come, let us have tea together. " We then sat talking about nothing in particular for half an hour, and, just as I thought of leaving our conversation, was interrupted when the door of an adjoining room was lightly opened from the inside and, for a few seconds, there stood framed in the doorway the silent figure of a man beyond fifty, short in stature and sparse in build, with ordinary features but remarkably liquid greyish blue eyes. He had two flowers in one of his hands. 

For those brief seconds in which he stood still like a statue looking at me I felt a 



passing fancy that there was a look of 'smiling recognition ' in those eyes. He then advanced toward where we were sitting, offered one flower to me and passed on the other to my friend. After the stranger had taken his seat, my friend broke the momentary silence and introduced me to Mr. L. as his guest, and added, "I am sorry I forgot to tell you about my guest and introduce you to him earlier." After exchanging a word or two of formalities with Mr. L., I left my seat saying, "I am sorry I must leave you abruptly as I have to finish some work and catch the evening express for Poona." "Oh, you are going to Poona by the express," said Mr. L., and added, "I am also going there by the same train. " It was more out of politeness than with any particular intention that I remarked, "I hope we shall meet at t h e station," and then I hurried out. 

There was no time to think about these strange happenings as I had to meet Baba that evening in Poona, and, before I could start, it was necessary to finish some work. I had, therefore, almost forgotten about Mr. L., until I arrived at the railway station and found him looking for me. He appeared just the same as any other passenger waiting there on the platform. But from close quarters it did not take me long to distinguish that he was as much serenely unconcerned with the sur≠rounding animation as he was found averse to idle conversation. 

The meeting between us now appeared to be a well carried out plan by nature, starting with an impulsive invitation and culminating into the coincidence of both of us having decided to travel by the same train. When we found seats to ourselves in the train I looked forward to interesting discus-sions. But neither did Mr. L. put to me a single question nor give me an opportunity to ask him one. As soon as the train moved out of the platform and began to rush to Poona, Mr. L. com≠menced telling me all about himself in a matter-of-fact way. All the time that he talked, he did not even look at me or see whether I listened or not. He appeared to take it for granted that I was bound to lend him 



my ears, and the fact was I could not help following him with rapt attention. Here is the gist of his story as far as I can remember, in his own words: 

"My father was very fond of sadhus and fakirs.. There was hardly a day when I did not find him surrounded by such people. In fact our house was a regular dharmashala (free waiting room) for ascetics and mystics who were always very welcome. Many came and went, but a few of them were regular visitors. I neither felt any attraction or repulsion for these people. As a rule, I always kept myself aloof from them. 

"I had my own hobby. Since my childhood, I was very fond of distri≠buting money to the poor, but I never liked to give coppers. I always tried to collect silver pieces and then distribute them. The more I could give, the more I felt pleased. 

"After my father's death, many changes came about our family life. For one thing, all the holy men disappeared into thin air. Our house ceased to be the meeting  place and waiting  room for such. They neither came, nor were they invited, excepting one of the frequent visitors of my father, who continued to see me of his own accord now and again After prolonged perseverance he succeeded in inducing me to go with him, from time to time, to his out-of≠the-way hole of a place that used to be full of dirt and filth. I used to be shocked with the surroundings and it was with effort that I could remain by his side there. The more aversion I felt, the more he persisted in making me share with him his indifference to the repulsive surroundings. He would put his finger into the filth and brush it on my hand, and when I shrank with dislike, he would bite his own hand. I could not also stand the sight of his hurting himself, particularly when he bit himself to bleeding." 

As abruptly as he had started the narration, he stopped it, and for the first time asked me point-blank: "Where are you going to Poona?" I was going to meet Baba, but I did not disclose the fact and replied, "I am going to call on a friend." In spite of an evasive answer that I gave him, after he had taken me into his confidence, he neither appeared offended nor inclined to probe further. He then asked me how long I was going to remain in Poona. Hearing that I was going to Bombay by the next morning train, he again declared that he also happened to be going there by that same train, and this time I meant it when I promised to meet him the following day. 



When I came to the station, the train was already along-side the platform, and I had no alternative but to look for Mr. L., in every compartment. While doing so, I had an impulse that, granted Mr. L. was a saint, why should I look for him when I belonged to the "Imperial Order"? Thereupon I lost all interest in looking for him, but as I had promised to meet him, I finished searching all the carriages, and feeling a pleasure in not finding him, I got into the train. 

For about ten minutes I was all absorbed planning the details of the work I had to carry out in Bombay, when, quite abruptly, my mind swung  back to the propriety of the attitude adopted by me in looking for Mr. L., and felt, that for the very fact that I belonged to the "Imperial Order, " I ought to have been all the more humble in my attitude. To the surprise of those sitting beside me, I jumped from my seat and shot out of the carriage with a determination to go through all the compartments once again, although only a few minutes remained for the train to start. 

Practically I did not have to search at all. There he was in the next but one compartment, his eyes twinkling with welcome. "You are very late," I told him after I had taken the seat beside him. But he simply took my breath away by replying: "How do you mean late? I am sitting here looking for you since half an hour." We were then together for nearly four hours in the train, but we might scarcely have talked in all for ten minutes. It was all a silent but pleasant companionship. 

    "You will meet many more of the type," was all that Baba told me when I described to him this unusual meeting. 
