 Fear of Life/Death 
April 25, 2010 
Rev. Mark Belletini 
 Opening Words
 We are here, 

on a rain and lilac-scented spring day, 

to worship, to celebrate our lives 

while we face ourfears, ground our strength, 

and learn to walk gently 

on this, our common home, the earth.  And so–
  
Mindful that we share a common world, but approach 
that world in different ways, we 
begin our celebration together by kindling our prom
ise of mutual honesty, attentiveness, 
and deep courtesy. May we become more proficient at
 gratitude and awareness, that we 
might more deeply embody the kind of justice and pe
ace  
which embraces everyone on earth. 

Sequence 

Lilacs and silence. Spring rain and silence. Thunde
rclaps and silence.  Pink tulips and silence. 
Our footfalls on the muddy earth and silence. Unkno
wn birdsongs and silence. Woodpeckers and 
silence. Chasing squirrels and silence. Grief and s
ilence. Joy and silence. Memory and silence. 
Love and silence. Spirit and silence.  Earth Day an
d silence. All of us here gathered and silence. 
Come silence, and soothe hearts that ache, lift hop
es that falter, and wrap arms of peace around 
the shoulders of those who bear heavy burdens. Come
, silence–
 silence 

Remembering and silence. Concern and silence. Antic
ipation and silence. We are here with all of 
our lives, our loves, our worries, our grief, and e
ach of these feelings is attached to specific 
people whose heartbeats link to our own. Into the c
ommon silence, may we now release their 
names into this safe place; either within us, or vo
calized quietly, remembering that nothing we do, 
feel or think here today leaves them out. 

naming 

Silence and community. Silence and singing. Amen. 

Readings: 

The first reading comes from the novel Salvation Ar
my, a translation from the French L™armée du 
Salut by the Abdellah Taïa
. 
It™s an autobiographical novel by a gay Muslim from
 Morocco, and 
it™s one of the most amazing books I have read in t
hese last ten years. This reading is in the form 
of a conversation. 

 Can I interrupt for a second? 

Sure, what™s going on?
 Well, maybe it™s a dumb thing to say, but I think y
ou look an awful lot like Michel Foucault–the 
philosopher. 

Do you really think so? 

Yes, you look just like him, even your glasses. 

Should I take that as a compliment? 

I would. Michel Foucault was a great writer, a cour
ageous and admirable man. 
But how do you know if I am a courageous and admira
ble man? 
I don™t know–you seem like someone people could dep
end on. 
How flattering! 

I get a certain sense of security from you, of prot
ection–
 You seem afraid of something. What are you afraid o
f–? 
Afraid of? Afraid of life, like everybody else. 

But what is it you are afraid of? To say you™re afr
aid of life is precise and vague at the same 
time. 

I™m afraid of the sea because I almost drowned once
– And that™s it? 

I™m afraid I™ve made the wrong choice–maybe I would
 have been happier if I had stayed back in 
Morocco, allowed my mother do everything for me–
 The Second Reading 
comes from my friend and colleague, the wonderful M
eg Barnhouse, from 
her wonderful book ?Did I Say That Out Loud?? She i
s a humorist, as many of you will 
remember from when she last preached here, but thes
e are very serious words indeed. 
Here™s what I™m thinking. We™re scared of the wrong
 things. We lock our car doors and take our 
kids home to where the guns are. We tell them all a
bout being wary of pedophile strangers, and 
we forget to tell them about protecting themselves 
from their uncles and cousins. We™re scared of 
people, and worry that they want to rob or rape us,
 but we don™t want to hurt their feelings. 

 Isolation is greatly to be feared, but our fears ke
ep us alone. Ignorance is greatly to be feared, but
 
our fears keep us associating only with folks of ou
r same nationality, class and color. Looking 
like a fool is greatly to be feared, but our fears 
keep us silent when we should speak up, and make 
us talk too much when we should be quiet, and so we
 end up looking like fools after all. Our fears 
keep us from growing, changing in a supple way. Our
 fears lock us down into a narrowness of 
experience that sucks the marrow from our bones and
 leaves us in safe homes with satisfactory 
retirement funds. 

Yeah, we™re scared of all the wrong things. 

Sermon 

As usual, I was disappointed, but not surprised.  

Years ago, you see, I heard colleagues asserting th
at ?studies? had been made which offered clear 
results. And because of these studies, it was now c
ertain that most modern Americans feared 
public speaking– 
something I am doing right now
–four
 times as much as they feared death. 
That™s right, death. 

I checked on the sources; and of course, as usual, 
this is just another urban legend. The famous 
Book of Lists mentions it as sober fact, but it™s c
ompletely untrue. No studies have been done; 
nothing has been proved. 

I™ll grant you that over my years in the pulpit I h
ave asked people to read for me during the 
service, only to be told they would rather be struc
k by lightning than stand in this pulpit and read 
so much as a single word. So, like many urban legen
ds, the claim has some basis in the personal 
experience of at least a few people. 

But I was struck by what Abdellah Taïa
 wrote in his novel, when he claims he is 
afraid of 
life–?like most people.?
  Now, I have had many people tell me over the year
s that they have 
been wrestling with their fears of death; but so fa
r, not one person has come to me to express a 
fear of life. Not one. In the novel, Taï
a explains his fear of life by telling us that he a
lmost 
drowned as a child. ?That™s it?? asks his friend, s
keptically. ?That one event is why you are afraid 
of 
all life
?? Taï
a goes on to explain that he is afraid he may have 
made the wrong choices in his 
life–but even that does seem very compelling to me,
 coming as it does from the mouth of a 22 
year old college student in Geneva, Switzerland, wh
o is having his first experience away from 
home and his doting mother down in Morocco. Why wou
ldn™t there be fear–healthy fear–when 
going through such changes? 

Nevertheless, the notion of ?fearing life? struck m
e forcefully this week, while I was reading a 
biography of the great Italian martyr, Giordano Bru
no. For those of you who do not know him 
(and he is far less famous than Galileo, in whose e
ra he lived), Giordano Bruno was a Dominican 
Friar from Naples/Napoli who seems to have been the
 first human being to have taught that the 
sun was one star among many stars, and that each of
 the stars could be suns of their own, with 
planets and people whirling around them. He taught 
that the Universe was infinite in time 

 (duration) and space (size).  He traveled around Eu
rope, teaching in various cities–Frankfurt, 
Marburg, Oxford, Venice, and writing many books abo
ut his cosmological theories. He also 
expressed opinions that would eventually be labeled
 
Unitarian
 or 
Universalist
 by later 
theologians, once that term had been invented, whic
h was in the year 1600. (The year, 
interestingly enough, when Bruno died.) For example
, Bruno denied the idea of the Trinity, had 
no use for ideas like the divinity of Jesus or the 
virginity of his mother, taught universal salvation
, 
and openly defended the radical teachings of our sp
iritual ancestor, Arius of Alexandria. Like 
Spinoza after him, he was regarded as an ?atheist? 
because he thought the universe and God were 
basically the same. As you might imagine, these ide
as were not the best to be tossing about 
publicly in 16
th
 century Europe. So for his expressed religious opi
nions, and, I think, his theory 
that the universe was infinite and populated by oth
er beings, he was brought to Rome, given a 
chance to recant–which he refused; and then he was 
burnt at the stake in the Piazza del Fiore, or 
Flower Square, the central market of Renaissance Er
a Rome. Sadly, the report goes, some on-
lookers that day cheered as he died. 

But back to this ?fear of life? thing. I found it s
trangely reflected in what Bruno said to the judges
 
who accused him of heresy. As soon as they pronounc
ed sentence, he shook his fist at them, and 
then said to them, in Latin: ?I think there™s a goo
d chance you are pronouncing this sentence 
against me with greater fear in your hearts than I 
have in mine upon hearing it.? In other words, 
he was telling them that he was not as afraid of dy
ing as they were of living in a world where they 
had to use threats of death to maintain their contr
ol. Considering how terrible death by fire is, 
Bruno™s statement seems all the more profound, and 
wise. 
My colleague Meg Barnhouse, however, doesn™t so muc
h compare and contrast fear of life with 
fear of death. Instead, she insists it™s actually p
ossible to be afraid of the 
wrong
 things.  
She clarifies: 
Here™s what I™m thinking. We™re scared of the wrong
 things. We lock our car doors 
and take our kids home to where the guns are. We te
ll them all about being wary of pedophile 
strangers, and we forget to tell them about protect
ing themselves from their uncles and cousins. 
We™re scared of people, and worry that they want to
 rob or rape us, but we don™t want to hurt 
their feelings.
 Boy, did 
that
 ring a few bells. Like how we were told to lock ou
r car doors when we were kids 
because we were going through ?bad?–read ?black? ne
ighbor-hoods. Like the funeral I did for a 
12-year-old who shot himself with his mother™s gun.
 Like the stories I hear about sexual assault 
within homes, among family members–far more than I 
hear about sexual assault on the streets, 
although I am certainly aware that does happen. But
 as a minister, I hear far less about ?strangers 
with candy? than I hear about those ?uncles and cou
sins? Meg mentions, not to mention parents, 
step-parents, neighbors, and respected teachers and
 clergy. 
?We don™t want to hurt their feelings–? Boy has tha
t sentence echoed through my life, over and 
over, a mantra of ?don™t tell the truth, don™t tell
 the truth, don™t tell the truth. Be afraid of what
 
your neighbors, your friends, your family members, 
your leaders will think of you, so never, 
NEVER tell the truth.? 

 I™d like to suggest, interpreting a sentence in our
 new Mission statement, that such mantras are 
associated entirely with privilege. The privilege o
f isolation. The privilege of being above it all, 
and uninvolved. ?We don™t want to hurt their feelin
gs–? nor, for that matter, ?upset the apple 
cart,? or ?bother the neighbors,? or simply, ?get i
nvolved.?  
As we approach the big BREAD Meeting on May 3, I am
 thinking about one of those meetings 
about seven or eight years ago. It was a meeting wh
ere something happened which upset many 
people, including, at the time, I have to admit, my
self.  
A noted local leader was asked to give a three-minu
te talk. She agreed to the three minutes, and 
was glad to be asked. The staff stressed the import
ance of time in our meetings. No one else was 
going to get any more time than she was, or any les
s. It was a question of fairness. She was told 
there would be reminders and signs to help her reme
mber, since clearly, speaking to thousands 
might be a tad exciting, and three minutes might go
 by fast. 
Now, this meeting was during an election year, and 
she was up for election. (And for the record, 
I™ve always voted for her when she has run for anyt
hing; I think she is a good person for this kind 
of work.) And so, when her time came to speak at th
e Action Meeting, she talked for her three 
minutes, speaking very well to the points she said 
she would touch on. The thousands gathered 
were with her. But she went on when her time was ov
er to basically campaign, and talk about 
other things. Signs went up. She ignored them. Peop
le put their hands on her shoulder gently and 
spoke to her directly. She ignored them. Three minu
tes became six, and six became nine, and 
there was no end in sight. So without planning this
 in advance, a large number of folks started to 
clap loudly to bring her talk to an end. She ignore
d that too. So, many of them simply stood up 
and turned their backs toward her. 

Largely, the people who applauded and stood up were
 from historic African American churches. 
Many of whose members can easily recognize  stubbor
n rudeness when they see it, because 
they™ve experienced examples of it all their lives.
 Many of whom are understandably fed up with 
the ?We don™t want to hurt their feelings–? mantra.
  A few centuries of slavery and Jim Crow in 
your family and church history could make you less 
concerned about ?upsetting apple carts? and 
more concerned with truthfulness, accountability an
d witnessed promises kept by elected leaders. 
But, when the meeting was over, I did 
not
 hear that this local leader running for office had
 been 
rude,   but that 
BREAD
 was a rude organization, since some members of the
 organization, mostly, 
but not all, African American, stood and turned the
ir backs, and told her to stop and keep her 
word.  

Was it an uncomfortable night for many? You betcha.
 For people of every color and background. 
Stomach acid galore that night! Shaking guts. My gu
ts were shaking too. My hands were clammy, 
my head ached. I felt sorry for the local leader. 

But, as I spent time later analyzing what happened,
 I became aware that my ?sorry? was totally 
misplaced. I knew very well that at BREAD meetings,
 every official who is invited is always told 
in advance, with both clarity and repetition, exact
ly what is going to happen, what is going to be 

 said, and how much time they have. There are never 
any surprises. Never any ambushes, or 
planned-behind-closed-doors nasty confrontations or
 intimidations. Never any serious conflicts, 
unless a person does not keep their word, or doesn™
t call us ahead and tell us why. (I™m sick; my 
mother is sick; whatever.)  But when someone just b
lows us off after making a promise to be 
there, they 
are
 called on it. It is named. Aloud. That™s called ac
countability. The noun form of the 
adjective 
accountable
. That™s a word in our Vision statement. We ask our
selves to advocate 
for–an 
accountable 
conscience. 
But it™s frightening to advocate for such things. I
t™s fearful to speak up. It™s terrifying to face 
those who have power, who have reputations, who hav
e power behind the scenes. 
It™s that attitude which Abdellah Taïa would call  
?fear of life.? And Giordano Bruno says that 
fearing life is a lot more foolish than fearing dea
th. And Meg Barnhouse, I think, does a good job 
helping Friar Bruno explain what he means by saying
 that. 
?Looking like a fool,? 
she writes,
 ?is greatly to be feared, but our fears keep us si
lent when we 
should speak up, and make us talk too much when we 
should be quiet, and so we end up looking 
like fools after all.?  

In other words, it™s a fool™s errand to try and liv
e your life 
so as not to come off like a fool
. It™s 
gonna happen no matter what you do–speak or keep si
lent. So better not to worry about such 
things, and simply tell the truth, name what you se
e, keep promises, and face your fears. For, she 
continues, ?
Our fears keep us from growing, from changing in a 
supple way. Our fears lock us 
down into a narrowness of experience that sucks the
 marrow from our bones and leaves us in safe 
homes with satisfactory retirement funds. Yeah, we™
re scared of all the wrong things.? 
So here is what I think. I think that Meg Barnhouse
 is right. Being astounded by the sheer fact and 
profound mystery of our mortality–I can understand 
that. I can understand the awe and shaking 
wonder of standing under the stars at night and con
templating the mystery of one™s own death. I 
do that all the time. But being afraid of life–that
 is, being afraid of telling the truth, speaking up
, 
looking like a fool, is as unhelpful, ultimately, a
s our penguin, in the story this morning, being 
afraid to swim in the deep, dark ocean that was his
 destiny. Wanting to fly above it all and look 
down from above–that™s a privileged view. But to ju
mp in and swim in what™s before us, that is 
the nature of our life, that is what it means to 
live
. To be alive is not to avoid fear, but to face it,
 
not to run from the truth, but to participate in it
. Not to avoid issues, but to name them–and that 
can be done with kindness, you know, and direct sim
plicity. Not every confrontation needs to be 
dramatic. The drama only comes when one party does 
not want to communicate in any way, and 
wants to fly above everyone else and look down from
 a privileged place. 
Is public speaking, like I am doing right now, scar
y? Sure. I try and make it look easy, so my 
sermons are about the topic, not about my fear, but
, believe me, it™s an effort. But 
am
 I doing it? 
Yes, I am. And boy, am I ever glad, thankful, blest
 and excited about facing both life and death, 
both joy and sorrow, both facts and wisdom while st
anding here, before all of you, in this pulpit. 
Offering 

 We can choose either to bless life or to run from i
t. We can choose to face our fears, or let 
them hold us back–.so it is that we give to bless a
nd face the future, whose shape we do not 
know. Some give in other more electronic ways, othe
rs prefer this ancient way. In all cases, 
what we give, we give freely as a tangible sign tha
t our ancient free tradition resists coercion 
in all matters of the spirit. 

 
The morning offering is now given and received. 

Litany for Earth Day 
Alice Walker, 1991 
We have a beautiful mother  

Her hills are buffaloes  

Her buffaloes hills.  

We have a beautiful mother
  
Her oceans are wombs  

Her wombs oceans.  

We have a beautiful mother  

Her teeth the white stones  

at the edge of the water  

the summer grasses her plentiful hair.  

We have a beautiful mother  

Her green lap immense  

Her brown embrace eternal  

Her blue body everything we know. 

 
