 September 17, 1989    Bethlehem Baptist Church    John Piper, Pastor    
    The Sacrifice of Praise    (Hebrews 13:8-16)    
    Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today and for ever. Do not   be led away by diverse and strange teachings; for it is well that   the heart be strengthened by grace, not by foods, which have not   benefited their adherents. We have an altar from which those who   serve the tent have no right to eat. For the bodies of those   animals whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high   priest as a sacrifice for sin are burned outside the camp. So   Jesus also suffered outside the gate in order to sanctify the   people through his own blood. Therefore let us go forth to him   outside the camp, and bear the abuse he endured. For here we have   no lasting city, but we seek the city which is to come. Through   him then let us continually offer up a sacrifice of praise to God,   that is, the fruit of the lips that acknowledge his name. Do not   neglect to do good and to share what you have, for such sacrifices   are pleasing to God.    
    
    Two years ago I preached a series of messages in which I said that   Bethlehem is a vision of God, and that we exist to savor that   vision and strengthen that vision and spread that vision. In other   words we are who we are because God has revealed himself to us.   When Peter said to Jesus, "You are the Christ, the Son of the   living God," Jesus said to him, "Flesh and blood has not revealed   this to you, but my Father who is in heaven." If you know God   today, if you have seen his glory in the face of Jesus Christ, it   is because God revealed himself to you. God opened the eyes of   your heart. We exist as a church because we have caught a glimpse   of the infinite greatness and majesty and holiness and justice and   wisdom and power and truth and goodness and mercy and love of God.   We have sung and it is coming true,    
    Be Thou my vision, O Lord of my heart,    Nought be all else to me save that Thou art &#151;    Thou my best thought, by day or by night,    Waking or sleeping, Thy presence my light.    
    Bethlehem is a vision of God. And therefore we exist for three   purposes.    
    1. To savor that vision in worship. A banquet may strengthen the   knights and ladies of the court, but if it is not savored,   relished, enjoyed, neither the cuisine nor the cook is honored. We   exist to savor the God we have seen. And that precedes all work   and labor and toil and service. If wonder doesn't precede work,   work will become wearisome. But God does not mean to weary his   people: the joy of the Lord is your strength. Savoring comes   before serving.    
    2. Second, we exist to strengthen the vision of God in each other.   This is the purpose of the Bethlehem Institute and Training   Center. It's the purpose of Sunday School. It's the purpose of all   kinds of spontaneous get-togethers. Fellowship is for   strengthening our grasp on the vision of God &#151; for deepening,   for clarifying, for enlarging, for rooting the vision of God in   each others lives.    
    3. Third, we exist to spread the vision to those who have not yet   seen the glory of God in the face of Christ. This is evangelism   and world missions. This is what we pray is happening through all   of us in hundreds of work places and neighborhoods around the   city. It's what we hope many of our small groups will strategize   for. It's what we hope happens in these services. It's why the   nurture program and apprenticeship program exist to multiply   ministers and missionaries beyond Bethlehem.    
    Well, that is what I tried to say two years ago. This past summer   I believe the Lord led me to the 13th chapter of Hebrews and   showed me these same three priorities, but in a very different   imagery. Let me show them to you in summary fashion and then we   will step back, look at the context and take one of these   priorities each week for three weeks.    
    In verse 12 it says, "So Jesus also suffered outside the gate in   order to sanctify the people through his own blood." Then follow   three exhortations for how we should respond. 1) Verse 13,   "Therefore let us go forth to him outside the camp, and bear the   abuse he endured." This is the priority getting outside the safety   of our camp and being inconvenienced, and perhaps even suffering,   to make Christ known. 2) Verse 15, "Through him then let us   continually offer up a sacrifice of praise to God, that is, the   fruit of lips that acknowledge his name." This is the priority of   praise, or worship. 3) Verse 16, "Do not neglect to do good and to   share what you have, for such sacrifices are pleasing to God."   This is the priority of generosity and sharing and ministering to   each other.    
    The new imagery for these familiar three priorities is the imagery   of sacrifice. Verse 15: "Sacrifice of praise." Verse 16: "Such   sacrifices are pleasing to God." In verse 13 the word is not used,   but the idea is very clearly there: Since Jesus suffered outside   the camp, that is, since he sacrificed his life outside Jerusalem,   therefore let us go out to him and bear the same reproach. Let's   be willing to sacrifice our lives the same way he did.    
    So I have chosen to title these three messages "The Sacrifice of   Praise" (verse 15), "The Sacrifice of a Shared Life" (verse 16),   and "The Sacrifice of Suffering" (verses 13-14) &#151; beginning   this morning with "The Sacrifice of Praise." Our aim is to sharpen   our focus, to clarify why we exist as a church, to bring us   together with fresh, new zeal for what God is calling us to in the   months and years to come.    
    Before we zero in on verse 15 we need to see the context.    
    Verse 8 says that "Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, today and   for ever." So there is a stability in Christ that should keep us   from being led away (as verse 9 says) by diverse and strange   teachings. Jesus is not strange. He is the same. If you know him   and his salvation you will not be swept away by newfangled   fads.    
    Then in the second half of verse 9 a special kind of strange   teaching comes into view: "It is well that the heart be   strengthened by grace, not by foods, which have not benefited   their adherents." So someone was teaching that significant   spiritual experiences to strengthen the heart could be found   through eating certain kinds of foods. (Amazingly relevant today   in view of religious food fads that come and go.)    
    Verse 9 probably also refers to Jewish claims that Christians who   don't follow the dietary laws and don't participate in the   sacrifices have cut themselves off from God. Verse 10 seems to be   a response to that kind of criticism. It says, "We   &#91;Christians&#93; have an altar from which those who serve the   tent (i.e. the priests who handle the sacrificial animals) have no   right to eat." They may say we have been cut off from the altar of   God; they may say we have no access to the sacrificial food that   strengthens the heart; but the truth is the very opposite. We have   an altar that they are cut off from, by their own unbelief.    
    Verse 11-12 explain. According to Leviticus 16:27 when the blood   of a sacrifice was taken into the holy place of the tabernacle to   make atonement for the priests and the people, the body of the   slain animal could not be eaten by the priests (as the animals   usually were) but had to be burned outside the camp. This points   to Jesus as our atoning sacrifice, the writer says. Verse 11: "For   the bodies of those animals whose blood is brought into the   sanctuary by the high priest as a sacrifice for sin are burned   outside the camp. (12) So Jesus also suffered outside the gate in   order to sanctify the people through his own blood."    
    So the priests may well say that we Christians have cut ourselves   off from the altar and the sacrificial foods and the true worship   of the temple. But we answer: the opposite is the case. The true   Messiah has come, Jesus. He has given himself as the final atoning   sacrifice for sin on the cross outside the camp. He is our   spiritual food to strengthen our hearts. And he is the same   yesterday, today, and for ever. You may say that we have left the   true faith, but we answer, "In refusing Christ, you cut yourself   off from the true altar, and the true bread and the true worship   of the living God."    
    The whole point of this book, Hebrews, is that the old form of   Judaism has been fulfilled and replaced by Jesus Christ. Those who   insist on staying behind with the old ways, the old sacrifices,   the old temple, the old foods, will have no right to eat from the   Christian altar, the cross of Jesus Christ. But for any who come   to him, and trust in him, there is a new way of life, a new way of   worship. And that is what is described in verse 13-16.    
    If the old way was built around sacrifices in the tabernacle and   temple, the new way too is built around sacrifices, but of a very   different kind &#151; the sacrifice of suffering (vv. 13-14), the   sacrifice of praise (v. 15) and the sacrifice of a shared life (v.   16). This is the Christian life. You might say, this is the new   religion that came into being when Jesus fulfilled the Old   Testament pattern of sacrifices. What does it mean to be a   Christian church today? What should our aims and priorities be.   Here they are: the sacrifice of suffering with Christ outside the   camp; the sacrifice of praise; and the sacrifice of a shared   life.    
    Let's look today at the new worship &#151; the "sacrifice of   praise" .Verse15: "Through him (i.e. through Christ) then let us   continually offer up a sacrifice of praise to God, that is, the   fruit of lips that acknowledge his name."    
    I want to impress upon you as powerfully as I can this morning   that this is your sacred duty and joy &#151; to praise God   continually with your lips.    
    Priority Number One at Bethlehem is the cultivation of hearts that   stand in awe of God. We believe in missions. We believe in   evangelism. We believe in nurture and education. But we know that   this is all a weariness of the flesh if it is not preceded and   carried by a sense of wonder at the glory of God. If your    
    heart is not amazed by the grace of God,    and your mind is not gripped by the truth of God,    and your sense of right and wrong is not permeated by the justice   of God,    and your faith is not resting in the power of God,    and your imagination is not guided by the beauty of God,    and your life is not steadied by the sovereignty of God,    and your hope is not filled with the glory of God,    
    then the service of God will be what Paul calls works of the law,   and not the fruit of the Spirit. Work for God that is not   sustained by wonder at God is a weariness of the flesh. Priority   Number One is the cultivation of hearts that stand in awe of   God.    
    Someone may say, "Why do you say that the Number One Priority at   Bethlehem is the cultivation of a heart of praise, when this verse   15 emphasizes lips that praise?" My answer is that the word   "fruit" demands the priority of the heart. God calls us in this   verse to offer a sacrifice of praise which is the "fruit of lips"   .Fruit is something that grows naturally when the sap is flowing   within. Jesus said in Matthew 15:8, "This people honors me with   their lips but their heart is far from me." That is not what   Hebrews 13:15 is commanding. That is the work of the lips, not the   fruit of the lips. The "fruit" of lips is the natural outgrowth of   the heart. And therefore Priority Number One is the cultivation of   a heart that stands in awe of God.    
    But it does say "lips" .Not just heart, not just thoughts, but   lips. God wants from us lips of praise. Lips that speak and sing   the praises of his name. Real sounds. Real words. And the verse   says he wants them "continually" ."Let us continually offer up a   sacrifice of praise to God, that is, the fruit of lips . . ." One   of the reasons that so many Christians lead such weak and unhappy   and ineffective lives is that this exhortation is disobeyed most   of the time. Ask yourself, does the praise of God grow out like   fruit on your lips continually?    
    Most of us would have to say, No. Do you see what a great need   there is in our lives for revival, for a great awakening of   heart-felt love for the glory of God? Most of us live at a level   of praise that is pathetically beneath this text. But God would   not have called us to this experience of continual verbal praise   if it were bad for us or impossible for us. If you want it you may   have it. And not to want it is to disobey Scripture&#151;to   disobey God.    
    It doesn't mean of course that every sentence should have a   "Praise the Lord" attached to it. (Though we are not now in danger   of overdoing it!) But it does mean, at least, that we should weave   worship into all the parts of our lives. Not just silent worship   of the heart, but verbal worship of the lips. We should weave   explicit worship into all our board meetings and committee   meetings and business meetings and small groups. Not the same in   every group, of course, but somehow the praise of God's greatness   and goodness finding verbal expression in all our gatherings.    
    For us at Bethlehem this also means that Sunday morning worship is   utterly crucial in the life of the church. It means we should be   radically God-centered in our worship. Why? Because the verse says   that our praises are a "sacrifice offered to God." We gather here   not merely to be with each other. Not merely to speak and sing to   each other. We come to meet God. That's why we encourage you to   pray silently during the prelude instead of talking with each   other. We are preparing to enter the holy of holies and lay our   sacrifices before God. The hymns are a sacrifice of the lips to   God. The choir's anthem is a sacrifice of the lips to God. The   sermon is a sacrifice of the lips to God. Our whole orientation as   we gather together should be that this building is transformed   into a tabernacle where God comes near to receive the sacrifice of   the praise of his people.    
    I got a letter this week from Bob Ricker, the president of the   BGC, who preached here while I was on vacation. His last two   sentences were, "There is a great difference between churches . .   . It seems as though a visiting preacher can pretty well tell   whether or not the people are expecting a word from the Lord."    
    He could read off of you a sense of expectancy &#151; that you   expected to meet God and hear God in worship. He could sense that   something very important was at stake. I praise God for that in   you. I want to see the life and expectancy and joy and earnestness   and authenticity of our worship grow and grow.    
    One of the things Jack Hayford said to us pastors at Lausanne II   was, "Help your people keep on growing as a choir." The choir   behind me is not there to replace you as a choir, but to help you.   To inspire you. To lead you. To sustain you and interact with you.   If we keep growing together, our singing is going to become more   and more real in its expression of the heart, and more and more   powerful in its spiritual effect.    
    Let me close with word of encouragement and invitation. Notice the   words at the beginning of verse 15: "THROUGH HIM &#91;Jesus&#93;   let us continually offer up a sacrifice of praise to God." All   Christian worship is worship THROUGH JESUS. Why is this crucial?   Because we are sinners. And we have no access in ourselves to God.   But personal, heart-felt praise can't be sustained if you feel   that God is against you and not for you. A heart of praise is   sustained by the smile of God, not by his frown.    
    How then shall sinners like you and me offer in the presence of a   holy God a continual sacrifice of praise? The answer is THROUGH   HIM &#151; through Jesus. It's all there in verse 12: "Jesus   suffered outside the gate in order to sanctify the people by his   own blood." Sanctified for what? For entering the presence of God.   "Christ died for sins once for all the righteous for the   unrighteous that he might bring us to God" (1 Peter 3:18). "There   is therefore now no condemnation to those who are in Christ Jesus"   (Romans 8:1). "Who shall bring any charge against God's elect? It   is God who justifies; who is to condemn? It is Christ Jesus who   died. . ." (Romans 8:33f).    
    Jesus IS the smile of God. He invites you to come to God through   him this morning for salvation and from then on to offer a   sacrifice of praise, the fruit of lips that acknowledge his name.       
        Copyright 1989, 1998 John Piper      Piper's   Notes            
