the flooD of

thE Mubāhalah

All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the worlds. May peace and blessings be upon His Messen- ger Muhammad, and his family and compan- ions.

In the month of Jumādā al-Ūlā 1435 (March 2014), Shaykh Abū Muhammad al-‘Adnānī (ha - fidhahullāh) made his famous speech titled “La’natullāhi ‘Alal Kādhibīn” (May the Curse of Allah Be Upon the Liars) in which he called the leadership of the Jawlānī Front to a mubāhalah (supplicating Allah for His curse to be upon the deceitful party) after Abū ‘Abdillāh ash-Shāmī – a member of the Jawlānī “shar ’ī” leadership – officially declared the Islamic State to be more extreme than the original khawārij in a lengthy speech. The call was answered by ash-Shāmī and he did so on behalf of the leadership of his party – the Jawlānī Front.

In his speech, Shaykh Abū Muhammad al-‘Ad - nānī said – after mentioning some of the accu - sations made by ash-Shāmī and declaring them to be fabrications against the Islamic State, “O Allah, whoever is the liar, then make Your curse come upon him, show us a sign regarding him, and make an example out of him.” He then said, “O Allah, whoever conspires against jihād and the mujāhidīn, then make his plot backfire, re - veal his secrets, expose his intentions, and make an example out of him for those who heed. O Allah, subject them to the authority of diseas - es and disasters.” This second supplication was made before by Shaykh Abū Mus’ab az-Zarqāwī (rahimahullāh) in his speech “Fasayakfīkahu - mullāh” (Allah Will Be Sufficient for You against

Them) against the groups covertly belonging to or conspiring with al-Hizb al-Islāmī (the branch of the “Ikhwān” in Iraq led by Tāriq al-Hāshimī). Then in the month of Jumādā al-Ākhirah 1435 (April 2014), Shaykh Abū Muhammad al-‘Adnānī reaffirmed the mubāhalah in his speech “Mā Kāna Hādhā Manhajunā wa Lan Yakūn” (This Was Not Our Methodology Nor Will It Ever Be) saying, “O Allah, if this is a state of khawārij, then break its back, kills its leaders, make its flag fall, and guide its soldiers to the truth. O Allah, and if it is a state of Islam that rules by Your book and the tradition of Your prophet, and performs jihād against your enemies, then keep it firm, strengthen it, support it, grant it authority in the land, and make it a kh - ilāfah upon the prophetic methodology.” He then said, “O Allah, deal with everyone who has split the rank of the mujāhidīn, divided their word, de - lighted the kuffār, angered the believers, and set the jihād back many years.”

Shaykh Abū Muhammad al-‘Adnānī

20

-----------------------------------------------------Page 20-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
dabiq

part 2:

a DIscussIon on

Mubāhalah

Alhamdulillāh, the mujāhidīn have been the firmest in believing in the legality of mubāhalah. Shaykh ‘Abdul-Karīm al-Humayd (may Allah keep him firm and release him from imprisonment) wrote an excellent treatise titled “Al-Mashāyikh al-Judud wa Da’watuhum ilal Mubāhalah” (The New Mashāyikh and Calling Them to Mubāhalah) in which he clarified the proofs for the matter and called the so-called “Committee of Elder Scholars” as well as Salmān al-‘Awdah and Nāsir al-‘Umar to a mubāhalah, after they repeatedly labelled the mujāhidīn “khawārij” and invited the Palestinians to participate in the shirkī religion of democracy by voting for Hamas! The following discussion on mubāhalah is mostly taken from his treatise. The main proof for the legality of mubāhalah is the verses: {Indeed, the example of Jesus to Allah is like that of Adam. He created Him from dust; then He said to him, “Be,” and he was. The truth is from your Lord, so do not be among the doubt - ers. Then whoever argues with you about it after knowledge has come to you – say, “Come, let us call our sons and your sons, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves, then suppli - cate earnestly and invoke the curse of Allah upon the liars”} [Āl ‘Imrān: 59-61].

These verses were revealed with regards to a christian delegation from Najrān that came to the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) and de - bated him on Islam. When mubāhalah was pro - posed, the christian delegation backed out.

Allah ‘azza wa jall also said, {Say, “Whoever is in error – let ar-Rahmān lengthen for him an exten - sion [in time] until, when they see that which they were promised – either punishment or the Hour.” They will come to know who is worst in position

and weaker in soldiers”} [Maryam: 75].

Ibn Kathīr (rahimahullāh) said – commenting on the verse, “Allah ta’ālā says, {Say}, O Muhammad to these mushrikīn who associate others with their Lord, who claim that they are upon the truth and that you are upon falsehood.

{Whoever is in error}, meaning from amongst us and amongst you. {Let ar-Rahmān lengthen for him an extension} meaning, that Allah leaves him in his condition, until he meets his Lord and his term elapses. {Either punishment} afflicts him, {or the Hour} comes to him suddenly. {They will come to know} then, {who is worst in position and weaker in soldiers}, meaning in contrast to their claim of good position and assembly.”

“Mujāhid said regarding His words: {Let ar-Rahmān lengthen for him an extension}, ‘Let Allah leave him in his tyranny.’ This is what Abu Ja’far Ibn Jarīr at-Tabarī (rahimahullāh) ascertained.”

“This is the mubāhalah for the mushrikīn who claim that they are upon guidance with regards to their religion, as Allah ta’ālā also mentioned the mubāhalah for the jews in His words, {Say, “O you who are jews, if you claim that you are allies of Allah, excluding the [other] people, then wish for death, if you should be truthful”} [Al-Jumu’ah: 6], meaning supplicate for death to befall the one upon falsehood amongst us or amongst you; if you claim that you are upon truth, then du’ā’ cannot harm you. But they retreated from this invitation” [Tafsīr Ibn Kathīr].

Ibn ‘Abbās, Ibn Mas’ūd, ash-Sha’bī, al-Aw - zā’ī, Ibn Taymiyyah, Ibnul-Qayyim, Ibn Ha - jar, Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdil-Wahhāb, and

21

-----------------------------------------------------Page 21-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
feature

Siddīq Hasan Khān, all challenged those who op - posed them with mubāhalah – and some of them called to mubāhalah over matters of furū’ (fiqhī matters with room for difference).

Ibnul-Qayyim said, “If a debate reaches this point and there is no longer any benefit in continuing, it becomes incumbent to turn towards what Allah and His Messenger ordered with – mubāhalah” [Mukhtasar as-Sawā’iq al-Mursalah].

Ibnul-Qayyim also said – commenting on the sto - ry of the christian delegation from Najrān, “[You also learn from this story] that when debating the people of falsehood and Allah’s proof is estab - lished against them, yet they do not turn back, rather they insist upon stubborn opposition, it is then the Sunnah to call them to mubāhalah. Al - lah (subhānah) ordered His messenger with such, and He did not say, ‘This does not apply to your Ummah after you.’ His cousin ‘Abdullāh Ibn ‘Abbās (radiyallāhu ‘anhumā) also called to mubāhalah when some censured him regarding some matters of furū’, and none of the Sahābah criticized him for mubāhalah. Al-Awzā’ī called Sufyān ath-Thawrī to it over the matter of raising hands, and no one criticized him for such. Thus the mubāhalah entails fully establishing the proof ” [Zād al-Ma’ād].

The mubāhalah also does not have a specific word - ing. For example, Ibn Hajar called a proponent of the heretic Ibn ‘Arabī to mubāhalah. He told him to say, “O Allah, if Ibn ‘Arabī is upon deviance, then curse me with Your curse.” Ibn Hajar in turn said, “O Allah, if Ibn ‘Arabī is upon guidance, then curse me with Your curse.” After two months, the here - tic was afflicted with blindness and then died. As- Sakhāwī – Ibn Hajar ’s student – reported this in his book “Al-Qawl al-Mubnī.”

According to the scholars and their experience,

the mubāhalah’s result materializes within a year from the day of mubāhalah. The ma - terialization of the mubāhalah may consist of a disgraceful demise (which does not in -

22

clude the honorable death of shahādah), disease, exodus, or poverty. When it occurs between two parties, then triumph for one party and defeat for the other are obvious outcomes. This outcome shows more clearly which party is the deceitful party, than merely having an individual member of one of the two parties demise in a condition of disgrace. So how much more does it become clear when the deceitful party threatened to eradicate its rival altogether with the so-called “Lions of the East ”?!

Hudhayfah (radiyallāhu ‘anh) said that when the heads of Najrān – as-Sayyid and al-‘Āqib – came to Allah’s Messenger (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) for mubāhalah, one said to the other, “Do not per - form it, for by Allah, if he is a prophet and curses us, we will never prosper, not us nor our descen - dants after us” [Sahīh al-Bukhārī].

Ibn ‘Abbās (radiyallāhu ‘anhumā) said, “If the jews had wished for death, they would have died and seen their places in Hellfire. And if those who called Allah’s Messenger to mubāhalah had performed it, they would have returned home not finding any wealth nor family ” [Sahīh: Musnad Ahmad].

‘Ilbā’ al-Yashkurī – a student of the tābi’ī and mu - fassir ‘Ikrimah – reported that when Allah’s Mes - senger called the jews to mubāhalah, one of the youth of the jews said, “Be wary. Do you not re - member your brothers in the past who were trans - formed into apes and swine? Do not supplicate for curses upon each other.” So they ceased to per - form the mubāhalah [Tafsīr at-Tabarī].

Mubāhalah was also part of the da’wah of Imām Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdil-Wahhāb (rahimahullāh), who said, “I call those who oppose me to one of four matters: either the Book of Allah, or the Sun - nah of Allah’s Messenger, or the Ijmā’ (consensus) of the scholars. If he is stubborn and insists on opposing our da’wah, I call him to a mubāhalah” [Ad-Durar as-Saniyyah].

-----------------------------------------------------Page 22-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
dabiq

the proper

creeD of

thE MuJāhIdīn

part 3:

After this discussion, it is important to remem - ber that the mujāhidīn are from the people with the most proper creed, especially concerning Allah’s names, attributes, and actions. Because their creed is that of Ahlus-Sunnah, they believe that Allah’s actions are truly characterized by justice, wisdom, mercy, and grace, contrary to the Ashā’irah who believe that wisdom “limits” Allah with regards to His actions, therefore they don’t truly attribute wisdom to Him, never mind mercy, which they distort to mean merely “in - tending good” for the creation. Some of these mutakallimīn (innovators of theological rheto - ric) even believed that Allah might decree pro - phetic miracles to occur at the hands of a liar claiming prophethood, and the only proof of his falsehood would be someone countering his claim with miracles similar but opposing that of

1 2

perhaps the Jawlānī Front and their allies adopt this creed, exaggerate it, and expand it to deny the results of any mubāhalah after the passing away of the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sal - lam).

In addition to the proper creed of Ahlus-Sunnah, the mujāhidīn also have husnudh-dhann (good expectations) concerning Allah. Allah ta’ālā said – as in the qudsī hadīth, “I am according to My slave’s expectations of Me. If he expects good

of Me, then it is for him; and if he expects bad, then it is for him” [Sahīh: Ahmad, Ibn Hibbān]. In another wording, “So let him ex - pect of Me what he wishes” [Sahīh: Ahmad, Ibn Hibbān, and al-Hākim]. In another hadīth, He ta’ālā said, “I am according to My slave’s expectations of Me, and I am with him when he supplicates Me” [Sahīh Muslim].

Allah’s Messenger ( sallallāhu ‘alay -

hi wa sallam) said, “none of you should die except while having good expectations about Allah”

[Sahīh Muslim].

Finally, the problem with the opponents of the Islamic State is that they treat mubāhalah and slander like a childish game. While for the leaders and soldiers of the Islamic State, to accuse Muslims with baseless lies and haughtily make mubāhalah over such is a se - rious matter that entails bringing about the wrath of al-Jabbār (the Powerful). Allah ta’ālā said – as in the qudsī hadīth, “Whoever bares enmity towards a walī of Mine, then I have declared war against him” [Sahīh al-Bukhārī]. Wallāhul musta’ān.

1 the matters related to hikmah (wisdom), ‘adl (justice), the signs of prophethood, and inherent good, were discussed by Ibnul-Qayyim in his

books, “Miftāh dār as-sa’ādah,” “as-sawā’iq al-Mursalah,” “shifā’ al-‘alīl” and Ibn taymiyyah in his book “an-nubuwwāt.”

2

the “wonders” that appear at the hands of awliyā’ (persons close to allah). shaykhul-Islām Ibn taymiyyah (rahimahullāh) said in al-wāsitiyyah, “and from the usūl (principles) of ahlus-sunnah is to believe in the karāmāt of the awliyā’.” For this reason al-lālikā’ī dedicated a section in his famous book “sharh usūl I’tiqād ahlus-sunnah” to the matter of karāmātul-awliyā’, in which he reported more than two hundred relevant narrations from the prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) and the salaf.

3 a person close to allah.

23

the liar ! Other mutakallimīn from the mu’tazi -

lah deny the reality of karāmātul-awliyā’ , and

-----------------------------------------------------Page 23-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
feature

part 4:

the sItuatIon after

thE Mubāhalah

After this mubāhalah, a number of issues quickly came to light. First of which, some of the stories that ash- Shāmī used to claim that the Islamic State resisted Al - lah’s Sharī’ah were shown to be fabrications and dis - tortions, especially the claim that the Islamic State had asked adh-Dhawāhirī to arbitrate between itself and the Jawlānī rebels. Allah decreed that adh-Dhawāhirī himself would negate ash-Shāmī in a speech (sadly his negation and speech themselves were also distortions of reality). Secondly, many of the major allies of the Jawlānī Front – especially the so-called Jayshul-Mujāhidīn and the Is - lamic Front – quickly exposed the reality of their creeds and methodologies. On “the 18th of March 2014,” Jayshul-Mujāhidīn released a statement referring to hijāb as a personal freedom! A month later they flaunted their reception of As’ad al-Mustafā – the Defense Minister for the Syrian National Coalition’s interim government! Bear in mind that ash-Shāmī had mentioned Jayshul-Mu - jāhidīn in his speech and testified to their “proper ” creed and manhaj, claiming that the Jawlānī Front understood them better than the Islamic State due to the close rela - tionship the Jawlānī Front had with Jayshul-Mujāhidīn! Ash-Shāmī said, “I perform mubāhalah and say that you examine the people on their creed. The proof for this is your setting of conditions to accept Shaykh al-Muhay - sinī’s initiative. This in general is a form of examining people’s creeds, not any people, rather that of the best people. I mean the mujāhidīn including the different mu - jāhid groups like the Islamic Front, Jayshul-Mujāhidīn, and others” [The Mubāhalah]. Ash-Shāmī also said, “De - scribing the fighting taking place as a battle between the Dawlah group on one side and those who stand with Jar - bā and Idrīs [two SNC leaders] on the other, is far from the truth. Those who carried the greatest burden of fight - ing the Dawlah group in the north are the Islamic Front and Jayshul-Mujāhidīn. […] As for the Islamic Front and

Jayshul-Mujāhidīn – two major sides in the battle against the Dawlah group – then it hasn’t been conformed to us that they’ve fallen into aposta - sy. We know their condition better than the Daw -

24

As’ad al-Mustafā – SNC Defense Minister

SNC Defense Minister With Jayshul-Mujāhidīn

Al-Hamwī (Islamic Front Leader) With Jamāl Ma’rūf

-----------------------------------------------------Page 24-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
lah group does, this is because of our closeness to them” [Wa Law Annahum Fa’alū Mā Yū’adhūna Bihi Lakāna Khayran Lahum].

As for the Islamic Front, they released numerous statements referring to the tawāghīt of the Arabs as “friends of Syria.” They also renewed their commit - ment to respect ALL religious sects in Syria without exception, which would include the Nusayriyyah, the Ismā’īliyyah, the Yazīdiyyah, and the Durūz. When the secularist “Islamists” of Turkey won the recent elections, Islamic Front leaders congratu - lated the Erdogan secularists upon their renewed apostasy. Finally, they released a document titled “Mīthāq ash-Sharaf ath-Thawrī” (The Revolution - ist Covenant of Honor), which was signed by them and numerous other groups including Jayshul-Mu - jāhidīn. The covenant reads like a secularist decla - ration with commitments free of Islam. It led some of the biggest supporters of the Islamic Front – so- called “theorists” – to renounce the covenant and call upon the Islamic Front leadership to release a retraction!

Worse yet, the Jawlānī Front entered into alliances with secularist parties including the military coun - cils belonging to the Military General Staff of the Syrian National Coalition, especially in the eastern region of Syria. After the final break up of Mishmish (The “Shūrā” Assembly for the Eastern Region), the Jawlānī Front ’s biggest allies began to openly renew their call to the Syrian National Coalition and the “Friends of Syria” to arm them and support them in their war against the Islamic State!

Throughout this period, footage of al-Harārī (the main “shar ’ī” of the Jawlānī Front) was released showing him to claim that he was the founder of the Nusrah Front and the man most wanted by Ameri - ca! His words were saturated with riyā’, nifāq, and idiocy. A former prisoner from the Islamic State was released and testified that al-Harārī had coerced him to make a recorded denunciation of the Islamic State (issued by the Jawlānī Front) and asked him to contact the sahwāt of Iraq and their leader Ibrāhīm ash-Shummarī to coordinate between them and the Jawlānī Front in their battle against the Islamic

dabiq

State! This report was strengthened by al-Harārī’s twitter “apology ” to the people of Iraq, where he claims he had wronged them by labelling the treacherous apostate parties as sahwāt! In addition to all this, the words of the Jawlānī leadership are filled with implied and indirect slandering of Abū ‘Umar al-Baghdādī and Abū Hamzah al-Muhājir, for no one fought the sahwāt of Iraq except the Islamic State under the leadership of these two men. And these two men and the state that they established were praised by Shaykh Usāmah Ibn Lādin (rahima - hullāh) as well as the rest of the former al-Qā’idah leadership.

In addition to all this, the sahwāt and their Jawlānī allies withdrew from large sections of Halab, Homs, Dimashq, and al-Lādhiqiyyah. These same sahwāt had bragged for months that they would liberate the prisoners in the Central Prison of Halab, which is no longer under siege. They had boasted pomp - ously when they took the border town of Kasab, from which they later withdrew. And they would slander the Islamic State using the superficial tri - umphs of the sahwah and the reports of Qatari and Saudi media as their “proof ” that the sahwah was the only entity waging war against the nusayriyyah. Furthermore, the Jawlānī Front more and more op - erates like gangs without any central leadership. Al - though the man they claim to be their top leader – adh-Dhawāhirī – orders them to stop using any “human bombs” against Muslims, they continue to use this tactic against their opponents, even if their opponents had only recently left them, as occurred in Albū Kamāl. In the announcement on the forma - tion of Mishmish, it was declared that after some months the components of Mishmish – which in - cludes the Jawlānī Front formerly located in Wilāyat al-Khayr – would dissolve into this new entity. Reg - ularly, reports are heard of local leaders from the Jawlānī Front entering into alliances with secularist and saudi-backed groups in some regions as other local leaders withdraw from alliances in other re - gions, without any uniformity present in any decision taken, as if the head of their central leadership was severed. The most blatant contradictions also appeared when

25

-----------------------------------------------------Page 25-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
feature

they adopted positions which they formerly criti - cized the Islamic State on, including the targeting of armed opposition that operate like gangsters plun - dering the wealth of the Muslims, and declarations censuring military and political organizations direct - ly and indirectly belonging to the nationalist oppo - sition including the “shar ’ī” commissions. These are things the Islamic State had done for a long time while being denounced by the Jawlānī Front for changing the direction of the “revolution” and jihād, which – according to them before – should only be against the nusayriyyah.

In contrast, despite what the Islamic State faces of economic, military, political, and media war, and de - spite all the different parties unified against it – from the new al-Qā’idah leadership in Khurāsān, to the safawis in Tehran, and all the way to the crusaders

in Washington – it advances from victory to victo - ry. It liberated all the eastern region of Syria from the sahwāt. It liberated the wilāyāt of Nīnawā and al-Anbār as well as vast regions of other wilāyāt. It caused the safawi army to disband, disperse, and disappear. It killed rāfidah (“Muslims” according to the new al-Qā’idah leadership) by the thousands. It kept to its promise and destroyed the border ob - stacles that formerly separated the lands of Iraq from Shām. Its numbers continue to grow. It an - nounced the Khilāfah and people have begun to pledge allegiance to it in Algeria, Sudan, Indonesia, the Philippines, Waziristan, and other places. All this is from Allah alone, for the Islamic State would be nothing if left to itself. And yet the sahwah allies insist that division is better for the Ummah while having no practical political aspirations for Islam! Wallāhul musta’ān.

unDerstanDIng the hIKmah

In allah’s actIons

part 5:

It is important to contemplate Allah’s hikmah in His actions before reflecting upon the mubāhalah. Al - though this following excerpt discusses Allah’s hik - mah in a greater context, it helps one understand the reality of His hikmah in many other contexts.

Ibnul-Qayyim (rahimahullāh) said, “I will mention a debate that occurred between me and some jews. I said to one of them – after he had denied the prophet - hood of the Prophet, ‘Your denial of his prophethood entails slandering the Lord of the universe, belittling Him, and attributing to Him the worst of all blem - ishes. Before the discussion with you was about the Messenger and now it is about the Lord ta’ālā being free of all imperfections.’ He said, ‘How can you say such?’ So I said to him, ‘Clarifying such is my respon - sibility, so listen now. You claim that he was not a messenger rather he was a conqueror king who con - quered the people by his sword until they yielded to

him. And he spent 23 years lying against Allah and saying, ‘I was revealed to,’ and he was not revealed to. ‘He commanded me,’ and He did not command him. ‘He forbade me [from do -

26

ing something],’ and He did not forbid him. ‘Allah said such and such,’ and He did not say such. ‘He made such and such halāl, such and such harām, such and such wājib, and such and such makrūh,’ and He did not make any of such halāl nor harām nor wājib, rather he did these things on his own by lying and fabricating things against Allah, His prophets, and His angels.”

“Thereafter he spent 23 years apathetically kill - ing His slaves, spilling their blood, taking their wealth, enslaving their women and children, while they had no sin save rejection of and op - position to him, and throughout all this he says, ‘Allah ordered me with this,’ and Allah did not order him.”

“And in addition to this, he endeavors to change the religions of the messengers, abrogate their laws, and undue their traditions.”

“This is his condition in your view. So either the Lord ta’ālā knows about this, hears of it and his

-----------------------------------------------------Page 26-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
condition, sees and witnesses him, or not. So if you claim that all this is away from Allah, and He did not know of it, then you have slandered the Lord ta’ālā and attributed extreme ignorance to Him, since He did not hear of this great event, nor know of it, nor see it. And if you claim that rather this occurred with His knowledge, awareness, and under His vision, you will be asked if He was able to change such, hold him back, and prevent him, or not. If you say that He was incapable of such, you have attributed weakness to Him and negated His rubūbiyyah, thereby this hu - man along with his followers were more capable of achieving their desires. And if you say that rather He was capable but He consolidated him, supported him, gave him mastery over the creation, and did not sup - port His awliyā’ and the followers of His messengers, then you have attributed to Him the worst of foolish - ness, oppression, and lack of wisdom. That would be the case if He merely allowed him to do what he did. So what if He Himself was his support, the answer - er of his supplications, the destroyer of those oppos - ing and contradicting him, the confirmer of his claim with many forms of sanction, and the revealer of signs upon his hands – signs that if the people of the earth were all to gather and work together, they would not be able to produce just one of such signs and would fail in doing so. And at every moment He creates for him causes of victory, consolidation, ascension, and abundance of followers, in a manner that is abnor - mal?”

“Therefore it becomes clear that the one who denies him to be a messenger and prophet has indeed cursed Allah, slandered Him, and attributed ignorance, weak - ness, and foolishness to Him!’”

dabiq

“I then said to him, ‘This is not contradicted by the oppressive kings that Allah granted with consolida - tion upon the earth for a period of time and then He destroyed their existence, annihilated their tra - ditions, and erased their traces and tyranny, for they had not practiced any of this, nor were they aided and supported. Nor did signs appear at their hands. Nor did the Lord ta’ālā confirm them with His consent, actions, or speech. Rather their con - dition was like Pharaoh, Nimrod, and their likes – opposite of that of the Messenger.”

“This is also not contradicted by the claimants of prophethood from amongst the liars. Rather their condition is opposite of that of the Messen - ger from every angle. Instead, their condition was from the clearest of proofs confirming the truth - fulness of the Messenger. It was from the wisdom of Allah (subhānah) that the likes of these came out to existence so that the condition of the liars became apparent and distinct from that of the truthful. Therefore, their appearance was from the clearest of proofs for the truthfulness of the messengers and showed the difference between these liars and the messengers, because things be - come clear when their opposites appear. And the good of something is shown by its opposite. Thus, awareness of the doubts used to argue falsehood directs one to the truth and its proofs.’”

“He then said, ‘I seek refuge with Allah. We do not say he is an oppressive king. Rather he is a noble prophet. Whoever follows him is from the bliss - ful…” [At-Tibyān fī Aqsām al-Qur ’ān: 180-182].

27

-----------------------------------------------------Page 27-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
feature

part 6:

contemplatIon of the

Mubāhalah rEsults

Although this excerpt is related to prophethood – a matter undeniably greater than the one being dis - cussed – it helps one understand the reality of Allah’s wisdom and the manifestation of this wisdom in His ac - tions. Mubāhalah is a matter raised to Allah so that He judges between two parties and exposes the deceitful party that claims it is upon truth when in fact it is upon falsehood and lies. In light of the mubāhalah, it is not befitting Allah that two parties – both claiming proper religious methodology, opposing each other, and accus - ing each other of major deviance – perform mubāhalah and then He blesses the deceitful party deserving curs - es while He curses the noble party deserving blessings (even completely crushing the “blessed” party at the hands of the “cursed” party). He then makes these outcomes so visible for people to witness, especially when the scholars have mentioned that the results of mubāhalah materialize any time within a year from the date of the mubāhalah, usually shortly after its recital. Also, this discussion refutes the claims of the partisan Hānī as-Sibā’ī and his likes who claim that triumph is never an indication of proper manhaj, and this is be - cause the triumphs and defeats being discussed are from the aftermath of the mubāhalah, not utterly re - moved from any context.

But knowing the mentality and hizbiyyah (partisanship) of these people, they will either ignore the outcomes or act like the mushrikīn when they refused to acknowl - edge the sign in the splitting of the moon and made it out to be from the effects of magic.

{The Hour has come near, and the moon has split [in two]. And if they see a miracle, they turn away and say, “Passing magic.” And they denied and followed their in - clinations. But for every matter is a [time of] settlement.

And there has already come to them of informa - tion that in which there is deterrence – extensive wisdom – but warning does not avail [them]. So leave them} [Al-Qamar: 1-6].

28

Hānī as-Sibā’ī

-----------------------------------------------------Page 28-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
dabiq

part 7: thE Flood oF

Doubts anD DesIres

If one were to ask, what causes these different par - ties to deviate although they claim to have “prop - er ” creed, he only has to reflect over a number of realities and statements of the scholars.

Ibnul-Qayyim (rahimahullāh) said, “The pillars of kufr are four: arrogance, envy, anger, and desire” [Al-Fawā’id].

These four pillars push the person and party to commit kufr. How so? Arrogance and envy are what pushed Iblīs to resist prostrating to Ādam after he was ordered to by Allah. He then angrily promised to wage war against Ādam and his offspring de - spite knowing that he would be burnt in Hellfire. Arrogance and envy also prevented the Israelites from accepting Islam, believing that the final mes - senger should only be from them.

Abū ‘Umar al-Baghdādī (rahimahullāh) mentioned that one of the main components of the Iraqi sah - wah was “A group of the envious who were driven by the fact that many of their members and bri - gades rushed to aid, support, and pledge allegiance to the Islamic State. This is because the soul’s na - ture is to love supremacy and it does not like any - thing to be more superior to it. […] So they turned people away from jihād fī sabīlillāh because of what their hearts contain of hate and envy towards the true believers and because of what their hearts contain of fear and panic dislocating their hearts. Therefore, they called their companions and tribes to comfort and ease, even if such entailed allying with the kāfirīn and disavowing from Allah, His Messenger, and the believers. They placed their hands in the hands of the Arab tawāghīt imploring them for support, using sharp tongues against the people of the religion, claiming they only wanted to expel the occupation” [Qul Innī ‘Alā Bayyinatin Min Rabbī].

The situation he describes – in many aspects – is one that has similarly occurred in Shām. Soldiers have left the deviant parties in the hundreds, sometimes whole battalions, to pledge loyalty to the Islamic State. This filled the hearts of their for - mer leadership with envy and anger.

Desire also pushes to kufr, as the Salaf said, “sin is the gate to kufr.” The most dangerous desire that must be overcome is desire for wealth and pow - er. Allah’s Messenger (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) said, “Two wolves being released amongst sheep is not more destructive than a man’s desire for wealth and honor [destroying] his religion” [Sahīh: Ahmad and at-Tirmidhī].

These four factors then push one to look for justi - fications for his sin and kufr. He searches humon - gous volumes of references for a single forgotten name or odd opinion to justify, for example, why he is “allowed” to enter into open alliances with

29

-----------------------------------------------------Page 29-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
feature

the apostates – like the Syrian National Coalition brigades and the Salūlī (Saudi) Front – against the “khawārij” and why such isn’t kufr – or so he claims. He alleges either that the apostates are ignorant “Muslims” pronouncing kufr to trick the secularists and crusaders into arming them, or he claims that his alliances are a form of merely seeking the aid of the apostates against the “khawārij” which he claims can never be kufr regardless of the condition of the parties involved.

Abū ‘Amr Ibn as-Salāh (rahimahullāh) said, “Who - ever pursues the differences of opinions of the scholars and follows the rukhas (the allowances or odd opinions) in their statements, will fall or almost fall into zandaqah (heresy)” [Ighāthatul-Lahfān - Ib - nul-Qayyim].

Al-Hamwī (Hassān ‘Abbūd) Islamic Front Leader

Their case is like that of one who whimsically gath - ers the different opinions of the scholars. He puts them into an equation which equals kufr, like some - one who commits kufr for the sake of military aid. He would see that some scholars allowed the de - lay of the prayer during battle past the time of the prayer. He sees that some scholars don’t make takfīr of the one who abandons prayers occasionally. He sees that some scholars consider a real threat with torture to be ikrāh (coercion). He sees that some “scholars” deviantly innovated the opinion that kufr can be committed for “the sake of jihād”! Then he combines the different factors into an equation and decides he can abandon his prayers, wear a cross, and call to democracy for the sake of “saving ” the people and “defending ” them.

The problem is many of those committing this type of kufr don’t actually have these empty arguments in their minds, rather it is the neo-jahmiyyah (ex - treme murji’ah) who invent these excuses for them after the kufr has already been committed. The neo-jahmiyyah then ally with them against the “khawārij.”

lyst forcing any hidden deviance – if present – to surface and become apparent for all to witness. “Whoever wants to know how a mujāhid group fī sabīlillah becomes a militant group fighting fī sabīlit-tāghūt, then let him review history, and let him know that a man’s love for leadership, wealth, and personal opinion becomes pride. Pride becomes envy. Envy becomes arrogance. Arrogance becomes hatred. Hatred becomes en - mity. Enmity becomes contradiction of the rival. The contradiction begins with hiding tawhīd, dis - playing deviant ambiguity, avoiding the muwah - hidīn, and compromising with the mushrikīn. Thereafter it becomes open kufr and war, follow - ing desires and holding on to doubts, unless Al - lah saves the slave with His mercy” [Quoted from a ‘Abwah Lāsiqah article].

Allah’s help alone is sought, upon Him we rely, there is no power nor strength except by Him. Sufficient for us is Allah, and He is the best Dis - poser of affairs.

Of course, arrogance, envy, anger, and desire are factors leading to kufr. When committed by one with a “proper ” manhaj, they act as a cata -

30

May Allah guide the confused to contemplate the consequences of the mubāhalah, abandon their doubts and desires, and return to the ranks of the muwahhidīn. Āmīn.

“