  April 28, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor      
        THE DANGER OF DRIFTING FROM THEWORD   (Hebrews 2:1-4)   
  For this reason we must pay much closer attention to what we haveheard, lest we drift away from it. 2 For if the word spoken throughangels proved unalterable, and every transgression and disobediencereceived a just recompense, 3 how shall we escape if we neglect sogreat a salvation? After it was at the first spoken through the Lord,it was confirmed to us by those who heard, 4 God also bearing witnesswith them, both by signs and wonders and by various miracles and bygifts of the Holy Spirit according to His own will.    
      In the Beginning was the Word    In chapter one of Hebrews there are no commands for the church. Weare not told to do anything. The whole chapter is a declaration andcelebration of God's final word to the world -- Jesus Christ the Sonof God. The chapter begins, "God, after He spoke long ago to thefathers in the prophets in many portions and in many ways, in theselast days has spoken to us in his   Son." This is the point ofchapter one: something utterly stupendous happened in the coming ofthe Son of God.  This is Hebrews' way of saying what John said in his gospel, "Inthe beginning was the Word and the Word was with God and the Word wasGod . . . and the Word became flesh and dwelt among us" (John1:1,14). In other words, God the Son took on human form as God'sfinal, decisive Word to the world. Not final in that God has notspoken since then, but final and decisive in that, since Jesus came,all that God has to say is rooted in Jesus, and points toward Jesus,and is proven by conformity to Jesus. All the fullness of God is inJesus (Colossians 2:9). All the treasures of wisdom and knowledge arein Jesus (Colossians 2:3). Beyond what the Old Testament told us,whatever we need to know about God and how he relates to our lives welearn from what we hear and see in God's final, decisive Word, JesusChrist.  That's what Hebrews 1 is all about: this final word of God, JesusChrist. In summary, chapter one says that the Son of God is the heirof all things (v. 2), he made the world (v. 2), he is the radiance ofGod's glory and the exact representation of God's nature (v. 3), heupholds all things by the word of his power (v. 3), he madepurification for sins (v. 3), he sat down at the right hand of God'smajesty (v. 3) and he is greater than any angel (v. 4) because angelsworship him (v. 6). He is the mighty God (v. 8).  That's the message of chapter one: God has spoken by his Son andthis Son is Creator and Sustainer and Owner and Ruler and Redeemer ofthe world. There are no commands for us here. Only declaration andcelebration of the greatness of Jesus, the final Word of God.    
      The First Command in Hebrews --Listen!    But in chapter two the first thing is a command or a duty --something we must do. And the connection with chapter one is veryimportant. Chapter two begins, "For this reason . . ." (Or: someversions have, "therefore"). In other words chapter two begins bytelling us that chapter one is the reason for this duty. Because  God has spoken by his Son in these last days, and because  he is the Creator and Sustainer and Owner and Rulerand Redeemer of the world -- above all angels --  therefore ("for this reason . . .") "we must pay much closer attention to whatwe have heard."  So the first command in this book -- the first duty mentioned --is that we give heed to the Word of God in his Son. We could boildown the two chapters so far to this: "In these last days God hasspoken to us by a Son . . . for this reason we must pay closerattention to this word that he has spoken." In other words, God hasspoken by his Son, so listen, listen very carefully.  Now here is a command that we need desperately to hear in our day.What do you listen to? Whom do you listen to? God has spoken throughhis Son, do you listen to him? How does your listening to him compareto your listening to other things? When we want to listen to someone,we make provisions for listening. If we want to listen to a musicalgroup we make sure that we have a tape player in the car and that wehave the tapes. If we want to listen to the news, we make sure thereis a radio in the kitchen or that we have a TV and that we have itturned on at the right time. If we want to listen to a missionary whois in a critical situation overseas we make arrangements to haveEmail and pick up our mail often during the day. If we want to listento John Grisham tell his latest tale we buy a paperback in theairport and have it with us on the airplane.  On and on it goes. We all want to listen to something. And we makeplans for our listening and we buy things and go places and make surewe are not distracted. So how does all this compare to our listeningto God's Word to us in his Son? Are you listening to that? Are youmaking provisions for that? Are your kitchen and your car and yourden and your reading devoted to that?    It is Exceedingly Necessary    What Hebrews is saying here is that in the Christian life we mustgo on listening to God's Word in Jesus. And we must do this with veryclose attention. We cannot treat this casually. We cannot act as ifwe already know all we need to know, or that we have nothing to gainfrom listening to Jesus. There is an urgency here in Hebrews 2:1.Literally it says, "It is  exceedingly necessary  that we giveheed to what we have heard." It is not just an option that you can doif you are especially spiritual or have a crisis in front of you orif you are at camp or if you need to prepare some lesson. This is aword to all Christians: it is "exceedingly necessary to give heed" toJesus as the Word of God.  This is not an isolated command in the book of Hebrews. Thisconcern to get the readers to wake up and listen closely to God isrepeated. For example, Hebrews 3:1 says, "Therefore, holy brethren,partakers of a heavenly calling,  consider Jesus ." ConsiderJesus! That's the point of Hebrews 2:1. Listen to him. Consider him.Focus on him. Stay close to him and keep him in your thoughts. Learnmore and more from him every day -- what he is like and what he saysand the way he sees the world.  Then again in Hebrews 12:1-2 the author says, "Let us run withendurance the race that is set before us,  fixing our eyes onJesus ." There it is again: "Fix your eyes on Jesus." ConsiderJesus! Listen to Jesus!  One of the great burdens of this book is that we the readers willsee how serious it is to listen to Jesus, the Word of God, andconsider Jesus, and fix our eyes on Jesus. This is the firstcommandment in the book. It is not a difficult command: Listen!Consider! Look! These are not hard things to do -- unless we don'twant to do them. The first command of this book is not "labor forJesus", but "listen to Jesus." He is not commanding us to work forhim, but to watch him. All our spiritual life-changes come from that(2 Corinthians 3:18).    Pay Attention, So You Don't Neglect Such aGreat Salvation    And the whole first chapter is intended to make this a lightburden and an easy yoke. The one we are to pay close attention to isthe Creator and Sustainer and Owner and Ruler and Redeemer of theworld. And what he has to say to us is a "very great salvation." Doyou see that in verse 3: "How shall we escape if we neglect so greata salvation?" So if we choose not to listen to Jesus every day andconsider him and fix our eyes on him, then we are scorning hisimportance described in chapter one and we are neglecting a "greatsalvation." Now why would anybody want to do that? The only reasonwould be if we regard something else as more important to listen toand consider and fix our eyes on. But what distinguishes a Christianfrom a non-Christian is that a Christian has been born again with anew nature that regards Christ as supremely valuable. And so we findthe argument of chapter one powerfully compelling. God has spoken inthese last days by a Son . . .  For this reason  we  must listen and we  want  to listen all the more closely to what hesays.  The Christian life is first and foremost a life of contemplation-- listening to Jesus, considering Jesus, fixing the eyes of theheart on Jesus. Everything else in the Christian life grows out ofthis. Without this the Christian life is simply unlivable.  This is why the next phrase in verse 1 is a warning: ". . . lestwe drift away from it." "For this reason we must pay much closerattention to what we have heard, lest we drift away from it." Thefirst reason for paying close attention to what we have heard inGod's word through his Son is that the Son is infinitely greater thanangels: Creator, Sustainer, Owner, Ruler, Redeemer. Therefore howcould you not want to be vigilant in listening and considering andfixing your eyes on him?    Pay Attention, So You Don't Drift intoDestruction    Now comes a second reason for paying close attention to what wehave heard of God's word through his Son: if we don't do this, wewill drift into destruction. Consider this word "drifting." It meansfloat by. It's what a piece of bark or a leaf or a dead fish does inthe river -- it floats by the boat that is being rowed up stream. Ittakes no life and no motion to float by. One need only do nothing,and you will float by.  Hebrews say that if we do not vigilantly pay closer attention tothe Word of God, we will float by -- we will drift away from God'sword. We all know people that this has happened to. Some are in thisroom. Some are reading this sermon. There is no urgency. Novigilance. No focused listening or considering or fixing the eyes onJesus. And the result has not been a standing still, but a driftingaway.  That is the point here: there is no standing still. The life ofthis world is not a lake. It is a river. And it is flowing downwardto destruction. If you do not listen earnestly to Jesus and considerhim daily and fix your eyes on him hourly, then you will not standstill, you will go backward. You will float by.  Drifting is a deadly thing in the Christian life. And the remedyto it, according to Hebrews 1, is "Pay close attention to what youhave heard." That is, consider what God is saying in his Son Jesus.Fix your eyes on what God is saying and doing in the Son of God,Jesus Christ. This is not a hard stroke to learn so that we can swimagainst the stream of sin and indifference. The only thing that keepsus from swimming like this is our sinful desire to float with otherinterests. But let us not complain that God has given us a hard job.Listen, consider, fix the eyes -- this is not what you would call ahard job description. It is not a job description. It is a solemninvitation to be satisfied in Jesus so that we do not get lureddownstream by deceitful desires.    Our "Job" is to be Satisfied With the Love ofGod    One of the most powerful words to me in Kenya as I was teachingwas the simple prayer in Psalm 90:14, "O satisfy us in the morningwith your lovingkindness, that we may rejoice and be glad all ourdays." That is our "job" as Christians: being satisfied in themorning with the love of God spoken to us in the Son of God, so thatwe may rejoice and be glad all our days -- and so be free from thedeceitfulness of downriver desires.  O the danger of drifting away from the word of God's promise inJesus Christ!  Verses 2 and 3a tell us why this is so dangerous.  For if the word spoken through angels proved unalterable, andevery transgression and disobedience received a just recompense, 3how shall we escape if we neglect so great a salvation?  Failing to pay close attention to God's Word and the drifting awaythat results is described in verse 3 as "neglecting a greatsalvation." And this is said to be extremely dangerous.  How dangerous? So dangerous that if we go on in the way ofneglecting this great salvation -- not listening to Jesus day by day,and not considering Jesus, and not fixing our eyes on Jesus -- theresult will be that we will not escape. That is, we will not escapethe judgment of God (Hebrews 12:25; 1 Thessalonians 5:3). We will belost. We will not inherit eternal life. We will perish in hell.    Drifting is Infinitely Dangerous    Drifting is infinitely dangerous. O that I could waken you all tobe joyfully vigilant in living the Christian life of looking toJesus, and considering Jesus, and listening to Jesus. His yoke iseasy and his burden is light -- as easy as listening and as light aslooking. But if we neglect this great salvation, and drift into thelove of other things, then we will not escape. We will perish. Themark of the true child of God is that that he does not drift forlong. If you are drifting this morning, one of the signs of hope thatyou are born again is that you feel pricked for this -- a risingdesire in your heart to turn your eyes on Jesus and consider him andlisten to him in the days and months and years to come. And one ofthe signs that you may not be born again is that you hear what I amsaying and feel no desire to guard against drifting.  The argument given in verse 2 for why we will not escape if wedrift and neglect our great salvation is that "The word spokenthrough angels proved unalterable, and every transgression anddisobedience received a just recompense." In other words, in the OldTestament God did not yet speak directly through his Son on theearth. He spoke through intermediary messengers. Hebrews says angelswere involved in the revelation of God's word. Nevertheless, thefirmness of this mediated word was so great that every neglect andrejection of it was punishable with a just recompense.  Now something much greater has come: God has spoken to us notthrough angels, but unmediated through a Son. God himself stood forthfrom heaven in Jesus and spoke a great salvation with his lips andhis life and his death. Now, this writer says, if we neglect thisgreat word, we are much more guilty than the Old Testament people whodisobeyed the word of God given through angels, and therefore we willnot escape.  So, as always in the Bible, God graciously is giving us in thisbook positive and negative incentives to embrace our great salvationand listen to the great Savior. Negatively, he says that we willperish if we drift away from the Word of God and neglect our greatsalvation. Positively he says that this Word is such that how couldanyone not want to listen and linger and live in this Word -- theCreator of all things, the Upholder of all things, the Heir of allthings, the Ruler of all things from the right hand of Majesty, andthe Purifier of all our sins, if we will trust him. How could we notwant to pay attention to this Word and consider him and fix our eyeson him!  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
