


The Truth about the Sodomites
Video
February 10, 2013

Now, in Genesis chapter 19, of course we have the famous story involving the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. Before I get into the sermon, I just quickly want to tell the story and just briefly give you a synopsis of what we just read. Of course, the Bible talks about these two men entering into Sodom. Of course, from chapter 18, we know that these two men are the two angels of the Lord that he sent to the city. They show up and they're saying that they're going to sleep in the street that night. They're just going to remain in the street that night and just see what happens.	Of course, Lot comes to them and Lot was the only man in the city who is actually a believer, he's actually saved. He's not living a very godly life, of course. Otherwise, he wouldn't even be living in Sodom in the first place. But Lot comes to them and tells them, "Whatever you do, don't stay in the street tonight. You guys need to come over to my house. You need to stay with me tonight." He compels them. They come in, they sit down to eat with him, and just as they're going to sit down to eat, the Bible says in verse 4, "But before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of Sodom, compass the house round both old and young, all the people from every quarter and they called unto Lot and said unto him, 'Where are the men which came into thee this night? Bring them out unto us that we may know them.'"	When they say there "that we may know them", they're not just saying, "We just want to meet these guys. We just want to shake their hand and get to know them." This is the word that the Bible often uses all the way back to Genesis chapter number 4, when it talks about Adam knew his wife Eve and she conceived and brought forth a son. You know, the result of Adam knowing his wife was that she became pregnant. The Bible uses the word "know" to talk about ... It's a euphemism for obviously something else. When they say we want to know these guys, that's the kind of relationship that they want to have with these men. Of course, it says in verse 5, "Bring them out unto us that we may know them." Lot comes out and says, "Look guys, don't do this wicked, awful thing. These guys are staying with me. Whatever you do, don't do it." He even tries to get them to suffice themselves with his daughters, which obviously is a bizarre thing to offer them. Again, he just doesn't want this perversion to take place on these men.	Look what they say in verse 9, they said, "Stand back." They said again, "This one fellow came into sojourn," talking about how Lot has just been temporarily living there. "This one fellow came into sojourn and he will needs be a judge. Now, will we deal worse with thee than with them." They pressed sore upon the men, even Lot, and came near to break the door. Because they don't get access to these two men, who are actually angels but they just look like normal men, instead they decide that they're going to violate Lot. They attack Lot and they are trying to assault him and they even have him up against the door and they're almost going to break the door. Then, the two men put forth their hand, reach in, grab him, pull him inside the house, and so on and so forth. Then, they reveal their identity to Lot and tell him how God has sent them there to get Lot out of the city because the city's going to be destroyed with fire and brimstone because of all the sin and wickedness and so on. 	Now, you say, "What are you preaching on tonight?" Well, the word "sodom" or "sodomite" is found 54 times. This is actually a very significant event. This is not just an obscure Bible story. This is something that the Bible references over and over and over again, all throughout the Old Testament, all throughout the New Testament. 54 times the term "sodom" or "sodomite" is mentioned. The sermon that I want to preach tonight is called The Truth About the Sodomites. Okay. The Truth About the Sodomites. You see, "sodomite" is a term that the Bible uses for a homosexual. All throughout the Bible, he uses that term a few times to refer to one that is a man who is attracted to other men or a woman that is attracted to other women.	You know, I refuse to use the term "gay" because the term "gay" is used in the Bible just about someone who's happy or cheerful. This is something that's considered strange in the Bible or "sodomites". Those are words that I'm going to use. Queer or sodomite. I'm not going to use the world's term.	But let me tell you something right now. I'm just going to warn you right now that many people are going to find the sermon that I'm going to preach right now very offensive. People are going to be offended by it and you know what that tells me? That just tells me that the brainwashing's going really well. TV and Hollywood and the music industry have done their work because everything that I'm going to preach tonight is directly from the Bible and it's going to offend a lot of people but ask me if I care. You know what? The word of God is crystal clear on this subject. I'm going to be crystal clear on this subject and people are going to be offended because they have been taught by Hollywood and taught by the mainstream media and they've been taught by the music and the TV shows that homosexuality is a normal alternative lifestyle and that they are normal people. That is not what the Bible teaches anywhere.	I'm going to show you a pattern in the Bible here. When the Bible talks about this subject, it's always the same old story playing out. You see in Genesis 19, you have a city that is filled with these homos, with these sodomites. These men in the city, instead of contenting themselves to just be a homo or get married to each other or whatever they want to do, what do they want to do? They want to go after the two guys who just got into the town, the two innocent visitors who march into town and they say, "We want those two guys." The whole town's there. They say, "We want to bring those two guys out and we want to know them." You say, "They just want to have a loving relationship." Okay. If they want to have a loving relationship, then why is it that when Lot tells them no, they say, "We're going to do worse to you than what we were going to do to them." Does that sound like they were going to do a good thing to them or a bad thing? Because worse is the superlative of bad. They said, "We're going to worse with you than what we would have done to them."	Go to Judges chapter 19. Judges chapter 19. It's interesting also when Lot tries to rebuke these men and he says, "Do not so vile a thing. Do not such a wicked thing." When he tells these men. You know what they say to him? "Oh, this guy came into sojourn among us and he'll be a judge now." What are they accusing him of doing? Judging. Isn't that the same thing today?	When you try to preach the word of God and when you show what the Bible teaches about the subject of sodomy, people will say this, "You're judging. You're judgmental." What do you say we turn to the book of Judges? It seems like a great book to go when we're dealing with this subject. The only time I see somebody telling you, "Oh, you're judging," they were the ones who were guilty of this wicked sin. "Oh, you're judging." Look at Judges 19:22. We find a very similar story. Here's a guy who's traveling with his concubine, or his live-in girlfriend, and a servant. He shows up in a town. It's a similar story, except in this story, he's trying to find a place to stay. He can't find anywhere to stay. An old man comes in from the field and says, "I will let you stay at my house, but you guys should not spend the night in the street." Very similar story.	Look at Judges 19:22. "Now, as they were making their hearts merry ..." They're having dinner, they're laughing, they're having a good time. It says as they were making their hearts merry, "Behold, the men of the city, certain sons of Belial." The term "Belial" is like Bale, Beel, Beelzebub, it's basically a term for Satan. It says, "Certain sons of Belial beset the house round about and beat at the door and spake to the master of the house, the old man, saying, 'Bring forth the man that came into thine house that we my know him.'" 	Does this sound familiar? This is several hundred years later. "The man, the master of the house, went out unto them and said unto them, "Nay, my brethren. Nay, I pray you do not so wickedly. Seeing that this man has come into my house, do not this folly. Behold, here is my daughter, a maiden, and his concubine, them I will bring out now and humble ye them. Do with them what seemeth good unto you. But unto this man, do not so vile a thing." Notice that word "vile". "But the men would not hearken to him. The man took his concubine and brought her forth unto them and they knew her and abused her all the night and until the morning. When the day began to spring, they let her go. Then came the woman in the dawning of the day and fell down at the door of the man's house where her lord was, till it was light. Her lord rose up in the morning and opened the doors of the house and went out to go his way. Behold, the woman, his concubine, was fallen down at the door of the house and her hands were upon the threshold. He said unto her, 'Up and let us be going,' but none answered. Then the man took her up upon an ass and the man rose up and got out of this place." She's dead. 	You say, "Well, this isn't a very pleasant story. This isn't a very pleasant sermon." No, it's not a very pleasant subject. But this, my friend is reality that you're seeing tonight. You see, what you see on TV is a lie. What you hear in the music is a lie. What you see in the Hollywood movie is a lie. This is the truth. When you come to church, you should expect to hear the truth about every subject. Tonight, you're going to hear the truth about the sodomites. It's not what you might have already previously thought. You says it's an unpleasant sermon. Of course it's an unpleasant sermon. We're preaching about the sodomites. It's an unpleasant subject. But it's a subject that needs to be preached because somebody's got to tell the truth today in 2013. It's not being preached today. Why is it not being preached? Because it's unpopular. Why is it not being preached? Because people don't want to hear it. Why is it not being preached? Because it's not pleasant. But it's going to preached tonight.	Go if you would to the New Testament. Go to 2 Peter chapter 2. While you're turning to 2 Peter chapter 2, let me just give you some other scriptures from the Old Testament that use the word "sodomite" because Sodom went down in history as a place known for this type of sin and perversion. Therefore, that term is used to describe any man who would lust after other men or women who would lust after other women. They're called sodomites in the Bible. The Bible says in 1 Kings 14:24, "There were also sodomites in the land and they did according to all the abominations of the nations which the Lord cast out before the children of Israel." 	Chapter 15 of 1 Kings, verse 11. You don't have to turn there. It talks about King Asa coming on the scene at this time of sodomites being in the land. It says, "Asa did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, as did David, his father. He took away the sodomites out of the land and removed all the idols that his followers had made." Look, we don't see a tolerance here of sodomites. We see a righteous King Asa getting them out of the land.	It says in 2 Kings 23:7 about King Josiah, a future king. He break down the houses of the sodomites that were by the house of the Lord, where the women wove hangings for the grove.	Just in case there's any confusion about what God thinks about the subject of homosexuality or sodomy, he told us very clearly in Leviticus 20:13. He said, "If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination. They shall surely be put to death. Their blood shall be upon them." That's Leviticus 20:13. I'm not the author of Leviticus 20:13. God is the author of Leviticus 20:13. He said that when a man goes to bed with another man, that is an abomination and that should be punished by the death penalty.	Now, you say, "Are you going to go out and kill homos?" No. I'm not, but you know what? That is the punishment that God ordained. Back when God was running the government of the Old Testament, that's the punishment that was carried out when God was in charge. Now, God is not in charge of our nation today. That's why our nation promotes everything that's against God. That's why our nation is the tip of the spear of the New World Order and the global government and the satanic one world religion. That's why our government today promotes the slaughter of unborn and newborn children. That's why our government promotes sodomy and promotes homosexuality. Because God's not in charge. Back in the days of the children of Israel of the Old Testament, God was in charge and this was the law of the land and it was literally carried out. This is not just a theory. This was actually was carried out. By the way, it was carried out in this country. The death penalty was on homosexuality in the early days of our nation in the 1600 and 1700s. That was the law of the land as well. 	But if you would, look down at your Bible there in 2 Peter chapter 2. You say, "Well, that was the Old Testament." Okay. Let's go to the New Testament then. 2 Peter chapter 2, almost to the very end of the Bible, it says in verse 6, "Turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes condemned them with an overthrow," because that's how he felt about it back then. That was before he had evolved on that issue. Is that what it says? It says that he turned Sodom and Gomorrah and condemned them with an overthrow. He turned it into ashes, making them an example unto those that after should live ungodly. Do you see that when God destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, that was supposed to be an example unto us today? That's why in the New Testament, at the end of the Bible, he's saying, "Hey, let me tell you something. That was an example unto those that afterward should live ungodly." He delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked. It doesn't say the alternative lifestyle of the wicked. It says "vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked."	Go to Jude, just a few pages to the right in your Bible. Jude verse 7, just a couple pages over. Second to last book in the Bible. Jude verse 7. "Even as Sodom and Gomorrah and the cities about them and like manor, giving themselves over to fornication and going after strange flesh are set forth for an example suffering the vengeance of eternal fire." Again, emphasizing the fact that that is supposed to be an example unto us today. Where we can look at that example and say, "This is what God thinks about that sin." You say, "Well, what was the sin? What was the big sin?" He tells right here what the sin was. You say, "Why did he rain fire and brimstone? Was it just because of the violent way that they were trying to carry out their lust? Was it just the violence that they were trying to do?" Well, the Bible says it's because they had given themselves over to fornication, going after strange flesh. You know, strange has a synonym. Queer. Okay. It is not normal for a man to go after another man's flesh. That's strange flesh. He says that they gave themselves over to fornication and went after strange flesh and that they are set forth an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.	Go to Romans 1. Romans, chapter number 1. A lot about this in the New Testament, my friend. We're not even going to look at all the New Testament passages for sake of time. We could look up all 54 times that the word "sodom" or "sodomite" is mentioned in the Bible, but it would take too long to go to all the scriptures. People think, "Oh, the Bible barely touches on that," or "Oh, the Bible doesn't really talk about that." Look, 54 times the word "sodom" is used. The passage I'm taking you to in Romans 1 deals with this subject and doesn't even mention the word "sodom" or "sodomite". I mean, there are more than 54 scriptures to deal with here. I mean, there are a lot of scriptures. Genesis 9 deals with this subject. Again, no mention of the word "sodom". Again, this is a subject that the Bible deals with quite a bit actually.	Look at Romans chapter 1. Let's just let the Bible do the talking tonight because the Bible says so much. Look at verse number 18. It says, "For the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and all unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth and unrighteousness. Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them. For God hath showed it unto them. For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and God-head so they are without excuse." Verse 21, "Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God. Neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools and changed the glory of the un-corruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man and to birds and to four-footed beasts and creeping things. Wherefore," wherefore means for this reason. "Wherefore, God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts to dishonor their own bodies between themselves." If you have a pen and if you like to mark things in your Bible, I would just underline the words "God also gave them up". Okay. Let's keep reading.	Verse 25. "Who changed the truth of God into a lie and worshiped and served the creature more than the creator, who is blessed forever. Amen. For this cause, God gave them up." Underline the word "God gave them up". "Unto vile affections." 	Now, do you remember how the "vile" was used back in Judges 19? When the old man said, "Do not so vile a thing." What does the word "vile" mean? Somebody help me out. What does the word "vile" mean? Disgusting. What's another? Sick. Not in a good way. You know, vile means disgusting, gross. Would that be another word that you would probably use for vile? That's what the word V-I-L-E means. The Bible says here that for this cause, God gave them up unto vile affections. For what cause? The fact that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God. The fact that they rejected God, they rejected the evidence that he is the creator of the world. They rejected all the things that he gave them and the good things that he did for them. Keep reading. 	It says, "God gave them up unto vile affections. For even their women did change the natural use into that which is against nature. Likewise, also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman burned in their lust one toward another. Men with men, working that which is unseemly and receiving in themselves that recompense of their err which was meet." The wording that God uses to describe this activity of men with men, he used the word "vile". He used the word "unseemly". He used the word it's not "convenient", meaning convenient, meaning it doesn't come naturally. He used the word "against nature". He used the word "uncleanness". He said he gave them unto vile affections. He says here in verse 28, "Even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over." Underline the words "God gave them over". "To a reprobate mind to do those things which are not convenient."	Let me ask you something. According to verse 28 here, which came first here? Them rejecting God or God rejecting them? Which came first? It's pretty clear isn't it? It says first here's what they did. They refused to acknowledge God. They refused to worship God. They refused to believe on the lord, Jesus Christ. They reduced God to the image of a man. They reduced God to the image of an animal or a beast. They did not like to retain God in their knowledge, meaning they hated God so much, they don't want to think about God. They don't even want to remember that there is a God and he says that that is what lead to them being given over to a reprobate mind.	Three different times, it says God gave them up. God gave them up. God gave them over. Then, people, today still, 99% of evangelical Christianity or Baptist that you talk to will say, "I don't think God gave them up. I don't believe God gave them over. I don't believe God gave them up. I don't think God had anything to do with it." Am I telling the truth? Do you want to take a poll with me? If we were to go around and ask all the evangelical Christians and Baptists in this area, do you think God had anything to do with these people becoming perverted or becoming a reprobate or becoming vile? No. No. But what does the Bible say? It says it. I believe it. This is what it says here. Did it say born that way? Did this say they're normal, they're just born that way, or it's just another lifestyle, it's just another way? Now, you say, "I do not agree with this sermon." Well, just buckle up. Just hang on. I've got all the facts here. First of all, these are my most important facts. The Bible. The word of God. I've actually got other facts here for those of you that are a little more of a scientific persuasion. I've got those facts right here. 	But listen to this. Let's keep reading here. It says God gave them over to a reprobate mind. What does reprobate mean? Flip back. Keep your finger in Romans 1. Go to Jeremiah 6. Now, here's a tip on studying the Bible. Anytime you come to a word in the Bible that you don't understand, that's a difficult word. Let's face it, "reprobate" is a difficult word because reprobate is not a word that we commonly use in our vernacular. Is it? I mean, you don't walk around using the word "reprobate". Whenever you find a word that's a tough word, usually if you go to the first time that word's ever used in the Bible, God defines it for you. It's almost like the Bible has it's own built in dictionary. I mean, if you go back to Genesis 1, man, he's defining everything. He's defining day, night, he's defining the sun, moon, and stars. God has a good way in the Bible of defining words. If people that have trouble understanding the Bible, if they would just read the Bible cover to cover, they'd learn the vocabulary. They're learn the information.	But Jeremiah 6:30 is the first time that the word "reprobate" is ever used in the Bible. We can expect to maybe find a little help with the definition. It says in Jeremiah 6:30, "Reprobate silver shall men call them because the Lord hath rejected them." Built into that verse, we find the definition of the word reprobate and if you look up in a dictionary, you'll see that the word "reprobate" means reject or rejected. Okay. Basically, what we see in Romans 1, because Jeremiah 6:30, go to Romans 1 though. It said, "Reprobate silver shall men call them because the Lord has reject them." Applying that definition of reprobate to Romans 1:28, it says, "Even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind to do those things which are not convenient." Basically, they first rejected God and then as a result, God rejected them. When God rejected them, he gave them over to uncleanness.	You say, "Well, Pastor Anderson, are you saying that God makes people be a homo or makes people be a sodomite?" No. I want you to be very careful to what I'm saying here and not to misunderstand. Now, the homo says, "God made me this way." I have to say that he is partially correct. Okay. But he wasn't born that way. He became that way. Let me just explain this to you very clearly. God is not the author of confusion. God is not the author of sin. God does not dream up wickedness and sin in his heart. There are those who believe in a doctrine called Calvinism and the false doctrine of Calvinism teaches that God is the author of all sin, that God is author of all wickedness. That is not true. God is light and in him is no darkness at all. Okay. The Bible says God is not the author of confusion. The Bible actually describes this type of perversion in the Old Testament as confusion.	But notice the key verse in Romans 1, go up just a few verses, the key point is in verse 24. It says, "Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own heart." Is God the one who came up with this perversion and wickedness of sodomy or homosexuality? No. But he gave them over to do those things which are not convenient or do not come naturally. He gave them up. He gave them over to their own hearts' lusts. Okay.	Go to Psalm 81. Psalm 81 is a great scripture that ties in with Romans chapter 1 because it has a similar teaching in Psalm 81. Let me just explain it to you this way. You say, "What do you mean by that, Pastor Anderson, when it says God gave them up unto vile affections or God gave them over to their own heart's lust to do these wicked things?" Well, I'll put it to you this way. As human beings, we have certain constraints upon us of things that we just will not do. You know, there are things that we just will not do. You know, just to use a really basic example, if I wanted to just stand here right now and just fall flat on my face, I would be unable to do so, wouldn't I? Because my hands would come out. It's a reflex. You can't help it. If I just start falling, I can't help it but to stop myself. Because we have a built in mechanism that says, "Do not destroy yourself." That's why it's so hard for people to commit suicide and they have to dream up all these ways to commit suicide. Because our body has a built in mechanism that says, "Don't hurt yourself. Don't destroy thyself." Okay.	There are other things that we don't want to do. We look at a lot of things that are gross. We have a physical reaction. Now, let me ask you this. Do animals find the same things gross that we find gross? No, because you'll see animals do things sometimes that no human being could ever bring themselves to do. You know, you see animals for example, I don't want to be crass here, but this is a biblical verse. The Bible says, "As the dog returns unto his vomit, so doth the fool return to his folly." The Bible compares the foolish person to a dog returning to his own vomit. Now, look. Dogs will throw up and then what do they do? They eat their own vomit. Would you be comfortable doing that? Now, wouldn't you just be grossed out by that and just find that just completely disgusting? Okay.	Well, there are other things that any normal person finds very disgusting. One of those things is, as a man, if you're a normal man, you find it disgusting to be intimate with another man. Okay. If you're a woman, you find it disgusting to be intimate with another woman. Then, there are plenty of other bizarre things that we would all find disgusting or repulsive or, let me think, vile. Okay.	That's a good word. What happens is when a person becomes reprobate, according to the Bible, when a person is rejected by God after repeatedly refusing God, hating God, it's like God just removes that restraint or removes that constraint that says, "Hey. These are gross things. These are weird things. These are things that you just don't do." It's like he just removes that and then they just do whatever. That's one of the things that they do is men with men. But they do other things. I mean, I don't want to go into it all tonight, but Leviticus 18 is chalked full of things that they do that are even worse. Things with animals ... It goes down the list in Leviticus 18. I'm not even going to go into it tonight. This sermon's already nasty enough without having to go verse by verse through Leviticus 18. I don't think I can handle that one tonight.	But in Psalm 81, look at a similar concept here. This is talking about ... Keep in mind, when you use the word "my people" here, he's not talking about saved believers because this is back in the Old Testament when the nation of Israel was God's chosen people. In the New Testament, we know that is no longer the case. God said the kingdom of God will be taken from you and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. But he called the children of Israel in the Old Testament often his people.	Well, there is a period in the history of the nation of Israel when his people went off into sin and perversion and wickedness. That's what we're reading about in Psalm 81. Let me get there myself. It says in verse 10, "I am the Lord, thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt. Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it. But my people would not hearken to my voice. Israel would none of me." Look at verse 12, "So I gave them up unto their own hearts' lusts." Does that sound familiar to Romans 1? Their own hearts' lusts. That's exactly the wording of Romans 1. Look, he gave them up. Isn't that like where it said God gave them up in Romans 1. It says, "So I gave them up to their own hearts' lusts and they walked in their own council." Again, God is not the author of this perversion, but he gave them up to where they would partake of it because they're going to partake of anything because they've removed the constraints of a human being made in the image of God and given a heart similar to the heart of a beast.	Now, let me ask you this. Do animals sometimes engage in what the world will try to tell is sodomite activity? I've never seen it either, but sometimes you might see a dog just pretty much hump just about anything. Okay. Well, that's where these sodomites are at. That's pretty much where they're at. At that level. Okay. We bought a dog one time and it was like that. We got rid of that dog about two days later. We said, "This is not the dog for our family. This dog is out of control. This dog is reprobate." We rejected that dog. Okay.	It says in Psalm 81:12, "So I gave them up unto their own hearts' lusts and they walked in their own councils. Oh that my people had hearkened unto me and Israel had walked in my ways." Based on verse 13, does it look like it's God's fault? God's pleading, saying, "Man, I wish that it hadn't have ended up this way." Is God just glad that it ended this way? He's glad to just reject people and turn them into a reprobate and give them up to their own ... No, he's saying, "Man, I wish that it hadn't had come to this." He says this, "I should soon have subdued their enemies and turned my hand against their adversaries." Verse 15, "The haters of the Lord." Notice how he describes the same people who are given up to their own hearts' lusts as the haters of the Lord.	In Judges 19, he described them as the sons of Belial. Okay. Here, he says, "They should have submitted themselves unto him, but their time should have endured forever. He should have fed them also with the finest of wheat and "with honey out of the raw should I have satisfied them." Look, it's not that these people never had an opportunity to get saved, they should have endured forever. They should have eternal life. They should have believed on Christ. They should have gotten saved. They should have retained God in their knowledge. They should not have decided to reject the creator and reject the truth and reject the word of God. They should have accepted it. It's not God's fault. Look, is it God's fault? No. He says, "Man, I would have done everything for them. They messed it up. It was their choice."	Back to Romans 1, if you would. Let's finish up with Romans 1. Romans chapter 1 here says this. It says, "Even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind to do those things which are not convenient." What he just mentioned. Men with men, women with women, burning in their lusts one toward another.	Now, look at the end of verse 28. What punctuation do you see at the end of verse 28 there? What punctuation is that? A semicolon, right? I got a semicolon in my Bible here. Is the sentence over when you have a semicolon? Are we moving on to a new subject, new thought? Absolutely not. Now look, is "being filled" a way to start a sentence? Not necessarily. Look, what we see here is a continuation of what he just said. Are we not? Are we not in the same sentence? Are we not continuing with the same thought? Isn't "being filled" talking about the people that we were just talking about? "They are being filled with these things." He just said even as they ... Who's the they? Well, in verse 27, he said, "Men with men, burning in their lusts one toward another. And even as they ..." Who's the they? The men who burn in their lusts one toward another. "Even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind to do those things which are not convenient; being filled with all unrighteousness." 	What does that say? It's saying that these men with men, who burn in their lusts, one toward another, are filled with all unrighteousness. Is this the only area they're messed up in? I mean, other than that, they're great people. If it weren't for this one thing that they lust for other men. Is that what the Bible says? No. It says that they are also filled with all unrighteousness. What does all mean? Thank you.	It says, "Being filled with all unrighteousness: fornication." That goes with out saying. "Wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy ..." What's the next word? Murder. Now, who believes that? Who believes the Bible tonight? That's what the Bible says, they're filled with murder. He says, "Debate, deceit, malignity, whisperers, back biters ..." What are the next three words? Haters of God. Isn't that what God called them back in Psalm 81? Haters of God. "Spiteful, proud ..." What's that event that they have again where they march up and down the street? What's that called again? Oh, Phoenix Pride. Oh, Gay Pride. I think the Bible mentions that here. Proud. He says, "Boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents, without understanding, covenant breakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful." That's a pretty bad list of sins that they are filled with. Really, we don't even need the list because we just go back to the beginning of verse 29. It says filled with all unrighteousness. That runs the gammit.	The last two words are the most chilling. When we see the last two words, these are the ones that aught to get our attention. "Implacable, unmerciful." What does the word implacable mean? Well, have you ever heard of the word to placate? What does it mean to placate someone? You know, let's saying someone's asking me for something and I just want to placate them. It means I'm just going to give them something just to get them off my back. Isn't that what it means to placate someone? Just get them off my back. Just satisfy them. Just give them what they want. The Bible says here, they're never going to be satisfied. They're implacable. It means that they will never be satisfied. Then, the next word ties in. Unmerciful. Is this consistent with Genesis 19 and the story of Sodom? What happened in the story of Sodom? Two strangers walk in to town, innocent guys. They're having dinner. They sit down to eat a meal with Lot. A knock comes at the door and says, "Bring those guys out that may know them. We want to get to know these guys in way that's carnal." They say, "No. You can't have these guys." "Okay. We'll do worse to you than what we were going to do to them." No mercy. No listening to reason. No placating them.	Judges 19. Similar story. Men of the city come knocking at the door. "Bring those two guys out." They will not be satisfied. Did they show any mercy on that woman that they abused? They abused that woman all night until she was dead. That's what the Bible said in Judges 19. You know what? People will lie to you and say, "These homos. They're just not attracted to women." Is that biblical? Every single homo in the Bible went both ways. Every single one. From Genesis to Revelation. Whether it's the story of Ham in Genesis 9, whether it's the story of Sodom and Gomorrah. It talks about how the men of the city had wives and children, the young of the city. When we go to Judges 19, we see that they basically went after this woman, also. See, that's why in Leviticus 13, it says if a man also lie with mankind as he lieth with the woman. It doesn't say he's lying exclusively with mankind as opposed to lying with a woman. It says, "If a man lie also with mankind as he lieth with a woman, even both of them have committed an abomination. They shall surely be put to death. Their blood should be upon them."	You say, "Well, you have that verse memorized? You don't even have to turn there?" You know, you might want to make that a memory verse too, especially if you don't like this sermon. You may need that to be a on a 3 by 5 card in your pocket this week, which I've done in the past and you need to do today if you're not clear on this doctrine. It's important to understand.	Look what he says after he mentions the the fact that they're implacable and unmerciful in verse 32. "Who knowing ..." Are we on a new sentence or we're still on the same thought? I see a colon at the end of verse 31. Same sentence. "Who knowing the judgement of God that they which commit such things are ..." What? Is that consistent with Leviticus 20:13? Bible's consistent. Worthy of death. "Not only do the same but have pleasure in them that do them." You say, "No. They're no longer worthy of death." Then why did God say, "Well, I rained fire and brimstone on them, that was an example to those that afterwards should live ungodly?" If they are no longer worthy of death, then why did God say it's an example unto those in the New Testament who afterwards should live ungodly? Simple. Because they are worthy of death, because that is what the Bible teaches.	Now, what we see here is that the Bible is painting a very ugly picture of the subject of sodomy. Because there are three stories in the Bible ... Look, I already mentioned to you that there are 54 mentions of the word "sodom" alone. But as far as stories, there are a lot of statements. Is Romans 1 really a story? Romans 1 isn't really a story, he's just stating some facts to us. If we look at stories, there are three stories in the Bible that involve sodomy, that involve men who commit acts with other men. They're found in Genesis 9, Genesis 19, and Judges 19. They all involve violating someone against their will. They are all horrible stories of violence. They're all consistent in what they teach. Now, the Bible is painting a very negative picture of this so-called segment of our population. Because the Bible is saying that they're vile. The Bible is saying they're disgusting. The Bible is saying that they're reprobate. The Bible says they hate God. The Bible says that they are filled with murder and malignity and maliciousness and violence and that they're basically rapists and predators and hurting people, that they're wicked, that they can't ever be satisfied, that they are just completely given over to their own wicked heart and the heart of a beast. I mean, that's the picture that the Bible paints. It's very consistent.	Let's step over here to the picture that the world paints. Then, we're going to take our scientific facts out and see which of these pictures is really the true picture. Who here tonight would say, "Pastor Anderson, I don't care what the facts say, I don't care what the Bible says, I don't care what science tells us. Don't confuse me with the facts. I just believe that homosexuals are wonderful and nothing you can say will ever change my mind on that." Wouldn't that be ridiculous to say, "I don't care what the Bible says. I don't care what the truth is." Can't we just examine the facts together tonight? Can we, as mature adults, look at some facts and come to a conclusion tonight? Over here, the Bible's painting a picture but there are those out there that say the Bible's a fairy tale. Aren't there? There are people out there who believe that the Bible is lying. There are people out there who believe that the Bible was just written by someone who was homophobic. The Bible is wrong. Look, the Bible's painting a pretty grim picture. They say, "Well, the Bible's just not true. The Bible's not real."	Let's step over into their realm for a moment. Let's step into the realm of Hollywood. Let's step into the realm of television. Let's step into the realm of rock and roll. They will tell you that homosexuality is normal. Right? I'm sorry. Let's step into the realm of public school. Let's step into the realm of government schools and government universities. Here's what they'll tell you. It's okay. It's normal. Experiment with it. Maybe you are one. Don't worry about it. It's fine. It's wonderful. In fact, we're going to read you stories about it to make you comfortable with it, even when you're five, six, seven, eight, nine. We just want to make sure you know it's okay to do it. In fact, it's cool. In fact, it's stylish and trendy. That's what the world sees. The world's teaching you over here these people just love each other want to get married.	Isn't that a big issue today that you hear a lot about? Gay marriage. I personally don't really get involved in that debate. You know why I don't get involved in that debate? Because there's nothing in the Bible that says that they can't get married right before they're stoned to death. I'm okay with it. You know, I'm okay with it. Again, we're always talking about the wrong thing. The world wants to get you arguing about the wrong thing. While you're arguing about whether or not they should get married, I'm arguing about whether or not they should even be alive. You see how the devil gets you all mixed up. It's the Hegelian Dialectic my friend. What they do is they start talking about something really extreme over here in order to move the normal of the center over. That's what they're doing. They don't want to talk about the real subject. They want to take you to some extreme of pedophilia or take you to an extreme of homos getting married in church or something just to get you to say, "Well, we're going to draw the line at that."	Look, this whole "gay marriage" debate is a fraud. Let me just expose it to you tonight. It's a fraud. It is something that politicians use to look like they're taking a stand for something when they're really not. Let me explain it to you this way. When Obama was running for election in 2008, he was against gay marriage. Did you know that? In 2008, when Obama was running for election, he was against gay marriage. So was his republican opponent. The reason that politicians do that is because they want to go to one group and say, "I'm for traditional values and I'm against gay marriage and I'm for a man and a woman." Then they come over to this group and say, "I'm hiring 50 million homos on my staff this week." It's like a way to make both happy. Look, the republicans do it. Don't be deceived by this false choice. The republicans and democrats are identical. The republicans come in and say, "I'm going to hire so many homosexuals my office is going to be like a gay bar." Everybody's like, "Yeah. Yeah. Yeah." That's what they say. I've heard Mitt Romney say, "Oh, man. I'm going to hire so many homosexuals. I'll put them on the Supreme Court." Then he goes to some pro-family group. "They're not going to get married under my watch." But Obama does the identical thing because there is no difference. It's a fraud, my friend.	The Bible doesn't mention gay marriage. The Bible mentions gay burial, gay funerals, not marriages, funerals. Anyway, I'm just telling you the truth tonight. Let me say this. Over on this side of the spectrum, they say, "It's normal. We need to accept it. It's fine." They even say, "It's natural." I mean, don't they teach it's natural? I mean, if they're saying that a huge percentage of the population is born that way, they're saying it's natural. Here's what they say, "Animals do it. We've evolved this way. It's a gay gene. It's normal. It's okay." This is what they say, "These people just want to love each other and just get married. Why can't they enjoy this union of being married? They just want to be accepted. They just want to live a normal life. It's just two men who want to live together and raise children. It's going to be very similar to Leave It To Beaver. It's just that there's two men instead of a man and a woman."	Is there something inaccurate? I want somebody to correct me right now if there's something inaccurate about the way I'm portraying that the world ... Does anybody have anything to add about how the world portrays it? I just want to make sure I'm covering it. It's normal. They just want to get married. They just want to love each other. They're just like you and me. They're nice people. They're wonderful people. They're not bad people. They're not bad people. They're not pedophiles. Natural. Am I missing something? Many of them love the Lord and are Christian. They love God. Is there anything I'm leaving out? Congregation:	Income tax advantage.Pastor:	Yeah, yeah. They just want to get that income tax advantage. Now, let's get out some science. Let's test it out. I don't need the science because I just believe the Bible because I just believe the Bible because the Bible's God's word. For me, that's it. It's done. Let's just test out the world's view point versus Pastor Anderson's view point, which is basically me just telling you what the Bible says. Okay. Let's test it out.	This is from the Center for Disease Control. Let me ask you this. Is the Center for Disease Control a right-wing family group? The Center for Disease Control, I believe, correct me if I'm wrong, is a wing of our government, which is actively pro-homosexual. The Center for Disease Control is a wing of our government. Here's what they say. That the AIDs rate, that the rate of HIV, is 50 times higher for homosexuals. Did you hear that? 50 times higher. Okay. You say, "Well, that's odd. I wonder how in the world, this normal, natural, healthy, wonderful lifestyle would lead to 50 times as much of this deadly disease. How in the world is the AIDs rate 50 times higher?" According to a February 2000 ... I don't even want to mention that, but it also mentions how syphilis off the charts, cancer of the backside, off the charts. I mean, just through the roof rates. AIDs alone, 50 times higher. You know, there's a whole list of diseases here. Okay. Let me explain to you how they got 50 times as much AIDs.	It's right here in this article which is a scientific article put out by two researchers, Belle and Weinberg, and they did a study of thousands and thousands of homos. Just doing a study on their lifestyle, doing a survey. Here's what they found. They found that 28% of homos that they checked with, 28% had already had more than one thousand partners. Now, look it's hard to even wrap your mind around a number like that. Isn't it? A thousand. I mean, there's only 365 days in a year. I mean, a thousand different people. 28% that's almost a third. Let's just round it down. Let's just call it a fourth. That means that if you know four homos, one of them has already surpassed the thousand mark, based on this information. Do you think I made this up? Go research it. It's all fact. There are about three other studies that were done that showed the same thing. This was done in different parts of the country, different time periods, one was done in the 70s, one was done in the 90s. More than a quarter, more than one out of four, had a thousand, already a thousand. I mean, that number boggles the mind. 28%. But it goes further than that.	43% had had over 500. That's already just bizarre. I mean, just off the charts. If you know two of them, one of them has hit the 500 mark already. Now, do you understand why they're 50 times more likely to have AIDs? Do you see how these two support each other and prove? Okay. This is not normal. This is not healthy. This is not what it's portrayed in the media. Is this what the guy on the sitcom, the queer character that they put on the movie, the token queer, the token queer on the sitcom, the token queer on the movie, is this the type of lifestyle that they show him living? Anonymously committing acts with a thousand people. It says over 50% of these acts are with people that they have no idea. Just random strangers. Over half of these encounters. Okay.	Not only that, but a mere 17% reported having less than 50 already. I mean, look. They still have their whole life ahead of them. 17%, a mere 17% said, "At this point, I've had less than 50." Only 17%. This study showed that being monogamous or being faithful to one partner was non-existent. Not a low percent. You say, "Well, what's the percentage of them where they're just married and it's just the two of them." The percentage is zero. You know, one particular that's mentioned here, they studied like a 150 some couples and they said it didn't exist. Amongst these 150 something couples, it just didn't exist. Yeah, they might have been married for five years, ten years, because these homos are getting married now in places like Massachusetts and whatever. It said it just didn't exist. They're just married but they're still just going out and just being like that dog that we had to get rid of after two days. Everywhere they go with strangers. Okay.	They are filled with disease. They are, all of them, filled with disease, whether it's AIDs, syphilis, gay bowel syndrome, cancer of the backside, all these different things. I mean, the list and the litany goes on and on and on. Look, is it starting to make sense why the Bible used the word "uncleanness"? Because it sounds pretty unsanitary to me. Is it starting to make sense why the Bible used the word "vile"? Is it starting to make sense why the Bible said it's filthy? If you remember when Lot left Sodom, it says he was vexed with the filthy conversation of the world. Now, look. Is this side looking true right now? But folks, the Bible's a fairy tale. The Bible's a fraud. The Bible's a stone age book. The Bible doesn't know what it's talking about, my friend. You need to get enlightened. You need to get into the twenty-first century and quit reading that barbaric bronze age book and get enlightened and realize that homos are normal. It's normal to have a 1000 partners. It's normal to commit animalistic acts with people that you've never met and don't even know their name every day, 365 days a year. It's normal. It's an alternative lifestyle. It's healthy. Don't worry about the fact that your intestines are falling out. It's normal. Look, this is what children in school are being taught is normal.	Look, here's what's funny. You know what public school will teach them? Don't smoke. Don't smoke. Because smoking is shaving years off your life. Isn't that what the school will teach them? Who went to public school and was taught repeatedly every year that smoking is bad? I went to school and there was Red Ribbon Week. In Red Ribbon Week, it was like, "Don't drink coffee. Don't smoke. Don't drink alcohol. Don't do drugs. This stuff is bad for your health." We need to have a rainbow ribbon week that says if you want your guts to fall out, if you want to be filled with AIDs and syphilis and gonorrhea and gay bowel syndrome, then be a fag. That's what we need. Actually, we don't even need a public school. That's another sermon in and of itself. But what I'm saying this is a fact.	Here's another article explaining that the homo lifestyle shortens a man's life by an average of 20 years. Look, you can smoke two packs a day and it's probably not going to shave 20 whole years off your life. I'm sure it will shave years off your life. For example, it lists here that a lesbian woman ... Because we always tend to focus it on the man, but there are just as many women in this lifestyle as there are men. A woman who is normal has an 85% chance of reaching age 65, but a lesbian woman as a 24% chance of making it to 65. Did you hear that? I mean the chances are slim that they're going to make it to 65. I mean, look. It's 20 years.	Even a pro-gay research group, they did a study and they said, "You're losing at least 8 to 20 years off your life by being homosexual." They were angry when preachers and family groups would use those statistics against them. "That's not why we did this research. We're trying to figure out a way to keep them healthy while they do this. You're using this to expose how filthy." Who would have guessed, oh TV watcher? Who would have guessed, oh Hollywood fan? Who would have guessed, who would have said, "I guess that probably 3 out of 10 homos have probably had 1000 partners already." Who would have guessed that based on what you see on TV, movies? Yet, these are the facts.	Are all these facts lying? Come look at them after the service. Are all these articles lying? Is the CDC lying? Is all of this a lie? Is the Bible lying? Hollywood's lying. TV is lying. But you know what? Most people are too stupid to question anything that they see on that idiot box. They just, "Oh, you're a hate preacher. You're just hateful. You just hate people who go around and fill themselves and everyone around them with disease. You just hate these pedophiles. You just hate these perverts. You're a hate group." No. This is a Baptist church. But you know what? The truth is hate to those who hate the truth. I'll tell you something right now, my friend. Case closed. You know what I mean? The Bible is right again. The world is found to be a liar again. You know, I hope this will make you question some of the other things that you're told my society. You know what? There are all kinds of little kids and young people and adults who watch CNN and TV and they think, "Oh, Pastor Anderson. That wicked man. That evil man. That wicked, sick, evil, individual." But look, they don't realize these facts. They don't realize the biblical facts and they don't realize the scientific facts.	I'm going to tell you something, the reason I'm preaching this sermon, it's not a fun sermon to preach, it's not a pleasant subject, it's not even something that I like to think about or bring up, but it's in the Bible for a reason. The reason that I've preached this sermon tonight is one reason, because you will not hear it anywhere else. You can even go to 99% of Christian or Baptist churches and you're not going to hear it. There must be some place where the truth is told. Now, if I had said something tonight that is not in the Bible, then come tell me. If I have said something that is not backed up by hard evidence and facts, then come correct me after the service. But you know and I know that everything I've said tonight is true. This is the message that we need to get out to our young people and that we need to get out to Christianity and that we need to get out from the housetops that this is the truth about the sodomites. This mess is not being heard because it's unpopular.	You know what? Jesus wasn't popular. They crucified him. Steven wasn't popular. They stoned him to death. The apostles weren't popular. They spent half the book of Acts in jail. It's not about being popular, it's about preaching the truth and preaching what's right. Let's bow our heads and have a word of prayer.	Father, we thank you so much for your word and we thank you for the truth, dear God, because frankly without it, we wouldn't even know what's happening. We are so brainwashed. We've been so lied to. I don't even know what to believe anymore. But one thing I do know is I can believe everything in your word. Thank you for giving us the rock that no matter what study says this or what history says or what this website says, we just know that the Bible's right and we can just anchor our soul to it. Here, it's been proven right once again. Please help everyone who's here not to be offended, not to have their feelings hurt because of their queer cousin or whatever. God, please just help them to understand that this is what you've taught and that this is your word. God, just please bless our church. Help us never to go soft. Help us to keep on standing for the truth until the end comes. In Jesus' name we pray.


