




Shri Meher Baba's Teaching as the 
Kernal of Upanishadic Wisdom 


BY DR. C. D. DESHMUKH, M. A., PH. D.

    In Upanishads, philosophy is not divorced from religion. A story in Katha Upanishad brings out effectively how the earlier forms of nature worship and polytheism were super-ceded by philosophical mon≠ism. The gods had won a victory over demons by virtue of the power which they really derived from the Brahman; but they thought that it was their own greatness. So the Brahman appeared before the gods in order to free them from this illusion. The gods deputed Fire and Wind to find out the strength of what had appeared to them. The Brahman pre≠sented them with some straw; but Fire could not burn it, and Wind could not blow it away. But when Indra who knew the greatness of the Brahman approached it, it vanished from sight. So the story posits an all-powerful and unitary cosmic principle which is beyond the elements or the gods. But poly≠theism is not merely negated. The element of truth in it has been absorbed in the doctrine of the immanence of the divine life in all creation. We thus find that the Ishavasya Upan≠ishad begins with the following assertion: "All that has life is pervaded by the Divine Life." 

(Isha) 

The great regard for truth, in whichever form it may be, keeps the Upanishadic sages free from sectarian bias even at the cost of apparent incon≠sistencies. Thus when Vidag≠dha, the son of Shakala, asks Yadnyavalkya, "How many gods are there?" he says in the same breath, "Three and three hundred; three and three thousand." He even says that the gods might also be said to be one and a half, and cites in this connection the example of the wind which perceptibly increases in volume, thus becoming more than one but remaining less 
       

than two entities. But he explains the position by saying that all these are Vibhuties, i. e., mani≠festations of Divinity, and affirms that God is really One. One who realizes God transcends the manifold nature of the world. "The Seer goes beyond duality and becomes one. This is his ulti≠mate goal."(Brihadaranyaka)

    As Shri Meher Baba puts it: "God-consciousness means to be mentally, emotionally and spiri≠tually conscious of the One Self at all times and in all places."* 

    Shri Meher Baba does not put forth the idea of the Atman as some bloodless category which would merely help to solve the problems of intellectual know≠ledge. It is true that the ideal of a comprehensive and unified know≠ledge, though it is merely intel≠lectual, requires the assump-tion of a basic unity in Reality; but the Atman is much more than this. Shri Meher Baba has depicted it as "the real Beloved". We find that this way of looking at reality has a parallel in the Upanishads, where the Atman is described as a life principal and regarded as the Beloved. It should be wor≠shipped as the Beloved. (Briha≠daranyaka)

    In fact even ordinary love of wife, son, husband, wealth, ani≠mals, people, gods, etc. is in the last analysis found to be for the sake of the Atman and not for their own sake. "Not for the sake of the beings are beings dear, but for the sake of the Atman are beings dear. " (Brihadaranyaka) In this passage the word Atman is sometimes translated as one 's own self; but such selfish hedonism is far from being consistent with the later contexts where Atman is described as the object of search. What the sage means is that although we may not always be conscious of the fact, our love for another is ultimately based in our fundamental unity with the other in the Universal Atman. The natural conclusion is that the true object of love is the Atman and not its manifestations taken in isolation. The forms are fleeting and elusive; but the Atman is eternal. Just as the sounds of the drum cannot be caught but only the drum, the forms of the Atman cannot be grasped but only the 



Atman. Atman is, therefore, the Supreme Beloved. The philoso≠phical monism of the Upanishads is not so rigid as not to allow room for bhakti or love. 

The Mundak Upanishad des≠cribes the individual soul and the universal soul as two birds sitting on the same tree; the former is attached to the fruit of the tree, while the latter is merely a detached observer. Caught up in the bewildering and tempting multiplicity of the world, the individual soul goes through many joys and sorrows. But it also has the idea of liberation however vague, and it expresses itself as the following prayer: "Lead me from the unreal to the Real. Lead me from darkness to Light. Lead me from death to Immortality." (Brihadaranyaka) The life of prayer is essential. "The Atman can be obtained only through the Atman itself which is the object of prayer." (Katha) 

    After attaining the Atman the individual soul knows itself to be identical with the Universal Soul, and acquires not only highest knowledge, but also highest bliss.   On one occasion Shri Meher Baba has said, "If you realize only a portion of what I call the highest Knowledge you will experience great bliss. It will bring down heaven into your heart."* The Upanishads state that the bliss of a realized person is many times greater than the happiness of a man who is the lord of others and has at his disposal all the pleasures of life. Further, he attains to freedom from fear, for fear is rooted in duality. "Only in Brahman is there freedom from fear." (Brih≠adaranyaka)

    The religion of the Upanishads is far more rationalised and evolved than the earlier nature worship, polytheism or the reli≠gion of rituals and sacrifices. The Brahman is looked upon as a principle which is both immanent and transcendent; and this truth is made a basis of a very interesting type of intellectual and emotional mysticism. But this mysticism of the Upanishads is in no way in≠different to the mundane aspect of life. It goes hand in hand with active interest in the social problems. The Upanishadic pant≠heism is the background of a moral 


philosophy according to which the highest type of action is in the spirit of an offering to God. The interest in the social good is also predominant. We have for ex≠ample the following prayer in Katha Upanishad: "Let us join together, enjoy together, reinforce our mutual strength and shine through our learning. Let us not hate each other." (Katha) The individual is not thinking in terms of any private or selfish salvation for himself alone, but joins in a collective prayer for social well≠being. 

    We find this active interest in the collective good of the whole mankind equally pronounced in the life and the teaching of Shri Meher Baba. His prospectus for the Universal Ashram announces that one of its sections "will pre≠pare mystics of the practical type" and that "these mystics will inspire others to have a life in which there will be complete detachment side by side with intense creative action". In the same prospectus another section of the Universal Ashram is described as being meant "to be a training ground for a band of self≠less workers who will learn how to render real and effective service". This clearly brings out how the teaching of Shri Meher Baba is not meant to propagate some barren form of mysticism; his teaching, like that of the Upanishads, is essentially prac≠tical and humanitarian in its effects and objective. 

    Thus in the teaching of Shri Meher Baba, as in the main current of Upanishadic philo≠sophy, the mundane and social aspects of life receive full re≠cognition and attention; but these aspects of life are not looked upon as all-in-all, and are shown to be ultimately grounded in the Atman which gives to them a deeper sanctity and meaning. The Upanishads recognize the reali≠zation of the Atman as the final goal of life, and the search for this Ultimate Reality is varied and many-sided. The speculative ap≠proach is superceded by the moral approach; the moral approach is superceded by the psychological approach; the psychological approach is carried on side by side by the religious approach of Devotion or Love; and at the end of this long and varied search the individual arrives at his original 



 

home, which is the "Truth is of Infinity alone is there final bliss truths". Shri Meher Baba and has and peace, and freedom from come to bring the world closer to  fear; and in Infinity alone is to be this Truth which is infinite: for in found the final destiny of human 

life. 

