Sunday, October 21, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  "My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou hast  rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shalt be no  priest to me: seeing thou hast forgotten the law of thy God, I will also  forget thy children. As they were increased, so they sinned against  me; therefore will I change their glory into shame. They eat up the  sin of my people, and they set their heart on their iniquity. And there  shall be, like people, like priest: and I will punish them for their ways,  and reward them their doings. For they shall eat, and not have  enough: they shall commit whoredom, and shall not increase:  because they have left off to take heed to the Lord. Whoredom and  wine and new wine take away the heart." (Hosea 4:6-11.)  AMERICA HAS GONE A-WHORING FROM GOD. "My people (Americans) ask counsel at their stocks (Arminian peanut gods of American Christianity), and their staff (dunghill gods of Sodom) declareth unto them: for the spirit of whoredoms hath caused them to err, and they have gone a-whoring from under their God." (Hosea 4:12.) This describes the condition of affairs in Israel (the ten northern tribes) just before the Lord sent Assyria to finally destroy Israel in 721 BC -- just as He later sent Babylon to finally destroy Judah (the two southern tribes); in 605 BC: to-wit: "...Therefore the Lord was very angry with Israel, and removed them out of His sight; there was none left but the tribe of Judah only... So was Israel carried away out of their own land to Assyria unto this day." 2 Kgs. 17:5-23.  Beloved, it is our duty to discern whether that same condition of affairs prevails today; and whether the fiery, sententious (pithy, energetic, explosive) -- young prophet, Hosea -- in denouncing and warning Israel, also denounces and warns America. Hosea began preaching when he was very young, and preached for almost 90 years! Hosea was a most remarkable preacher and prophet in every way, and both Isaiah and Jeremiah borrowed some of his startling sermon material. To emphasize his message to all mankind, God ordered Hosea to take a wife of whoredoms and children of whoredoms, "for the land hath committed great whoredom, departing from the Lord." Hos. 1:2. The prophet must, as it were in a looking-glass, show them their sin, and show it to be exceeding sinful, exceedingly hateful. He must take a notorious whore (Gomer) for a wife, and have such children by her as everyone would suspect to be children of whoredoms, begotten in adultery. A shameful, scandalous situation to be in, to say the least.  Now, saith God: Hosea, this people is to me such a dishonor, and such a grief, and vexation, as a wife of whoredoms and children of whoredoms would be to thee. For the land has committed great whoredoms. In all instances of wickedness they had departed from the Lord; it is not here and there a particular person that is guilty of idolatry, but the whole land is polluted with it; the sin has become national, the disease epidemical. Spell it, A-M-E-R-I-C-A. What an odious thing would it be for the prophet, a holy man of God, to have a whorish wife, and children whorish like her! What an exercise would it be of his patience. And what a commentary on conditions then, as now: There is no other kind of wife and children to be found in this place. Same-sex marriage is virtually a Satanic fait accompli ­ throughout the world -- but led by the United States. The curse of God rests solidly on this evil nation: I'm talking Lexington, Concord, West Point -- final stop: HELL.  Sunday, October 21, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  "Therefore your daughters shall commit whoredom, and your spouses shall commit adultery." (Hosea 4:13[b].)  Further describing conditions just prior to Israel's national doom -- very much like conditions in pagan America today. To wit: While you are off worshiping idols called American Patriotism, Flags, and Militarism -- including holy whoredoms, from Episcopal sodomy to Evangelical divorce and remarriage -- your own daughters and spouses are at home committing old-fashioned Catholic whoredom, sodomy and pedophilia. When Hosea says, "They sacrifice upon the tops of mountains, and burn incense upon the hills, under oaks and poplars and elms, because the shadow thereof is good," (Hos. 4:13), he is describing American Citizenship, Christianity, Patriotism; worshiping their idols whose names are: "God Bless America,""Free-Will,""God Loves Everyone,""Divorce & Remarriage,""It's OK to be Gay," "Jacobus Arminius."  "The shadow thereof is good," screening the filthy, lascivious worshipers from the glare of public exposure. But God exposes them, by causing their daughters and spouses to commit whoredom and adultery at home. America has some 600,000+ formal houses of idols -- masquerading as churches -- where the great god, Free-Will and his lesser off-shoot idols are devoutly worshiped by 300+ million Americans via 600,000+ "churches" -- on their way to Hell. Because they do not understand what Hosea (WBC) is saying to them. Furthermore, God is saying to them; To wit: "I will not punish your daughters when they commit whoredom, nor your spouses when they commit adultery..." (Hosea 4:14[a].)  Beloved, this startling modus operandi is indeed what the old preachers called "sententious" preaching (otherwise known as Hell-fire and brimstone and damnation preaching). [Sententious. Pithy, dynamic, energetic, pointed]. God is punishing America by making all her daughters notorious whores at home, and all her spouses notorious adulterers at home. No more old- fashioned "Red Light Districts" where whores are rare and severely sequestered. Every American home and every American so-called church is a whorehouse -- departed from the Lord -- and all America is one humongous big "Red Light District." God Almighty has made it so, saying: I will not punish your whorish daughters nor your adulterous spouses for their whoredom and adultery at home -- while you are off fornicating with idols in your 600,000 sodomite, holy "Priapus" churches, synagogues, and mosques.  "Signs of the Times:" DC Madame Deborah Jeane Palfrey, 137 Escort Services, and dozens of Massage Parlors, "service" our national leaders; and when they get caught, an outfit called Alibinetwork.com makes millions selling them alibis. "Ephraim (Israel, northern 10 tribes) is joined to his idols; let him alone. Their drink is sour: they have committed whoredom continually: her rulers with shame do love, Give ye." (Hos. 4:17-18.) Further describing the state of things just prior to Israel's final doom; again, like the United States -- spiritually -- today. For some time now WBC has refused to pray for America's good, believing that the Holy Spirit directed us to God's four-times-repeated order to Jeremiah under similar conditions just prior to Judah's doom in his day; to wit:  "Then said the Lord unto me, Pray not for this people for their good...I will not hear their cry...I will not accept them: but I will consume them." (Jer. 14:11,12)  Sunday, October 21, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  See also, Jer. 7:16; 11:14; and, 15:1. Beloved, have we not been led to believe from the Scriptures and from Divine Providence, that it is too late for this ungrateful, Sodomite-controlled nation -- too late for anything but final Divine Judgment and Condemnation and Eternal Punishment (i.e., Hell Fire and Damnation). And those dreadful words of our dear Lord Jesus in final condemnation of the Pharisees; To wit: "But he answered and said, Every plant, which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up. Let them alone: they be blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch." (Matt. 15:13;14) Even so, we believe America's 600,000+ false prophets are leading 300 million+ Americans ­ irresistibly, irreversibly, inevitably -- to Hell. Too late to pray! America's drink is sour, and her rulers are all Shaggy, Satanic Satyrs, afflicted with terminal Satyriasis (identified by excessive and often uncontrollable, and insatiable sexual desires). (Satyr. god of the woods, given to inordinate sexual lusts, pictured in goat-like chases of young maidens in revelries through the wild woods). Their -- (i.e., citizens of ancient Israel and citizens of modern America) -- their drink is sour, and their rulers are all Shaggy, Satanic Satyrs, afflicted with terminal Satyriasis. (Hos. 4:18.) Their religion is and has always been the Great Whore's religion of Rev. 17, and "they have all been made drunk with the wine of her fornication." Rev. 17:2.  After a long time of being in a state of moral stupor or drunkenness -- as Americans most certainly have been-- their digestive system rebels, and they vomit (eructations) and stink. Americans fit that description. John Gill: "Their drink is sour. In their stomach, having drank so much that they can't digest it; hence nauseous eructations, with a filthy stench, are belched out; so it is a charge of drunkenness which Ephraim or the ten tribes (Americans) were addicted to, and are accused of, Isa. 28:1-8; To wit: Woe to the crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim (America) ...they have erred through wine, and through strong drink are out of the way; the priest and the prophet have erred through strong drink, they are swallowed up of wine, they are out of the way through strong drink; they err in vision, they stumble in judgment. For all tables -- (in America, as with ancient Israel) -- are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is no place clean (in America as with ancient Israel). Whoredom and wine and new wine take away the heart.' (Hosea 4:11.)" Now for Satyriasis; To wit: "In that day shall the Lord of hosts be for a crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty, unto the residue of his people, and for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment, and for strength to them that turn the battle to the gate." (Isa. 28:5,6)  What glorious words to us from the Lord our God, inserted into the description of conditions just before doom. The picture painted by our fellow prophets -- Hosea and Isaiah -- is that of whoredom and wine taking away the heart of 300 million doomed Americans just before God's wrath strikes. Hos. 4:11. There they are, wandering around in a spiritual stupor, filthy and stinking, belching up nauseous eructations, filling all their tables with their vile vomit; and the whole stinking population being led by rulers addicted to excessive, insatiable, perverted sexual lusts -- in a word, "whoredom and wine." Meanwhile, Beloved: Where are we all this time? What is our role? The answer lies in the passage quoted above right out of the big middle of a vast human sea of "whoredom and wine."  Sunday, October 21, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  Adorned with a glorious crown and beautiful diadem from our king, surrounding, adorning, protecting and empowering his people; granting them His presence, giving them His grace, and large measures of it, which abundantly equips them to perform their adjudicatory duties: "Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world?" (1 Cor. 6:2) "Until the Ancient of Days came, and judgment was given to the saints of the most High..." (Dan. 7:22)  Especially does our God grant us a supernatural "spirit of judgment," because we are "sitting in judgment" upon this vile, Satanic situation; and supernatural "Strength to them that turn the battle to the gate;" because we are his soldiers, pulling down Satan's strong holds and, "Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ." 2 Cor. 10:5. "...Her rulers with shame do love, Give ye. The wind hath bound her up in her wings, and they shall be ashamed because of their sacrifices." (Hosea 4:18-19)  The rulers of America are slaves to lust, and never have enough sinful and perverted and same-sex sex: "Give ye!" From judges fornicating in courthouse chambers, to presidents fornicating in the White House, to Congress feeding the multibillion- dollar DC Big Sex industry, which was played out and exposed on national TV featuring DC Madame Deborah Jeane Palfrey, and her 137 Capital Hill Escort Services and dozens of Massage Parlors -- all hastening to final doom with the speed of "The Wind in her wings" and all accurately analyzed, adjudged, and denounced, by the preaching of WBC's holy prophets.  Belshazzar's Last Feast - recounted at Daniel, chapter 5 - is one of the most dramatic events in all world's history. It should be studied and re-studied. It is most somber, gloomy, and doleful - and pictures the terrors of the doomed soul upon first realization of the most solemn of all facts; to wit: "It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God." (Heb. 10:31)  It will be the experience of every lost soul - without Christ as his righteousness, standing without hope before God to face his doom - the handwriting on the wall; to wit: "In the same hour came forth fingers of a man's hand, and wrote over against the candlestick upon the plaister of the wall of the king's palace: and the king saw the part of the hand that wrote. Then the king's countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another." Dan. 5:5-6. The Doom of Sinners - No Space to Repent.  Matthew Henry: "Now this may, without any force, be applied to the doom of sinners. Mene, Tekel, Peres, may easily be made to signify death, judgment, and hell. At death, the sinner's days are numbered, when he will be weighed in the balance and found wanting; and after judgment the sinner will be cut asunder, and given as a prey to the devil and his angels. Daniel does not here give Belshazzar such advice and encouragement to repent as he had given Nebuchadnezzar, because he saw the decree had gone forth and he would not be allowed any space to repent."  The Absolute Sovereignty of God has fixed the exact time. The Doom of Sinners - No Space to Repent.  I love you. Amen.  
