  Before I say anything about the content of this textI want to try to answer this question: Why is the Old Testamentcommand to tithe not used by Paul in the New Testament to enforcehis efforts to raise money from the churches?    First three things that are not the answer!   1. It is not because Jesus abolished the tithe.   You never read anything like, You have heard that it wassaid to you, Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse!  ButI say to you, Five percent will do, or even two.  On the contrary Jesus says in Luke 11:42, Woeto you Pharisees! for you tithe mint and rue and every herb, andneglect justice and the love of God; these you ought to have done,without neglecting the others.  So Jesus warns agaist makingthe tithe a religious cover for injustice and lovelessness.  Buthe doesn't throw it out.  He says, These you ought to havedone.   2. The reason Paul doesn't use the command to tithe is not because proportionate giving has ceased to be the rule.   In 1 Corinthians Paul says, On the first dayof every week, each of you is to put something aside and storeit up, as he may prosper, so that contributionbs need not be madewhen I come.   In other words, proportionate giving is still therule.  If you prosper more, you give more.  If you prosper less,you give less.  And that is exactly what tithing is.  So thereis no conflict here.  Proportionate giving is still the rule,and that can't be why the command to tithe is not used.   3. It can't be that the ministry needs less money in the New Testament.  In Galatians 6:6 Paul says,Let him who is taught the word share all good things withhim who teaches.  And in 1 Timothy 5:18 Paul talks aboutthe payment that preachers and teachers should receive and says,`You shall not muzzle and ox when it is treading out thegrain,' and , `the laborer deserves his wages.'  Not only that, he expects the disabled poor in thechurch to be supported by some kind of systematic collection. This includes elderly widows in 1 Timothy 5 and the poor saintsin Jerusalem (Romans 15:26).  All that takes money.  Not only that he teaches that the churches shouldsupport financially the missionary enterprise of taking the gospelto the unreached peoples of the world. In Romans 15:24 he asksthe Roman church to asist him on his way to Spain.  And in 1 Corinthians9:7 he says, Who serves as a soldier at his own expense? Who plants a vineyard without eating any of its fruit?  Who tendsa flock with out getting some of the milk?    In other words, the teaching and preaching and caringand mission of the church all cost money, just like the templeservice did in the Old Testament -- in fact it probably cost alot more because because the mission of the church stands so muchmore in the forefront.  So the reason the tithe is not commanded by Paulis not that Jesus abolished it.  He didn't he approved it.  Norwas the reason that we should no longer give proportianately. We should as we may prosper.  The more you make themore you give.  Nor was it that the need of the ministry is lessin the New Testament.  It's not.  Teaching, preaching, caring,missions all take money.  Why then did Paul not use the command to tithe whenencouraging this kind of giving in the church?  Three reasons!   1. He didn't command a tithe because he wanted to emphasise willingness rather than constraint.   2 Corinthians 9:7 says, Each one must do as he has made up his mind, not reluctantly or under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver.    Another example of the principle here is when Paulwrites to Philemon.   He says, Though I am bold enough tocommand you to do what is required, yet for love's sake I preferto appeal to you.  And he says in 2 Corinthians 8:8, Isay this not as a command, but to prove by the earnestness ofothers that your love also is genuine.  So Paul downplays the possibility of commanding acertain level of giving because he wants to emphasize loving willingnessrather than constraint.   2. He didn't use the command to tithe because he wanted to emphasize liberality rather than limitation.    He wanted to urge people beyond the old constraints of simple proprtionate giving.  For example, in 2 Corinthians 8:3 he commends the poverty stricken Macedonians like this: They gave according to their means, as I can testify, and beyond their means, of their own accord, begging us earnestly for the favor of taking partin the relief of the saints.  And in 2 Corinthians 9:6 he says, he who sowssparingly will also reap sparingly, and he who sows bountifullywill aso reap bountiffully.  In other words the issue isn'tmeeting a minimum limit.  The issue for Paul is how to unleashthe maximum liberality.  The command to tithe just doesn't suitthis approach.   3. He didn't use the command to tithe becausehe wanted to emphasize that all our getting should be designedfor giving.   He says in Ephesians 4:28, Let the thief nolonger steal, but rather let him labor, doing honest work withhis hands, so that he may be able to give to those in need.  In other words the alternative to stealing in Paul'smind is not working in order to get and have, but working in orderto get and give.  Everything we spend on ourselves should be tobuild a platform for giving, that is, for loving.  Or, as Jesustaught, he is the Owner of all we have.  We are just stewardscommissioned to invest his money for his glory.  And what glorifieshim most is loving liberality from a simple base, not tithingfrom a palace.  So the reason that Paul did not use the command totithe in order to enforce his teaching about giving was that hewanted to emphasize 1) willingness over constraint, and 2) liberalityover limitation, and a sense that all our money is God's not justa tenth.  Now what does all this have to say to us about howwe use Malachi 3:7-12?  Verse 8 says that not tithing if the sameas robbing God.  Will a man rob God?  Yet you are robbingme.  But you say, `How are we robbing thee?'  In your tithes andofferings.  And verse 10 commands tithing: Bring thefull tithes into the storehouse.  Now how does Paul's approach to giving help us putthis text to use?  What Paul's approach does is show us that thereis a proper New Testament way to, as it were, set asidethis command and there is a wrong way to set aside this command.   We have three guidelines.   1. If we are going to set aside the command to tithe in these verses because it feels slavish and legal,and because we want to promote freedom in our giving, then letus beware of jumping out of the frying pan of legal slavery toa command into the fire of carnal slavery to fear and greed. Sin lurks at both doors -- the self-righteous door where sin welcomesthe command to tithe in order to boast in its piety; and the self-indulgentdoor where sin  
