  March 24, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor      WHEN GOD SAYS, "NOT NOW"   Luke 11:1-13      God's "Not Now" to Bethlehem    Last Sunday I stood here and prayed publicly that the Lord wouldgive us $1.4 million dollars in pledges toward   Freeing theFuture  . That was $300,000 more than we needed to end the $1.1million debt on this building. It seemed to me that this was whereGod was leading us. And I still find myself praying toward thatnumber. I claim no divine authority for it. I could be wrong. Butuntil I see a different cloud to follow, that is the direction I willpray.  God's response last Sunday and in this week was to bring in, not$1.4 million in pledges, but about $850,000 in pledges. Which meansthat our goal of debt elimination in 1996 calls for an additional$250,000 in pledges in the next six months. The Resource Task Forceof the Master Planning team is meeting tomorrow to seek God's leadingin how to complete what we have begun. I'm sure they would appreciateyour prayer and input (Tim Johnson is the chairman).  My sense of what we need to hear from the Lord today is a wordabout prayer. I prayed, and many of you prayed, that we would reachour goal last Sunday, and we didn't reach it last Sunday. How are weto understand this? Over 700 cards came in. That is staggering. We'venever had 700 cards or pledges on anything before. There are onlyabout 600 giving units in this church. So a lot of children have doneexactly what we asked, and pledged. So old and young -- we all need aword from God about the (temporary!) shortfall.  The word I think he wants us to hear is Luke 11:1-13. This wholesection is about prayer.  1 And it came about that while He was praying in a certain place,after He had finished, one of His disciples said to Him, "Lord, teachus to pray just as John also taught his disciples."  2 And He said to them, "When you pray, say: 'Father, hallowed beThy name. Thy kingdom come. 3 Give us each day our daily bread. 4 Andforgive us our sins, For we ourselves also forgive everyone who isindebted to us. And lead us not into temptation.'"  5 And He said to them, "Suppose one of you shall have a friend,and shall go to him at midnight, and say to him, 'Friend, lend methree loaves; 6 for a friend of mine has come to me from a journey,and I have nothing to set before him,' 7 and from inside he shallanswer and say, 'Do not bother me; the door has already been shut andmy children and I are in bed; I cannot get up and give you anything. ' 8 I tell you, even though he will not get up andgive him  anything  because he is his friend, yet because of hispersistence he will get up and give him as much as he needs.  9 And I say to you, ask, and it shall be given to you; seek, andyou shall find; knock, and it shall be opened to you. 10 For everyonewho asks, receives; and he who seeks, finds; and to him who knocks,it shall be opened.  11 Now suppose one of you fathers is asked by his son for a fish;he will not give him a snake instead of a fish, will he? 12 Or  if he is asked for an egg, he will not give him a scorpion, will he?13 If you then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to yourchildren, how much more shall  your  heavenly Father give theHoly Spirit to those who ask Him?"  Notice that, as this section on prayer begins in verse 1, Jesus ispraying, "And it came about that while He was praying in a certainplace . . ." Jesus didn't just teach on prayer. He prayed. In fact,Luke emphasizes the praying of Jesus more than any other Gospel. Herecords nine prayers of Jesus, and seven of the nine are  only in his gospel. So let's let Jesus teach us about prayer. He knowsabout it from both ends: he prayed as a full human; and he receivesand mediates prayer as God himself. There is no better teacher onprayer.  What does Jesus have to say about all the prayer that went towardlast week's pledging and the $850,000 that was pledged instead of$1.1 million? I want to draw out four lessons on prayer.    
      Lesson #1      Prayer is always supposed to be God-centeredand God-exalting.    I see this in verse 2. The disciples ask Jesus to teach them topray and the first thing he does is give them a sample prayer -- akind of summary prayer. It begins (verse 2), "When you pray, say:'Father, hallowed be Thy name. Thy kingdom come.'" Notice two things.  1) The name of God is the first and main thing to prayed about inprayer. "Hallowed by thy name." That is, "Lord, I ask that your name-- your reputation and your character and your honor -- be reverencedand worshipped and glorified and exalted and esteemed and cherished."First and foremost in prayer, we ask God to work in human hearts tocause them to hallow his name.  2) And notice that we are to pray this "when" (literally:"whenever,"  hotan ) we pray. In other words, this isn't aformal prayer that we pray every now and then, like on a Sundaymorning when we pray the Lord's prayer. This is the summary contentof normal daily prayer. " Whenever  you pray," express a desirefor the name of God to be valued more in your own heart and in thechurch and in the world. "Hallowed be thy name," is a prayer forpassion in the soul and revival in the church and awakening in theworld. And we desire this "whenever" we pray.  So last weekend, when we gathered to pray on Saturday night wespend most of our time praying not about money, but about our heartsand our church and the mission of God in the church and the world.And when I chose my sermon for last Sunday I chose a text not aboutmoney but about magnifying God, "Let those who love thy salvation saycontinually, "The Lord be magnified!'" The whole point of the weekendwas "Hallowed be thy name." Or: Supreme be thy name in all things forthe joy of all peoples. That is the aim of   Freeing theFuture   -- the removal of debt for the sake of the Name.    
      Lesson # 2.       God answers prayer for penitent sinners, notperfect people.    I am emphasizing this as a balance to the other side of the truth,namely that unconfessed sin can shut the door of heaven. Psalm 66:18says, "If I regard wickedness in my heart, The Lord will not hear."This truth should make us search our hearts after every prayer thatdoesn't get answered the way we hoped. Did we fall short last weekendbecause of sin in our midst -- attitudes or actions that aredispleasing to the Lord and hinder our prayers?  We put a high premium on getting our hearts ready for last Sunday,and I know some difficult things were done and God was honored inmany relationships.  But I want to make sure that we not elevate the condition ofanswered prayer more highly than the Bible does. God answers theprayers of sinners, not perfect people. And you can become perfectlyparalyzed in your praying if you do not focus on the cross andrealize this. I could show it from numerous Old Testament texts whereGod hears the cry of his sinful people, whose very sins had gottenthem into the trouble from which they are crying for deliverance (forexample, Psalm 38:4,15; 40:12-13; 107:11-13).  But let me show it from this text -- in two ways:  1) In this version of the Lord's prayer (verses 2-4) Jesus says,"When you pray say" . . . and then in verse 4 he includes thispetition, "and forgive us our sins." So, if you connect the beginningof the prayer with the middle, what he says is, "Whenever you praysay . . . forgive us our sins." I take this to mean that this shouldbe as much a part of all our praying as "Hallowed be thy name." Whichmeans that Jesus assumes that we need to seek forgiveness virtuallyevery time we pray. In other words, we are always sinners. Nothing wedo is perfect. As Martin Luther said, on his deathbed, "We arebeggars, this is true." It doesn't matter how many relationships wemade right last weekend, we came to the Lord last Sunday as sinners-- all of us. And God does not turn away the prayers of sinners whenthey pray like this.  2) The second place I see this taught here is in verse 13: "If youthen,  being evil , know how to give good gifts to yourchildren, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the HolySpirit to those who ask Him?" Jesus calls his disciples "evil."Pretty strong language. And he did not mean that they were out offellowship with him. He did not mean that their prayers could not beanswered. He meant that as long as this fallen age lasts, even hisown disciples will have an evil bent that pollutes everything theydo, but doesn't keep them from doing much good. We are simultaneouslyevil and redeemed. We are gradually overcoming our evil by the powerof the Holy Spirit. But our native corruption is not obliterated byconversion. We are sinners and we are beggars. And if we recognizethis sin, fight it, and cling to the cross of Christ as our hope,then God will hear us and answer our prayers.    
      Lesson # 3.       Our Father in heaven never gives us a snakewhen we ask for a fish.    The key verses here are verses 11-13:  Now suppose one of you fathers is asked by his son for a fish; hewill not give him a snake instead of a fish, will he? 12 Or if he isasked for an egg, he will not give him a scorpion, will he? 13 If youthen, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, howmuch more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to thosewho ask Him?  Jesus says that ordinary dads will not give snakes and scorpionsto their children when they ask for fish and eggs. And then he adds,neither will God our heavenly Father. In fact, he goes further andsays, "How much more . . ." will God respond positively to yourprayers, since he is a perfect Father and not an defective fatherlike all the rest of us dads are. Even we won't give snakes andscorpions to our children. How much less will God!  From this I conclude that God did not give us a scorpion or asnake last Sunday. The $850,000 pledged instead of $1.1 million or$1.4 million is not a snake in the grass or a scorpion in the bed.  What was it then? It was what a perfect Father always gives to hisasking children: it was what is good for us. We must keep this simplefact before us: God is Father and we are children. The Father alwayskeeps the right to do what is best for the children even if theydon't understand why it is best. If this were not so, then we wouldbe saying that we should run the Father's house. We should be theFather and he should be the child. Which in this case would mean weshould rule the universe and God should learn from us how to do it.  Prayer has never meant that God should stop being God. We do nothave the wisdom or the grace to run the universe. God is God. And hewill continue to decide how to run the universe in the best way. Ifwe ask him for a fish he will not give us a snake, but he may give usPepto Bismol or Ibuprofin or grapefruit. He will give us what is goodfor us.  The utterly amazing thing is that he has ordained to include us inrunning the universe. He really does respond to our prayers. They arewoven into the fabric of causes that God wills to be moved by. We donot pray in vain. He is our Father. And when he hears his children heresponds. He is not deaf or indifferent or powerless. He hears and heacts.  How then should we respond to last Sunday? That comes from . . .    
      Lesson # 4.       Persistence in prayer will prevail where givingup won't.    This comes from verses 5-8. Jesus tells a parable to illustrateexactly this point.  And He said to them, "Suppose one of you shall have a friend, andshall go to him at midnight, and say to him, 'Friend, lend me threeloaves; 6 for a friend of mine has come to me from a journey, and Ihave nothing to set before him'; 7 and from inside he shall answerand say, 'Do not bother me; the door has already been shut and mychildren and I are in bed; I cannot get up and give you anything. ' 8 "I tell you, even though he will not get up andgive him  anything  because he is his friend, yet because of hispersistence he will get up and give him as much as he needs."  What's the point of this parable? The point is given in verses 9and 10: Keep on asking, keep on seeking, keep on knocking; keep onasking, keep on seeking, keep on knocking.  Why compare answered prayer to a friend who is unwilling to getout of bed for the sake of friendship, but willing to get out of bedto stop the knocking on his door? Is it to say that God is tired orirritable or stingy? That can't be, because he is so ready and ableto give in verse 13. Then what's the reason for this parable?  I think it is simply a striking, shocking way of saying, God hashis reasons for waiting that for us may seem as strange andprovocative as a friend who doesn't want to get out of bed but thendoes. At first he doesn't give the $1.1 million, and then he will --if we keep knocking. If we keep knocking -- that is clear. If thefriend had gone home after the first refusal, he would not havegotten the bread he needed. But since he stayed and kept on knocking,he got "as much as he needed" (verse 8). The point for Bethlehem:Keep on asking, keep on seeking, keep on knocking.  This is a hard lesson about prayer. But it is clearly Biblical: Persistence in prayer will prevail with God where giving upwon't . It is so Biblical and so important that Wesley Duewelwrote a whole book on it called  Mighty Prevailing Prayer (Zondervan Publishing House, 1990). In his chapter on this textcalled "The Dynamic of Importunity" he quotes Andrew Murray,  [Importunity] begins with the refusal to at once accept a denial.It grows to the determination to persevere, to spare no time ortrouble, till an answer comes. It rises to the intensity in which thewhole being is given to God in supplication, and the boldness comesto lay hold of God's strength. (p. 80)  Thomas Watson, a Puritan pastor from 350 years ago asked in hisbook,  Body of Divinity,  "Why does God delay an answer toprayer?" In other words, why would God ever keep us asking andseeking and knocking when he could respond sooner? He gives fouranswers (Baker Book House, 1979, pp. 399-400). I give these to youfor your pondering as we press on in prayer for   Freeing theFuture  :  1) Because he loves to hear the voice of prayer. "You let themusician play a great while before you throw him down money, becauseyou love to hear this music."  2) That he may humble us. We may too easily assume we merit someready answer, or that he is at our beck and call like a butler, notas sovereign Lord and loving Father.  3) Because he sees we are not yet fit or ready for the mercy weseek. It may be he has things to put in place -- in us or in ourchurch or in the world. There are a million pieces to the puzzle.Some things go first to make a place for the others.  4) Finally, that the mercy we pray for may be the more prized, andmay be sweeter when it comes.  If you belong to the Lord Jesus, if you trust his word, and if youlove Bethlehem, join me in "mighty prevailing prayer" and do not growweary, for we shall reap if we do not faint -- the elimination ofdebt for the sake of the Name.  Copyright 1996 John Piper  
  
