Turn you to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope: even to day do I declare that I will render double unto thee. (Zechariah 9:12) Good morning, beloved fellow prisoners of hope. Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits, even the God of our salvation. Selah. (Psalm 68:19.) Today, while we wait upon the Lord of all comfort, mercy, blessings, and peace for our daily download, we have a good report from California--the dry, dry, bone-dry land of the sodomite damned. The light of the eyes rejoiceth the heart: and a good report maketh the bones fat. (Proverbs 15:30.) This morning our fellow-laborers have shined Gospel light in Lakewood, California, at: St. Timothy Lutheran Church (You so-called Lutherans ought to read the Bondage of the Will; but you are unbelieving and reprobate unto every good work); Lakewood First United Methodist Church (Wesley was a Calvinist when he wrote hymns, but otherwise Arminian; and therefore in hell); West Lakewood Baptist Church (John the Baptist preached repentance for the kingdom of heaven is at hand, (Matthew 3:2.); your church is full of divorced and remarried unrepentant freaks and you purport to give that which is holy unto the dogs with your kowtow to the fags' "transformation ministries" shtick); and St. Pancratius Catholic (Yes, as we have prophesied for years that you will always be known for raping little boys, and this morning's headlines prove it. PS: Be sure to follow @PriestsRapeBoys on Twitter). Contrary to Bob's opinion that St. Pancratius is the saint of the pancreas and found the cure for diabetes, he in fact is a fable agreed upon, as is all Catholic history, wherein the Catholics claim he was a 14year-old martyred for opposing false Roman gods; which is even more bizarre then Bob's theory. In fear of stating the obvious, from top to bottom and side to side your Catholic monstrosity is full of false gods which are worshipped 24/7. Somehow it makes sense that they worship him? And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy: and nothing shall by any means hurt you. Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven. (Luke 10:18-20.) No praying for rain by true Gospel preachers, Elias Avilla; except for Sodom's rain. Or that prayer from Deuteronomy 28:24: The LORD shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust: from heaven shall it come down upon thee, until thou be destroyed. Or perchance, that fond wish from Ezekiel 38:22: And I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood; and I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone.  Turn ye to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope. March 2, 2014.  Page 1  Tonight our fellow watchers will publish words of life and peace, which the Lord has entrusted to us, at the "Oscars." We are confident that each of them are saying, "And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who hath enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, putting me into the ministry." (1 Timothy 1:12.) We pray the Lord will cause His words to prosper there; and we know that he is indeed the Lord of the Harvest and will plant, fertilize and water as he sees fit and proper. (Matthew 9:38.) For after that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. (1 Corinthians 1:21.) Tomorrow our most fortunate friends will publish at Lakewood High School, and our Lord the sovereign of publishing will insure His words are seen by all the eyes and heard by all the ears of that beastly audience. For as the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater: So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it. (Isaiah 55:10-11.) Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord. Behold, the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth, and hath long patience for it, until he receive the early and latter rain. (James 5:7.) This morning I have the privilege to talk with you about hope. That is, that Grace of Hope in God; the object, ground, and foundation of it, Jehovah, God, Father, Son, and Spirit. Not in any creature whatsoever. Supernaturally implanted hope: For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God: Not of works, lest any man should boast. (Ephesians 2:8-9.) Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God: for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God. (Psalm 43:5.) Good commentators are good and I encourage you to consult them. (2 Timothy 4:13.) But, most subjects in the Bible only require the reading of the words with the best exposition from other Bible verses. This is one of those subjects. For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope. (Romans 15:4.) So, here goes: And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three. (1 Corinthians 13:13a.) For the grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men, Teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world; Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ; Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. (Titus 2:11-14.)  Turn ye to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope. March 2, 2014.  Page 2  If I have made gold my hope, or have said to the fine gold, Thou art my confidence; ... for I should have denied the God that is above. (Job 31:24, 28.) For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he hath gained, when God taketh away his soul? (Job 27:8.) So are the paths of all that forget God; and the hypocrite's hope shall perish: Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a spider's web. (Job 8:13-14.) Truly in vain is salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of mountains: truly in the LORD our God is the salvation of Israel. (Jeremiah 3:23.) To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles; which is Christ in you, the hope of glory. (Colossians 1:27.) According to my earnest expectation and my hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but that with all boldness, as always, so now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life, or by death. (Philippians 1:20.) Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: By whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also: knowing that tribulation worketh patience; And patience, experience; and experience, hope: And hope maketh not ashamed; because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us. (Romans 5:1-5.) Who by him do believe in God, that raised him up from the dead, and gave him glory; that your faith and hope might be in God. (1 Peter 1:21.) The hope of the righteous shall be gladness: but the expectation of the wicked shall perish. (Proverbs 10:28.) But thou art he that took me out of the womb: thou didst make me hope when I was upon my mother's breasts. (Psalm 22:9.) For thou art my hope, O Lord GOD: thou art my trust from my youth. (Psalm 71:5.) But I will hope continually, and will yet praise thee more and more. (Psalm 71:14.) That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God, but keep his commandments. (Psalm 78:7.)  Turn ye to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope. March 2, 2014.  Page 3  And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth; for I have hoped in thy judgments. (Psalm 119:43.) ZAIN. Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou hast caused me to hope. (Psalm 119:49.) They that fear thee will be glad when they see me; because I have hoped in thy word. (Psalm 119:74.) CAPH. My soul fainteth for thy salvation: but I hope in thy word. (Psalm 119:81.) Thou art my hiding place and my shield: I hope in thy word. (Psalm 119:114.) Uphold me according unto thy word, that I may live: and let me not be ashamed of my hope. (Psalm 119:116.) I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried: I hoped in thy word. (Psalm 119:147.) LORD, I have hoped for thy salvation, and done thy commandments. (Psalm 119:116.) I wait for the LORD, my soul doth wait, and in his word do I hope. (Psalm 130:5.) For we through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith. (Galatians 5:5.) Let Israel hope in the LORD: for with the LORD there is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption. (Psalm 130:7.) Let Israel hope in the LORD from henceforth and for ever. (Psalm 131:3.) Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the LORD his God. (Psalm 146:5; Jeremiah 17:7.) The LORD taketh pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy. (Psalm 147:11.) Turn you to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope: even to day do I declare that I will render double unto thee. (Zechariah 9:12.) Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the LORD. (Psalm 31:24.) Behold, the eye of the LORD is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy. (Psalm 33:18.)  Turn ye to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope. March 2, 2014.  Page 4  Let thy mercy, O LORD, be upon us, according as we hope in thee. (Psalm 33:22.)  For in thee, O LORD, do I hope: thou wilt hear, O Lord my God. (Psalm 38:15.)  And now, Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee. (Psalm 39:7.)  The LORD is my portion, saith my soul; therefore will I hope in him. (Lamentations 3:24.)  It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the LORD. (Lamentations 3:26.)  He putteth his mouth in the dust; if so be there may be hope. (Lamentations 3:29.)  The LORD also shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem; and the heavens and the earth shall shake: but the LORD will be the hope of his people, and the strength of the children of Israel. (Joel 3:16.)  Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God: therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not. Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure. (1 John 3:1-3.)  For when God made promise to Abraham, because he could swear by no greater, he sware by himself, Saying, Surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee. And so, after he had patiently endured, he obtained the promise. For men verily swear by the greater: and an oath for confirmation to them an end of all strife. Wherein God, willing more abundantly to shew unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath: That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us: Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast, and which entereth into that within the veil; Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an high priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. (Hebrews 6:13-20.)  Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead To an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you, Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time. (1 Peter 1:3-5.)  Turn ye to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope. March 2, 2014.  Page 5  Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ. (1 Peter 1:13.) Seeing then that we have such hope, we use great plainness of speech. (1 Corinthians 3:12.) But Christ as a son over his own house; whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end. (Hebrews 3:6.) For David speaketh concerning him, I foresaw the Lord always before my face, for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved: Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad; moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope (Acts 2:25-26; Psalm 16:8-9.) For the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God. For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope, Because the creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God. For we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now. And not only they, but ourselves also, which have the firstfruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body. For we are saved by hope: but hope that is seen is not hope: for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for? But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it. (Romans 8:19-25.) Hope deferred maketh the heart sick: but when the desire cometh, it is a tree of life. (Proverbs 13:12.) But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these words. (1 Thessalonians 4:13-18.) Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost. (Romans 15:13.) I love you. Amen.  Turn ye to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope. March 2, 2014.  Page 6  
