"From Darkness to light: A Qur'anic perspective"
)(
)(
)(
The Qur'an talks about the believers being pulled out of the darknesses into the light on multiple occasions and the one occasion that I want to talk to you a little bit about Insha Allah in this session is the one I recited to you. I chose to recite the passage in the beginning, because I believe that reciting the Qur'an and listening to the recitation of the Qur'an, not only is that an act of worship, but actually it has an effect on our Emaan; listening to the recitation of the Qur'an to the one reciting and the one listening also it effects and benefits their Emaan and if we are gonna benefit from something from the understanding of these Aayah we should also benefit from the Barakah of its recitation. Plus of course it fulfills the beautiful Sunnah of the Prophet (peace be upon him)
read on to the people, recites the Aayaat on to the people. In any case, Allah Azza wa Jal if you notice I started reciting with the Aayah that probably most of you memorized. Which Aayah is that? `Ayatul kursi'. This grand Aayah of the Qur'an, "Sayidatul Ayaatul Qur'an", the grand leader, the chief Aayah of Qur'an. Allah Azza wa Jal describes some of His most fundamental qualities and how Incredible, how Awesome He is, how Magnificent He is. That there is no one worthy of worship, only He is, in any shape or form except He is. Now you have to

understand Suratul Baqarah is a Makki surah, or a Madani surah rather,

Prophet (Peace be upon him) already moved to Medina and the Muslims (some of them have been Muslims from the very beginning and some of

them relatively new) but all of them understand the basics of Islam and

the most basic teaching of Islam is

right? It's the most basic

teaching of Islam and this far into the message of Islam, Allah chooses to

reveal an Aayah that goes back to the basics, this far in! This should be

like early Makkan Qur'an, you should be learning about

but

and these kinds of Aayat come in the Madani Quran. You

know why? Because they are just not information they are reminder

because somebody could say,

, and be a Muslim but they are

not conscious of what that really means. And so especially in the Madani

Qur'an when we hear Aayaat about the Qur'an, when we hear Aayaat about Tauheed, they are actually a reminder to the Muslims that they

need to refresh their Eeman, they need to go back to those basics, that I

need to hear

as though I never heard it before, I have to start

over again and this is one of the beautiful things in our faith is this

Tajdeedul Emaan, the revival of Emaan. Because our faith is not just an

intellectual thing; everybody knows,

, everybody here knows it,

there is no one in this audience that doesn't know `

, but you

know what, our hearts and our minds are two different things. The heart

needs to be reminded of

so it's shaken by it. We don't feel

, sometimes. The Aayaat in Medina that remind us of

Tawheed, that remind us of Allah's attributes aren't just there to teach us; they're actually there to shake us up. Allah says

`Isn't yet the time that the believers'

heart should be full of fear from the remembrance of Allah',

, `Because of whatever came down from the truth'.

Understand also that in Madani Qur'an the word,

, obviously a

negation of any form of Shirk that we shouldn't be associating partners

with Allah. When the Mushrikoon of Makkah the Idol worshippers of

Makkah thought about that, they thought this is negating their idols, this

is negating the things that they worship they have around the Ka'ba and

Allah is saying none of those should be worshiped, only Allah should be

worshiped but when the same thing is being said to the Muslims in

Medina, there are no idols. What idols are there? There's no Shirk going

on, and by the way every time

is mentioned, every time it's

mentioned it's supposed to destroy some form of Shirk. It gets rid of

Shirk it's part of the definition of the statement. So there is another kind

of Shirk in Medina, a hidden kind of Shirk, there's an obvious kind of

Shirk in Makkah. It's those idols you can see them right in front, Al-Laat,

Al-Manaat and Al-Uzza. Allah mentions them by name but on the other

hand we have another kind of Shirk creeping into what is supposed to be

a believing community and this hidden form of Shirk, Qur'an calls it

Nifaaq ­ Hypocrisy and so just like the outside shirk has to be destroyed

by what?

, just like that the inside shirk will be destroyed by

.

, the Living, the Source of all life, the Maintainer of all things and the Source of all things that stand, all things that exist. When somebody internalize that, you know what they realize? No matter how much I think I have accomplished none of that was me, none of that was me, all of that was Allah, I have no credit, I take no

credit. That is entirely given by Allah. There are so many more people

that are more qualified than I am, that are more intelligent than I am,

that are better spoken than I am, that Allah will not give opportunity to.

And there are so many more that are much less qualified than I am and

Allah will give them way more opportunities than me because He's the

source. When you realize that he's Al-Hai, then you realize that your life

isn't actually yours, it's not yours, it's a gift given by Allah. Which means

it can be taken at any moment because He's al-Hai, He is the eternally

living, He's the one maintaining that life Al ­ Qayyum and if He's the one

maintaining it,

, anyone else, any other living thing

needs sleep, needs rest, needs downtime; sleep doesn't get a hold of

Him, slumber or sleep. He doesn't get drowsy doesn't get sleepy,

. This is by the way comes up so much in

the Qur'an that we don't even think about it. He keeps saying He owns

everything in the skies and in the earth, He owns everything in the skies

and in the earth. By the way, He says He owns everything in the skies

and in the earth or whatever lies in the skies and the earth exclusively.

He is the only Owner of the skies and the earth. You know when you buy

your house and your name's on the title; it says owner and it says your

name. When you pay off, let's just say your `Islamic Mortgage' and you

finally get the deed and it says `Owner of the Property' in your name,

just write on top of that,

. It ain't mine,

that's His, that's His. Who remembers that? Who thinks when they go

into their car, "This is not my car"? Who thinks when they go into their

closet and they're putting their clothes on, "These aren't my clothes; it's

given to me"? Who looks at their hand and doesn't say, "This is my

hand"? It's not my hand, it's a gift that I didn't pay for, I didn't pay for it.

He owns everything in the skies and the earth. Thinking about that will change the way you live, just thinking about

. And when you realize He owns everything, He is in complete charge of everything, then where are you going to go? You know we go to people when they own something. You go to the judge because he owns authority. You go to the store because they own the merchandise. You go to the lawyer because he owns some expertise. You go to different sources because they own something you need. That's the world, we depend on each other because each of us owns different things in a limited sense. But Allah Azza wa Jal says on judgment day, "It will become very clear who owns everything". Because in this world every one of us is in need. I'm in need, there are some things I need from my family, there are some things my family needs from me. There are some things I need from my work and there're some things my work needs from me. There are some things I need from my government, and my government needs some things from me. This is a world of interdependent needs. But no day will come that will be clearer about the needs than judgment day. If there's one day that you and I will feel need it's that day when we don't even have clothes on, when we have no friends left. Anybody we depended on has disappeared, there's nobody, nobody. It is the greatest single gathering of humanity ever and yet you will feel the loneliest you have ever felt in your entire existence at the same time. And at that moment you still need someone, someone

to speak on your behalf. And Allah says

whose gonna

make a case on his behalf unless if Allah gives him permission? Who are

you gonna get, you're gonna need somebody to speak on your behalf.

You will get no one unless Allah grants permission and He granted that

permission to Prophet (Peace be Upon Him). You know, this is an honor

given to Prophet (Peace be Upon Him). But even the way it's said ,

meaning

,

, the there, is very important it's even

hard to communicate in English what that is doing there

Who at all, anyone out there wanna speak on this guy's

behalf? Anyone there?

And then you come

before, you know this is judgment day, it's court. You're coming before

the judge and when you come before the judge you're supposed to

bring your case. And if you are the accused and you are in court, when

you come before the judge then you are supposed to say or your lawyer

is supposed to say, "Well, your Honor, you don't know the whole story. I

know he committed this crime but there's some background information,

he had a tough childhood, society messed him up, it was his friend's

fault. There is some background information that, your Honor, you

should consider before you punish him". You understand? So the lawyer

tries to bring up the new evidence to defend his plaintiff, the accused.

Allah says ,

, He knows what they have in front of

them, what they are presenting and everything behind them. He has

more background information than they have about themselves. What

case are you gonna bring in front of Allah? What evidences are you

gonna bring in front of Allah on the judgment day?

, On the one hand He

knows everything in front and behind of you more than you and I will

know about ourselves and on the other hand we, even together,

,

they will altogether not be able to encompass anything from his

knowledge.

, you know, you can't even know anything from

Allah's knowledge. When you and I learn Quran, we learn some things that Allah chose to teach us, some things that Allah chose to teach us. But even that combined is a small, not even something small, compared to Allah's knowledge itself (Subhanahu wa Tta'aalah). We think we're knowledgable, we don't know anything. One of my favorite Ayaat in Quran is about, when we were born, when we were born, when we come out of our mothers, every one of us came out of our mothers.

, He's the one who took you out of the bellies of your mothers, He delivered you. The doctor didn't deliver you, the push didn't deliver you, the C-section didn't deliver you. He is the one who pulled you out of your mothers, because there were so many more that came out without life. There are so many more that didn't come out alive. He delivered you, that successful delivery, and then He says, by the way, when the baby comes out does the baby know

anything? No. Allah says

, He didn't say you didn't know

anything because when He brought you out of the belly of your mother,

this is the past,

,,

,

, , , He says

, which is a

and it could be

.. which means in simple English you still don't

know anything, SubhanAllah! He didn't just say He brought you out of

your moms and you didn't know anything. He says He brought you out

of your mothers and you still don't know anything.

What

are you gonna encompass out of Allah's knowledge? What are these

Aayaat doing? They are putting us in our place, Ya-Rabb I don't know

anything. The angels have access to the unseen, we read about the Arsh.

They do Tawaaf of the Arsh. We read about it. We read about the angels.

We read about the Jinn. They see the angels and the Jinn, we read about,

. They guard the,

. They have way more

knowledge then we do. The angels see a lot more; they see the seen and

Allah has given them the unseen, because they are the creatures of the

unseen. They even know more about ourselves because they write all

our deeds down, the ones we know and the ones we don't remember.

They lock them down,

, right? They lock them down and even

the angels say,

. Master we have no knowledge.

We don't know anything. Allah!, The angels don't know anything! What

do we know then?

. Except what you taught us.

That's all we know. Except the little that you've given us. This puts the

believer in his place. These Aayaat are supposed to put us in our place.

Emaan is about putting yourself down, you don't declare Allah's

greatness until you realize how low you are, how low I am, you know,

declaring the Takbeer of Allah is declaring one's own lowness. There is

no higher position than `Rab' and there is no lower position than `Abd'.

There is no job description lower than `Abd' in the world. Slave is the

lowest you can go, you can't go lower than that, there's no job lower

than that. And that's when you realize the true greatness of Allah,

SubhanAllah. So he says

except for

whatever He wants,

. His throne his

kingdom extends the skies and the earth

. And guarding

the skies and the earth, now guardianship is mentioned, so please

remember this. Allah says guarding the skies and the earth does not

exhaust Him. What do we learn from that? So Allah Azza wa Jal says

, guarding the skies and the earth doesn't exhaust him.

He didn't just tell us he's owning it, He didn't just tell us He owns the universe. He also told us He guards it. You know what that means? He guards everything in it. He guards the sun, he guards the moon, he guards the sky, he guards the cloud, he guards the little bird that leaves the nest, he guards the egg that's still sitting in the nest, he guards you and me when we're getting in our car, he guards my children when they get on the bus. There's no way that bus will reach the school until Allah guards it, it will not. The security system you have installed at home, does not guard your house, Allah does. Allah is guarding our house. Allah is guarding our money, it's not the FBIC insurance, it's not. Allah is guarding it. Allah is guarding entire nations, human beings and every moment of everyday. And guarding all of this does not exhaust Allah. Human beings when they think about guarding, in human experience

human beings know that guarding something comes with exhaustion. Ever seen security guards? What do they do all the time? It's exhausting, they have to have shifts, they have to march because if they stand in one place they'd go to sleep. That's guarding for us. Allah does not get exhausted guarding the entire universe, in all of its existence.

And then when he tells us,

He is the ultimately high, the

truly great. Now that he has declared himself this and you should have

Emaan in Him. Then he tells us

.) There is no, no need,

there's absolutely no room to force anybody in any shape or form into

the religion. There is no coercion or forcing in to Islam.

.)

Why does he say that? You don't have to tell people to come. "I don't

need them", Allah says, "to have Emaan". Don't force anybody to the

Deen. Allah is already as high as He can be, the highest imaginable,

beyond imagination. He doesn't need a slave to worship Him. "Don't

force anybody to worship me."

.)I'm telling that to the

youth here, parents are yelling at their children, "Make Salaat, make

Saalat, make Saalat". "Yeah mom, I know, I know, I know", the youth

who you think, "Oh my God, that's so annoying. Every few hours mom

comes back and tells me to make salat", and you know and then you

make salat without making `wudu' because you don't care! That's your

Rukoo', that was the Rukoo', superfast, OK. Allah is letting you know

Allah is not forcing you. Your parents might be. Allah says "I don't want it.

I don't want that, it's unacceptable to me, have it your way, be free, go

ahead,

, the straight path has already been made

very clear from the deviant one." Straightness has already been clarified.

People who want to take it, will take it.

.

And He gives us an image, "Whoever will deny forces of rebellion" There are forces of rebellion that want you to believe in them. There's rebellious urges inside you that want you to believe that your temptations will lead you to happiness and that's what you should believe in. There are forces inside you that make you think that greed is good for you, your pride is good for you, your show off attitude is good for you. There are things

inside you, this Fujoor inside you,

Allah is telling us

in this Aayah, "Whoever fights the forces of rebellion inside and outside".

Outside Taghoot is like the leader the `Faraina' of the world, the

`Firauns', the idols. Inside US there's Taghoot too, there's rebellious

forces inside. Whoever can deny them successfully

­ and then

believe in Allah. The Emaan in Allah was mentioned next, because you

can't really believe in Allah if you haven't conquered the forces of rebellion. Until you put the rebellion down, what good is Emaan? What good is Emaan? The surah begins (this is towards the end of al-Baqarah), the surah began talking about Shaytan who knew about Allah, who believed in Allah, who worshiped Allah, but couldn't put his internal rebellion down. Actually even after Allah calls him Kafir, he makes Dua

to Allah,

. "Give me time until the day that they

raise", is a Dua. He asked Allah for something. When you ask Allah for

something, what it is called? A dua. So what if he made dua, he is still a

rebel, still a Kafir. So don't just think that because you are making Dua

you have Emaan. Emaan is about putting the rebellion down. That's not,

not Emaan

then this person who can put the

rebellion down inside of them

that's the one

that's holding on to an anchor, like the chain of a ship, that's so well put

together he's holding on to that anchor. Where is the anchor? Where is

it found? On a ship (reply from audience), on a ship? And you are not on

the ship, you are obviously in the water because the anchor goes into

the water. You are in the water, and there's a storm, the anchor is

dropped when the ship needs to stay stable. So you are in a storm in the

ocean; you are going to drown unless you hold on to the anchor. Allah

says, "Whoever can put the rebellion down and hold on to Emaan in

Allah then they are holding on to that anchor"

. There is no

breaking it. There is no breaks in that, there they are no chinks in that

armour, that doesn't break. The Aayah began "I don't need you", the

Aayah ends, "But you need me", that how it ends. You want to drown,

go ahead, go ahead. But whoever holds on, is holding on to something

that doesn't disappoint

and then comes the next Aayah the

Aayah about darkness and light, when Allah describes the ocean in the

Quran Allah describes darkness upon darkness the quran's imagery is all

connected in Surah Noor when Allah talks about bahr he says

a deep ocean that's so

deep there is no light getting through extremely dark and deep and then on top of that there's Mauj, another wave another wave on top of that dark clouds, so there's this dark, dark, dark, dark place night time in the middle of the ocean and it's a cloudy night so even the moonlight can't get through the stars can't get through because you would imagine night time in the ocean you might think the moon is reflecting right? on the water you imagine that scene but what keeps the moon even shining

through? the clouds

but the clouds are there they block

whatever light could have been there so you are in absolute pitch dark in

the ocean holding on to this anchor if you can and now appreciate what

Allah says ... Allah is the protective friend of those who believe i want

you to imagine take a note of the imagery here because Qur'an speaks in

imagery a lot you just fell off a ship you have a friend on board the ship

and there are different kinds of friends there is a kind of friend that's on

the ship sees you fall and says, Oh! I m gonna to miss you that's it then

there is a friend that can do everything in his or her power and he really

wants to protect you, the friend who wants to protect you, tell you hey!

Hold on to the anchor and i will what.. I will pull u up that kind of a

friend that wants to protect you in Arabic that's actually called a Wali a

Wali is a friend but a protective one not just the friend that's you know

gonna ditch you at the right time that's called Khadhool in Arabic

Khadhool is a friend that acts like a buddy until you need them and they disappear, when a trouble shows up they disappearthe Shaytaan is Khadhool he is a kind of friend who is always hanging out with you he is always there he talks to you a lot he talks to you more than anybody else probably when the time shows up though when trouble comes he is out of there Shaytan is egging on the Kuffar egging them on, egging them on they go all the way to the battle of Badr and when he sees angels coming from the other side he says i got nothing to do with this I'm out you guys are on your own now.. i misguide you as far as I can you know

Allah calls himself Wali in next Aayah

Allah is the

protective friend of those who have come to the faith this is a very

heavy Aayah because Allah did not say, (Subhanhau wa Ta'ala),

,

, , , there is a difference in the Arabic

language between saying and saying

there is a difference,

one is verbal in nature, the other is nominal in nature and noun in Arabic

represent permanence when Allah talks about a Momin someone stable

in their Emaan and when Allah talks about Al-Mominoon he only

complements them so he says

people who are Momin

have already attained success but when he talks about

he even

criticizes them sometimes

what is wrong with you he

doesn't criticize the 'Mominoon' but he criticizes

because there

Emaan has not settled, they entered Emaan, but it hasn't become

concrete yet 'abhi kacha hay thora' that's what it is it's not there yet but

in this incredible Aayah Allah says He is offering his protective friendship

to the person who has weak Emaan, strong Emaan, strongest Emaan,

bordering on Nifaq, doesn't matter,

if he/she says

, then Allah is offering his

protective help if you want it .. it's there

Allah is

offering to become your Wali, doesn't matter what state of Emaan so

long as you are a believer, doesn't matter what level what rank you are

at so you don't say Allah is only Wali to the highest level

,

, , , , all of them

and the

proof of that is the next part of the Aayah 'He pulls them out of various

shades of darkness' ..

, , various states of darkness in to ,

in to the light, they were the people of Emaan, why would they be in

darkness...because just you have Emaan doesn't mean you don't have

some darkness that's why he doesn't say

..the darkness..shades

of darkness, multiple shades of darkness some of you have the darkness

of envy, others have the darkness of Anger, others have the darkness of

greed, others have darkness of narcissism - self obsession, others have

the darkness of materialism, others have the darkness of cheating and

lying and stealing, multiple different kinds of the darknesses within

people who claim to be Muslims Allah says, I'm willing to pull you out,

no matter what your darkness is, I'm willing to pull you out to the light,

in Al-Noor, to the light you notice before Allah started talking that He

owns everything, he owns everything, then He talked he guards

everything, remember that? on top of guarding everything he wants to

protect who, especially, he is protecting the entire Universe, he is even

guarding the ocean you are drowning in, he is even protecting the

anchor you are holding but he is offering you a special protection,

offering you special protection, he is willing to pull you out,

,and he continues to pull them out which

)(

means that it's not a one time thing, Allah guided me I can feel Allah guided me last Ramadan, and I felt closer to Allah than i felt ever before

so it's done, No! it's not

it's he keeps doing it he keeps

doing it he keeps doing it you keep going to Allah, Allah will keep pulling

you out but you have to admit to Allah first, let me tell you, one of the

most beautiful thing i have heard when i was at Hajj this year in one of

the Khutub at Hajj the sheikh said you know , ,

,

the day of Dua is the day of admission, before you make Dua you need

to admit who you are, you need to confess to Allah what your

darknesses are, you know what they are nobody else does, you know

what they are, you have this laziness, you don't pay attention in Salah,

you have filthy habits that nobody knows about, you have anger, you are

hiding secrets, you've cheated someone, you've lied against, you know

what they are you have to admit them to Allah and then ask to pull you

out of that darkness, and then he says

, and

those who disbelieved, those who are ungrateful those who don't hold

on to the anchor then their protective friends are the same sources of

rebellion, then that's )the o(nly protection they get from those entities, , he brings them out of the light into various )(
shades of darkness, now the question arises how are disbelievers in light,

because it says He takes them from light in to the darkness so how can

the disbeliever be in light to begin with I thought disbelievers are from

the beginning are in the darkness. So what light? Allah Aazza wa Jal is

teaching us that all humans start off with light, we are not born into sin,

it's not Christian creed, this is the Emaan in Allah Azza wa Jal teaches us

that human beings are born in Emaan they have the potential of faith,

when they don't exercise that muscle then it goes into darkness, one of the wise anecdotes an example to help me understand this, one of my teachers Dr Abdul Sami, may Allah protect him, he gave us example, he said you know when you exercise the muscle it gets stronger but when you don't exercise a muscle it gets weaker and you know somebody lying in bed, they are lying in bed for six months, eight months, ten months and they don't get up, guess what? after ten months when they try to get up their legs don't work, they loose it the ability to accept guidance is a muscle Allah puts inside us, if you exercise that muscle it will get stronger, if you don't exercise that muscle, reminder comes to you, advice comes to you, opportunity comes to you, prayer time comes to you, and you ignore it, you ignore it, that ability to accept guidance starts getting weaker, until that muscle dies then it doesn't matter if it's

a message from Allah or Prophet

, the greatest of all

teachers and speakers, speaking to you the greatest of all speech, the

Qur'an itself, it won't matter because your muscle is dead, it won't

matter now, because you didn't exercise when it was still

alive,

... you only warn someone who is still alive. that's

what Allah says he pulls the Taghoot, the rebellious forces, the rebellious

urges inside us pull people out of light that Allah gave them endowed

them in with their birth and pulls them back into the shades of darkness,

, those are going to be the people of fire, those are the people of fire, the companions of fire in which they will remain, the last nuance that i share with you, it's difficult to share as it has do with the Arabic language I'll try my best to make it easy to understand insha Allah and that's that there is two comparisons in this Aayah, in this Aayah there is a comparison of two relationships, believers

have the relationship with Allah and disbelievers have relationship with

the entities of rebellion

, right? believers have a relationship

with Allah and disbelievers with what is in Arabic called

,

extremely rebellious, which is inside and outside as I mentioned and the

name of those relationships is the same Allah to us is Wali, the name of that relationship on the two sides is us and Allah and the name of the

relationship is Wali and the relationship between the disbelievers and

Taghoot is also Wali

, it's the same name it's the same

relationship so again i repeat what i said so i can build it slowly, two

relationships have been compared, now let me hear from you, what's

the first relationship? Believers and Allah and what's the name of that

relationship Wali, what's the second relationship? Disbelievers and

Taghoot and that relationship is also Wali. Now listen, listen carefully, i

promise i finish at this point, who is the wali in the first relationship?

Allah is. Who is the Wali in the second relationship? Everyone clear

about that, wali in the first relationship is Allah and the Wali in the

second relationship is?

. You with me? You know what that

means? That mean every relationship has a dominant party, and there's

a sub party, teacher student, parent child, wife husband, i had to do it, i had to do it, anyhow, in this relationship who is the dominant party?

Allah believers. In the second relationship who is the dominant party? Taghoot disbelievers. You understand? Now what does Allah do?

, when Allah describes his relationship he mentioned

himself first, then he mentions the believers, the Aayah continues and it

says relationship is who?

the dominant party in the second , and where are the mentioned when you

heard the Arabic? In the beginning or in the end? At the end. But you know in language there's an idea of expected sequence. So in the first case, the dominant and the secondary was mentioned, so you are expecting the second time also the dominant and then the secondary will be mentioned so the sequence would have been

it would have been like that, keep the sequence,

but Allah in His wisdom decides that when he was mentioned first with

the believers, but the

do not deserve to be mentioned the same

place Allah was mentioned in the sentence so they are pushed to the

end they are not even compared to Allah there is no comparison, not

even in the language so the word goes to the end it doesn't deserve the

same seat as , you know,

becomes a

in Grammar actually now there are two and the , that's when grammar becomes sweet man, that's why I love grammar, Qur'an becomes juicy seriously you just, you taste it and what translation is going to communicate that, what translation? By the way you notice

at the end this, , this , this principle and I'm not just saying that to make you feel bad, every one of you can learn Arabic, every one of you can learn Arabic. There is not a single person who can not the question is whether you want to or not, that's the only question, Allah has guaranteed to make it easy, I'm telling you, i was a terrible student of the language, a terrible student in college, I am the guy who studies the day before the exam, who is okay with the 70 I'm that guy, but when i decided to learn Arabic in Queen's you know, people after a Khutba they came to me say where did you learn 'Arabi' I said 'Queen's' you know from the sheikh Al-Queenzi it doesn't have to be exotic guys, it doesn't have to be under a tree in the desert, it doesn't you can learn, i

tell you if you want to get close to Allah's word, Allah will open those doors, because Allah is the Wali of those who believe. Allah will make it easy for you. So what if you are a bad student in every thing else? Allah will make you top notch in Qur'an because you wanted to do it because you wanted to get closer to him, and you wanted to hold on to an anchor, you wanted to taste it for yourself, you know, that's what you wanted, I wanna be able to have this conversation without explaining a word to you and just go straight to the Arabic itself everybody here understands that and we can get there, we can get there as a people, in my previous session when i talked about, set goals for yourself, i mean it, set goals for yourself don't just say O..i can't believe they already reached there I am never gonna get there, don't think like that take one thing at a time, take what in front of you, pay attention, don't loose sight of it. Don't memorize a surah and hold the pages of the Mushaf like this, the one surah you memorize and compare to the rest of the pages that are left.. O my God! don't do that, this is good, you look at the next page, don't look the rest of Mushaf..........you know kids do that they compare the thickness of the pages ...yea.. ..... it's very skinny here, you know, I was asked to share the Qur'an's perspective of darkness to light there is lot that can be said about this beautiful passage and i didn't give you the Dars of Qur'an in the previous session so i figure at least i make this a Dars of Qur'an thank you very much for listening ... Alhumdulillah! if you get a chance memorize these Aayaat..now that you have heard about them memorize them and then pray with them pray these Aayaat in Salah they are towards the end of surah Al-Baqarah... I'm not giving you the Aayah nos. find them it's okay, spending a little extra time with the Qur'an, I don't think it's gonna heart, I know it's like the root canal for

most of you but that's okay do it.. take your time find the Aayaat toward the end of Baqarah and sit there with your family, memorize them, that's when you walk out of the conference saying we have got something out of this to get closer to Allah, not just at this session but we got closer to the Qur'an. BarakAllahu Li wa Lakum. Assalamu Alaikum wa Rahmatullahi wa Barakatuhu.

