  Two weeks ago I directed your attention backwardto some Biblical risk-takers.      To Joab, who took up arms for the cause of God,and said, May the Lord do what seems good to him!(2 Sam. 10:12).     To Esther, who risked her life for the Jewish peoplein exile, and said, If I perish, I perish! (Esther4:16).     To Shadrach, Meshach and Abednigo who stood unflinchingbefore the fiery furnace and said, Even if God does notdeliver us, be it known to you, O king, we will not serve yourgods or worship the golden image (Dan. 3:18).   To Paul, whose life seemed to be round-the-clockrisk, but who said, I do not count my life of any valuenor as precious to myself if only I may accomplish my course andthe ministry which I received from the Lord Jesus, to testifyto the gospel of the grace of God (Acts 20:24).    And we concluded from these Bible stories that itis right to risk for the cause of God.  God does not mean forus to know what our future will be in this world, and he doesnot want our response to that uncertainty to be fear or paralysisor the love of security or excessive caution; instead he teachesus again and again to risk for the cause of God.  So last week we turned our attention from the pastrisk-takers of the Bible and heard the word challenge us to takerisks in four areas of our own lives.    Risks in relationships for the sake of righteousnessand authenticity.  Risks with our money for the cause of the gospel. Risks in our personal witnessing to the truthand beauty of Christ.  Risks in ministry ventures.   The text last week was Luke 21:16, You willbe delivered up even by parents and brothers and kinsmen and friends,and some of you they will put to death.  We focused on theword some.  For some, obedience to Christ will resultin suffering and death.  For some, not for all.  And neither younor I will knows whether we are in that number.  Therefore obedienceis always a risk.  This is the will of God, and therefore it isright to risk for the cause of God.    Now today I want to make explicit something thathas been assumed for the past two weeks.  I have been assumingthat the power or the motive behind taking risks for the causeof God is not heroism, or the lust for adventure, or the courageof self-reliance, or the need to earn God's good will.  RatherI have been assuming that the power behind all Biblical risk forthe cause of God is faith in the triumphant love of God.  I have been assuming     that the strength to risk losing face for thesake of Christ is the faith that God's love will lift up yourface in the end and vindicate your cause.     that the strength to risk losing money for thecause of the gospel is the faith that we have a treasure in theheavens that cannot fail.   that the strength to risk losing life in thisworld is faith in the promise that he who loses his life in thisworld will save it for the age to come.   This is very different from heroism, and self-reliance. When we risk our face and money and life because we believe Godwill always catch us and turn our loss into glory, then it's notwe who get the praise because of our courage; it's God who getsthe praise because of his care.    That has been my assumption for two weeks, and myaim this morning is to lay it out in the open and to show itsBiblical foundation.  Let me begin in last week's text.  In Luke 21:16Jesus says, Some of you they will kill.  But then in verse18 he says, But not a hair of your head will perish.  Byyour endurance you will gain your lives. Some of you they will kill. . . But not a hair of your head will perish!!  What does this mean?  What is Jesus trying to sayto us when he says:  Go ahead and risk obedience; some ofyou they will kill; but not a hair of your head will perish? I think the best commentary on these verses is our text for today,Romans 8:35-39.  Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?  Shalltribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness,or peril, or sword?  As it is written,    For thy sake we are being killed all the daylong; we are regarded as sheep to be slaughtered.No, in all these things we are more than conquerorsthrough him who loved us.  For I am sure that neither death, norlife, nor angels, nor principalities, nor things present, northings to come, nor powers, nor height, nor depth, nor anythingelse in all creation, will be able to separate us from the loveof God in Christ Jesus our Lord.   Remember that the words of Jesus were: Someof you they will kill. . . But not a hair of your head will perish. Now what does Paul say?  1.  Like Jesus, he says, first of all, that the loveof Christ for us does not eliminate our suffering.  On the contraryour very attachment to Christ will bring suffering.  What is Paul'sanswer to his own question in verse 35: Shall tribulation,or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril,or sword separate us from the love of Christ?  His answer in verse 37 is a resounding NO!    But don't miss the implication of the question: thereason that these things will not separate us from the love ofChrist is not because they don't happen to people whom Christloves.  The quote in verse 36 from Psalm 44:22 is Paul's way ofsaying that these things do in fact come upon Christ's people. For thy sake we are being killed all the day long; we are regarded as sheep to be slaughtered. In other words, Christ's love for us, referred toin verse 35, does not remove us from these sufferings.  This is the meaning of the little word inin verse 37: In all these things we are more than conquerors.. .  Not by escaping them!  So Paul agrees with Jesus: some of you they willkill.  Obedience is risk.  And it is right to risk for thecause of God.  Notice some of the risks in verse 35:   tribulation -- Christians will experiencetribulation! i.e. trouble and oppression of various kinds.   distress -- stressful circumstances occasionedby all kinds of dangers and threats and worries.    persecution -- active opposition fromthe enemies of the gospel.    famine -- note this well!  There is noguarantee that Christians will be spared when there are food shortages.  When Jesus says that we should not be anxious what we shalleat or drink because our Father knows what we need, he doesn'tmean that Christians will never be hungry or starve.  He meansthat there will always be enough food so that we can do his willand glorify his name.  And if famine strikes it will not cut usoff from the love of God.  This has tremendous implications forour understanding of various national catastrophes and how wemight expect to be involved in them.  I urge you to think aboutit.  That is enough to show that Paul shared Jesus' convictionthat obedience is risk and that some of you they will kill.  2.  But the second thing Paul says is that none ofthese miseries will ever separate us from the love of Christ. He asks, Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution,or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword separate us from thelove of Christ?  His answer in verse 37 is, NO!  This is what Jesus meant when he said, Someof you they will kill. . . But not a hair of your head will perish.   In other words, no misery that a true Christian everexperiences is evidence that he has been cut off from the loveof Christ.  The love of Christ triumphs over all misery.  Verses38-39 make this crystal clear:  For I am sure that neither death, nor life, nor angels,nor principalities, nor things present, nor things to come, norpowers, nor height, nor depth, nor anything else in all creation,will be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesusour Lord.  On the far side of every risk-- even if it resultsin death -- the love of God triumphs.  This is the the faith thatfrees us to risk for the cause of God.  It is not heroism, orlust for adventure, or courageous self-reliance or efforts toearn God's favor.  It is childlike faith in the triumph of God'slove -- that on the far side of all our risks for the sake ofrighteousness God will still be holding us.   But Jesus seems to say something more than this. He says, Not a hair of your head will perish.   Itseems ironic that he could know that his cousin John was beheadedfor the cause of righteousness, and yet say that not a hair ofyour head will perish.  It's one thing to say that God will bethere after you have suffered and will catch you and love youand restore you.  But it seems like so much more to say to a torturedand dying saint, Not a hair of your head will perish. What does he mean?  3.  Well, Paul has this same kind of statement --and this is the third thing Paul says.  He raises the same questionfor us.  Look at verse 31: If God is for us, who can beagainst us?  That is the same as saying, If God isfor us no one can be against us.  But if no one can be againstus, why are we counted as sheep for the slaughter and killed allday long, as verse 36 says we are?  No one can be against us, seems justas excessive as Not a hair of your head will perish. Both Paul and Jesus seem to want to say more than that we survivesuffering and live for ever.  They want to say something morethan that tribulation and distress and persecution and famineand nakedness and sword and peril can't separate us from the loveof Christ.  And this something more comes out clear as a bellin verse 37.  Do these things separate us from the love of Christ? NO! says verse 37, in all these things we aremore than conquerors through him whom loved us.  This isthe more that seems to be implied in the statementthat no one can really be against us (v. 31), and the statementthat not a hair of your head will perish (Luke 21:18).  But what does this mean?  How can you be morethan a conqueror? when you risk for the cause of God gethurt for it?  If you attempt some act of obedience to Jesus Christand get attacked by one of the enemies mentioned in verse 35,say famine or sword, what must happen for you to be called a conqueror? Answer: you must not be separated from the love of Jesus Christ. If the aim of the attack is to destroy you and cut you off fromChrist and bring you to final ruin without God, then you are aconqueror if you defeat this aim and remain in the love of Christ.  But what must happen in this conflict with famineand sword if you are to be called more than a conqueror?  I wouldsay that a conqueror defeats his enemy, but a more thanconqueror subjugates his enemy.  A conqueror nullifies thepurpose of his enemy; a more than conqueror turnshis enemy to his own purposes.  A conqueror strikes down his foe;a more than conqueror makes his foe his slave.  Practically what does this mean?  Let me use Paul's own words in 2 Corinthians 4:17. For this slight momentary affliction is preparing (literally:is effecting, or working, or bringing about) for us an eternalweight of glory beyond all comparison.  Notice affliction is one of the attackingenemies in Romans 8:35.  What has happened in Paul's conflictwith it?  It has certainly not separated him from the love ofChrist.  But even more, it has been taken captive.  It has beenenslaved and made to serve Paul's best interest.  Affliction,the enemy, is preparing for Paul an eternal weight of glory. His enemy is now his slave.  He has not only conquered his enemy. He has more than conquered him.   Affliction raised his sword to cut off the head ofPaul's faith.  But instead the hand of faith snatched the armof affliction and forced it to cut off another part of his worldliness. And so affliction is made the servant of godliness and humilityand love.  And in this way it is forced to be Paul's slave andto prepare for him an even greater weight of glory than he wouldhave ever had without the fight.   So now we have seen three things that Paul and Jesussay:    The love of Christ does not remove his peoplefrom suffering, and so all obedience is risk.  We are regardedas sheep to be slaughtered.   But none of this suffering will ever separateus from the love of Christ.  On the far side of risk the loveof God always triumphs.   But even more.  When we risk for the cause ofGod and meet the enemy of affliction with the weapons of faiththe enemy is not just defeated, it is captured and made to servethe eternal good of the Christian warrior.  And all this is throughthe triumphant love of Christ.  In all these things we aremore than conquerors through him who loved us.   So in the last two weeks I have not been appealingto the impulse of heroism, or the lust for adventure, or the courageof self-reliance, or the need to earn God's favor.  I have beenappealing to faith in the triumphant love of God.  And so I conclude where I began: it is right to riskfor the cause of God.  It is right to engage the enemy and say,May the Lord do what seems good to him!  It is right to servethe people of God and say, If I perish I perish!  It is rightto stand before the fiery furnace and refuse to bow down to thegods of this world.  Why?   Because in all these things we are more than conquerors! He who did not spare his own Son but gave him up for usall, will he not also give us all things with him?  Indeedhe will -- even our enemies -- and make them serve us for everand ever.  Amen.  
