INTRO.- ILL.- Florida Woman to Get Brain Surgery Thanks to ?FOX and Friends?.  Friday , July 18, 2008Insurance provider Aetna will cover a Florida woman?s brain surgery after the intervention of a "FOX & Friends" contributor.Caitlin White, 19, of Bartow, Fl, suffers from a debilitating brain disorder that could kill her.  She was scheduled for surgery when her insurance carrier, Aetna, canceled the family?s coverage just minutes before she was scheduled to go under the knife.But after hearing her story, FOX News legal analyst Peter Johnson Jr. contacted Florida Gov. Charlie Crist?s office, which was able in turn to reach Aetna through the state?s Office of Citizen?s Services.Crist?s staff convinced the carrier to cover the surgery and give White 90 days of hospital service thereafter."We didn?t know what to do," her mother, Sheila Jackson, told "FOX & Friends" on Friday.  "Our hands were tied."White suffers from Chiari malformation, a brain condition that causes excruciating headaches and fainting spells and can, without treatment, eventually lead to the destruction of motor skills and memory.White will now have the $113,000 surgery on Monday.  "Oh, it?s wonderful," White told FOX. Her mother was also elated. "It?s incredible," Jackson said.  "We?ve been on such a rollercoaster and to get such incredible, wonderful news and then to find out how it came about, it?s just better."Brothers and sisters, sometimes people have to fight for what is right, good and holy.  That Fox news analyst did the right thing, as did Florida?s Gov. Charlie Crist.  Thank God!  Praise God!There is a time when people have to stand up for what is right! And there are other times when people need to stand up and be counted for that which is right.  WHEN?When it comes to protecting children we need to take a stand.ILL.- I have a nephew who is 46-47 years old.  My sister-in-law said that when he was only 3 years old she could let him run loose in the mall in Joplin, MO, but she was quick to add that no one could do that kind of thing today.  ISN?T THAT THE TRUTH?I love looking at babies in the mall or in shopping carts in the grocery store, etc. but I?m almost afraid to look too closely and speak to a child for fear the parent will think I?m trying to kidnap their child.  ILL.- She?s 3 feet tall, loves her teddy bear and hosts tea parties with her stuffed pig and Elmo doll at a toddler?s picnic table.The last time her grandma and grandpa saw her, she was moving out of their Lee Vista-area home with her mom.  The question is, where is Caylee Marie Anthony?  The 2-year-old girl hasn?t been seen in more than a month, and her grandparents are worried.  So are Orange County investigators.  SOMEONE SHOULD BE WORRIED AND SHOULD HAVE BEEN MORE CAREFUL IN THE FIRST PLACE!  There are some things worth fighting for: children, God, Christ, the church, the faith.PROP.- Because we have such a great salvation we have some responsibilities in life.  Two are listed in this text.1- We fight the fight2- We condemn the condemnedI. WE FIGHT THE FIGHT3Dear friends, although I was very eager to write to you about the salvation we share, I felt I had to write and urge you to contend for the faith that was once for all entrusted to the saints.II Tim. 4:7 "I have fought the good fight, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith."  Have you been fighting the good fight?  And do you have any ?fight? left in you?ILL.- Rocky Marciano (September 1, 1923 ? August 31, 1969), born Rocco Francis Marchegiano, was the heavyweight champion of the world from 1952 to 1956.  Marciano, with forty-three knockouts to his credit (87.8% knockout rate), remains the only heavyweight champion in boxing history to retire having won every fight in his professional career.  49 fights, 49 wins with 43 knockouts.  WHAT A RECORD!How?s your record against evil and the evil one?  Have you lost any fights to him lately?  Or have you won any fights?  ILL.- You may be like the guy that decided it was time to shed some excess pounds.  He took his new diet seriously, even changing his driving route to avoid his favorite bakery.  One morning, however, he arrived at work carrying a gigantic coffee cake.  Everyone scolded him, but he just smiled.  "This is a very special coffee cake," he explained.  "I accidentally drove by the bakery this morning and there in the window were a host of goodies.  I felt this was no accident, so I prayed, ?Lord, if you want me to have one of those delicious coffee cakes, let me have a parking place directly in front of the bakery.?  And sure enough," he continued, "the eighth time around the block, there it was!"Have you lost any fights when it comes to any temptation in life?  I?m sure you have.  We all do.  But we can?t give up the fight.  We must continue to fight the fight.  And not only the fight against temptation to sin, but also the fight for the faith of Christ.We are living in a hostile and anti-Christ world!  Most people don?t want to hear about God, Jesus and Christianity, BUT WE MUST CONTINUE TO FIGHT THE FIGHT.ILL.- We have heard about Tom Cruise and his belief in Scientology.  I think it?s crazy but he believes in it! Consequently, he?s not afraid to talk about it.  WHAT ABOUT US?  He believes a lie and talks about it.  We believe in the truth and don?t say anything about it!When was the last time that you stood up for the Bible and faith in Christ and the Christian life?ILL.- I remember many years ago when I was in my 20?s and was preaching at a nursing home service.  Several times in my preaching I said, "The Bible says..."  After only a short time some old man said out loud, "The Bible doesn?t say anything.  It?s just a book..."  I just tried to ignore him but the second time he said those words I went over to him, looked him in the eye and punched him in the nose.  NO, OF COURSE NOT, I DIDN?T DO THAT.	But his argumentative spirit was something new to me.  I?d never had anybody question my preaching.  What did I do?  I stopped in the middle of my preaching and tried to explain to him that I believed the Bible was the Word of God and that spoke to us from His Word.  HE DIDN?T BUY IT.  The people at the nursing home were embarrassed by his outburst so they finally took him out of the room.  Brothers and sisters, have you ever had anybody question your faith or the Bible, etc.?  What did you do?  What did you say?  Did you try to defend the faith?  Did you speak up for Christ and the Bible?I Peter 3:15 "But in your hearts set apart Christ as Lord. Always be prepared to give an answer to everyone who asks you to give the reason for the hope that you have. But do this with gentleness and respect."II. WE CONDEMN THE CONDEMNED4For certain men whose condemnation was written about long ago have secretly slipped in among you. They are godless men, who change the grace of our God into a license for immorality and deny Jesus Christ our only Sovereign and Lord.  CERTAIN MEN WERE CONDEMNED.ILL.-  GORHAM, Maine - Mara Ranger will be a little paranoid doing laundry now.  When she was removing clothes from the washing machine at her Maine farmhouse Wednesday, the clothes moved.  She told WMTW-TV, "I jumped back" and saw a snake.  She quickly shut the lid and called for help.Maine Animal Damage Control operator Richard Burton reached into the machine and pulled and pulled ? all 8 feet of a python.Burton guesses the snake got into Ranger?s washing machine through water pipes.  The snake?s future home will be York Animal Kingdom in York.Ranger is going to start looking into every corner of her washing machine.  She says, "I?m going to be looking in the tub first ? before and after, maybe even during, the rinse cycle."Brothers and sisters, there?s a big snake loose in the house.  And his name is Satan!  And he?s just waiting to devour any suspecting person who comes into his territory.Gen. 3:1-4 "1 Now the serpent was more crafty than any of the wild animals the LORD God had made. He said to the woman, "Did God really say, ?You must not eat from any tree in the garden??" 2 The woman said to the serpent, "We may eat fruit from the trees in the garden, 3 but God did say, ?You must not eat fruit from the tree that is in the middle of the garden, and you must not touch it, or you will die.? "4 "You will not surely die," the serpent said to the woman. The devil is a lying serpent.  He may appear pleasing to the eye but he?s nothing but a big liar, a deceiver and a cheater.I Pet. 5:8-9 "Be self-controlled and alert. Your enemy the devil prowls around like a roaring lion looking for someone to devour. Resist him, standing firm in the faith, because you know that your brothers throughout the world are undergoing the same kind of sufferings."Eph. 6:10-12 "Finally, be strong in the Lord and in his mighty power.  Put on the full armor of God so that you can take your stand against the devil?s schemes.  For our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the powers of this dark world and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms."Condemn the condemned.  Some day God in His infinite wisdom and power will condemn Satan to hell.  And along the way we need to do something to the devil?s associates! ILL.- No More Mr. Nice Guy, As They Say.  Thu Jul 17, 2008DEAR MARGO: I?m a 20-something female.  At my gym I made the mistake of politely saying hello to a stranger, a 50-ish male, because he said hi to me.  In so doing, I unwittingly opened the floodgates to this man?s personal history (sexual exploits included), medical problems, unsolicited health advice, all of which he broadcasts in a detailed (and gross) monologue while I huff away on the bike, then the treadmill.  My part in the conversation includes head nods and "uh-huhs."  I try to lose him by moving on to weights ... to no avail.  "This began a year ago, and every time I see him he tries to engage me in these one-sided conversations about some woman he dated and her hot legs, or other equally uncomfortable tidbits.  I?ve tried reading books while I do cardio, but then he comes up and suggests self-help books I should read to help my relationships or spiritual life. "When I am listening to my Walkman, he talks over it.  If I weigh myself, he?s there making sarcastic comments about my weight (I?m thin and petite).  I?ve tried walking away after a polite head nod, even going at different times.  Yet he?s always there, trapping not only me, but other people as well.  He doesn?t seem to work out except for his mouth.  This guy must be thicker than a neutron cloud in a sauna because he just doesn?t get it.  How do I get him to leave me alone without being rude?DEAR AB:  What?s wrong with rude?  He sounds like such a clod that I?m not sure telling him to shut up would even register. Here?s a guy with no judgment and a big mouth who?s made you a captive audience and ruins your time at the gym.  I hope you tell this jerk, next time he begins a monologue, "Would you please leave me alone?  I have no interest in listening to you.  I come here to work out."  You might also inform the manager.Tell the jerk to "hit the road."  This is what we must do that jerk called Satan and to his henchmen.Sometimes people will tempt you to join them in their revelry or their rebellion against God and we must say, "No way! Hit the road Jack and don?t come back no more!"ILL.- When I was teenager the first time someone said to me, "Let?s go to Kansas and get some beer," I went.  I wasn?t smart enough or strong enough to say "no" to that temptation.  Brothers and sisters, we must smart and smarter than others and say, "no" to some people and some activities that lead us away from the Lord.  In some cases, we may need to say, "Get thee hence, Satan!"  "The Lord will deal with you."Titus 2:11-13 "For the grace of God that brings salvation has appeared to all men.  It teaches us to say "No" to ungodliness and worldly passions, and to live self-controlled, upright and godly lives in this present age, while we wait for the blessed hope..."CONCLUSION----------------ILL.- My mama loved me but my daddy loves me more.  Before mama died she got a beneficiaries will and left her little house at 321 S. Ball in Webb City, MO, to me.  She loved me indeed.But my daddy loves me more.  My daddy in heaven has a mansion waiting for me.  It?s eternal.  It?s forever.  And there I?ll live in a state of blessedness and peace!We have a wonderful salvation and it?s all because of the Lord. Because of what is waiting for us in heaven, we need to fight the good fight of the faith and at the same time, oppose evil in this world and the evil one of this world.  