Sunday, August 31, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse; A blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the Lord your God...And a curse, if ye will not obey... And...thou shalt put the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and the curse upon mount Ebal." Deut. 11:26-29.  The text says, "A blessing if ye obey the commandments of the Lord your God, which I command you this day; And a curse, if ye will not obey the commandments of the Lord your God, but turn aside out of the way which I command you this day, to go after other gods, which ye have not known...And...thou shalt put the blessing upon mount GERIZIM, and the curse upon mount EBAL. Are they not on the other side Jordan?" Deut. 11:27-30. These "commandments of the Lord your God" are the same as referred to by our Lord Jesus Christ when He said:  "He that HATH MY COMMANDMENTS, and keepeth THEM, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him." (Jn. 14:21)  Make no mistake, Beloved. The moral law of Moses is as binding, and vibrant, and living today as it was in Moses' day, and beyond, to Adam's day, and beyond, to all eternal ages past. We will not allow heretics to pit the Old Testament against the New Testament, and thereby make void the Word of God.  Here are the words of the Lord Jesus, on that point; to wit: "Think not that I am come to destroy the law (i.e., Moses' writings, or the Pentateuch, the first five books of the Bible), or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven." Mat. 5:17-19. ­ (i.e., when the blessed inhabitants of heaven [elect angels and elect humans] discuss and evaluate those yet alive on the earth, and as they render their holy opinions, those humans on earth who keep His commandments themselves, and teach others so, rank highest; and vice versa). Dr. Gill says:  "The law being written on stones denotes the duration of it, which continued not only during the times of the Old Testament dispensation, and to the times of John the Baptist, and had its fulfilment in Christ, BUT STILL CONTINUES; for though Christ has redeemed His people from the curse and condemnation of it, yet it is in His hands as a rule of direction to them as to their walk and conversation; NOR IS IT MADE VOID BY ANY DOCTRINE OF THE GOSPEL, and nothing more strongly enforces obedience to it than the Gospel. (Bang!) THE MORAL LAW IS IMMUTABLE, INVARIABLE, AND ETERNAL, in its nature, and in the matter of it."  These huge stones in their natural condition, without any tool upon them, were plastered with plaster, giving the appearance of huge billboards on the top of the mountains, upon which the blessings and curses were written; to wit:  Sunday, August 31, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 2  "And it shall be on the day when ye shall pass over Jordan unto the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, that thou shalt set thee up great stones, and plaister them with plaister; And thou shalt write upon them all the words of this law...ye shall set up these stones, which I command thee this day, in MOUNT EBAL...And Moses charged the people the same day, saying, These (six tribes, about 1.5 million people) shall stand upon MOUNT GERIZIM to BLESS the people, when ye are come over Jordan; Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin: And these (six tribes, about 1.5 million people) shall stand upon MOUNT EBAL to CURSE; Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali." (Deut. 27:2-13)  Beloved. This was a HUGE production. Dr. Munsey says:  "THIS WAS DOUBTLESS THE GRANDEST CEREMONY IN THE HISTORY OF THE NATIONS. Mount Ebal and Mount Gerizim are on every page of the Bible, and on every field of divine providence, and in the valley between them will sit the Throne of the Judgment ­ and to every blessing and every curse, all the people will say `Amen,' and the universe shall acknowledge that eternal punishment is right. The blessed Savior sat down on another mount and preached His first sermon, forever known as the `Sermon on the Mount.' It was a sermon of blessings. `Blessed are the poor in spirit ­ Blessed are they that mourn ­ Blessed are the meek ­ Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness ­ Blessed are the merciful ­ Blessed are the pure in heart ­ Blessed are the peacemakers ­ Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake.' The Beatitudes. A Sermon of Blessings. `Look,' says the heretic, `it would be inconsistent with Christ's character to curse. The dear Lord Jesus is a man of utter kindness, love, mercy, tenderness" ­ (all the goodie, goodie, sloppy agape) ­ "it would not suit that kind face, or be in harmony with His mission.' As I say, this was His FIRST SERMON. Now hear His LAST SERMON. Standing in the Temple in the presence of all the people and those who had been taught from childhood to regard the Pharisees and scribes as their teachers and patterns of piety; to wit: `Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites ­ Woe unto you, ye blind guides ­ ye fools and blind ­ Woe unto you scribes ­ Woe unto you, thou blind Pharisee ­ ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell?'"  The truth is, God's Curses and Blessings go together. Ebal and Gerizim must be right across the valley from each other ­ and the huge ceremony ­ as Munsey says, "This was doubtless the grandest ceremony in the history of the nations;" I say, That grand ceremony must forever play itself out in every age on the vast stage of human endeavor, in thunderous tones of warning to all mankind: Curses and Blessings go together. Christ, as Love Incarnate, can curse a sinner.  Sunday, August 31, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 3  Christ, as Love Incarnate can damn a sinner. And, if Christ, as Love Incarnate can curse and damn a sinner, He can do it for all eternity. And all the world, in every age, hears the infallible word of God thundering from these two mounts ­ which, incidentally, are still standing today as in the Bible days.  Josephus, the ancient secular historian, says, "that when Moses was about to die, he ordered the blessings and the curses to be written on the altar, on both sides of it." A further ancient, secular source, the so-called Misnah, says that "the altar was built of these stones, and on that the law was written; for it is said, `they shall bring the stones and build the altar, and plaister it with plaister, and write upon it all the words of the law."  Other ancient Jewish writers say that there were extraordinary pains taken to assure that all the world, in all succeeding ages, might continue to hear the thunderous message of Mounts Ebal and Gerizim ­ "very plainly" ("And thou shalt write upon the stones all the words of this law VERY PLAINLY." Dt. 27:8.).' And, so that they might easily and readily be read by all mankind, those ancient Jewish writers say, the words were written in 70 languages ! ; which they say was done, that whoever would learn the law might learn it, and so the Gentiles would have no excuse; for it was a prevailing notion among them, of those days, that there were exactly 70 nations and thus 70 languages in the world. Very probably. Amazing !  Think of it, Beloved. Barack Obama chose the football stadium of the Denver Broncos to accept the nomination of the Democratic Party as President of the United States of America ­ a big deal ! ­ because that stadium accommodated 77,000 people. He wanted to create a big show for a big event. Congress voted to put up millions of dollars of federal tax money just for security for the open-air event. The Democratic Party put up more millions. Obama and his political party wanted his event to make an huge impression. A never-to-be-forgotten impression ­ hoping thereby for a tacky political advantage.  Beloved, the Denver Bronco outdoor football field, seating 77,000 people, is a dinky little thing compared to God Almighty's mounts Ebal/Gerizim outdoor arena. And, Beloved, Obama's much-ballyhooed acceptance speech ceremony is a dinky little thing ­ no matter how many millions of dollars it cost for security ­ compared to God Almighty's historic and thunderous readings of His eternal BLESSINGS and CURSES.  As I say, God's open-air arena accommodated three million people, perhaps more. Take another look at the recent photograph of mounts Ebal and Gerizim, and picture in your mind how three million people might be gathered, standing on the twin slopes and half of them facing the other half, as the Levites loudly read the curses and the blessings to the people.  Then imagine the thunderous noise that probably echoed and re-echoed from mount to mount and then back again ­ from the configuration of the two mounts facing one another, and considering the exact degree of the two twin slopes ­ all as three million people loudly shouted "AMEN" ! as the Levites loudly read 12 curses, followed by 14 blessings, followed by 54 curses; to wit:  Sunday, August 31, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 4  "And the Levites shall speak, and say unto all the men of Israel with a loud voice, Cursed be the man that maketh any graven or molten image, an abomination unto the Lord, the work of the hands of the craftsman, AND PUTTETH IT IN A SECRET PLACE. And all the people shall answer and say, AMEN." (Deut. 27:14,15)  And so on, ­ some 66 curses, some 14 blessings, all read by the Levites (either in seriatim by all the Levites together, reading in a loud voice as a group, or one by one, taking turns, reading solo "with a loud voice"). But in any event, following the reading of each item, ­ at least 80 times ­ ALL THE PEOPLE, IN UNISON, ­ ALL 3 MILLION OF THEM ­ SHOUTED, "AMEN !" Talk about a ceremony making a lasting impression! And, remember, Beloved, that that great assembly of people were speaking representatively for all mankind, when they all, in unison, shouted "Amen" to more than four times as many Curses from God, as Blessings from God (i.e., 66 to 14; see, Deut. 27:14 to 28:68).  Moreover, recall, that not only did all mankind have the great AUDIBLE evidence that God's Curses are just and right and far more numerous than His Blessings, because of the numerosity of mankind's sins ­ but all of mankind also had the WRITTEN evidence, because every word that the Levites articulated in shouting out the Blessings and the Curses of God, ­ I say, EVERY WORD spoken by the Levites was also written, permanently carved in stone atop the mountains; to wit: "And thou shalt write upon the stones all the words of this law very plainly." Deut. 27:8. And, you may see the great scope and sweep of God's command about the publication of His words; to wit:  "And he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses, which he wrote in the presence of the children of Israel. And all Israel, and their elders, and officers, and their judges, stood on this side the ark and on that side before the priests the Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord, as well the stranger, as he that was born among them; half of them over against mount Gerizim, and half of them over against mount Ebal; as Moses the servant of the Lord had commanded before, that they should bless the people of Israel. And afterward he read all the words of the law, the blessings and cursings, according to all that is written in the book of the law. THERE WAS NOT A WORD of all that Moses commanded, which Joshua read not before ALL THE CONGREGATION OF ISRAEL, WITH THE WOMEN, AND THE LITTLE ONES, AND THE STRANGERS THAT WERE CONVERSANT AMONG THEM." (Josh. 8:32-35)  Add to this, Beloved, that not only were all the words of Moses engraved in stone in the language of the Jews; but, ­ if we can believe the ancient Jewish writers, ­ all the words of Moses were also engraved in stone in all 70 of the extant languages of all 70 of the extant nations of the world ­ thus that all the Gentiles would be without excuse as to the knowledge of God and His Word.  Sunday, August 31, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 5  They could all journey to the tops of mount Ebal and mount Gerizim, and there read the Word of God, each in his own language! And now let us take a few samplings of the promised curses and blessings of God, to see how it worked; to wit: Curse #2 at Deut. 27:16. "Cursed be he that setteth light by his father or his mother. And all the people shall say, Amen."  This shows that the curses of Mt. Ebal reached to the inner recesses of the heart, and not merely to outwardly visible acts. Recall that Curse #1 at Deut. 27:15 forbad the making of graven or molten images, but added to the offense by cursing the man who puts the image "in a secret place;" thereby, says Gill, imposing God's curse on secret idolaters, such as those professing Christianity nowadays, exposed in the last verse of First John; to wit: "Little children, keep yourselves from idols." 1 Jn. 5:21. Similarly, "the setting light by his father or his mother," refers to secretly despising them in his heart, and by looks and gestures mocking them in a private manner, unseen by others, ­ ("The eye that mocketh at his father, and despiseth to obey his mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it." Prov. 30:17.) ­ I say, this cursed, incorrigible child mocked his parents in a private manner, unseen by others, lest if he did so publicly he be put to death by the magistrates under the law of Moses in the theocracy of Israel; to wit: "For everyone that curseth his father or his mother shall be surely put to death: he hath cursed his father or his mother; his blood shall be upon him." (Lev. 20:9)  Renegade, brutish, and incorrigible children are early and unmistakable signals of a society that has departed from God, irreversibly, and is doomed. The criminal law of Moses, often called the Mosaic Code, that governed the ancient theocracy of Israel, called for the death penalty for all children who, upon trial and conviction, were found to be stubborn and rebellious; to wit: "If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that, when they have chastened him, will not hearken unto them: Then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the elders of his city, and unto the gate of his place; And they shall say unto the elders of his city, This our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice; he is a glutton and a drunkard. And all the men of his city shall stone him with stones, that he die: so shalt thou put evil away from among you; and all Israel shall hear, and fear." (Deut. 21:18-21)  Beloved, look at these young hellions all around us. We are expert witnesses on the subject of stubborn and rebellious teenagers. I tell you, if that section of the Mosaic Code were suddenly, miraculously, to become the law in America ­ strictly enforced ­ there would scarcely be a teenager left alive in six months ­ (except for our loved ones, of course). Thank God for the Curses of Mt. Ebal ­ that hang the plumbline of God's truth and His standard next to all mankind ­ to show the sons of men just exactly how crooked they are; and, that read the handwriting on the wall for godless America; to wit: "Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin;" translated, "Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting." Dan. 5:25-27.  Sunday, August 31, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 6  I say, Thank God for the Curses of Mt. Ebal. They point to us the only way of putting evil away from among us; in the language of Curse #2 (Dt. 27:16). It is exclusive. It is the ONLY WAY; to wit:  "So shalt thou put evil away from among you." (Deut. 21:21)  Next, let us consider four Curses, ##6-9, together, as they all deal with the same general subject; to wit: SEX SINS. See, Deut. 27:20-23. The sex sins enumerated therein are generally thought of ­ in polite society, as they say ­ as not-so-common. But I wonder. I say, When the Holy Ghost enumerates the sins of incest (in various forms) and bestiality to be Cursed from Mt. Ebal, in thunderous tones verbally, and in writing etched in stone atop the mountain ­ I say, I wonder just how common these not-so-common SEX SINS really are. I would not be surprised, Beloved, if these enumerated sins are not far, far more common than usually thought. A nation, and a world, that supports and even promotes the filthy fag agenda of eating feces and worse; I say, such a nation, and such a world, would not scruple over a little sex with animals, and any and every other kind of kinky sex. Picture it, Beloved. Just think about how it looked and sounded on Mt. Ebal when 3 million voices joined the "Amen" chorus, ­ all as described by Dr. Munsey in 1860; to wit:  "In Palestine there are two mountains, rising on steep and rocky precipices about 800 feet high, on both sides of a narrow valley about 300 yards wide. They are called Ebal and Gerizim. God commanded the children of Israel by Moses when they entered the promised land, that six tribes of them should stand upon Mount Ebal and the other six tribes on Mount Gerizim, and that the Levites should pronounce the curses and blessings of the law ­ the tribes on Mount Ebal responding "Amen" to the curses, the tribes on Mount Gerizim responding "Amen" to the blessings. THIS WAS DOUBTLESS THE GRANDEST CEREMONY IN THE HISTORY OF THE NATIONS. Mount Ebal and Mount Gerizim are on every page of the Bible, and on every field of divine providence, and in the valley between them will sit the Throne of the Judgment ­ and to every blessing and every curse, all the people will say "Amen," and the universe shall acknowledge that ETERNAL PUNISHMENT IS RIGHT. Away, you sickly sentimentalists! While you say God cannot hate, you say he cannot love ­ and every argument you use against Hell is an argument against Heaven."  And, in fact, while 14 pronouncements of God's blessings rang out from Mt. Gerizim, 66 pronouncements of God's curses thundered from Mt. Ebal ­ and all the universe said "Amen." God's blessings and Heaven, await the righteous. God's curses and Hell, await the sinner. Therefore, says the poet: "Bow, ere the awful trumpet sound, And call you to His bar! For Mercy knows the appointed bound, And turns to Vengeance there." The moral filth of America, such as that emanating from Obama's gang in Denver this week, demands that Ebal's curses be mightily, diligently, often, and regularly preached. But there are no preachers!  Sunday, August 31, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 7  America is going to Hell in Satan's faggot handbasket, and America's so-called preachers are as silent as a tomb ­ leaving the field of battle to the filthy likes of Obama, Biden and McCain, with a "God bless you" here, and a "God bless America" there! until the angels weep, as they say. It is time for Mt. Ebal's curses to thunder once again; to wit:  "And these shall stand upon mount Ebal to curse...And the Levites shall speak, and say unto all the men of Israel with a loud voice... Cursed be he that removeth his neighbor's landmark. (You are going to Hell if you interfere with another person's eternal inheritance, i.e., Heaven). And all the people shall say, Amen." Dt. 27:17.  "Cursed be he that maketh the blind to wander out of the way. (You are going to Hell if you in any way contribute to another's leaving the narrow pathway to Heaven and detouring to the broad way to Hell). And all the people shall say, Amen." Dt. 27:18.  "Cursed be he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger, fatherless, and widow." (You are going to Hell if you pervert ­ or contribute to the perversion of ­ human justice for God's elect on earth). And all the people shall say, Amen." Dt. 27:19.  And now come the four SEX SIN Curses ##6-9 at Deut. 27:20-23, their numerosity showing the importance of the danger to God's elect which the Holy Ghost attaches to these sins of lust, lewdness and lasciviousness; to wit:  "Cursed be he that lieth with his father's wife (stepmother); because he uncovereth his father's skirt. (You are going to Hell if you have sex with your stepmother). And all the people shall say, Amen." Dt. 27:20.  "Cursed be he that lieth with any manner of beast. (You are going to Hell if you have sex with any kind of animal). And all the people shall say, Amen." Dt. 27:21.  "Cursed be he that lieth with his sister, the daughter of his father, or the daughter of his mother. (You are going to Hell if you have sex with your sister or your half-sister). And all the people shall say, Amen." Dt. 27:22.  "Cursed be he that lieth with his mother in law. (You are going to Hell if you have sex with your mother in law). And all the people shall say, Amen." Dt. 27:23.  Beloved, the only sex that satisfies God and His Holy Standards, is, One man, One woman, One lifetime. Whatsoever is other than this is sin ­ soul-damning sin; to wit: "Marriage is honorable in all (i.e., all times and all places), and the bed undefiled (i.e., the marriage bed only is undefiled with sex, every other bed is defiled, i.e., no other sex is permitted; ergo); but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge (i.e., God will damn these whoremongers and adulterers to Hell forever). Heb. 13:4.  Enumerating four kinds of what is sometimes called kinky sex ­ and that some might consider to be fairly uncommon sex ­ may be a healthy tactic by the Holy Spirit to teach the sons of men a lesson; to wit: That if some relatively uncommon sex sins will damn your soul to eternal Hell, you can be double-dog-certain that the COMMON SEX SINS SUCH AS CHEATING HUSBANDS' ONE-NIGHT STANDS, and DIVORCE AND REMARRIAGE, will all the more damn your soul to eternal Hell.  Sunday, August 31, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 8  Beloved, nothing is more dangerous for your immortal soul than SEX SINS. "The mouth of strange women" (note, "mouth" is singular, and strange "women" is plural, indicating it is a collective "mouth" (i.e., a metaphor for SEX SINS), consisting of all evil women everywhere, in the aggregate, a huge and powerful "mouth," like a giant suction pump, which is said to be a deep pit; he that is abhorred of the Lord, i.e., the non-elect, those whom God hated from eternity past and who were and are predestinated to go to Hell, and who are left to themselves to be overcome of temptations to evil ­ "those people who are abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein;" i.e., shall fall into SEX SINS. Prov. 22:14. One of Paul's greatest fears for himself and for his young preachers and for all the members of all the churches seems to have been SEX SINS; to wit:  "Flee fornication. Every sin that a man doeth is without the body; but he that committeth fornication sinneth against his own body." (1 Cor. 6:18)  "Flee also youthful lusts: but follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart." (2 Tim. 2:22)  "Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul." (1 Pet. 2:11)  "Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness." (Gal. 5:19)  "Who being past feeling have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness." (Eph. 4:19)  (Laciviousness means filthy, wanton, licentious, of or characterized by lust; lewd, exciting strong sexual desires.) Paul appears to be greatly disturbed by reports of renewed disorder and LASCIVIOUSNESS in the troubled church at Corinth; to wit:  "And lest, when I come again, my God will humble me among you, and that I shall bewail many which have sinned already, and have not repented of the uncleanness and fornication and LASCIVIOUSNESS which they have committed." (2 Cor. 12:21)  You see, Beloved, the apostle was jealous over the Corinthians "with a godly jealousy; for," said he, "I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a CHASTE virgin to Christ." 2 Cor. 11:2. (Chaste means morally pure in thought and conduct; decent; modest; abstaining from sex sins.) Let us heed the call from Ebal and Gerizim, and obey the Lord, and thereby seek His blessings; to wit:  "Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse; A blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the Lord your God...and a curse, if ye will not obey...And...thou shalt put the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and the curse upon mount Ebal." (Deut. 11:26-29)  Thank God for Mt. Ebal and Mt. Gerizim. Amen.  
