 Beyond  Goodwill
 Rev. Eric Meter 
December 4, 2011 
 Welcome 

Centering   

Kindling 

Opening  Words 

We are here   

after the  arrival  of  frost  covered  mornings   

to worship  as  we  come  together  once  more   

to  bring  our  doubts  and  challenges,  our  drea
ms  and  hopes   
into the  care  of  this  community  of  faith  and
  commitment.   
And so, without  guarantees,  we  lean  into  joy, 
 and  bend  toward  a  just  way  of  life,  both  
for  
our  own  sakes,  and  for  the  sake  of  our  chi
ldren  and  everyone  with  whom  we  share  the  
earth.  We  would  engage  our  mission  wholeheart
edly,  with  courage,  self-questioning,  
compassion,  vulnerability  and  honesty. 

Praising
  #1059  May  Your  Life  Be  as  a  Song   
Ingathering
    Sélavi    as told by Jolinda Stephens   
Gathering   

Affirming
  #437  Let  Us  Worship  by  Kenneth  Patton   
Let  us  worship  with  our  eyes  and  ears  and  
fingertips;   
Let  us  love  the  world  through  heart  and  min
d  and  body.   
We  feed  our  eyes  upon  the  mystery  and  revel
ation  in  the  faces  of  our  brothers  and  sist
ers.   
We  seek  to  know  the  wistfulness  of  the  very
  young  and  the  very  old,  the  wistfulness  of
  
people  in  all  times  of  life.   

We  seek  to  understand  the  shyness  behind  arr
ogance,  the  fear  behind  pride,  the  tenderness
  
behind  clumsy  strength,  the  anguish  behind  cr
uelty.   
All  life  flows  into  a  great  common  life,  if
  we  will  only  open  our  eyes  to  our  compani
ons.   

 Let  us  worship,  not  in  bowing  down,  not  wit
h  closed  eyes  and  stopped  ears.   
Let  us  worship  with  the  opening  of  all  the 
 windows  of  our  beings,  with  the  full  
outstretching  of  our  spirits.   

Life  comes  with  singing  and  laughter,  with  t
ears  and  confiding,  with  a  rising  wave  too  
great  to  be  held  in  the  mind  and  heart  and
  body,  to  those  who  have  fallen  in  love  wi
th  
life.   

Let us worship, and let us learn to love.   

Sequence   

Let  us  move  into  the  center  of  our  time  to
gether,  a  time  for  stillness  and  reflection, 
 with  
these  words  adapted  from  the  Rev.  Barbara Che
atham:   
Let us be gentle with ourselves just now.   

For  a  few  moments,  let  us  release  ourselves 

from  a  world  that  is  ?too  much  with  us? Š  

      too  noisy,  too  frantic,  too  demanding,  
too  judging. 
Let us be gentle with ourselves just now. 

For a few  moments,  let  us  release  ourselves 

into  the  calm,  still  world  that  waits  to  re
ceive  us Š 
 where  the  quiet  is  broken  only  by  sounds  o
f  our  own  making, 
 by  those  of  our  children  near-at-hand, 

 by  a  bird,  an  airplane  high  overhead....   

Within this welcoming quiet, let us befriend oursel
ves. 
Where  we  would  unfairly  and  endlessly 

berate  ourselves  for  our  imperfections, 

let  the  tongue  of  harsh  judgment  be  silent. 

We will do better tomorrow.  We will ?rise to the o
ccasion.? 
We will surprise the world with our goodness and ac
hievements. 
For  now,  let  us  simply  rest  in  the gentlenes
s  of  this  moment, letting  the  healing  hand  o
f  
self-understanding  and  forgiveness  touch  us  wi
th  peace. 
bell   

In  the  continuing  stillness,  we  pause  to  rem
ember  our  larger  lives.  Let  us  recall  with  
gentleness  those  who  helped  make  us  the  peop
le  we  are.  Now,  either  silently  or  softly  
aloud,  let  us  lift  up  the  names  of  those  i
n  our  lives  whom  we  miss,  whom  we  love  or 
 
struggle  to  love,  those  who  we  hold  with  te
nderness  and  sympathy,  those  we  long  to  see 
 
again  soon.   

Naming   








 From  stillness  to  the  names  of  those  whose  
lives  give  shape  to  our  own,  now  let  us  mo
ve  
into  the  celebration  
that
  
is
  song.  May  this  music,  by  the  magic  of  bre
ath  and  tone,  rest  
and  rhythm,  carry  us  anew.   

Readings   

Our  first  reading  today  is  from  an  essay  ti
tled  Engagement  by  Terry  Tempest  Williams,  
2004. 

It  is  easy  to  believe  we  the  people  have  n
o  say,  that  the  powers  in  Washington  will  r
oll  
over  our  local,  on-the-ground  concerns  with  t
heir  corporate  energy  ties  and  thumper  trucks
.  
It  is  easy  to  believe  that  the  American  wil
l  is  only  focused  on  how  to  get  rich,  how 
 to  be  
entertained,  and  how  to  distract  itself  from 
 the  hard  choices  before  us  as  a  nation. 
I refuse to believe this.  The  only  space  I  see
  truly  capable  of  being  closed  is  not  the  
land  or  
our  civil  liberties  but  our  own  hearts. 

The human heart is the first home of democracy.  It
 is where we embrace our questions.  Can we be 
equitable?  Can we be generous?  Can  we  listen  w
ith  our  whole  beings,  not  just  our  minds,  
and  offer  our  attention  rather  than  our  opin
ions?  And  do  we  have  enough  resolve  in  our 
 
hearts  to  act  courageously,  relentlessly,  with
out  giving  up Š ever Š trusting  our  fellow  
citizens  to  join  with  us  in  our  determined  
pursuit  of  a  living  democracy?   
Our  second  reading  this  morning  is  from  a  m
ore  conservative,  but  no  less  idealistic  voic
e,  
in  this  case  the  New  York  Times  columnist  D
avid  Brooks.  In  a  column,  published  in  late 
 
September,  titled  The  Limits  of  Empathy,  he  
writes:   
Nobody is against empathy.  Nonetheless, it™s insuf
ficient.  These days empathy has become a 
shortcut.  It  has  become  a  way  to  experience 
 delicious  moral  emotions  without  
confronting  the  weaknesses  in  our  nature  that
  prevent  us  from  actually  acting  upon  
them.  It  has  become  a  way  to  experience  the
  illusion  of  moral  progress  without  
having  to  do  the  nasty  work  of  making  moral
  judgments.  In  a  culture  that  is  
inarticulate  about  moral  categories,  and  touch
y  about  giving  offense,  teaching  empathy  
is  a  safe  way  for  schools  and  other  institu
tions  to  seem  virtuous  without  risking  
controversy  or  hurting  anybody™s  feelings. 

People  who  actually  perform  pro-social  action 
 don™t  only  feel  for  those  who  are  
suffering,  they  feel  compelled  to  act  by  a  
sense  of  duty.  Their lives are structured by 
sacred codes. 

Think of anybody you admire.  They  probably  have 
 some  talent  for  fellow-feeling,  but  it  
is  overshadowed  by  their  sense  of  obligation 
 to  some  religious,  military,  social  or  
philosophic  code.  They  would  feel  a  sense  of
  shame  or  guilt  if  they  didn™t  live  up  to 
 
the  code.  The  code  tells  them  when  they  des
erve  public  admiration  or  dishonor.  The  
code  helps  them  evaluate  other  people™s  feeli
ngs,  not  just  share  them.  The  code  tells  
them  that  an  adulterer  or  a  drug  dealer  may
  feel  ecstatic,  but  the  proper  response  is  
still  contempt. 

The code isn™t just a set of rules.  It™s a source 
of identity.  It™s pursued with joy.  It arouses th
e 
strongest emotions and attachments.  Empathy is a s
ideshow.  If  you  want  to make the world  a  









 better  place,  help  people  debate,  understand, 
 reform,  revere  and  enact  their  codes.  Accept
 that codes conflict. 

Sermon   

Our  responsive  reading  Gina  led  earlier  was  
all  about  worship  and  love.  Our  ingathering  
story,  which  Jolinda  told,  was  about  communit
ies  of  courage  and  care  in  a  state  of  poli
tical  
oppression.  The readings earlier highlighted polit
ical realities and social norms.   
You  might  be  thinking,  ?What  in  blazes  is  E
ric  going  to  be  talking  about  today?  The tit
le 
of  his  talk  is  called  Beyond  Goodwill.  What™
s that about?  Is  that  some  reference  to  the  
line  
from  the  Christmas  carol  that  goes,  ?Peace on
 Earth,  Goodwill  to  all??  I don™t know whether 
to be nervous or sleepy.?   

Well,  for  what  it™s  worth:  Yes,  Maybe,  and  
I  hope  not.   
Taking a nod from the story Jolinda told earlier–  
Not  so  long  ago  and  not  so  far  away Š last 
 
June  in  Charlotte,  North  Carolina,  to  be  pre
cise Š the  popular  religious  historian  Karen  
Armstrong  gave  the  main  talk  at  our  denomina
tion™s  general  assembly  in  which  she  began  
by  laying  down  a  challenge  for  us.  As  quote
d  at  the  top  of  your  program today, she  said
  to  
us,    ?I  urge  you Š so  far  businessmen  have  
taken  the  lead,  but  why  not  let  the  Unitari
an  
[Universalists]  come  forward  and  spread  compas
sion  throughout  the  world.? 
We  had  invited  her  to  speak  to  us  on  a  pr
oject  she™s  been  engaged  in  for  a  few  years
  
now,  called  the  Charter  for  Compassion.  It  i
s  the  basis  of  her  most  recent  book,  Twelve
  
Steps  to  a  Compassionate  Life.   

Both  the  Charter  and  the  book  were  born  in 
 response  to  Armstrong  being  awarded  the  TED 
 
Prize  in  2008.  TED,  a  consortium  of  leaders 
 in  the  fields  of  technology,  entertainment  a
nd  
design,  is  a  nonprofit  which  promotes,  in  it
s  words,  ?ideas  worth  spreading.?  But  the  gr
oup  
doesn™t  award  its  prize  solely  to  express  ap
preciation  of  past  work.  Instead,  winners  are
  
charged  with  articulating  a  wish  that  will  c
hange  the  world  for  the  better.  Members  of  
the  
consortium,  then,  help  the  prize  winner  promo
te,  if  not  implement,  that  idea.   
Her  wish  was  the  Charter  for  Compassion,  a  
means  of  lifting  up  compassion,  exemplified  
by  the  Golden  Rule,  treat  others  as  you  wou
ld  wish  to  be  treated  yourself,  as  a  founda
tion  
for  our  lives,  faiths  and  society  at  large. 
 It  concludes  with  these  words,  ?Born  of  our
  deep  
interdependence,  compassion  is  essential  to  hu
man  relationships  and  to  a  fulfilled  humanity
.  
It  is  the  path  to  enlightenment,  and  indispe
nsible  to  the  creation  of  a  just  economy  an
d  a  
peaceful  global  community. 

These are noble words.  The  UUA  has  signed  on  
as  a  Charter  Partner,  and  thousands  of  
individuals,  including  myself,  have  signed  on 
 as  well.  This  summer,  Dick  Dawson  and  
others  from  the  congregation  led  a  worship  s
ervice  based  in  large  part  on  Armstrong™s  
work.   

So, back to her challenge.  Can we come forward and
 spread compassion throughout the world?   
Well,  as  much  as  I™d  like  to  say  that  I  t
hought  we  actually  were,  in  all  seriousness, 
 I  don™t  
think  we  can.   

 My  reason  for  saying  so  isn™t  because  this  
is  such  a  small  faith  tradition  in  the  glob
al  
sense.  I™d  love  to  see  greater  multitudes  be
come  part  of  our  religious  movement.   
My  reason  for  saying  so  isn™t  because  compas
sion  is  for  wimps.  Armstrong™s compassion is 
not weak.  Listen  to  her  as  she  speaks  of  wh
at  it  means  to  be  a  parent.  I™ve edited her 
remarks to be more inclusive:   

?[A parent™s] love is hard.  A  [parent]  has  to  
get  up  every  night  for  her  crying  child  no 
 
matter  how  exhausted  she  is.  [He]  has  to  be
  aware  of  what  that  child  is  doing  at  ever
y  
moment  of  the  day.  [Parents  have]  to  put  [t
heir]  own  frustrations  and  exhaustion  and  
impatience  on  the  back  burner,  and  [their]  c
hild  must  be  in  [their  minds]  all  day  long.
  And  
then  that  cute  little  baby  grows  up  and  can
  become  an  awful  disappointment.  But  a  
[parent]  doesn't  give  up  no  matter  how  dispi
riting  it  might  be.?   
Armstrong™s compassion is not for sissies.  It has 
backbone, tenaciousness and principle.   
No,  the  reasons  I  believe  we  won™t  be  the  
ones  winning  the  day  under  the  banner  of  
compassion  are  twofold.  The  first,  smaller,  r
eason  why  is  on  account  of  leverage.  The  sa
d  
truth  is  that  good  liberal  religious  folks  g
oing  around  talking  up  how  compassion  will  m
ake  
everything  better  for  everyone  is  not  going  
to  inspire  anyone.  The  business  leaders  who  
are  
backing  the  Charter  for  Compassion  will  be  m
ore  effective  than  we  will  ever  be  because  
people  don™t  expect  to  hear  them  championing 
 anything  other  than  the  next  product, or how 
great their earnings will be next quarter.   

Faith communities certainly  can  support  our  mem
ber  in  the  business  world  and  Charter  
members  directly,  but  even  that  won™t  be  eno
ugh.   
That™s because David Brooks has it right this time.
  Compassion  is  necessary,  but  it  will  never 
 
be  sufficient  to  building  the  kind  of  societ
y  most  of  us  want  to  live  and  raise  our  c
hildren  
in.   

Part  of  the  tragedy  of  the  human  condition  
is  that, as  necessary  as  they  are  to  the  fa
bric  of  
our  lives,  by  themselves,  empathy  and  compass
ion  will  never  be  sufficient.   
Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  knew  that  when  he  wrote 
 in  his  famous  essay  Self-Reliance,  ?Your  
goodness  must  have  some  edge  to  it Š else  it
  is  none.?   
Martin Luther King Jr.  knew  that  when  he  wrote
,  ?Power  without  love  is  reckless  and
  
abusive,  and  love  without  power  is  sentimenta
l  and  anemic.?   
Here is what Brooks had to say again,   

?People  who  actually  perform  pro-social  action
  don™t  only  feel  for  those  who  are  
suffering,  they  feel  compelled  to  act  by  a  
sense  of  duty.  Their lives are structured  by  
sacred  codes. 

Think of anybody you admire.  They  probably  have 
 some  talent  for  fellow-feeling,  but  it  
is  overshadowed  by  their  sense  of  obligation 
 to  some  religious,  military,  social  or  
philosophic  code.  They  would  feel  a  sense  of
  shame  or  guilt  if  they  didn™t  live  up  to 
 
the  code.  The  code  tells  them  when  they  des
erve  public  admiration  or  dishonor.  The  
code  helps  them  evaluate  other  people™s  feeli
ngs,  not  just  share  them.   

 The code isn™t just a set of rules.  It™s a source 
of identity.  If  you  want  to  make the  world  a
  
better  place,  help  people  debate,  understand, 
 reform,  revere  and  enact  their  codes.  
Accept that codes conflict.? 

While  Brooks  waxes  a  bit  poetic  when  talking
  about  such  moral  codes,  I  have  to  admit  
that  there  is  something  here  that  gives  me  
pause.   
I  don™t  normally  think  in  terms  of  having  a
  moral  code,  per  se.  I  mean  I  don™t  think 
 that  
I™m  too  much  of  a  social  deviant,  but  think
ing  in  these  terms  is  foreign  to  me.   
And,  as  someone  whose  been  around  our  congre
gations  his  whole  life,  I  don™t  hear this  
kind  of  talk  in  our  congregations  at  large. 
 Not that we™re without moral compasses, but they a
re 
seldom  well  defined.  

This  congregation  should  take  some  justifiable
  pride  in  having  a  Covenant  of  Respectful  
Relations  and  Mark,  Kathleen,  Suzan  and  I  ad
here  to  our  Ministers™ Association™s Code of  
Conduct.   

But at least for me those are external codes, not s
omething I feel is part of my character.   
When  I  started  thinking  about  my moral  compas
s, the  first  thing  that  came  to  mind  was  
something  that  happened  to  me  when  I  was  9 
 or  10.  My  uncle  Sandy  brought  me  to  a  
Milwaukee  Brewers game.  We were sitting way out p
ast third base.  When  the  guys  in  front  of  
us  starting  booing  the  other  team,  I  thought
  that  sounded  fun,  cupped  my  hands  and  booe
d  
along  with  them.  In  no time  at  all,  my  uncl
e  (6™3? and  a  fit  Vietnam  vet)  put  his  hand
  on  
my  shoulder,  and  said  in  no  uncertain  terms,
  ?We  don™t  do  that.?   
Oh.   

If  it  had  been  my  father,  I™d  be  a  certifi
ed  Bleacher  Bum  today.  But  I  listened  to  my
  
uncle, and  late  this  summer  caught  myself  say
ing  the  exact  same  thing  to  my  friends™  nin
e  
year  old  at  a  Columbus  Clippers  game.   

Now,  there  are  moral  codes  and  ethical  frame
works,  and  there  are  moral  codes  and  ethical
  
frameworks.  There  are  the  moral  principles  th
at  are  written  and  professed,  and  there  are 
 the  
much  less  visible  ones  we  actually  live  by. 
 And  context  comes  into  play  in  any  unpackin
g  
as  to  what  motivates  us  along  ethical  and  m
oral  lines.   
I  can  guarantee  that  if  I  were  to  spend  th
e  hours  and  weeks  and  months  it  would  take 
 to  
unpack  the  tangled  web  of  moral  codes  I  mor
e  or  less  live  by,  what  I  would  come  up  
with  would  be  noticeably  different  than  yours
.  That™s just the way of things.  And  Brooks  is 
 
right  to  remind  us  that  moral  codes  of  diff
ering  people,  let  alone  groups,  will  conflict
.  
Such is what it means to live in human community.  
 What  interests  me  more  is  where  Brooks  says,
  ?If  you  want  to  make  the  world  a  better  
place,  help  people  debate,  understand,  reform,
  revere  and  enact  their  codes.?   
Why,  that  sounds  like  a  job  for  a  liberal  
faith  community,  doesn™t  it?  Hmmm.   

 I  hope  I  won™t  offend  anyone  if  I  say  I  t
hink  this  is  something  that  happens  primarily
  sub  
rosa  around  here.  We  pick  up  social  and  mor
al  norms  by  osmosis  in  most  UU  
congregations.  Anything  else  reminds  us  too  m
uch  of  the  Calvinism  we  worked  so  hard  to  
get  away  from  all  those  years  ago.   

And that is understandable because this is risky te
rritory.  When  we  talk  about  what  motivates  u
s  
to  live  moral  lives,  or  to  stray  from  doing
  so,  we  are  on  vulnerable  ground.   
There  is  the  very  real  possibility  that  we  
will  find  we  come  up  short.   
I  remember  reading  about  a  Quaker  woman  who 
 despaired  and  left  her  local  church  
because  she  began  noticing  that, while  the  me
mbers  of  her  church  would  bake  casseroles  
for  any  fundraiser  and  write  letters  for  any
  progressive  cause,  none  was  willing  to  risk
  jail  
for  any  cause.   

I  find  myself  in  that  same  camp  of  those  c
ooks  and  letter  writers,  and  it  is  a  realiz
ation  
that  does  not  sit  comfortably  with  me.  I™ve 
 given  a  great  deal  of  thought  to  what  I  w
ould  
take  up  arms  for,  and  have  come  to  realize 
 that  I™m  not  a  pacifist.  But  I  like  to  th
ink  that  
the  bar  is  set  quite  high  for  what  I  would
  go  to  war  for.  But jail?  Not so much.     
I  imagine  the  church  folks  in  Haiti  worried 
 about  the  same  thing  in  the  story  earlier  
about  
Sélavi.  But it didn™t stop them.   

But  where  do  we  encourage  one  another  to  en
gage  questions  like  this?   
I serve on our Covenant Group curriculum writing te
am.  These questions aren™t there.   
I lead our Wellspring program.  These questions are
n™t there, either.   
I™ve  asked  our  religious  educator  Jolinda  Ste
phens;  these  aren™t  in  other  of  our  fabulous
  
adult  faith  development  opportunities.   

How  much  would  it  hurt  if  we  gave  some  of 
 our  attention  to  such  questions?   
This isn™t an impossibility.   

Here™s  a  story  of  how  one  person  is  guided 
 by  a  moral  compass  instilled  in  him  largely
  
form  the  faith  community  of  his  youth.  It  c
omes  from  Rebecca  Parker,  president  of  our  
seminary  in  Berkeley.   

?Several  summers  ago,  when  Rita  Brock  and  I 
 were  beginning  to  work  on  [our  book]  
Saving  Paradise,  we  joined  my  brother™s  famil
y  for a  weeklong  backpacking  trip  into  the  –
  
eastern  slope  of  the  Sierra  Nevada.  To  get  
to  the  trailhead,  we  took  a  Forest  Service  
bus–
  
and  while  the  bus  switch backed  up  the  narro
w  road  through  the  pine  forest  my  seat  mate
  
struck  up  a  conversation  with  me.  He™d  overh
eard  my  brother  talking  with  Rita  and  me  
about  our  theological  work.  He  asked  if  we™d
  written  any  books,  so  I  told  him  about our
 
first book, Proverbs of Ashes, which exposes how Ch
ristian ideas that the death of Jesus saved 
humanity have sanctioned domestic violence, sexual 
abuse, racism, homophobia and war.  He 
nodded.  He  said  that  he  had  been  raised  Cat
holic  and  that  his  wife  was  the  daughter  of
  a  
Methodist  minister.  Church was important to him. 
  

 ‚I can™t believe all the doctrines,™ he said.  ‚I  
never  was  comfortable  with  the  bloody  crucifi
x  
hanging  over  the  altar Š I  couldn™t  understand
  why  we  would be worshipping  it.  But  I  
learned  a  way  of  life  from  the  church  that 
 I  have  not  rejected.™   
‚What was that way of life?™  I asked.   

‚Oh, it™s simple,™ he said, ‚Love your neighbor as 
yourself.   Try to help, not harm.  Do what you can
 
to make a difference.™  He went on, ‚We do foster c
are for kids.™  He  said  it  was  heartbreaking  t
o  
see  some  of  the  violence,  abuse,  and  depriva
tion  these  children  have  experienced.  But  he 
 
and  his  wife  welcomed  them  into  their  home  
and  did  what  they  could.  ‚Not even love can 
repair the damage sometimes,™ he said.  ‚I know,™ I
 replied.?   
This  man™s  moral  framework  supported  him  as  
he  continued  to  invest  his  heart  in  caring  
for  foster  children.  Mine,  while  I  may  not  
have  it  clearly  mapped,  supports  me  to  inves
t  
my  time  in  helping  to  foster  religious  commu
nities.   
But  I  can™t  shake  the  sense  that  there  is  
a  world  of  hurt  out  there  that  could  use  a
  bit  
more  attention  from  folks  like,  well,  me.   

I  don™t  have  any  definitive  answers  for  you 
 today.  Just  a  reflection  on  something  I™ve  
been  
mulling  over  for  a  while.   

So, back to compassion.  It  may  not  be  sufficie
nt  in  itself  to  get  us  where  we  want  to  g
o,  
but  it  is  still  necessary.  So  I  will  try  t
o  be  compassionate  with  myself  as  I  continue
  
working  for  clarity.   

Soon we™ll be singing once again, ?Peace on Earth. 
 Goodwill to all.?   But  we  also  know  that  
old  saw  about  the  road  lined  with  good  inte
ntions.  To  get  where  we  want  to  go,  is  goi
ng  
to  take  more  than  compassion  and  goodwill.   

It™s  going  to  take  honest  assessment,  a  will
ingness  to  be  vulnerable,  and  perhaps  garneri
ng  
a  little  courage.   

Sounds like that™s work best  done  together,  frie
nds.  Let™s see what we  can  do.   
Offering 

Investing  in  the  future  of  our  common  house,
  and  our  compelling  vision  of  life  and  love
  
for  all  people,  we  offer  this  time  to  bless
  the  choice  we  have  made  to  participate  in 
 this  
beloved  community. 

Returning   

Ursula K. Le Guin™s  version  of  a  verse  from  L
ao  Tzu  reminds  us  of  the  necessity  of  
compassion:   

Everybody says the way is great  

but improbable.   

 All greatness  

is improbable.   

What™s probable  

is tedious and petty.   

I have three treasures.   

I keep them and treasure them.   

The first, mercy,  

the second, moderation,   

the  third,  modesty.   

If  you™re  merciful  you  can  be  brave,   

if  you™re  moderate  you  can  be  generous,   

and  if  you  don™t  presume  to  lead   

you  can  lead  the  high  and  mighty.   

But  to  be  brave  without  compassion,   

or  generous  without  self-restraint,   

or  to  take  the  lead,   

is  fatal.   

Compassion  wins  the  battle   

and  holds  the  fort;   

it  is  the  bulwark  set   

around  those  heaven  helps. 

Singing
    #95    There is More Love Somewhere   
Blessing   

