Sunday, June 1, 2008 page 1  Sermon Outline  "The show of their countenance doth witness  against them; and they declare their sin as  Sodom, they hide it not." Isa. 3:9.  The word translated "show" ­ old English is "shew" ­ is only used in THIS ONE PLACE, and means "to know," i.e., the knowledge of what's going on inside the person, which one may obtain JUST BY LOOKING UPON HIS COUNTENANCE. The countenance oftentimes shows what is in the heart, the cruel disposition of the mind, the pride and vanity of it, the uncleanness and lasciviousness that is in it. The Chaldee version renders it, "the knowledge of their countenance in judgment doth testify against them; i.e., as they appear there, so it may be judged of them; their guilt flies in their face, and fills them with shame and confusion." The Septuagint and Arabic versions render it, "the shame of their face." Rabbi Joseph Kimchi renders it, "the hardness of their countenance," like this, "The hardness of their countenance doth testify against them," meaning their impudence; not only their words and actions, but their impudent looks, show what they are. Beloved, we have been dealing with these "natural brute beasts" now for more than 17 years on a daily basis; and we have amassed a great body of empirical knowledge ­ that is, competent, highquality evidence. And we certainly agree with all of these ancient authorities about these floods of impudent, hard-hearted, degenerate sodomites that fill the land, with their faces shouting their feces-eating debauchery like so many foghorns in the mist; to wit: "And they declare their sin as Sodom, and hide it not." DECLARE. Meaning, to stand boldly out, in opposition. I.e., in bold, impudent, loud, raucous, profane opposition to all that is good, decent, wholesome, right and Godly in the world. Fags DECLARE, shout it, blare it out, trumpet it proudly ­ GAY PRIDE; "they declare their sin as Sodom, and hide it not."  Gill says; "I.e., commit it openly, without fear or shame; glory in it, and boast of it, as the Jews did in their crucifixion of Christ, and their evil treatment of him; `woe to their soul, for they have rewarded evil unto themselves;' they have brought upon themselves, soul and body, the just recompense of reward; they have been the cause of their own ruin, and have wronged their own souls." "And there were also sodomites in the land (i.e., dominating in the land); and they did according to all the abominations of the nations which the Lord cast out before the children of Israel. And...Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem; and he took away the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the king's house; he even took away all (i.e., in punishment of the land because of the abominations of the dominating sodomites in the land). 1 Kgs. 14:24-26. "They have wronged their own souls;" to wit: "Woe unto their soul! for they have rewarded evil unto themselves." Isa. 3:9. Trapp has this to say about Isa. 3:9; to wit: "`The show of their countenance doth witness against them.' You may see by their very looks what lewd losels (a "losel" is a worthless person) they are. Their cruelty, pride, envy, hypocrisy, mulieorsity (i.e., womanish, effeminate), sitteth and showeth itself in their faces and foreheads."  Now, Beloved, take a look at the dreadful context of that verse ­ Isa. 3:9. See the immediate context, first, at verse 8; to wit:  Sunday, June 1, 2008 page 2  Sermon Outline  "For Jerusalem is RUINED, and Judah is FALLEN; because their TONGUE and  their DOINGS are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory." (Isa. 3:8)  "The eyes of his glory," may be translated, "The cloud of his glory," meaning the Shechinah, or the very Godhead itself, meaning the Essence of His Holy Attributes and Absolute Sovereignty. These atheistic fools are tweaking the nose and spitting in the Face of God, as it were, provoking the Holy Shechinah. Beloved! Have we not seen JUST THAT in our many picketing crusades, such as that in Pasadena, California, at the largest Episcopal church west of the Mississippi river; where young people from that church came out and counter demonstrated against us with huge sheets bearing the profane and blasphemous and sacrilegious message, that "JESUS IS GAY!"?  "Their TONGUE and their DOINGS are against the Lord" ­ (i.e., impudently, haughtily, with the middle finger lifted ­ IN GOD'S FACE!) ­ "to provoke the eyes of his glory." Isa. 3:8. Trapp says, "Sodomites, God calleth them. Isa. 1:10," in expounding Isa. 3:9. And, elsewhere, in expounding Hosea 5:4-6, Trapp says, "Now we read of sacrificing Sodomites. Isa. 1:10." To wit: "They will not frame their doings to turn unto their God; for the SPIRIT OF WHOREDOMS is in the midst of them, and they have not known the Lord. (Think, America.) And the pride (i.e., arrogance) of Israel doth testify to his face (i.e., IN HIS FACE, like the Beast of Rev. 13 unto whom there was given "a mouth speaking GREAT THINGS AND BLASPHEMIES...AGAINST GOD, TO BLASPHEME HIS NAME." Rev. 13:5,6.); therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquity; Judah also shall fall with them (i.e., both the northern kingdom of the Jews AND the southern kingdom of the Jews were hopelessly, irreversibly DOOMED). They shall go with their flocks and with their herds to seek the Lord;" ­ (i.e., these Jews will ­ massively ­ attempt to seek the Lord, going with their animals to sacrifice them, and otherwise begin to keep the laws of Moses as God had required of them at the outset) ­ "BUT THEY SHALL NOT FIND HIM (i.e., it is FOREVER TOO LATE); he hath withdrawn himself from them." (Hos. 5:4-6)  When Lot went out of Sodom, it was forever too late for the men of Sodom to repent. Lk. 17:29. Hence, Trapp also calls them, "sacrificing Sodomites. Isa. 1:10." When the idolatrous Jews wept all night and viciously balked at straightway going up and conquering the Promised Land for fear of the giants, the Lord said to them, in effect: "NOW IT IS FOREVER TOO LATE."  "Because all those men which have seen my glory, and my miracles, which I did in Egypt and in the wilderness, and have tempted me now these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice; Surely they shall not see the land which I sware unto their fathers, neither shall any of them that provoked me see it...But as for you, your carcases, they shall fall in this wilderness...I the Lord have said, I will surely do it unto all this evil congregation, that are gathered  Sunday, June 1, 2008 page 3  Sermon Outline  together against me; in this wilderness they shall be consumed, and there they  shall die...AND THE PEOPLE MOURNED GREATLY. And they rose up early in  the morning, and gat them up into the top of the mountain, saying, Lo, we be  here, AND WILL GO UP UNTO THE PLACE WHICH THE LORD HATH PROMISED;  FOR WE HAVE SINNED." (Num. 14:22-40)  But, Beloved, IT WAS FOREVER TOO LATE. Yes. For some 1,200,000 people, IT WAS FOREVER TOO LATE. Listen to these fearful words; to wit: "And Moses said, Wherefore now do ye transgress the commandment of the Lord? but it shall not prosper" ­ (i.e., IT IS FOREVER TOO LATE. For every last one of you grown people, IT IS FOREVER TOO LATE. All of you are IRREVERSIBLY DOOMED!). ­ "Go not up, for the Lord is not among you; that ye be not smitten before your enemies. For the Amalekites and the Canaanites are there before you, and ye shall fall by the sword; because ye are turned away from the Lord, therefore THE LORD WILL NOT BE WITH YOU. But they presumed to go up unto the hill top; nevertheless the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and Moses, departed not out of the camp. Then the Amalekites came down, and the Canaanites which dwelt in that hill, and smote them, and discomfited them, even unto Hormah." Num. 14:42-45. FOREVER, IRREVERSIBLY TOO LATE.  "Sacrificing Sodomites?" Yes ­ according to John Trapp. Of all those recalcitrant, disobedient Jews, who despise the law of Moses and reject the Lord Jesus Christ, in every age since Abraham, Trapp says, "God calleth them Sodomites," and "Now we read of sacrificing Sodomites;" and in each place Trapp cites Isa. 1:10 in support of his thesis. Speaking to the Jewish nation, Isaiah says, "Hear the word of the Lord, ye rulers of Sodom...to what purpose is the MULTITUDE OF YOUR SACRIFICES unto me?" Isa. 1:10,11.  "Sacrificing Sodomites?" Yes. They sinned away their day of grace, and now it is forever too late for them; and our Lord Jesus Christ said, "Your house is left unto you desolate." Mat. 23:38. And this is one of many such episodes in the lives of the apostles; to wit: "But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with envy, and spake against those things which were spoken by Paul, CONTRADICTING & BLASPHEMING. Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken to you (Jews); but seeing ye put it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles." Acts 13:45,46. FOREVER TOO LATE for many generations of Jews.  Now, Beloved, look again at the immediate context of Isa. 3:9; to wit: "For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen; because their tongue and their doings are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory." Isa. 3:8. Immediately following Isa. 3:8 is Isa. 3:9, which says, "The show of THEIR ­ (i.e., logically, the inhabitants of Jerusalem and Judah, the Jews, just referred to) ­ the show of THEIR countenance doth witness against them; and THEY declare THEIR sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto THEIR soul! for they have rewarded evil unto themselves." Isa. 3:9. "God calleth them Sodomites," says Trapp. "Now we read of sacrificing Sodomites. Isa. 1:10," says Trapp.  Sunday, June 1, 2008 page 4  Sermon Outline  THE FIRST FIVE VERSES of the third chapter of Isaiah, show to us in some detail the exact  METHODOLOGY the Lord our God uses to bring down an evil nation to its knees and then to  execute ­ i.e., to UTTERLY DESTROY that nation; to wit:  "For, behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts, doth take away from Jerusalem and from Judah the STAY (i.e., the supporter of life) and the STAFF, the WHOLE STAY of bread, and the WHOLE STAY of water," ­ (i.e., two of the three vital elements of life (food, water, and air), without which human life cannot exist; to take away food and water is to take away life itself) ­ "The mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, and the prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient, The captain of fifty, and the honorable man, and the counsellor, and the cunning artificer, and the eloquent orator." (Isa. 3:1-3)  Think about it a little while, Beloved, and you will agree with the Holy Spirit, that these 11 categories of the population of any great nation are absolutely necessary for any nation to be a vibrant, thriving, powerful community of people. When one or more, let alone all, of these segments of society, are removed ­ THAT is fatal to the survival of any nation as a great nation. Isa. 3:1-3. But in addition, the Lord God of Nations says, "And I will give children to be their princes, and babes shall rule over them." Isa. 3:4. That is, only spoiled brats ­ i.e., grown people with the dispositions and abilities and intelligence of spoiled brats ­ will run the government at every level of the officials and the work force (the bureaucracy). (Beloved, Think, America.) Isa. 3:4.  In addition, the Lord God will take away the spirit of good will and camaraderie among people ­ i.e., the paste that binds a nation of people together; to wit: "And the people shall be oppressed, every one by another, and every one by his neighbor; the child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against the honorable." Isa. 3:5. Now, verses 6 and 7 show just how devastated, unmanageable, and completely dysfunctional and powerless such a nation has become. Verses 6 and 7 reveal a nation that NO DECENT PERSON wants to be in charge of and responsible for ­ at any level. NO GOOD PERSON wants to run for any office, because NO GOOD PERSON wants any office in the government of such a nation.  Gill says, "In this chapter the Jews are threatened with various calamities, on account of their sins, which would issue in their entire ruin and destruction ...that such would be their state and condition, that men, though naturally ambitious of honor, would refuse to have the government of them, as is revealed in verses 6 and 7;" to wit:  "When a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of his father, saying, Thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and let this ruin be under thy hand; In that day shall he swear, saying, I will NOT be an healer; for in my house is neither bread nor clothing; make me NOT a ruler of the people." (Isa. 3:6,7)  Is it not now an ideal situation for filthy sodomites to take over the government that nobody else wants? Is it not a description of what's going on in America now? "For Jerusalem (think, America) is ruined...because their tongue and their doings are against the Lord...The show of  Sunday, June 1, 2008 page 5  Sermon Outline  their countenance ­ (i.e., those just spoken of immediately above) ­ doth witness against them,  and they declare their sin as Sodom (i.e., they are sodomites!)." Isa. 3:8,9. "God calleth them  Sodomites," per Trapp!  In the last of the last days, ­ it is everywhere declared in Scripture, ­ sodomites do proliferate! (Lk. 17:28-30). Sodomites are wicked and sinners before the Lord exceedingly (Gen. 13:13), they are violent and they doom nations (Gen. 19:1-25; Jgs. 19), they are nasty and abominable (i.e., exceedingly filthy) in the sight of God, who Himself says that they are worthy of death for their vile sex practices (Lev. 20:13; Rom. 1:32). Beloved, the filthiness of the sodomites cannot be overstated. The Lord has Himself chosen the strongest of terms to describe it; to wit: "ABOMINABLE." The old preachers used a term that covers all manner of sodomite filth, from eating feces, to anal fornicating, to sex with animals, to molesting little children, etc.; to wit: "SODOMITICAL." God has destroyed nations because of their vile SODOMITICAL PRACTICES; to wit:  "Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people the house of Jacob (the Jews, Israel), because...they please themselves in the children of strangers ­ (i.e., pedophilia)." (Isa. 2:6)  In expounding this verse, Gill says: "(The children) being brought into their convents, monasteries, and nunneries; the priests and nuns vowing celibacy and virginity, and contenting themselves with the children of others; or they love strange flesh, delight(ing) in SODOMITICAL PRACTICES, and unnatural lusts with boys and men." Make no mistake, Beloved, sodomites produce in society a kind of mass intoxication from their wine made from grapes of gall from the vine of Sodom and the vineyard fields of Gomorrah, poisoning society's notions of morality and mores with the poison of dragons and the cruel venom of asps. Deut. 32:32,33; to wit:  "For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah; their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter; Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps. Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures? To me belongeth vengeance, and recompence; their foot shall slide in due time; for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make haste." (Deut. 32:32-35)  Beloved. In the midst of all this pushy sodomite proliferation and public filth and nasty activity in these last days of the last days, it is expressly declared by our heavenly Father to be well with all God's Elect; to wit: "Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him; for they shall eat the fruit of their doings." Isa. 3:10. It is this verse that inspired the hymn, "It is well with my soul." However filthy and soaked with sodomy and sodomites this evil world becomes, we still may joyfully sing, "It is well with my soul." Isa. 3:10. "Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord." 1 Cor. 15:58. "And let us not be weary in well doing; for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not." (Gal. 6:9) Amen.  
