




NOTES FROM MY DIARY 


F. H. DADACHANJI 

THE MASTER'S SPECIAL WORK IN AJMER

    It was from Delhi that the trend of our tour was altered and assumed a different aspect. The Master's mission in life, as he has himself repeatedly declared, is the spiritual upliftment of humanity. Hence all his work, movements, visits, etc. to different places under-taken with whatever exter≠nal or apparent motives, have 

always a spiritual aim and back≠ground. Whatever opportunities his intimate group had in seeing planes of interest during this tour since November last, they all knew that a different internal object was behind each of these moves in company with Baba. But in Delhi, the Master's specific object of this tour was more clearly understood when he explained that instead of going 



 

Northótowards Sind, Punjab and Kashmir as intendedóhe had decided to go South to a place where he had important spiritual work, in fact the most important work in this period of his activi≠ties in which he also wanted to have some of the members of the group actively to participate. Any hopes which he had himself created and engendered in the group accompanying of visiting Kashmiróthe accredited "Para≠dise on Earth"ówas for the time being abandoned. 

    Baba has always said that he goes wherever there is the grea≠test need. The Master 's selection for this particular nature of work that he wanted to do fell on Ajmer, the most important city in Rajputana and a place of histor≠ical importance due to its con≠nection with the great king and warrior Prithviraj Chowhan who for some time had removed his capital here from Delhi. Besides, it was the seat and centre of one of the most renowned saints of India, the Khwaja Moenuddin Chisti. Hundreds of thousands of his devotees and even others from all over India visit this place during the anniversary of the Khwaja and also throughout the year. The religious significance of the Khwaja's, nazar (tomb), espe≠cially for the Mohamedans, is very great, as this revered Saint who lived here and lies buried here holds a very high distinction spiritually, and is venerated alike by Hindus, Mohamedans and even by other communities in India. So great was the impor≠tance of pilgrimage to this place amongst the Mohamedans, that the great Mogul Emperor Shah Jehan had his devout mother's desire fulfilled, by having his time of arrival at Ajmer and of prostration before the great living Saint announced in Delhi in a unique manner. The Emperor had small minarets erected at every mile all the way from Delhi to Ajmer a distance of about 200 milesóand on each of these minarets, he had special beaters of drums installed who passed on the message from one to another by the sound of the drums thereby announcing that the emperor had arrived in Ajmer and had prostrated before the great Saint. Thus it was made possible for the queen-mother to join with her son, at the 



same time in paying her reve≠rential homage to the great Saint.

 Lacs of pilgrims still come today to the sacred tomb to pay their respects to Khwaja Moenud≠din. Thousands of others come to Ajmer for sight-seeingóPushkar, Anna Sagar Lake, the red temple of the Jains, the "Arhai din ki Zhopri" (or the mosque supposed to have been miraculously built in two days and a half) for the saint who is buried there, and the Tara Garha. However, hardly any will have come to seek, amongst the poor, decrepit, spiritually-dazed souls, loitering in these surround≠ings near the seat of the Khwaja some lovers of Divinity, who, through their intense love and longing for union with the Divine Beloved, are dazed by a flash of Divine Light and have lost them≠selves on the Path without a Guru to guide them, are oblivious to the outer world and indifferent to their own bodily needs, and as such are taken for mad by a world ignorant of their true condition. 

One of Baba's special tasks seems to be the finding of these spiritually-advanced but dazed souls, and through his per-sonal sahavas and touch, help them onward in the Path, as well as restore their normal conscious≠ness. This particular phase of his work, as we know, commenced since the establishment of the special Ashram for the God-mad at Rahuri in 1936, and continues unbroken till this day. Mahomed, the principal inmate of this Ash≠ram of the God-mad since its beginning, seems to be the con≠necting link, and is almost always kept near the Master, even taken to the West, and during the pre≠sent long tour round India, being washed and fed personally by the Master, every day. But Baba's work with and through others of this type during the present tour commenced in Delhi where the first was brought, washed and fed by him, and from there, Baba seems to have restarted this phase of his work actively again.

    For a long stay with a big party of about 30 touring with Baba, also to collect a number of these God-mad and keep some of them with him, give them bath and food and his personal touch daily, a big bungalow to accommodate all, in 



a quiet, secluded locality where he could work undisturbed, is essential. To have one suited for the important work contemplated would not ordinarily be easy to secure, immediately. But where he wills it everything is possible; and an ideal bungalow in an ideally suitable locality is found and hired surprisingly within a few hours. I refer to this to pre≠sent a vivid contrast between conditions of work when Baba wills, and otherwise when he leaves things to take their natural course, as experienced during work under him. Hyderabad, Benares, Agra, Delhi in this respect actually presented and became problems, and days of hard labour and search throughout these cities for available places of residence would bring us nowhere until eventually Baba and party would actually be on the spot or very near, and shove in quarters where it would take time to adjust themselves and which we would leave just when we feel a bit settled. In short, wherever Baba had just a short stay for his internal work, incidentally giving the group an opportunity of a little sight-seeing, difficulties of all sorts presented themselves during the preliminary search for residential quarters, and every≠where the party had to put up with some sort of inconvenience due to delays in making these arrangements. But where Baba wants to work on the gross plane, it is a mere question of the Divine Will. All the imminent difficulties seem to disappear, the person deputed on duty is internally directed to step into just the right place, it seems ideal, is easily available, the party concerned (owner or manager) is readily found, terms are favourable and all the arrangements are made, even coping with a thousand and one details of peculiar require≠ments of a party like ours, in a surprisingly short time. To put it in a nutshell, instead of ourselves trying to find things, things come to us automatically one after the other. It is one of the most wonderful experiences the Master's disciples have in working under his directions. 

    In Ajmer, all are enthusiastic and look forward for some surprise in this work of Baba's, and they truly had one of the most unusual treats in 



life during their month of stay and work in this new undertaking in Ajmer. It forms a special chapter in itself, details of which will be given in our next issues from different angles as observed by different persons. Some striking traits of these masts (God-mad) brought over and treated here, their strangely amusing talks and murmurs with Baba, like seeming prattle of innocent babes, will provide very interesting reading. Besides it will give our readers an idea of Baba's work even on this material plane with these peculiar beings: how in their dimly visible perception of things above the normal and imperceptible to ordinary vision, they see and in≠wardly recognise the Master (Baba), although faintly, and allude or refer to these strange experiences and things they see, in a language that is significantly mystical. 

The importance of this par≠ticular work could be judged from the facts that Baba literally cut himself off to the outside world during this period, keeping him≠self entirely occupied with these masts to the exclusion of all else. 

In order to avoid all external dis≠turbances, not only from visitors but also from members of his own group coming from other places, he kept his visit and stay at Ajmer strictly private and unknown to anyone except those staying with him. And although his contact with the outside world continued through correspondence, tele≠grams and cables, etc., these were also diverted to and from a distant placeóabout 85 miles away from Ajmer, which would hardly give clue to anyone about Baba being in Ajmer. None of course knew in Ajmer who Baba was, as also his party, our identity being kept absolutely undisclosed, and infor≠mation when necessary was given out that it was a touring party. Nor did his own mandali know of this at Meherabad, his principal and original centre, from where all correspondence for Baba and party is redirected to wherever we are. All mail, wires and cables for the entire party were instructed to be redirected care Station Master, Marwar Junction, from where these were received and sent out. A member of the party 



was specially deputed for this duty to travel between Ajmer and Marwar every alternate day. This might seem so strange, and it did, but it had to be done. Else there was always a risk of any of his devotees or disciples from other places running up to him, if the place of Baba 's residence were known, for darshana, advice and guidance which they all seek from him in all the multifarious problems of life. But at certain times, when the Master wants to do certain important work, un≠disturbed, he has to keep himself aloof and away and unknown, or has to issue any special instruc≠tions forbidding to come to him, for certain periods. This does NOT mean and should not be misunderstood that the Master neglects those who depend on him and need his advice or guidance. His real contact and help is more internal than ex≠ternal. Has he not said that, "Things which are real and lasting are given and taken in silence!" Thus does he help all internally, irrespective of time or space, whenever his help is truly needed. No voice is left unheard with Masters of Perfection who control the universe internally as well as externally. It is a different mode or method of working that they adopt according to time and circumstances. His dear loving children, especially those who call for his help in their hours of need, cannot be left unheeded. So during Baba's special work at Ajmer with these masts, although he literally kept himself out of all external touch and contact with the outside world, he did this work internally, giving the desired guidance and help wherever needed, as was ex≠perienced by so many of his devotees and even others who talked of it later to him and to other members of his mandali. 

BABA'S BIRTHDAY 

     This time, Baba was in the midst of his activities with the God-mad at Ajmer, on his 45th Birthday. It was his own wish that this year there will be no cele≠bration. 

It was rather desired and decreed by Baba to be a day of great work that he wished to do. He ordered a specific number of the masts (20) to be brought to him from all around the city, whom he would personally wash and 



feed during this day, and only after finishing work with all these would he partake of food himself. To collect and bring this required, number took hours for the mandali whose hard labours could not be left unnoticed. It is easy to find and, feed any number of vagrants rambling around in streets in India, particularly in the surroundings of the Khwaja's mosque in Ajmer, but it is very difficult to get hold of masts, to induce them to leave their places where they have stayed for long years, since they avoid any outer disturbance to their spiritual ecstasy. They are sensitive to change, lose their moods and sometimes even become enraged, and if not tackled very tactfully, mildly and lovingly, it may lead to a row in public in their surroundings where they are so revered. This would spoil the work intended. It needs rather a special technique of this parti≠cular type of work in which the Master's mandali have become adepts, particularly K.. who might be said to be an expert in this task of bringing the masts after hours of patient and loving persuassions in various manners according to their different natures and types. 

    People who knew these holy men and actually revered them as Valis and Pirs (saints of the 5th and 6th spiritual planes) would dissuade the Master's mandali from trying to get hold of them, saying it was impossible, and it actually created a stir when some of these were finally persuaded and did come out of their dug≠outs to follow Baba's disciples going over to where Baba wanted them. The bystanders could not believe their eyes, and huge crowds followed in procession through the streets of the city as if it were a big festival, when these masts were driven in tongas from their remote dwelling places to the bungalow where the Master was expecting them. It was still quite another task of infinite patience and mild loving persua≠sions for hours to induce them for a bath, or food, or a shave, as they wouldn't let anyone touch even a hair of their shabby, unclean beard or on head, nor even would they allow anyone to touch their dirty clothes. One of these would at times 



take hours to get rid of his clothes and be given the bath and food by the Master. These masts are oblivious to all external surroundings and utterly indiff≠erent even to their own bodily needs for food or clothing, yet remain blissfully happy being all the time engrossed in spiritual ecstasy. What a contrast does this present between our worldly ideas of superficial neatness and clean≠liness on the surface and the true inner cleanliness of the heart, drowned in Divinity, ecstatic in Divine intoxication, even with rags and dirt! It is indeed beyond our ordinary intellect to have an idea of their spiritual state. 

AN INTERVIEW     On the 18th of March last, Mr. K.., a great Congress worker, visited Shri Baba and had con≠versation with him also of general interest which we reproduce hereunder:ó     When Mr. K.. was introduced to Shri Baba, it was explained that he was an Indian Civil Servant (I. C. S.) and held res≠ponsible Government posts, but gave it all up for service to the Country through Congress. Baba 

thereupon remarked with regard to the spirit of true sacrifice: "Sacrifice is sweet when it is for a good cause." 

Question 

    Is faith in God essential? 

Answer 

That depends on how you interpret faith. Some who have faith and believe in God, lead a life without character and fail to make any spiritual progress, while there are others who do not even believe in God but lead such a noble life that they automat≠ically come closer to God. Question 

What is the goal of creation? 

Answer 

    To know the Self as the infinite eternal existence and to enable others to realize this same Self. Question 

    How did the Universe come about? Answer 

This needs long explanation. (In "Philosophy and Teachings" it is explained.) Universe, if under≠stood as created, has an entirely different meaning from our view≠point that universe does not exist. Actually it is only God who appears as universe. But it is 



63 

necessary to creation to have this dual idea of God and universe. 

    To know the exact meaning of the "awake" state, one has to experience the "dream" state. Dreams can be good and bad. In dream you can suffer or enjoy. But when you wake up, you find it is all a dream. But this dream should be so adjusted that it awakens you soon. Sacrifice, character and selfless service help in waking you soon. Question 

Why do forces of evil pre≠dominate over forces of virtue? Answer 

    It is all in the scope of Uni≠versal Law. The suffering that appears so grave is necessary, for happiness, as binding is necessary to experience freedom. Unless evil temporarily triumphs, suf≠fering cannot be experienced. This universe is based on duality. Binding and freedom, bad and good, evil and virtue are inter≠dependent. If only one aspect existed, there would be no mean≠ing or interest in life. For the attainment of ultimate freedom and happiness, temporary victory of evil over virtue is necessary. 

Question 

    Why does God who is so kind and merciful give suffering and pain to so many? Answer 

    God has nothing to do with this. God is all One-in-One. He is aloof and yet so attached that whatever is done is by His Law of Love and Will. For example, when you sleep you enjoy a dream, and the enjoyment is so intense that this dream of hap≠piness does not wake you soon. But if in the midst of the dream you suddenly saw a snake you would at once wake up. This is the Law of God. God is neither 

merciful  nor  cruel  in  your  

"awakened" state.  

Question  

Is  renunciation  of  the  world  



necessary for spiritual attain≠ment? 

Answer 

    Internal renunciation is neces≠sary, but not external renun≠ciation. It is not the outward escape from the world that leads you to God. You have to live in the world, do all your duties, and yet feel as detached as if you were living in seclusion in the midst of intense activity. How can you renounce this body and 



mind by retiring into the jungles? 

Question 

    In a slavish country like India, is it not the duty of every Indian to work for the liberation of his country? Answer 

    Yes, but the aspect must be from spiritual standpoint. If material freedom binds you to maya and leads to spiritual avoidance, it is no freedom. You must try heart and soul to have India free, but it must be the freedom that helps you towards Truth and spirituality. Question 

    Will India come in the fore≠front, as in days of old, to lead the world? Answer 

    It is the duty of India to lead the world spiritually. Question 

    When will your Holiness mani≠fest yourself ? Answer 

The time is very near. 

Question 

    Is the path shown by Gandhiji the only path to attain India's freedom? 

Answer 

In some respects it is. It de≠pends on the circumstances. If India were not so disunited in≠ternally as it is now, the policy of Mr. Gandhi would bring freedom in a few moments, but it is so difficult for the Hindus and Mohammedans to unite. Mr. Gandhi saw me four times and I said the same thing to him that unless the hearts of Hindus and Mohammedans are united, little progress can be expected. 

    Work with all your heart, with the one motive of making India truly free, but do not think of the results of your work. Men like you can do what millions cannot do, as you have heart, intellect and sincerity. This selfless service of yours in striving for India's freedom will lead you ultimately to God. 



ï 