 Easter 
April 4, 2010 
Reverend Mark Belletini 
 Opening Words
  
We are here 

to celebrate life and love 

on Easter morning in early spring, 

with flowers and stories, music and singing, 

that our lives might awake! awake! awake! 

to the wild Alleluia thriving deep within us.
  
And so, mindful that we share a common world, but a
pproach that world in different ways, we 
begin our celebration together by kindling our prom
ise of mutual honesty, attentiveness, and deep 
courtesy. May we become more proficient at gratitud
e and awareness, that we might more deeply 
embody the kind of justice and peace which embraces
 everyone on earth. 
 
Sequence: Exultet
 for Easter 2010  a poem Imperatives, by Kathleen No
rris. 
 
Look at the birds. Consider the lilies. 

Drink ye all of it. 

Ask.  Seek. Knock. Enter by the narrow gate. 

Do not be anxious. 

Judge not.  

 
Go. Be it done to you. 

Do not be afraid. 

Maiden, arise. 

Young man, I say arise. 

 
Stretch out your hand. 

Stand up. 

Be still.  

Rise, let us be going. 

 
Love. Forgive. Remember me. 

 
silence 

 
No matter the day, no matter the hour, 

our past comes forward and greets us. 

Memories of days past, people we love 

or miss deeply, come forward and 

 knock at our doors. Awakening to their 

presence as we hold them in the arms of our love, 

we name them as we imagine them–
 quietly, or softly into the Easter morn. 

 
naming 

 
Soon, the choir will sing these wonderful words: Aw
ake. Awake. Awake. The silence of the 
night has passed. The new day has begun. Let music 
never die in us. Forever let our spirits sing. 
Wherever emptiness is found, let there be joy and g
lorious sound. Let music never die in me. 
Forever let my spirit sing. Let music live!  

 
The First Reading
 comes from one of the premier poets of the nation o
f Mozambique, Eduardo 
White. 

 
The burden of life! 

I wanted to feel it as you did, in your way, 

and to sense life growing inside me, 

in my living body.   

It™s not that I was looking to tear open an old wou
nd. 
It™s not that I was looking to work slowly like a f
armhand, or even like the earth,  
which the farmhand tends. 

 
So take up love as your profession. 

Practice it with care. 

Repeat it as many times as necessary, until it last
s,  
and everything inside you has meaning. 

Let the sun 
inside
 you
 climb and illumine the night. Let it be the wing l
ifting your imagination 
high; let it brighten up the storeroom where you ke
ep peace. 
But never let it be just a leftover. And don™t let 
it be only something you remember. 
The Second Reading
 is a poem by Kathleen Norris. Its title is ?A Litan
y for Basil, on Leaving 
Oz.?  She doesn™t tell us who Basil is, but Oz is p
retty clear. You will probably, most of you, 
remember the line spoken by Glinda the good witch i
n both the film and the book. 
I don™t know how to do it. But I see the plains bef
ore me like a book. 
I don™t know why pain comes in waves, but I see gra
ss in the wind. 
I don™t know how it happens, but I listen to the st
ory. 
I don™t know why it takes so long, but I love to he
ar it. 
I don™t know how the days will run, but I long to s
ee them unfold. 

 I don™t know why it™s in us, this love that moves i
n color through fears that are black and white. 
?You™ve 
always
 had the power,? the good witch says. Why, love is 
like death, only longer. 
Amen. Amen. 

Sermon 

 
Several times in the last month I have mentioned my
 friend Bonni down in Chile. I went to 
college with Bonni, and when she moved to Europe fo
r her year abroad, she never really came 
back. She lived in Switzerland for years, studying 
the techniques of translation. And then she 
worked in Algeria as a translator. It was there tha
t she met Ignacio, a Chilean who had left his 
native country to escape the violence and injustice
s of the Pinochet dictatorship. Bonni and 
Ignacio flew to England one weekend and officially 
married, and then returned to Africa to work 
several more years in Algeria. Then they spent a ha
lf-decade in Mozambique before moving to 
Chile.  

 
Bonni and I have mostly deepened our friendship via
 letters– long, long letters,–snail mail, 
mind you–although I 
have
 visited her in Chile, and she does fly up here som
etimes during our 
summer months.  

 
When Bonni first told me she was moving to Mozambiq
ue, I have to confess to you that I was 
pretty ignorant about geography. I thought she was 
moving to that big island off the east coast of 
Africa with all the cute little animals with wide r
ound eyes, the lemurs and bush babies, you 
know, the ones I get a kick out of when I go to a z
oo. I have since repented of my unfortunately 
rather 
typical
 American ignorance of geography, and studied our c
ommon world a lot more. 
After all, in this world of instantaneous communica
tion, I have to think of myself, like Diogenes 
of old, as a 
citizen of the world
; aren™t you? 
 
Now, over the years since I have been serving as on
e of your ministers, I have read many of the 
biblical Easter stories on this day. I™ve read them
 through a Unitarian Universalist lens of course. 
I™ve made it clear that Easter for me–and for those
 who first wrote about it as far as I can 
tell–was never about a corpse come back to life, as
 if living forever in a some sort of nifty new 
physical body was somehow a terrific thing, or a si
gn of special favor and divine care. I™m really 
not sure 
why
 this notion of resurrection as 
resuscitation
 is viewed by some people as a sign of 
some putative cosmic fairness; but I admit that it 
is so. I even think it™s the reason why some 
Unitarian Universalists don™t like to celebrate Eas
ter. They reason, ?Well, if it™s not the real deal 
I learned about as a kid in Baptist Sunday School, 
well, then, why bother?? 
 
Still, even someone like me can appreciate the insi
ghtful humor attributed to the Jewish non-
theist, Woody Allen: ?I don't want to achieve immor
tality through my work; I want to achieve 
immortality through not dying. I don't want to live
 on in the hearts of those who love me; I want 
to live on in my apartment.? 

 
In our children™s story this morning, which I thoug
ht was quite moving and beautiful, the idea of 
living on in the hearts of others, singing a song o
f life, is beautifully told. And I find myself in 
synch with the basic truth of the story as I unders
tand it. 

  
But I also realize that to many, the metaphor of a 
singing bird, in the hollow of a newfangled, but 
quite dead, tin man, still seems rather thin and we
ightless.  And not just because they would 
rather have the old fashioned kind of Easter, compl
ete with news of a 150 lb dead body that 
starts to breathe again. 

 
I understand, I think. After all, when you hear eve
n just the 
first
 line of Eduardo White™s poem, 
The 
Burden of Life
, you remember immediately how much outright suffer
ing accompanies our 
days. You realize how heavy life can be–dozens of p
eople being blown up on a Moscow 
subway train, a child killed by a bus at Disneyland
, strange cancers affecting friends, fires and 
gunshots and sudden death in Sudan, Somalia, Afghan
istan––and when you honestly 
realize
 how tough life can be, how 
unfair
 it can be, you begin to understand why some folks 
might 
dream of a physical resurrection as representing, a
t the very least, another chance at life. A real 
chance. Solid, not ghostly. Tangible, not metaphori
cal.  So, with that thought in mind, let me tell 
you an Easter story.  

 
No, not 
that
 Easter story. I™m not going to talk to you today a
bout Mary Magdalene or Peter. I 
am not going to interpret the story of the two trav
elers meeting a risen but incognito Jesus on the 
road. Jesus of Galilee is not even in this story. B
ut I assure you, it™s a true Easter story 
nevertheless. 

 
Back in the 1980s, when my friend Bonni and her hus
band Ignacio were in Mozambique, the 
country was going through a terrible civil war. The
 war was fought by two factions, the 
progressive, anti-colonialist faction, called Freli
mo, and the radically conservative faction, called 
Renamo. These are acronyms; you really don™t need r
ight now for me to explain them to you. All 
you need to know is that this civil war was very co
mplicated. And, that there were mistakes 
made on both sides, although I have more sympathy w
ith the Frelimo people, if only because the 
conservatives were being supported in their violenc
e, and brutally encouraged, by apartheid-era 
South Africa. The Frelimo people were mostly all Mo
zambiquans throwing off the colonial yoke 
of Portugal, although it™s fair to say they receive
d some little help from Soviet Russia and Cuba. 
But in any case, it was complicated, to be sure. 

 
The progressive government in Maputo, the capital c
ity, was led by a former nurse, Samora 
Machel. But South Africa was against Machel because
 he clearly favored a Marxist view of 
things. So they sent insurgents into Mozambique to 
destabilize the new government with acts of 
terrible violence.  Tens of thousands of them cross
ed the border and engaged in acts of terrorism 
in no way different from what we know in our presen
t decade.  
 
My friends Bonni and Ignacio were not involved in p
olitics, but rather, they were working with 
native people far away from either Maputo or Beira,
 the two largest cities. They were working 
with the United Nations through Sweden, and they ha
d been assigned to a forest area where a 
group of hunter-gatherer people lived. These were f
olks who wore no clothes, who had no 
villages, but slept under leaves at night. They gat
hered food as they found it, tubers and honey 
and other things. But the trouble was, it was the d
ays of the great African drought. The reddish 
soil was not producing much except an abundance of 
wild cotton and cassava roots.  And so, 
since neither cotton, nor cassava, are particularly
 nutritious, the people were starving. 

  
So Bonni and Ignacio noted the cotton, and decided 
what they had to do. Bonni flew to Rome, to 
the English library there, and became a quick study
 in carding and spinning cotton.  Ignacio, 
meanwhile, taught the people to stay put for a whil
e by helping them make a village of mud. He 
poured some river water into the earth, made mud, a
nd then created a circle about ten feet in 
diameter on the ground, leaving room for an entranc
e. Then, when that dried in the hot sun, he 
made more mud, and added another course, embedding 
dry sticks into it to make it stronger. 
Pretty soon, he had made a nifty dome, pretty solid
, with an entrance and a hole at the top to let 
smoke out when they built a cook-fire. When Bonni c
ame back from Rome, she helped the 
people design and make looms, and then to pick and 
card and spin the wild cotton into threads. 
Soon, they were weaving belts, dyed with local berr
y juice. These they could take to local town 
markets and sell, earning them money enough to buy 
some staples. They had the pride of earning 
their own food, and slowly, they built community in
 the manner of neighboring peoples, by 
living close together in their new domed settlement
. 
 
One day, a worker from Machel™s government in Maput
o found Bonni and Ignacio and told them 
they had to leave, and retreat to Beira for a while
. Seems like some local South African-
supported guerillas were coming through the area, b
earing guns and using them, and creating 
havoc everywhere. The man told them that because th
ey were foreign nationals, the government 
had the duty to keep them as safe as was possible, 
although he did praise them for the work they 
had done. He was amazed by their ingenuity. 

 
Reluctantly, Bonni and Ignacio went with the man to
 Beira, and holed up in an apartment for a 
month or so. There was no electricity in the forest
 where the mud and stick domes rose, so, even 
if cell-phones had existed they wouldn™t have worke
d. 
 
One day, a man came and knocked on Bonni and Ignaci
o™s door. They didn™t know who it was. 
He identified himself as a man who lived at the edg
e of town, and that some folks had come from 
the forest and called to him, but would not come fu
rther because they were frightened by what 
they saw–these big square things which he told them
 were ?buildings.? They had never seen 
anything like it before. But these visitors had men
tioned Bonni and Ignacio by name, and the 
man had figured out how to find them by asking arou
nd. On hearing this, immediately Bonni and 
Ignacio put the man in their jeep, and he took them
 back to the place where the visitors were. 
There they immediately recognized the faces of folk
s from the village of mud domes they had 
left. They looked terrible. They had burn marks on 
them, and bloody wounds, and they looked 
haggard. They spoke haltingly in their native langu
age, which Bonni and Ignacio could speak, if 
but barely.  They said that they were all that was 
left of the village. A handful. The insurgents 
had come through two weeks after Bonni and Ignacio 
left. They killed and murdered most of the 
villagers, but not before forcing them to burn down
 their huts and set fire to their belts and 
looms. Then they left, and the traumatized remnant 
buried their dead in the ground. ?And then 
we came here,? they said, ?because we didn™t know w
hat to do.? 
In her poem, Kathleen Norris writes: ?I don™t know 
why pain comes in waves–.? and ?I don™t 
know how it happens, but I listen to the story.? I 
can imagine the pain coming in waves, after 
hearing a story like that, can™t you? I too can™t k
now how such things happen–such things? oh, 
let™s call it by its proper name–evil. I don™t know
 how such evil things happen. But I do know I 

 cannot turn away. I have to listen to the story–whe
ther it™s Bonni™s version of the crucifixion in 
Mozambique, or the gospel of Mark™s version of the 
crucifixion in Jerusalem, or the latest report 
of such death from Darfur. I have to listen to them
. And to tell you the truth, I™ve heard such 
stories before, from the wars of the last century–M
y Lai, Auschwitz, Nagasaki. They chill my 
blood. They leave me feeling pretty powerless. 

?What can we do?? they asked. Bonni and Ignacio tri
ed to think, to push through the sludge of 
their thick and paralyzing grief. Then suddenly, so
mething lit up in their hearts. Perhaps the kind 
of light that brought them to far Mozambique™s fore
st people in the first place. Call it love if you 
want, as in Kathleen Norris™ poem: 
I don™t know how the days will run, but I long to s
ee them 
unfold. I don™t know why it™s in us, this love that
 moves in color through fears that are black and 
white. 
Or I think of Eduardo White™s words, forged in that
 difficult environment of Mozambique:
 So take up love as your profession. Practice it wit
h care. Repeat it as many times as necessary, 
until it lasts, and everything inside you has meani
ng. 
Let the sun inside you climb and illumine the night
. Let it be the wing lifting your imagination 
high; let it brighten up the storeroom where you ke
ep peace. 
But never let it be just a leftover. And don™t let 
it be only something you remember. 
So, lit up from the inside, and deciding not to los
e himself merely in remembrance of what was, 
but to push forward into the new day, Ignacio went 
and got a plastic pail from the jeep that had 
brought them there. He went to the nearest source o
f water, a small estuary near by, and filled it. 
Then he poured it into the earth. He and Bonni mixe
d mud. And then they lifted the mud in their 
hands, and daubed it onto the earth, making a circl
e about ten feet in diameter. A new dome for a 
new day. 

They could not bring back the dead. They knew that.
 But they realized they could show the 
living that it was possible to start again. The hor
ror of their loss was unspeakable, and very real. 
But every single day ahead of them would also be re
al. 100% real. 
And so there, at the edge of Beira, the remnant sta
rted again. Rose up, if you will, into new life. 
Rose up, not by supernatural power from above, but 
with a power that was in them from the 
beginning.  

Again, Kathleen Norris sums up this Easter story be
autifully. Imagine these words addressed, not 
to Dorothy Gale of Kansas wanting to take leave of 
Oz, but rather, addressed to the characters of 
my Easter story, the villagers of Mozambique, and B
onni and Ignacio, all of whom were feeling 
rather powerless. 

 ?You™ve 
always
 had the power,? the good witch says. Why, love is 
like death, only longer. 
Amen. Amen. 

So there you have it. A real Easter story. Nothing 
ghostly about it. The death was real, and the 
resurrection was real. No resuscitation or anything
 like that. For me, Easter is about the power to 

 love, which is even more real. Easter is about maki
ng it our daily practice no matter what. And 
love™s a power that was always with us, a power tha
t lasts a lot, lot longer than mere death. 
So awake! Awake! It™s time to get up! And while you
™re at it, says Kathleen Norris, says Jesus, 
look at the birds. Consider the lilies. Do not be a
nxious. Judge not.  Go. Be it done to you. Do 
not be afraid. Maiden, arise. Young man, I say, ari
se. Rise, let us be going. Love. Forgive. 
Remember. And then, keep on making love 
your profession
 until your very last day. 
Offering: 
 Remembering that transformation is a constant deman
d, that growth of spirit and joy ask  
of us a certain generosity of heart, we set aside a
 time during each Sunday Celebration,  
when the blessings which have sustained us become t
he blessings we share with our community.  
  

Flower Ceremony 
(adapted from Capek™s 1923 prayer)  
  Minister: 
In the name of that Mystery which implants in the s
eed the future of the flower, and in 
our hearts, the longing for harmony and peace;  

  East Voice 
In the name of the Most High and Most Deep, in whom
 we move and have our 
being, and who makes father and mother, brother and
 sister, lover and loner what they are;  
  South Voice 
In the name of the sages and prophets who lived out
 their lives to hasten the  
coming of the age of mutual respect---   

 
West Voice 
Let us renew our passion to find ways to be real br
others and sisters to each  
other, regardless of the kinds of barriers which tr
y to separate us, one from the other.  
  

North Voice 
In this holy resolve may we be strengthened, knowin
g that we are as one  
family, the human family; that one spirit, the spir
it of life and love, unites us, and in that  
spirit, may we move toward a more just and joyful l
ife, each and every day.  
 
Song: 

 
Consecration of the Flowers
  (Jolinda Stephens) 
(strike bell) Awake to these flowers before you! 

Awake and know that they are like us all, 

mortal and beautiful, and that they cannot help 

but sing Alleluia every moment of their lives. 

(strike bell) Awake! Awake to the song that rises f
rom these flowers, and know that song is your 
own. 

(strike bell) Let these flowers remind us that we a
re one with all that is, and that no one belongs 
in the world more than anyone else. We are all in t
his together. Amen. 
 
