 
We,	that	are	in	Love!
BY  JAL  R.  IRANI,   B.A.


 
‘I LOVE YOU!’ Ah, how romantic, how		thrilling		and		O!			how delicious. This is how love seems in its first glorious bloom; be it in youth or be it in age.  The  first kiss of love, O! Such ecstasy, while lovers shut their eyes in subdued		hush	and  the	rest	is sheer oblivion. Love is all that matters,		love		that		seems		so selfless		and		so		pure			and passionless, but only for  a fleet- ing second. Slowly the eyes open, and	the		lovers	are		suddenly aware of their  very  existence, their material surroundings, their physical contours . . . . They are   at once conscious of the will to possess, to possess each  other.  She is mine and he is mine; they cannot think otherwise. If love is  to be love, and if each is to make the other happy, then they must belong		to	each		other.		This happens and we think that we are in love.
Such is the worldly conception of Love from Pole to Pole, from East to West, in Park Avenues  and in slums, on the silver-screen and in books. It's love, love and love, backed by  Mr.  Jealousy who is happily married to Miss Possession. One and all think that
 
it is virtue to love, little knowing that it is vice in the form of self- satisfaction. A deluding delusion for kings and beggars, gangsters and merry-makers.
But the true conception of love is Love. Love that is out to love and asks not for love in return. Love that is selfless  and  knows no lust. Love that loves for the sake of loving. . . . To-day and beyond. Even Dr. Johnson falls short when he says, 'That which  is to be loved longest, must be loved with reason  rather  than with passion.' True love is eternal and cares not for time or reason. Man’s reasoning runs parallel to all that is material, although he is often heard to say 'God is Love.' But then he knows not what he says.
To-day a man loves a woman sincerely, and is out to make her happy, both mentally and physically. But does he go on loving her if after sometime he finds her attracted to some other maN? He is in torments, because Mr. Jealousy, and Miss Possession are flinging dishes at each other. He is out to shoot  both, her and the other man. And he thinks he loves
 

 
her. . . . Or shall we say he loved her once, just as the judges of the divorce-courts would pronounce the verdict. The same man might divorce such a woman out of selfish chivalry. . . . And this is where his Eternal love ends. He cannot love a woman that once belonged to him, now belongs to somebody else.
A true lover would willingly give up such a woman to another man and still go on loving her. After all he was out to give her everything and does it matter if she wants only another man?
Again there are men who give up their lady-love to another, quite willingly, but after this noble part they seek for self- destruction. They think they have lost because they could not retain their woman's love for themselves. Love is sheer cowardice in this form, and is much worse than love that gives up unwillingly and loves no more.
That God is Love and Love is God only when the lover does not feel the pang of separation from his beloved one . . . . When the lover has no thought of ever possessing her physically. He does not care whether she loves him or not. He loves her because she is the personification of love itself, and he loves Love. He sees her here, he sees her there
 
and he sees her everywhere. He sees her eyes in every sparkling stars, her face in a rose- bud, her rippling smile in a babbling brook, her voice in a warbling bird. He sees her in spring and he sees her in storm, until he sees himself in her, and himself becomes God. He is God and he sees her through God as God.
Such was the love of Majnun for Leila. He did not love Leila because she was black and beautiful, but because he wanted to love her, for in her he found his own true love. The world called him mad as he went about in tattered clothes, and calling out for Leila in jungles and places that seemed so strange. He saw Leila in trees that bloomed in Spring and he saw Leila in trees that went up in leaping flames. In every woman, both ugly and beautiful, he saw Leila. She, was everywhere. The whole creation changed itself into Leila. At last he saw himself in Leila, and Leila seemed like God as he stood in her. So his love for Leila turned into Love for God and he himself became one with God.
To-day we have puppy-dog love of very young men and women, a modern Romeo in  love with a night-club siren, a modern Joan of Arc in love with a Broadway Gigolo, and finally we have a pair of perfect lovers. All in love! Why?
 

 
Because all are curious to feel the throbbing pulse, and surging emotion of love without caring to know the real and significant meaning of true love. Of love which is so sublime and serene and free from lusty emotions. Somebody said that curiosity killed a cat. He ought to have said that curiosity killed love and is killing love.
All over the world, and es- pecially in the West, men fall in love and marry because they are tired. And women . . . . because they are so fidgety about everything. The worldly concep- tion of love with women in the West has either become most artificially glamorous or most damnably stupid. In the former case we have stars of the screen
 

parading their physical beauty under the guise of false glamour and false airs . . . . These stars who play the part of true love on the screen do not live up to it in their private lives. It does seem a bit outlandish, doesn't it?
And in the latter case we have women going silly all for the love of a mere gold-fish. They go raving about the whole house, heart in pieces, just because the gold-fish did not open its mouth when our grand duchess wished it a good-morning.
It's time we had some other word for 'Love' and save it from still further degradations.
In the glove of lust rests our hand of Love,
Discard the glove if God is to be Love ! ! !
