Sunday, July 10, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  If I should give a title to this sermon it would be as follows; to wit: "Rebellion Is As The Sin Of Witchcraft, And Stubbornness Is As Iniquity And Idolatry." See, 1 Sam. 15:23. Sometimes the mere describing of one incident ­ as recorded by the Holy Ghost in the first place ­ makes a  wonderful and unforgettable sermon in and of itself; e.g., to wit: Samuel also said unto Saul:  "The Lord sent me to anoint thee to be king over his people, over Israel; now therefore hearken thou unto the THE VOICE OF THE WORDS OF THE LORD." (1 Sam. 15:1) Not, hearken thou unto the Words of the Lord; but, Hearken thou unto "THE VOICE OF THE WORDS OF THE LORD;" as though as to suggest that there is a special importance attached to this message from God to His servants; and even that there is a mysterious "VOICE" in the Words not apparent on the surface. In any event the Words are unique, and, considering the subject matter, are very, very important. At one's peril does one ignore or neglect or deal lightly with such Words of the Great God Almighty.  "Thus saith the Lord of hosts, I remember that which Amalek did to Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came up from Egypt." (1 Sam. 15:2)  Just exactly what did Amalek do to Israel that was so grievous to the Lord and that demanded such vengeance at the hands of an angry God from generation to generation. Well, remember, Beloved; we have seen in case after case that it does not require all that much to trigger the outpoured wrath of God against anybody, anywhere, any time who molest His loved ones in the slightest degree. Remember when Sarah was taken by the Philistine King Abimelech, in large measure because Abraham misled the king by telling him Sarah was his sister; to wit:  "And Abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country, and dwelled between Kadesh and shur, and sojourned in Gerar. And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister; and Abimelech king of Gerar sent, and took Sarah. But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him, Behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman which thou hast taken; for she is a man's wife. But Abimelech had not come near her; and he said, Lord, wilt thou slay also a righteous nation? Said he not unto me, She is my sister? And she, even she herself said, He is my brother; in the integrity (i.e., sincerity) of my heart and innocency of my hands have I done this. And God said unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that thou didst this in the integrity (i.e., sincerity) of thy heart; for I also withheld thee from sinning against me; therefore suffered I thee not to touch her. Now therefore restore the man his wife; for he is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live; and if thou restore her not, know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou, and all that are thine. Therefore Abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all his servants, and told all these things in their ears; and the men were sore afraid. Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him, What hast thou done unto us? And what have I offended thee, that thou hast hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin? thou hast done deeds unto me that ought not to be done. And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What sawest thou, that thou hast done this thing? And Abraham said, Because I thought, Surely the fear of God is not in this place; and they will slay me for my wife's sake. And yet indeed she is my sister; she is the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife. And it came to pass, when God caused me to wander from my father's house, that I said unto her, This is thy kindness which thou shalt show unto me; at every place wither we shall come, say of me, He is my brother. And Abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and womenservants, and gave them unto Abraham, and restored him Sarah his wife. And Abimelech said, Behold, my land is before thee; dwell where it pleaseth thee. And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver; behold, he is to thee a covering of the  Sunday, July 10, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  eyes, unto all that are with thee, and with all other; thus she was reproved. So  Abraham prayed unto God; and God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his  maidservants; and they bare children. For the Lord had fast closed up all the wombs  of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah Abraham's wife." (Gen. 20:1-18)  Now, I put it to you, Beloved. Is not the conduct of Abraham as bad, or worse, than the conduct of the heathen king Abimelech? And yet, this episode in the life of Abraham was chosen by the Holy Ghost to illustrate how zealously and how jealously and how vigorously God avenges wrongs committed against His Elect people. The few words uttered by the Lord Jesus Christ in Luke, chapter 18, may prove in the end to be the most important and eternal declaration of the Gospel to be found anywhere; to wit: "AND SHALL NOT GOD AVENGE HIS OWN ELECT, WHICH CRY DAY AND NIGHT UNTO HIM, THOUGH HE BEAR LONG WITH THEM? I TELL YOU THAT HE WILL AVENGE THEM SPEEDILY. NEVERTHELESS WHEN THE SON OF MAN COMETH, SHALL HE FIND FAITH ON THE EARTH?" (Luke 18:7,8) That is, when the Lord Jesus comes the second time ­ this time in power and glory, will He find the kind of faith and preaching I am contending for in this sermon today? Beloved, it takes mighty little to trigger the wrath of God in vindication of His Elect people. Look again at Abraham in his contest with Abimelech. It seems to me that Abraham looks very bad. Yet the Lord God did not hesitate to come down on poor old Abimelech like a ton of bricks, as they say. Not a critical word did the Lord speak against Abraham. There are wonderful and comforting words here. And, even though Abraham who stands here as typical of God's Elect and as such is certainly not a sympathetic figure ­ nevertheless ­ God rushes into the fray on our side, AND DEAD AGAINST ABIMELECH, REPRESENTING THE ENEMY OF GOD'S ELECT. And, what's more, the Holy Ghost has selected the episode of Abraham vs. Abimelech to make his point; to wit: "When they were but a few men in number; yea, very few, and strangers in it. When they went from one nation to another, from one kingdom to another people; He suffered no man to do them wrong; yea, he reproved kings for their sakes; Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm." (Psa. 105:12-15)  And the chronicles account is slightly modified, as follows; to wit: "Saying, unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, the lot of your inheritance; when ye were but few, even a few, and strangers in it. And when they went from nation to nation, and from one kingdom to another people; He suffered no man to do them wrong; yea, he reproved kings for their sakes, Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm." (1 Chron. 16:18-22)  The glory of God is His store-house of vengeance & recompense; which will be brought forth in the day of the calamity of the sodomites of the ages; to wit: "For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah; their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter; Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps. Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures? To me" ­ exclusively ­ "belongeth VENGEANCE AND RECOMPENCE; their foot shall slide in due time; for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make haste." Deut. 32:32-35. Yes, Beloved, I believe that not nearly enough is made of the Lord God's attribute of Vengeance. Not nearly! The apostle plainly says that the only living and true God is the God that we worship, ­ even the God of Vengeance. Every other god is a false idol; and every other religious practitioner is an out-and-out idolater; to wit: "For we know him"­ and ONLY Him ­ "that hath said, Vengeance belongeth unto me, I will recompense, saith the Lord. And again, The Lord shall  Sunday, July 10, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  avenge his people. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God." Heb. 10:30-31.  And again, we read:  "Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give place unto wrath; for it is written, Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord." (Romans 12:19)  The sense is glorious. "Give place unto wrath," means, Get out of the way and give an angry God  plenty of room to wreak havoc upon His enemies; viz, in destruction upon those who have persecuted His Elect people upon earth. "For it is written, Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord," means that the Lord God takes great pride in His holy and awful Vengeance, as being one of, OR THE, greatest of His operative attributes; and God is very, very jealous of His holy prerogative that none but He may exercise; "I will repay", i.e., count on it, there is nothing that I  had rather do than to exercise that certain VENGEANCE on the workers of iniquity which I have promised my dear, longsuffering Elect Ones for thousands of years gone by; to wit: "Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures?" Deut. 32:34. Again, the meaning is another reference to His Holy Vengeance in vindication of His persecuted Dear Ones. Clearly, the Lord regards His Vengeance and His outpoured wrath upon the enemies and persecutors of His Dear Ones as being among His sealed up Treasures. The seminal passage of Scripture on this  beautiful subject follows; to wit:  "TO ME BELONGETH VENGEANCE, AND RECOMPENCE; THEIR FOOT SHALL SLIDE IN DUE TIME; FOR THE DAY OF THEIR CALAMITY IS AT HAND, AND THE THINGS THAT SHALL COME UPON THEM MAKE HASTE." (Deut. 32:35)  The gentle tinker and dreamer of heavenly things, John Bunyan, agrees with us, that we will have a hand in executing Vengeance upon our Satanic and demon-possessed enemies in the world to come; to wit: "There also (i.e., in Heaven) you shall be clothed with glory and majesty, and put into an equipage fit to ride out with the King of Glory. When He shall come with sound of trumpet in the clouds, as upon the wings of the wind, you shall come with him; and, when He shall sit upon the throne of judgment, ye shall sit by him; YEA, WHEN HE SHALL PASS SENTENCE UPON ALL THE WORKERS OF INIQUITY, LET THEM BE ANGELS OR MEN, YOU SHALL ALSO HAVE A VOICE IN THAT JUDGMENT, BECAUSE THEY ARE HIS AND YOUR ENEMIES. Also, when he shall again return to the city, you shall go too, with sound of trumpet, and be ever with him."  Now, Beloved, with this little study on the Vengeance of God behind us, let us consider King Saul and the Amalekites. The Lord God used some of the strongest language available, to express His feelings of wrath and Vengeance against the Amalekites ­ ENTIRELY BECAUSE OF THE VINDICTIVE WAY POWERFUL AMALEK TREATED WEAK LITTLE ISRAEL FRESH OUT OF SLAVERY & EGYPTIAN BONDAGE; to wit: "Remember what Amalek did unto thee by the way, when ye were come forth out of Egypt; How he met thee by the way, and smote the hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble behind thee, when thou wast faint and weary; and he feared not God. Therefore it shall be, when the Lord thy God hath given thee rest from thine enemies round about, in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance to possess it, that THOU SHALT BLOT OUT THE REMEMBRANCE OF AMALEK FROM UNDER HEAVEN; THOU SHALT NOT FORGET IT." (Deut. 25:17-19)  Wow! Talk about the Vengeance of God. But look what those cowardly; opportunistic bullies did ­ threatening the very existence of the Jewish nation; to wit: "Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel in Rephidim. ...And the Lord said unto Moses, Write this for a memorial in a book, and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua; FOR I WILL UTTERLY PUT OUT THE REMEMBRANCE  Sunday, July 10, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  OF AMALEK FROM UNDER HEAVEN. And Moses built an altar, and called the name of it  Jehovah-nissi (i.e., The Lord our Banner - Swearing Vengeance) For he said, Because the Lord  hath sworn that the Lord will have war with Amalek from generation to generation." Ex.17:8-16.  Thus, in process of time, Israel became powerful as a fighting force; and, eventually, the Lord God turned attention to His oath to annihilate the Amalekites in condign (i.e., well-deserved) Vengeance for what they had done to His Elect People many years ago; and thereupon the Lord God assigned Samuel to break the news to King Saul that he had been tagged for the job; to wit: "Samuel also said unto Saul, The Lord sent me to anoint thee to be king over his people, over Israel; now therefore hearken thou unto the voice of the words of the Lord" (the emphasis here is upon the very words themselves, individually; and to his peril does one deal in a slip-shod, cavalier fashion with such messages from the Lord ­ "The words of the Lord are pure words; as silver tried in a furnace of earth, purified seven times. Thou shalt keep them, O Lord, thou shalt preserve them from this generation for ever." Psa. 12:6,7.) King Saul would have done well that day to take heed. "Thus saith the Lord of hosts, I rremember that which Amalek did to Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came up from Egypt. NOW GO AND SMITE AMALEK, AND UTTERLY DESTROY ALL THAT THEY HAVE, AND SPARE THEM NOT; BUT SLAY BOTH MAN AND WOMAN, INFANT AND SUCKLING, OX AND SHEEP, CAMEL AND ASS. And Saul gathered the people together, and numbered them in Telaim, two hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand men of Judah. ...And Saul smote the Amalekites from Havilah until thou comest to Shur, that is over against Egypt. AND TOOK AGAG THE KING OF THE AMALEKITES ALIVE, AND UTTERLY DESTROYED ALL THE PEOPLE WITH THE EDGE OF THE SWORD. But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of the sheep, and of the oxen, and of the fatlings, and the lambs, and all that was good, and WOULD NOT UTTERLY DESTROY THEM; but every thing that was vile and refuse, THAT they destroyed." (1 Samuel 15:1-9)  (BANG ! Blatant disobedience by King Saul! Saul, the man of the flesh, had no capacity to appreciate and enforce God's sworn VENGEANCE AGAINST AMALEK. As the standing symbol of the reprobate ­ the Hell-bound Non-Elect among mankind ­ Saul hated God, His Word, His People, and His attributes ­ including most importantly here, HIS DEADLY VENGEANCE AGAINST THOSE WHO MISTREATED AND PERSECUTED HIS PEOPLE ON EARTH ­ LIKE THE AMALEKITE NATION. I say again, BANG! King Saul's Goose is cooked, sine die)  "Then came the word of the Lord unto Samuel, saying, It repenteth me that I have set up Saul to be king; for he is turned back from following me, and hath not performed my commandments. And it grieved Samuel; and he cried unto the Lord all night." 1 (Sam 15:10-11)  When confronted by Samuel about his willful sins of disobedience, Saul first denied every thing, then admitted every thing; but begged for pardon, and that Samuel "turn again with me, that I may worship the Lord. And Samuel said unto Saul, I will not return with thee; for thou hast rejected the word of the Lord, and the Lord hath rejected thee from being king over Israel. And as Samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the skirt of his mantle, and it rent. And Samuel said unto him, The Lord hath rent the kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and hath given it to a neighbor of thine, that is better than thou." 1 Sam. 15:25-28.  I love you. Amen.  
