
  We are here,
mindful that this time
  is a more like a journey,
than a destination,
  to worship, to remember the summer's peace
and unrest
  and to so transform memory into hope,
that our present lives are the better for it.

(all) may our reason and our passion
  keep us true to ourselves, true to each other
  and true to those shared visions of what we can together
  become?.

La vera vita
  no e fatta di parole
  -le nostre inutili parole
  corrose d'ignoranza e d'odio-
  e fatta di nuvole leggere
  che transcorrono
  silenziose per liberi cieli-
  e fatta de limpidi suoni
  d'acque erbe ucelli-
  come nel minuto innocente
  del primo respiro terrestre.

True life is not made of words,
  our futile words, corroded by ignorance
  and hatred?.it is made up of
  light clouds drifting silently through open skies-
  it is made up of limpid sounds of waters,
  grasses, birds-as in the innocent minute
  of earth's first breath.

  It is our quiet time, our time of silence.
  In the silence we know that we are not all that very powerful? we cannot
  stop rain storms or raging rivers in Europe or Nepal or other far away places,
  nor can we make the rain pour onto droughted soil in other lands.
  
  In the silence, we know we cannot at this moment magically create trust in
  places of the world where there is no trust, or erase war from the earth
  by our will and a snap of our fingers.
  
  Thus we take time each Sunday
  to remind ourselves that our power
  is limited, that our dreams are greater
  than our size, and that our best words,
  however sincerely spoken,
  have no automatic power to make
  broken things whole,
  or to cancel the real limits of time,
  strength and humanity.
  
  So I pray, may our promises always be real promises
  made in the light of our limited humanity.
  
  May our visions be lofty, yes, but not
  so lofty that we are always disappointed.
  
  May our silence serve to reconnect us
  to the silent clouds and quiet summer earth.
  
  May we remember in this central silent time
  that our relationships to each other are more important than what we have
  or do not have,
  and what we claim or do not claim.
  
  Turning to those who turn toward us, we
  remember those who enlighten us, or who care for us, or remember us, or do
  us the kindness of struggling with us, or those we remember deep in the embrace
  of our hearts. Let us set aside their names in the safe silence of our hearts,
  or say with our mouths the sounds that are or were their names.
  
(Naming)

  It's summer, it's summer, and here we are together again in August, in the
  easy light of morning, in the light of our mutual caring, in the light of
  summer rest and unrest, and in the incandescent light that we call music.
  
  (Summertime, from Porgy and Bess)

VENI CREATOR

  Come, Holy Spirit,
  bending or not bending the grasses,
  appearing or not above our heads in a tongue of flame, at hay harvest or
  when they plough in the orchards, or when snow covers crippled firs in the
  Sierra Nevada.
  
  I am only a human being: I need visible signs.
  I tire easily, building the stairway of abstraction.
  Many a time I asked, you know it well, that the statue in church lift its
  hand, only once, just once, for me.
  But I understand that signs must be human,
  therefore, call one person, anywhere on earth,
  not me-after all I have some decency-
  and allow me, when I look at that person, 
  to marvel at you.

The Summer Kitchen

  In June when the Brooklyn garden
  boiled with blossom,
  when leaflets of basil lined the paths
  and new green fruitless fingers of vine
  climbed the airy arbor roof,
  my Sicilian aunts withdrew
  to the summer kitchen,
  the white bare secret room
  at the bottom of the house.
  
  Outside, in the upper world,
  sun blistered the bricks of the tiny?
  terrace, where fierce
  socialisti uncles
  chain-smoked Camels and plotted politics;
  nieces and nephews tussled
  among thorny blood-colored
  American roses;
  a pimply concrete
  birdbath-fountain dribbled ineffectual
  water warm as olive oil.
  
  Cool and below it all,
  my aunts labored among great cauldrons
  in the spicy air
  of the summer kitchen: in one kettle
  tomatoes bloomed into sauce;
  in another, ivory pasta
  leaped and swam;
  on the clean white table
  at the center of the room
  heads of lettuce flung themselves open,
  and black-green poles of zucchini
  fell into slices of yellow,
  like fairy-tale money.
  
  Skidding around the white
  sink in one corner
  the trout that Uncle Christopher brought back
  from the Adirondacks gave up
  the glitter of its fins
  to the glitter of Zia Francesca's
  powerful knife.
  
  Every August day Zia Petrina
  rose at four to tend the morning:
  (her hair) drawn sleek,
  she stood at the sink.
  
  Her quick shears
  flashed in the silence,
  separating day from night, trunk
  from branch, leaf
  from shadow.
  
  As the damp
  New World sunrays struggled to rise
  past sooty housetops,
  she'd look suddenly up
  with eyes black as the grapes
  that fattened in the arbor:
  through one dirt-streaked window
  high above her
  she could see the ledge of soil
  where her pansies and geraniums anchored.
  
  Higher still,
  in tangles of heat,
  my uncles' simmering garden grew,
  like green steam swelling from the cool
  root of her kitchen.

  Some of you who are graduating at the end of this year are already feeling
  sad.
  
  You've come into my office feeling blue that your Starr King School days
  are coming to an end.
  
  But I am here to tell you that your Starr King School days are not coming
  to an end.
  
  To believe that they are is to have misconstrued the whole purpose of this
  school for the ministry. You see, this school has no illusions that it can
  train you to be a minister in three years. No school can do that. It takes
  a life-time to learn such things. But that's the point. What this school
  does is to help you understand that the entire world is slowly becoming Starr
  King School for the Ministry. Every person you meet from now on is your core
  faculty, every church you serve is your classroom, every city that you move
  to is your Berkeley campus, every experience, you either positive or negative,
  is a chapel service to lead you to your own spiritual depth. You cannot leave
  a school that has grown to fill the world. All of you are students forever.

  I am grateful for morning sunlight splashing on 
  the walls of the place where I live.
  
  I am grateful for tears, and what they do for me.
  
  I am grateful for corn on the cob and 
  summer meteor showers and fireflies.
  
  I am grateful for the elusive music of cicadas.
  
  I am grateful for the capacity to open up to the future
  without thinking I can control what shall greet me there when I arrive.
  
  I am grateful for the capacity to grapple with
  change, to resist and welcome, resist and welcome like the ins and outs of
  the breath of my own life.
  
  And I am glad for thee, O Spirit, O Mystery
  that hauls bee and butterfly, sun and rain,
  friendship and loss, heat and breezes, hopes
  and memories into one singular schoolroom called summer.
