 Yom Kippur 
September 27, 2009 
Mark Belletini 
 
Opening words  
  
We are here 

after a week of wet skies, wet sidewalks, 

to worship, to release our burdens honestly 

as we learn to fall like moving water 

over the hard, unmoving places in our lives. 

And so we say together: 

 
Mindful that we share a common world, but approach 
that world in different 
ways, we begin our celebration together by kindling
 our promise of mutual 
honesty, attentiveness, and deep courtesy. May we b
ecome more proficient at 
gratitude and awareness, that we might more deeply 
embody the kind of 
justice and peace which embraces everyone on earth.
  
Sequence 

 
Cosmologists say: We are ultimately all born out of
 the stardust once flung from 
exploding stars. 

Biologists say: We are all born of the ages, 

billions of years of slow, painful changes, 

species by species, all the way to us. 

Parents say: We are born of love, born from the wom
b of nurture and care. 
Spiritual teachers say: We are born of transformati
on, born of release and 
forgiveness, of principle, mission and faith. 

I say we are born all of these ways: we are born ma
ny times in our lives–. 
Grievers say: Part of us dies when 

we lose someone or something we love.  

Philosophers say: Since everything rises and falls,
 death is simply part of life. 
The religious say: Dying to selfishness and 

entitlement is a sign of positive growth. 

The wise say: Death comes to us all. 

I say: We die in all these ways: we die many times 
in our lives. 
Spirit of Birth and Death, of Life and Love, 

hold us, both tenderly and with strength,  as now w
e pour ourselves into this 
moment, this beautiful vessel of honesty, balance, 
and especially silence, the only 
reality I can think of which itself has no beginnin
g and no end. 
 
silence 

 
 Blest are all those who have brought us to this day
: those whose love has steadied 
us and bestowed us to ourselves like no one else co
uld. We name these people in 
our hearts or whisper their names into the common a
ir. 
 
naming 

 
Music too, like all things, has a beginning and an 
end. Music more than most 
things, is an emblem of you, Spirit of Birth and De
ath, Live and Love. Barukh 
atah, Zemar, chefetz ha-olam. Blest are you, songs 
of praise, the purpose and 
pleasure of the world. 

 
The First Reading
 is taken from psychotherapist Thom Rutledge™s 2002 
book with 
the intriguing title Embracing Fear
. 
 
A common fear Œ and criticism of psychology Œ is th
at self-forgiveness is a 
snazzy, socially acceptable way of letting ourselve
s off the hook by avoiding 
accountability and personal responsibility. This is
 absolutely not true–s
elf
-forgiveness is the natural starting place for anyon
e who wants to lead an ethical 
life as free from hypocrisy as is humanly possible.
  
 
Think of it this way: When I was a kid, my father o
wned a dry-cleaning store. As 
an adolescent, I drove his delivery truck, picking 
up and delivering dry cleaning 
all around the small town where I grew up. I was wo
rking to meet the needs of my 
dad™s customers. Was my father selfish for taking e
xcellent care of that truck? 
Was he being selfish to make sure its tank was full
, that the oil was changed on 
schedule, and that the tires were aligned?  

 
Of course not. My dad™s priority care of that truck
 was not about being selfish. It 
was about being smart. Without regular, quality mai
ntenance, the delivery truck 
would eventually require much more time and attenti
on, not to mention money, 
than he could afford. People are the same way.  

 
Self-forgiveness is that regular maintenance that k
eeps us on the road. The self-
forgiving person is not Œ as many believe, or at le
ast fear Œ a selfish person. It is 
the person who remains stuck in self-doubt and self
-condemnation who will lead 
the more selfish, less productive life.   Self-forg
iveness keeps us from being 
stuck; it keeps us moving.  
 
The Second Reading 
comes from Joan Borysenko™s book Minding the Body, 
Mending the Mind
, now 22 years old. 
 
You can be clear about whether or not a person™s be
havior is acceptable without 
judging the person. ?You are stupid? is a very diff
erent statement from ?Your 
behavior is not acceptable to me.? If a person know
s you respect him or her, your 

 comments about behavior are welcome. If you are att
acking a person™s character, 
however, no comment, no matter how perceptive, will
 be heeded. Forgiveness 
starts with ourselves and extends to others. Accept
ing that the core of your being is 
as precious and wonderful as that of any other pers
on is the greatest gift you can 
ever give yourself. 

 
Sermon 

 
?You always have to start where you are,? my preach
ing professor Ron Cook used 
to say. ?You can™t deliver a very convincing sermon
 on the redemptive power of 
love if your heart was broken the day before, and y
ou can™t offer many helpful 
words on the wonders of compassion if you™re still 
nursing a deep grudge. Start 
with where you are–but then,? he added with a twink
le, ?get to where you very 
much need to go.? 

 
So on this Sunday, when we celebrate the wisdom fou
nd in the most important 
holiday in our Jewish tap-root tradition, to wit, Y
om Kippur, the Day of 
Atonement, I have to begin with where I am.  

 
I am grieving. 

 
As you heard during the caring card announcement, m
y colleague and friend 
Forrest Church died this week. At 6 PM Thursday. Be
cause of the speed of modern 
electronic media, Jolinda Stevens, bless her heart,
 got the news and called me at 
home by 8 PM. I wept a good while, as is my persona
l grieving practice; and then I 
sat down and started to write, which is also a pers
onal grieving practice. Here is 
what I wrote: 

 
On Hearing of the Death of Forrest Church,
 Thursday Night, 24th September, 2009

  
?On and on they went, singing ‚Rest Eternal,™?
 pens Pasternak at the beginning of Zhivago.
 I've always loved that simple line
 of dark peasants gathered around a grave  

in autumn,
the ancient, steady and rhythmic  
emblem of love and death.
 Maybe Forrest might rest now too.  

But, even so,
I can't imagine that the stars  
will stop their singing
or close their eyes.  
Or that the laughter of maple leaves
 giggling in the park will flutter asleep any time s
oon.
 I can't see any memorial causing the relentless for
ce
 of the love he gave away to swerve off path,
 
 or make tepid his simmering sense  

of the just and holy.
I can't believe his skipping,  
playing words will
refuse to finally sink  
into the soul's shimmering depths,
 or that his tomes will close because his lips have.
  
Forrest's rest, I sing with those other peasants,  

will indeed be eternal,
but so will his living,  
the aliveness his body only weighted,
 but which, untethered now, freely soars  

high above
and deep below  
even his own best metaphors. 

 
Since my broken foot makes going there next weekend
 difficult, I am satisfied that 
Carolyn, Forrest™s wonderful wife, and Galen, the s
enior minister at All Souls 
Church in New York City (who served with Forrest fo
r many years) found those 
words useful for their own grieving practice and ha
d them read yesterday at his 
first memorial gathering.   

 
But after I had written those words, and shared the
m, I felt something people often 
feel after the death of a loved one.  

 
I felt guilty.  

 
I recriminated against myself: ?I should have calle
d him last week when I thought 
of it. Instead, I just rushed off to do my laundry 
and wash a huge pile of dishes that 
had been building up in my sink.? I said to myself:
 ?I wish I had written him a 
poem 
before 
he died instead of afterward. After all, I knew it 
was going to happen, 
that his time was limited– even last year, no one t
hought he would live a whole 
year beyond what the doctor had solemnly foretold. 

 
But such feelings often follow a death. Not just in
 me, but in so many people I 
have talked with over the years. Moreover, such fee
lings of guilt follow the birth of 
a child too–or a marriage, or 
any 
transition. ?I didn™t do enough to get ready; I 
haven™t prepared–I™m going to make a mess of it bec
ause I don™t have it all 
together.?  

 
And so with these clear feelings of guilt, I fulfil
l Ron Cook™s directive, and arrive 
at the place I need to be this morning, namely, sel
f-forgiveness, one of the 
compelling themes of Yom Kippur. I often talk about
 forgiving others on this day, 
or the whole concept of habits or promises, which a
re great themes. But every year 
we sing, to our own Les Kleen™s haunting compositio
n, 
?We forgive ourselves and 
each other, we begin again in love.?
  We 
forgive ourselves
–.The author of these 
simple words, my friend Rob Eller Isaacs, placed se
lf-forgiveness first, forgiveness 
of others, second. And I don™t think that he wrote 
it that way just to make it sing 

 better either. Because Joan Borysenko, author of th
e second reading, affirms what 
Rob wrote completely. ?Forgiveness,? she insists, ?
starts with ourselves, and 
extends
 to others.?  She gives us a very powerful image to
 take home with us, too. 
?You can be clear,? she says, ?about whether or not
 a person™s behavior is 
acceptable without judging the person. ‚You are stu
pid™ is a very different 
statement from ‚Your behavior is not acceptable to 
me.™ If a person knows you 
respect him or her, your comments about behavior ar
e welcome. If you are 
attacking a person™s character, however, no comment
, no matter how perceptive, 
will be heeded.? 

 
Let™s add that little dialogue to her first affirma
tion, about forgiveness beginning 
with ourselves. Which means I have to admit, I some
times dump on myself 
mercilessly, and judge myself as ?stupid? or ?worth
less? when I make a mistake.  
If I ever heard a parent in a public place like a s
tore shouting at his or her child and 
calling them ?stupid? or ?worthless? I would be ang
ry, appalled, and tempted to 
interfere. Yet when I dump on myself, and call myse
lf names, I am 
not
 angry. I 
don™t interfere. And this gets me into all sorts of
 trouble later. 
 
One fascinating study I read this week was an exami
nation on procrastination: you 
know, putting things off, making excuses for not go
ing ahead right now. And to 
the researchers™ surprise, the habit of procrastina
tion could be clearly traced back 
to a reluctance to forgive oneself for all sorts of
 things– relatively little things. 
We™re not talking about murder or mayhem here, but 
putting off phone calls, 
paying bills, delaying housecleaning, procrastinati
ng routine health treatments, like 
new glasses, hearing aids, dentistry–and not for fi
nancial reasons either.  
 
Now, that really rang a bell with me. In my busy li
fe, I can find all kinds of reasons 
to procrastinate almost anything. And I have not be
en very good at forgiving 
myself about that. Which leads to more procrastinat
ion.  Oh, I tell you I really can 
be hard on myself. For not doing enough, not comple
ting, not returning, not 
following through. I suspect some of you could tell
 me the same story back and 
claim it was your own. 

 
And maybe you, like me, have come to fear ?self-for
giveness? as a kind of 
shuffling off of responsibility, thus making the si
nging of Rob™s words every year 
a tad uncomfortable. But this morning I want to und
erline what Thom Rutledge 
reminded us all about in the first reading: 
?The self-forgiving person,? he says, ?is 
not Œ as many believe, or at least fear Œ a selfish
 person. It is the person who 
remains stuck in self-doubt and self-condemnation w
ho will lead the more selfish, 
less productive life.   Self-forgiveness keeps us f
rom being stuck; it keeps us 
moving.? Yes. Moving toward our goals, toward our i
deals, toward each other, 
toward the deep, non-superficial lives liberal reli
gion outlines for us. Rutledge 
offers us the homely but clear example of changing 
oil in a truck–if you don™t 

 maintain your vehicle, he says, you can™t go anywhe
re or do anything, because 
without maintenance, it will just stop working at a
ll.  
 
And folks who think of self-forgiveness as escapism
 have probably fallen for the 
worst definition of forgiveness I can think of, nam
ely, that forgiveness means 
saying, ?Oh, that™s OK. It™s all right. I™m not rea
lly that hurt.?   
 
Well, you are 
too
 hurt! When we hurt each other, or hurt our own sel
ves, it 
does
 affect us. To forgive, we have to admit that. Just 
like I did at the beginning of this 
sermon, we have start with where we are. In this ca
se, the fact of being hurt, or 
reality of hurting others–and then, go from there. 
 And even though ?I™m sorry? 
may indeed be the most difficult word to say, as ou
r children™s story made clear, 
I™d like to suggest that it™s important to speak th
at word not just to others, but to 
ourselves. I think we need to apologize to ourselve
s for treating our own selves so 
unforgivingly at times. 

 
Which brings me back to Forrest. Forrest used to al
ways define religion as our 
human response to the dual realities that we are bo
rn to live at all, and that we will 
some day die. As Forrest grew older, and then looke
d his cancer in the face, he told 
me that his own religious sense of wonder about eve
rything only increased, and his 
sense that he knew very little at all about this my
stery of birth and death that we all 
share grew greater by the day. 

 
That™s been my experience too. My sense of wonder g
rows, and never shrinks. I 
know less and less each passing day. But I do know 
that this life is what we have 
right now, and that whatever its larger meanings ma
y prove to be, at the very least 
we need to keep ourselves well tuned and honest for
 the living of it by the act of 
self-forgiveness. Over and over, not just on Yom Ki
ppur.   
 
And, in memory of Forrest, I can only end this morn
ing™s talk by praying that each 
of us, no matter our circumstances, can find some o
f sense of the real joy Forrest 
knew through out his life–even, I know, up to his l
ast day. And, as he used to end 
all of his sermons at All Souls: ?I love you.?  
 
Offering 

 
Rain and sun draw up life from the earth. In like m
anner, when we give, our giving 
calls forth life within the congregation and within
 our own hearts. There are many 
other ways and times we give, for we don™t follow a
 strict schedule any more than 
the rain and sun do.  But this time is important to
 many as 
their 
time. Let the 
ushers come forward. 

 
Kol Nidrei for 2009 

  
All vows we have made to live 
 the unexamined life are now cancelled. 

 Gone are the promises we made  
because of pressure or praise. 

Gone are the promises we made 

because we were shamed into them. 

Gone are promises and vows we made 

because of habit, because of custom, or 

because of confusion. Gone they are, vanished! I se
e them no longer.  
They are no more.  

Gone the excuses I make for why I can™t live within
 my own truth, but 
must orbit some other truth. 

Gone the vows I made to confirm myself by jumping t
hrough someone 
else™s arbitrary hoops. 

Gone, my vow to forgo my dreams, 

so I won™t disturb anyone else.  

Gone, vanished, just like that! 

As simply as water running swiftly over stones and 
disappearing from 
sight, 

it goes away, this habit of refusing to live in the
 freedom of complete 
honesty. 

 
Cut is the knot of all the choices  

I did not make, could not make,  

would not make, sundered by the sharp knife of this
 prayer,  
just like that, just like that. 

The paper is blank, the field is empty,  

the map has not been crafted.  

The pretend guarantees, like yesterday™s 

river water, are far away now. 

And thus now I no longer have to hide  

in the shelter of guilt, but I can show up, 

and be present to myself and to others. 

Now I will no longer define myself  

by my failings and the strains of my life. 

Nishmat hayay tevarykh v™kherev libi yahshir: Kol o
d neshamah bekirbi.
 The breath of my life will bless, the cells of my B
eing sing in gratitude, 
awakening! 

 
Sung Portion 

 
For all the things we never got done, 

or were not able to do; for all the  

 words we spoke in good faith but 

never were able to fulfill: 

We forgive ourselves and each other, we begin again
 in love. 
 
For all the times when a sense of guilt or 

shame kept us rigid, feeling righteous, or just rig
ht, and raw and resentful. 
We forgive ourselves and each other, we begin again
 in love. 
 
For each time we have moved toward defensive anger 
and procrastinated 
the healing intrusion of the truth. 

We forgive ourselves and each other, we begin again
 in love. 
 
For each time any comfort with unearned privilege h
as opened our mouths 
to place blame on others:  

We forgive ourselves and each other, we begin again
 in love. 
 
For the times we have been surprised or disappointe
d that other people do 
not think or feel exactly like us: 

We forgive ourselves and each other, we begin again
 in love. 
 For trying to earn the love of others by trying to 
be perfect instead of 
opening ourselves to vulnerability and risk:   

We forgive ourselves and each other, we begin again
 in love. 
 For the times when we have spoken about others with
out ever talking to 
them directly; for putting our own health behind th
e very real needs of 
others. 

We forgive ourselves and each other, we begin again
 in love. 
 For these, and for so many attitudes and acts, both
 obvious and not so 
obvious, which have fostered the illusion that we a
re truly separate from 
each other and completely self-derived. 
We forgive ourselves and each other, we begin again
 in love. 
 
Naming Ceremony: 

 
Eric
:  We are here to Name and Bless this child in the 
presence of this beloved 
community. For we affirm that this child is a good 
gift, not just to the parents, and 
larger family, but to all of us. 

  
Mark: 
 Nick and Rachel, you are the parents of this child
 who, in the words of 
poet Gibran, embodies ?life™s longing for itself.? 

 
 You already, by now, know well the responsibilities
 parenthood asks of you.  
You already, by now, know thoroughly the dedication
, time and strength of heart 
it requires of you. Therefore I ask you to express 
your experience in the form of 
promises: 

 
Do you bring self-examination, self-care and the fu
llness of your vulnerability and 
strength to the raising of this, your son?         
   
 
We Do. 

 
Eric:
 And do the loving family members from both sides o
f this family, four 
grandparents and friends and other family members h
ere gathered in both love 
and witness, speaking both for yourselves, on behal
f of others who are not able to 
be here, and recognizing that it takes a whole comm
unity of love to help raise our 
children, herewith offer your support both to this 
young child and his parents?   
 
We will.    

 
Mark:
 Bina and Andy Fish, you have been called to serve 
as godparents of this 
child, which is a rare and sacred privilege, someth
ing I know well from my own 
decades as a godparent. So now I pray that you shal
l always seek to guide, but 
never contain this young child. Be kind to him, lis
ten to him, tell him your stories 
and share your wisdom with him, but always remember
 to bless him for being 
exactly who he is, and no one else. This is the mos
t important thing you will do 
for him. Help to shape his trust and his confidence
 and character. Introduce him to 
the wider culture, help him to discern true from fa
lse, the merely beguiling from 
the authentic, and listen when, even as a young boy
, he asks you spiritual 
questions about the meaning of things. Respond with
 your heart and mind with 
care and gladness. Do you take up these responsibil
ities now with thanksgiving?    
 
We Do. 

  

Mark:
 Therefore, let us bless this marvelous child in ei
ght ways, joining in an act 
of love and beauty to bless him with the elements o
f our common creation, and 
with the glory of his distinct and beautiful names.
  
 
Mark will hold the elements before the child
. Eric will read: 
  
 
With earth, which is as strong as your given frame,
 my child, we bless you.  Take 
care of yourself as a body, be good to yourself - f
or you are a good gift indeed to 
this world. 

 
 With air, which moves and changes even as your give
n passions, my child, we 
bless you.  You will know contentment and disconten
t, joy and sorrow, anger and 
deep love in your life Œ feel your feelings, my chi
ld, for they are good gifts.     
 
With fire, which is as illuminating as your given i
ntellect, my child, we bless you.  
Think things through, and reason and question caref
ully, for the light that shines 
in your mind is a good gift. 

 
With water, which is as clear as your spirit, my ch
ild, we bless you.  Enlarge in 
conscience, and grow spiritually, for the spirit to
o is a good gift. 
 
Mark: 
Your name is Ferenc, the Hungarian form of the orig
inal Italian name 
which means ?Frenchy,? and in English is pronounced
 Francis. Your grandfathers 
both share forms of this great name. It was a nickn
ame first given to a young man 
named Giovanni, who sang songs from a faraway land,
 and who eventually 
became famous as the true saint of love for all ear
th™s creatures, Francis of Assisi. 
Ferenc is also the given name of the first and grea
t Unitarian minister in the 
Hungarian speaking parts of Europe, Ferenc David. Y
our name is rich with 
insight and inspiration. Your name is Ferenc. 

 
Your name is Calen, which is a Scottish form of you
r father™s name, Nicholas, 
meaning ?power to the people.? Your name reminds yo
u that to make changes for 
justice in the world, you don™t have to be a hero a
ll by yourself, but you do have 
to join with others in organizing and working toget
her. Your name is Calen. 
 
Your name is Relle, through which the Danube River 
flows mightily, shadowed 
by the forests of Germany. Your mother™s cultures h
ave made their home there 
too, the shadow of the Eiffel Tower, the green hill
s near Ireland and especially the 
colorful flowers, birds and great poets of Guatemal
a. Cherish your heritage, my 
child. Your name is Relle. 

 
Let us say his name together.  

Ferenc Calen Relle 

 
Now in presence of all here gathered, and in the pr
esence of Love, our true end 
and our best means, you are Named, dear child, and 
we dedicate you to the living 
of a good and grace-filled life within this beloved
 community, and wherever you 
shall go.  

 
Eric:
 You are free to be who you are, free to grow into 
whom you shall become. 
Be blest in our words, be blest in our love and be 
blest in your good and 
wonderful names. Amen. 

 
 
