INTRO.- More quips, quotes and notes.- The only loafer who makes money these days is a baker.  (and I?m not so sure about that, what with the Atkins? diet that warns against eating bread!  How ridiculous!)- Many of our modern girls have plenty of polish ? on their fingernails.  I Pet. 3:3-4 ?Your beauty should not come from outward adornment, such as braided hair and the wearing of gold jewelry and fine clothes.  Instead, it should be that of your inner self, the unfading beauty of a gentle and quiet spirit, which is of great worth in God?s sight.?I have nothing against a woman adorning her body with nice clothes, painting her fingernails, having her hair colored, etc., as long as this is not a priority in life.  And of course, the same principle applies to a man.  I see nothing wrong with looking nice, smelling good, etc. as long as this is not the only or the major emphasis.If a person lives for botox treatments, collagen injections, etc. then something is wrong.  If all emphasis is on the physical only, we have missed the mark and will be sadly disappointed.  Why?  Because eventually everything will drop, bag, sag, wrinkle, or fade.ILL.- I love to watch the EXTREME MAKEOVER TV show and see the appreciation and thrill of being remade, so to speak.  Some people are so homely that it?s a thrill for them and others to see a great physical change take place.  These people often ?come alive? and they all, obviously, are so appreciative.  Most of us would like to change something about our appearance or looks.  (hair, height, weight, shape, etc.) Be honest.  It?s true, but the most important ?makeover? that is needed is a spiritual makeover.And there is only one surgeon who can perform that makeover.Jerm. 13:23 ?Can the Ethiopian change his skin or the leopard its spots?  Neither can you do good who are accustomed to doing evil."No, we can?t change ourselves, but the Lord can.  He can give us all an extreme makeover, but only if we let Him.II Cor. 5:17 ?Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation (in God?s eyes); the old has gone, the new has come!?II Cor. 3:18 ?And we, who with unveiled faces all reflect the Lord?s glory, are being transformed into his likeness (very extreme makeover) with ever-increasing glory, which comes from the Lord, who is the Spirit.?- A Hollywood actress is always talking about her last picture or her next husband.  (or maybe her last husband)- Bulletin board notice in Minneapolis ? Conserve energy ? work slower.  I think some people really subscribe to that theory, thinking that perhaps if they work slower they will live longer.  BUT I DON?T BELIEVE IT.  Of course, everyone has their own opinion of things, but if I have a job to do, I don?t want to mess around.  I want to get it done.  Of course, I also realize that ?haste makes waste? too.  Been there and done that as well.  But a little speeding up in doing certain things wouldn?t hurt anybody.  Probably being steady is better than being speedy.  But when we have work to do, let?s get it done.  Anyone in favor?- A 20th wedding anniversary is difficult to celebrate.  It?s too soon to brag and too late to complain.- Anybody who doesn?t feel insecure these days is probably living in some remote, uncivilized corner of the world.  There is a lot to be said for getting away from this fast-paced, stressed-out society that we live in.  That?s why hobbies are handy.  (e.g. I can get away by going fishing and almost forget about everything else.)ILL.- And President Herbert Hoover once said, ?Presidents have only two moments of personal seclusion.  One is prayer.  The other is fishing and they cannot pray all the time!?  Amen!- It?s hard for a fellow to stumble onto something good while sitting down.- Since the advent of sex education, the old fellow who drives the local school bus can?t tell whether the kids are talking dirty or discussing their lesson assignments.- The energy situation is getting so bad that even rumors are traveling slower.  I DOUBT IT!- The only people you should want to get even with are those who have helped you.  Good thought!- In the old days, if a man missed the stagecoach, he was content to wait a day or two for the next one.  Nowadays he feels frustrated if he misses one section of a revolving door.  (or perhaps misses a green light, etc.)  What are we talking here?  That is, the virtue that we all need more of?  How is it acquired?  Patience.  The Lord.Now to the book of Proverbs.I. ACQUITTING AND CONDEMNING17:15 ?Acquitting the guilty and condemning the innocent ? the Lord detests them both.?Prov. 18:5 ?It is not good to be partial to the wicked or to deprive the innocent of justice.?ILL.- After a long two-week criminal trial in a high profile bank robbery case, the jury finally ended its 14 hours of deliberations and entered the courtroom to deliver its verdict to the judge. The judge turns to the jury foreman and asks, "Has the jury reached a verdict in this case?"  "Yes, your honor," the foreman responded.  "Would you please pass it to me," The judge declared, as he motioned for the bailiff to retrieve the verdict slip from the foreman and deliver it to him. After the judge reads the verdict himself, he delivers the verdict slip back to his bailiff to be returned to the foreman and instructs the foreman, "Please read your verdict to the court." "We find the defendant NOT GUILTY of all four counts of bank robbery," stated the foreman.  The family and friends of the defendant jump for joy at the sound of the "not guilty" verdict and hug each other as they shout expressions of divine gratitude.  The defendant?s attorney turns to his client and asks, "So, what do you think about that?" The defendant looks around the courtroom slowly with a bewildered look on his face and then turns to his defense attorney and says, "I?m real confused here.  Does this mean that I have to return the money?"?Acquitting the guilty and condemning the innocent ? the Lord detests them both.?  Why would the Lord detest both?  Because both are unjust, incorrect, unfair, etc.  The Lord always wants fairness, justice, etc.  The Lord wants people treated fairly and honestly.  And our court system does not always do this.  Why?  Because we humans fail.  We are not perfect in our judgments or discernment.  I wish we were, but we are not, and neither is our court system.ILL.- Have you ever heard the story  or seen the movie about the boxer Hurricane Carter?  In 1967, Ruben Carter, a middle weight, world-class professional boxer, was found guilty of committing a triple murder at the Lafayette Grill in Paterson.  A jury handed down a triple-life sentence.  John Artis, his alleged accomplice, was also found guilty. In the process, the Hurricane lost 20 years of his life, his marriage, the chance to watch his children grow up and an eye, which was lost during a botched surgery in prison.  He also lost his boxing career, forever in the prime moneymaking years of his life. In 1986, Ruben Carter and Mr. Artis were exonerated of the crimes by Federal Court Judge H. Lee Sarokin.  He ruled that the state withheld evidence and violated the Constitution in its overzealous attempt to nab the killers. Upon being freed, Carter headed for Canada.  He began giving lectures at high schools and colleges.  He also began working for an organization dedicated to freeing the wrongfully convicted and those with death penalty convictions.  Mr. Carter also began to tackle his last stronghold, his addiction to alcohol. Ruben Carter continues his work with the wrongfully accused to this present day.  He continues to give lectures and comes to the aid of others in need of someone to believe in them, as he himself had for so many years.The movie about Hurricane Carter is entitled, ?The Hurricane? and was made in 1999 and stars Denzel Washington.  I recommend the movie.Apparently, Hurricane Carter was a condemned innocent man.  And not all innocent men get freed from prison.  And not all guilty people get condemned to prison.?Acquitting the guilty and condemning the innocent ? the Lord detests them both.?Acquitting the guilty and condemning the innocent.  That?s us and that?s Jesus!  We are guilty and yet, we?ve been set free!  He was completely innocent and yet was condemned!II Cor. 5:21 ?God made him who had no sin to be sin for us, so that in him we might the righteousness of God.?All I can say is this:  We?d better be thankful that this time the table was turned, so to speak.  And it?s all because God has a heart of love.  NO, HE IS LOVE!  This is why He allowed the innocent one to be condemned for us!  Praise His name!  Bless His name!  Never stop praising Him, thanking Him!II. MONEY AND WISDOM17:16 ?Of what use is money in the hand of a fool, since he has no desire to get wisdom??  Interesting thought.What?s that old saying, ?A fool and his money are soon parted??  Or foolish people don?t know how to hold on to their money.  How true.What?s the most foolish purchase you ever made? Whoa!  Perhaps we shouldn?t even talk about it?might cause mass confusion or a mad fight!ILL.- I wouldn?t say it was my most foolish purchase, but it was a dumb one.  I believe it was in the mid-1970?s that gas prices started going up and the national speed limit was reduced to 55 mph.  Gas was $.59 per gallon in 1976.  By 1979 it jumped to $.86 per gallon.  Those were high prices back then.  And the cost of a new home went from $48,000 in 76 to $71,800 in 79.WHAT DID I DO?  Like a dummy I bought a Chevrolet Vega, four cylinder, the lowest horsepower four cylinder they had, thinking I would get good gas mileage.  The only problem was?it would barely run!  It didn?t have enough power to blow the hat off your head.  Talk about sick!I drove that car only a short time and then traded before it had very many miles on it.  It had something like 27,000 miles.  I wanted to trade it off before it died or blew a gasket.  A FOOLISH PURCHASE ON MY PART.  I should have exercised greater wisdom.  I would have, but I didn?t have it. Money can be good or it can be bad, depending on the person who possesses it.  A fool and his money are soon parted.  Here?s one that I thought was very foolish.ILL.- In 1975, the eccentric playboy George Whittell, Jr. died and left a $20 million legacy to animal, bird, and fish life.  In his will, he left 20 million dollars to his widow and nurse, and the remaining 20 million dollars to be used ?to relieve pain and suffering among animal, bird and fish life.?I have nothing against pets.  I have had plenty of dogs and have cried over them when they died, but I am not going to leave them any money!  I think my children would have a problem with that.ILL.- John Wesley said, ?When I have any money I get rid of as quickly as possible, lest if find a way into my heart.?  Not a bad thought.  I do think that the more you save, the more you want to save and this may do something to your heart.Matthew 6:19-21  ?Do not store up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust destroy, and where thieves break in and steal.  But store up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where moth and rust do not destroy, and where thieves do not break in and steal.  For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.?Our greatest treasure should be in heaven.  How do we store up treasure there?  By giving for the cause of Christ but also by working for the cause of Christ.It?s all right to have money, as long as money doesn?t have you. ILL.- P.T. Barnum said, ?Money is a terrible master but an excellent servant.?  ILL.- Someone said, ?It?s peculiar how a dollar can look so big when it goes to church and so small when it goes for groceries.?ILL.- Someone else said, ?If your outgo exceeds your income, then your upkeep will be your downfall.??Of what use is money in the hand of a fool, since he has no desire to get wisdom??We?ve all been foolish at times in life and we?ve all probably somewhat foolish with money at times. What?s the answer to overcoming all foolishness?  GET WISDOM.And where do you get wisdom?  Sometimes it comes from experience.  ILL.- A large rock fell on the back of a snake one day, says an old fable.  The snake called to a calf who was passing to remove it, but he refused.  ?If I take it off, you will bite me,? he said.  ?No,? replied the snake, ?I will promise not to bite.? The poor calf removed the rock and they went on together. ?Now I am going to bite you,? said the snake.  ?But you promised not to,? the poor calf said.  ?I know, but it is my nature to bite and I cannot help it.? They met a fox just then and the calf asked him to settle the dispute.  He would not, unless he could see how the rock was placed on the snake. Then the fox turned to the calf and said, ?Now that the rock is on his back I think it is safest to leave it there.?The calf finally got wisdom after his experience.  After we experience certain things, certain losses (as in losing money), hopefully we will get some wisdom.Generally, we have to go down before we ever go up.  We have to learn many things the hard way. Otherwise, when it comes to the matter of wisdom, there is really only one right source.  And where?s that?James 1:5 ?If any of you lacks wisdom, he should ask God, who gives generously to all without finding fault, and it will be given to him.?As we all know (or should know) it never hurts to pray and ask God for wisdom.  Something like, ?Father, I am not wise when it comes to money matters.  I need help.  Could you please give me wisdom and direction??  If we believe and trust the Lord, He will provide.Of course, God may provide that wisdom through some person.  Seeking the counsel or advice of a good Christian friend is a good thing to do.  And God uses His people to minister to one another.  And this could be one of those areas.ILL.- I had an elder in one church who was also the President of his local bank.  When it came to money matters I never hesitated to ask for his advice.  I trusted him as a brother in Christ but also as a man who knew about money matters.  God often gives us His wisdom through His people.  ?Of what use is money in the hand of a fool, since he has no desire to get wisdom??May God gives us all wisdom to avoid any foolishness in this life.