Sunday, June 26, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  In continuation of WBC's famous Compendium of Bible Truth About Sodomites; to wit: Sodomites  are abominable, meaning that they are vile and filthy to the utmost degree:  "Thou shalt not lie with mankind as with womankind; it  is ABOMINATION." (Lev. 18:22)  By consulting any good thesaurus and dictionary there are yielded the following words in association with the word ABOMINATION; to wit: loathsome, nasty, vile, abhorrent, heinous, despicable, atrocious, hateful, execrable, awful, horrible, deplorable, repulsive, disgusting, repugnant & detestable, etc. Beloved, these words in their totality, and taken to the infinite degree possible, do not begin to describe the feelings of revulsion and disgust that I feel just to consider the sodomite creature. "The show of their countenance doth witness against them; and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their soul! for they have rewarded evil unto themselves. Say ye unto the righteous, that it shall be well with him; for they shall eat the fruit of their doings. Woe unto the wicked! It shall be ill with him; for the reward of his hands shall be given him." (Isa. 3:9-11)  No matter how vile and filthy their conduct may be, sodomites are intrinsically unable to be ashamed or blush on account of it. "Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? Nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush; therefore they shall fall among them that fall; at the time that I visit them they shall be cast down, saith the Lord." Jer. 6:15. The Holy Ghost considered this passage and this verse to be extraordinarily important, as reflected by the fact that the passage was repeated verbatim two chapters later in Jeremiah 8:12; to wit: "Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? Nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush; therefore shall they fall among them that fall; in the time of their visitation they shall be cast down, saith the Lord." (Jer. 8:12)  The filthiness of these unclean brute beasts and moral lepers who are masquerading as slap-happy "gays" vacationing throughout the world ­ financed on twice the disposable income of ordinary people with families to support. I say, that the filthiness of these two-legged animals (sodomites are called dogs in Scripture because of their impudence, filthiness, and libidinous natures; of which, more later). I say, that the filthiness of these two-legged canine animals is expressed by Peter by their vomit; to wit: "But these, as natural brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things that they understand not; and shall utterly perish in their own corruption; And shall receive the reward of unrighteousness, as they that count it pleasure to riot in the day time. Spots they are and blemishes, sporting themselves with their own deceivings while they feast with you; having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin; beguiling unstable souls; an heart they have exercised with covetous practices; cursed children. ...But it is happened unto them according to the true proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again; and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire." (2 Pet. 2:12-14,22)  That these four verses from the latter half of 2nd Peter refer primarily to the filthiness and lawlessness of the sodomite brute beasts, is evident from the context. For example, in the very first verse of the second chapter, Peter launches a no-holds-barred attack upon the false prophets and the false teachers "who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction." 2 Pet. 2:1.  Sunday, June 26, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  Beloved, who can deny that the sodomite takeover of the churches has been complete, and is the  main explanation for the sodomite take-over of the world. For a couple of decades now the  abomination of desolation has been standing where he ought not (i.e., fags running the civil powers, politics, government ­ "But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not, let him that readeth understand." Mk. 13:14.).  Sodomites run the government, which explains why and how ­ now ­ the abomination of desolation is standing in the holy place (i.e., fags running the churches ­ "When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, STAND IN THE HOLY PLACE, whoso readeth, let him understand." Mat. 24:15).  Heresy therefore abounds, beginning with "It's OK to be gay," no matter what the Bible says; "God loves everybody," "Jesus loves and died for everybody," "Abortion is OK, never mind the Bible says Thou shalt not kill," "Divorce and remarriage is OK, never mind the Bible forbids it, calling it adultery," because the Bible guarantees everybody the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, OOPS! Awkward.  Furthermore, when Peter says that God spared not the old world, "bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly," Peter thus and thereby condemned the entire antediluvian world of some 14 or 15 billion souls who were all sodomites, or devout sodomite sympathizers. (All according to the Babylonian Talmud). The grand and glorious devastation wrought by God at the Flood of Noah, was far greater than the Holocaust of Lot and the fiery destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah; and it took only five or six hundred years from Noah's Flood for Sodom and the cities of the Plain ­ through the lineage of the apostate Ham ­ to degenerate to the point of utter annihilation, as recorded by Peter and Luke; to wit:  "For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment; and spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly; And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes condemned them with an overthrow, making them an example unto those that after should live ungodly; and delivered just Lot, vexed with the FILTHY conversation (i.e., lifestyle) of the wicked; (For that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their UNLAWFUL deeds)." (2 Pet. 2:4-8)  There you have it, Beloved. Fresh from the red-hot pen of the Holy Ghost; to wit: whatever the Bible-hating rabble may say, God's Word declares that homosexuals are FILTHY and LAWLESS. The burden of proof now shifts upon any contentious sodomite who denies that he is FILTHY and LAWLESS. He has a heavy burden, indeed; because God's Holy Word comes with a strong presumption of truth and accuracy. Call it, IRREFRAGABLE, Mr. Faggott.  It is the considered opinion and final judgment of the Almighty God ­ Who is absolutely just in all His ways ­ that sodomites are worthy of death. And that divine judgment is stamped indelibly upon the hearts of all the human race. All mankind recoils instinctively in disgust, when the loathsome, lawless, and filthy deeds perpetrated by the sodomites on a daily basis are merely mentioned; to wit: "scat" (eating each other's dung), "golden showers" (urinating on each other), (swallowing each other's semen), "fisting" (inserting the fist up the fellow sodomite's rectum), etc.  And who can doubt that these sodomitical practices were included in the Lord's direction to Ezekiel that the prophet punctuate his preaching by eating "dung that cometh out of man, in their sight?" To wit:  \  Sunday, June 26, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  "And thou shalt eat it as barley cakes, and thou shalt BAKE IT WITH DUNG THAT COMETH OUT OF MAN, in their sight. And the Lord said, Even thus shall the children of Israel eat their defiled bread among the Gentiles, whither I will drive them." (Ezek. 4:12,13)  And, early on in the Mosaic economy of things, Moses commanded that sodomites be likened unto dogs, due, in part, to the dog's fame among beasts for the dog's filthiness, as well as the dog's impudence, and the dog's libidinous nature (i.e., wild sex, anywhere and everywhere, with anybody and everybody, any time and all the time); to wit: "There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, NOR A SODOMITE of the sons of Israel. Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or THE PRICE OF A DOG, into the house of the Lord thy God for any vow (i.e., even for the performance of the holiest of occasions; PERIOD [!]) for even both these are abomination unto the Lord thy God." PERIOD (!) Deut. 23:17,18.  Beloved. Nowadays the sodomites run the churches, and the abomination of desolation (i.e., as barren and as impossible of procreation as a rock) is standing in the holy place, as spoken of by Daniel the prophet. To wit: "When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, STAND IN THE HOLY PLACE, (whoso readeth, let him understand)." Mat. 24:15. There is mystery here, and the suggestion that God's Elect will have special and supernatural wisdom to read what Daniel said, and to understand what Daniel said; to wit: "And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week; and in the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and for the overspreading of abominations he shall make it desolate, even until the consummation, and that determined shall be poured upon the desolate." (Dan. 9:27)  Daniel here makes powerful points about sodomites taking over the churches in the last times, all to be signaled by the sodomites standing in the holy place. The sodomites are identified by twice referring to them as "the abomination that maketh desolate;" which is a play upon the fact that sodomites cannot reproduce after their kind; i.e., two men cannot produce a child, nor can two women produce a child. No matter how hard they try. Period! Which is a humiliating defeat, which cannot be cured, no matter how massive are their numbers in their "overspreading of abomination."  And, finally, this situation whereby the sodomites take over the running of the government and the churches will only grow worse and worse, "even until the consummation and that determined." "And," said Daniel, "unto the end of the war, desolations (ever-increasing floods of sodomites) are determined." Dan. 9:26 and Mat. 24:15.  Moreover, we are expressly warned to beware of all these masses of sodomite dogs who surround us on every side (Phil. 3:2). We are commanded not to waste our wonderful Gospel bread by giving that which is holy to these filthy demon-possessed dogs, who roam the streets at night seeking victims for their inordinate lusts as at Sodom and Gibeah (Mat. 7:6 ­ "Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you." 15:26 ­ "But he answered and said, It is not meet to take the children's bread, and to cast it to dogs.").  Remember also that our dear Lord Jesus, when He was hanging crucified on a Roman cross and soon to expire, was set upon by sodomite dogs, and cried to His Father for deliverance from the power of the dog (Psa. 22:16,20 ­ "For dogs have compassed me; the assembly of the wicked have inclosed me; they pierced my hands and my feet. ...Deliver my soul from the sword; my darling from the power of the dog.").  Sunday, June 26, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  Beloved, it is the power of the dog that runs our nation and our world. For example, if anyone  entertains any doubt about sodomites running the United Kingdom, let him read the miserable letter  which the sodomite-ridden UK wrote May 26, 2011 excluding Steve Drain from the UK. They must have a 5,000-mile Act, somewhat like England's 5-mile Act forbidding any Gospel preaching within 5 miles of any town or city. Only the UK's numbers are larger. It is the same satanic spirit  behind both.  Here is the conclusion of UK's shameful epistle to Steve Drain, a valued preaching member of Westboro Baptist Church; to wit: "In light of these factors (i.e., Bro. Drain's faithful Gospel preaching), the Home Secretary is satisfied you should be excluded from the UK on the grounds that your exclusion is conducive to the public good. There is no right of appeal against the Home Secretary's decision to exclude you from the United Kingdom. The decision is reviewed after 3 years. On the basis of your exclusion, you are therefore advised not to attempt to travel to the UK as you will be refused entry. Yours sincerely, LS, On behalf of the Secretary of State for the Home Department" (dated May 27, 2011).  Beloved, sodomites saturate and control the United Kingdom and all who associate themselves in any least way with that God-forsaken nest of rattlesnakes. This is a perfect example of "the power of the dog," which is the same exact power that crucified the Lord Jesus Christ. (Psa. 22:16,20). We are warned ­ as WBC members of a New Testament Church in the last days, facing danger ­ to beware of these vicious sodomite dogs; to wit: "Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to you, to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it is safe. BEWARE OF DOGS, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision.'" (Phil. 3:1,2)  And, early on in the earthly ministry of our kind and dear Lord Jesus, as a part of His famous Sermon on the Mount, He commanded His disciples, including us, as follows: "GIVE NOT THAT WHICH IS HOLY UNTO THE DOGS." (Mat. 7:6.)  Beloved. These precious, and holy mysteries, doctrines and ordinances that our Father has entrusted  us with are not to be shared with filthy, lawless, sodomite dogs. They are like pearls cast to swine;  worth millions, but valued at zero to the swine, that will trample them under their swine feet and  turn again and rend you. (See, Mat. 7:6.) Look about you, Beloved. With so much said about  Sodom, sodomy, and sodomites in the Bible, why do you suppose so very, very little of truth is told about them? Why is it that only the voice of WBC is heard ­ and THAT, crying from this world's wilderness, and demanding that a straight line of God's truth about sodomites be told, coast to coast and shore to shore ­ worldwide? (!) Why? The answer may be found in Deut. 32:32-34; to wit:  "For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah; their grapes are  grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter; Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the  cruel venom of asps. Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my  treasures?" (Dt. 32:32-34)  Sodomites  thereby  produce  ­  by  their  very  \ presence  in  society  ­  a  kind  of  mass  intoxication  from  their wine made from their grapes of gall, from their vine of Sodom and their fields of Gomorrah, which fatally poisons society's mores with "the poison of dragons and the cruel venom of asps."  What a picture. Sodomites (call themselves the Creative Class), running all over the world, cultivating their fields, transplanting their slips, harvesting their vintages, crushing their grapes, producing and aging their tasty fine wine and, marketing their top-of-the-line wine, the easier to intoxicate all mankind. Dt. 32:34 suggests that God Almighty is looking forward to the destruction in Hell fire and damnation of every last sodomite who ever lived, calling it "My Treasures," His Last Great Holocaust, "sealed up among my treasures." I love you. Amen.  
