 Grief as a Privilege 
April 14, 2013 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 
 
Gathering, Welcoming, Centering, Kindling, Opening
: 
 We are here, 

to continue to open and blossom, 

 as the magnolias, lilacs and daffodils of spring, 

becoming exactly who we are at our best 

 while never denying our fragility, 

and our need for each other and the earth itself.  
                    
 
And so...
 Grounded in gratitude for the cosmos that is our ho
me, claiming deepening wisdom as our
 authority, and daring to engage joy, burden, loss a
nd insight in a deliberate community of 
many ways and ages, the flame summons us to 
awaken
: to listen with our whole lives, to 
open,
 to serve. 
 
Singing: #196 Singer of Life 

 
Ingathering: 

 
There once were two trees in a forest who grew clos
e to each other and who liked each other a 
lot. You could call them friends, I suppose, if you
 can call trees friends. 
 
They were very different. One was an evergreen, a s
pruce tree. When the winter would come 
with its snow and cold wind, the evergreen would st
ay green and bright. The evergreen was quite 
young, only about 25 years old. His friend, the Oak
tree, was much older, almost 90. The Oaktree 
was not always green. In the fall, his leaves will 
turn orange and then brown, and acorns will fall 
to the ground. In the winter, Oaktree has no color 
at all. But in the spring, Oaktree always started 
to send out little green shoots, which gradually un
rolled into beautiful green leaves. Spruce tree, 
the evergreen, didn't even have leaves, just soft n
eedle-like things poking out like a hairbrush 
from its branches.  

 
The two trees were quite different from each other.
 But they were good friends. The older tree 
would tell the younger tree stories that made it la
ugh or even cry sometimes from laughing so 
hard. The young evergreen tree would ask questions 
when he got serious, getting the older tree to 
talk about what the forest had been like before he 
was born. They really enjoyed their time 
together. 

 
When fall came one year, it was just like any other
 fall. The older Oaktree's leaves turned various 
colors, then brown, then slowly dropped off and wer
e blown away by the wind. The last acorn 
fell to the ground and rolled into a crack in the s
oil nearby, and the Oaktree stopped talking for 

 the winter like he usually did. But the Spruce tree
 happily waited out the winter knowing that 
spring was around the corner, and Oaktree would gro
w new green leaves, and start talking again. 
But March came, then April, and then May, and the o
ld Oaktree just stayed the same...no new 
leaves, no new acorns. Finally Spruce tree realized
 that his friend had come to the end of his 
life...most Oaktrees last at most a hundred years. 
So for the whole rest of May, and all of June, 
and most of July, Spruce tree was very sad. He miss
ed his friend very much. But one day he 
noticed that a little shoot of green was coming up 
from the crack in the ground where the acorn 
had fallen. In just a few years, it was a small tre
e. It wasn't his friend...but it was a new Oaktree.
 
And as the young Oaktree grew higher and higher nex
t to the Spruce tree, guess who got to be 
the best of friends?   

 
Greeting 

 
Affirming 

 
But sometimes it happens that we receive the power 
to say "yes" to ourselves, that peace 
enters into us and makes us whole, that self-hate a
nd self-contempt disappear, and that our 
self is reunited with itself.                   
Paulus Tillich 1955
  
Singing #6 Just as Long As I Have Breath 

 
Communing: 

 
I wonder what it™s like to live so much right now  

that tomorrow isn't even a idea in my head? 

To live as if this moment is all I have, 

here, me sounding words in this pulpit, 

with all of you listening in, or sitting more 

attentively, or wondering where I am going with thi
s? 
 
I wonder what it would be like if I acted as if thi
s air I breathe is the only air I'll ever know? Thi
s 
light coming through the windows, the only light I™
ll ever see? The people around me the only 
people? This carpeted wooden floor I am standing on
, the only floor? Neither birth nor death are 
here in this moment...just this very moment, where 
nothing is expected, and where memories 
fade as I am aware of just this second, and this on
e, and this one, this singular breathing in and 
out which will never again be repeated, and which r
esembles nothing but itself. 
 
I wonder, what it™s like to not only live right now
, but to actually give up even these very words 
I'm speaking, words that are pretending to grab thi
s singular moment as if it could be captured 
once and for all, as if it will not slip like quick
silver through the minute cracks of silence 
between them... 

 
Ah, but guess what? It™s time not to wonder anymore
 what it would be like to let go of it all. It™s 
time to do just that... let it all go...and be here
..... 
 
 silence 

 
And still, the silence is never really silent, is i
t, filled as it is with intruding memories and 
anticipations, admittedly another way of being huma
n just as sacred as the lingering silence. And 
so, opening into this way of understanding, may we 
name quietly in our hearts, or whisper by our 
lips, the names of all those whose faces rise befor
e the mystery of our inner heart: those who 
have loved us either beautifully or awkwardly, thos
e whom we miss because they were once a 
part of our lives and are no more, those we mourn, 
and even those whom we are still trying to 
figure out how to love. In this sacred human place,
 we name them. 
 
naming 

 
This moment is blest by the choir that usually sing
s at the other service. For the congregation is 
one, even as this moment is singular, and each brea
th is singular. Blest is this moment. 
 
The first reading
 is called The Cure by the late Albert Huffstickler,
 who included it in his 
chapbook, titled Wanda, 1988
  
We think we get over things. 

We don™t get over things. 

Or say, we get over the measles 

But not a broken heart. 

We need to make that distinction. 

The things that become a part of our experience 

Never become less a part of our experience. 

How can I say it? 

 
The way to get over a life is to die. 

Short of that, you move with it. 

Let the pain be the pain 

not in the hope that it will vanish 

But in the faith that it will fit in. 

And be then not any less pain but true to form. 

Because anything natural has an  

inherent shape and will flow towards it. 

And a life is as natural as a leaf. 

That™s what we™re looking for: 

not the end of a thing 

but the shape of it. 

 
The second reading
 comes from a rather gothic novel written by Mary St
ewart back in 1958, 
before they were very popular. 

 
Have you ever thought, when something dreadful happ
ens, "A moment ago, things were not like 
this: let it be 
then
, not now.... 
any
thing but 
now
"?  And so you try and remake 
then
, but you 

 know you can't. So you try and hold the moment quit
e still, and not 
let 
it move on, and show 
itself. 

 
Preaching:  The Privilege of Grief 

 
When you enter the front doors of this building, yo
u will find some elegant teal-colored letters 
greeting you up on the wall above the kiosk that gi
ves you the list of what's going on in this 
place. These letters make up the four assertions of
 our congregational Mission Statement. It was 
crafted over a good period of time by a whole host 
of members. Last week I brought my friend 
Joshua over to see this beautiful building that is 
our common home, and he stopped immediately 
to read the Statement. He took his time...and clear
ly he was moved, since he said to me when he 
was done, "That is deep...that is remarkably deep."
  
I loved it that he said that.  

 
The Mission is on the back of the Order of Celebrat
ion if you missed it on your way in. 
 
There is one word and one phrase I want to lift up 
this morning from that Mission Statement. 
You may have noticed that I titled my sermon this m
orning, "The Privilege of Grief."  Let me 
unpack that a bit. The word privilege is ancient. I
t hasn't really changed much since it was the 
Latin word "privilegium."  Back then, it meant "a p
rivate law applying to only one person," the 
first part of the word giving us our English word "
private." And the second part of the word 
giving us our English word "legal." Privilege meant
 that you were special, and could have things 
apply to you that applied to no one else. Like the 
Emperor for example. It was against the law to 
kill people in ancient Rome as it is now. But the E
mperor was privileged not to have to follow 
that law if he didn't want to.  

 
Now this meaning...law that applies to one, or just
 a few...is the first of its meanings, certainly, 
the one we meant when we wrote our Mission. After a
ll, we have grow aware that there are many 
laws, written and unwritten, which apply to some pe
ople and not to others. The whole civil rights 
movement was about laws and advantages which applie
d to Euro-American people, that did not 
apply to African-rooted people, or Native peoples. 
Men were allowed to do things women were 
not allowed to do. Straight folks had marriage adva
ntages over gay and lesbian folks, etc. Our 
Mission statement asks those who are part of this c
ongregation to relinquish the easy safety of 
those advantages so that, by examining ourselves de
eply first, we might actually and honestly 
further justice for all people.  

 
My friend Joshua was right. It is a deep statement.
  
 
But privilege has another meaning. It also means so
mething that can apply to anyone, not just the 
self-exalted few. It means "a special gift," or "go
od fortune" as in the sentence, "It™s been a 
privilege to spend time with you, my friend." Not b
ecause you™re the Emperor or a famous 
movie star, but because you are you, whoever you ar
e. 
 
This is what I mean by the title of today's talk, t
he Privilege of Grief. 

  
I think that to engage in grief is a special gift w
e all are given, each of us, a good fortune we all 
can share. I really resonate with the way David Ric
ho puts it. Grief (or mourning as he says it) 
"is what ?Yes? looks like when we face the conditio
ns of existence with feeling. Since every one 
of the givens in life represents a loss, grief work
 is a skillful means with which to face them all." 
 
I'll unpack that more later. 

 
Besides the word 
privilege
, I want to lift up the third affirmation in our Mi
ssion Statement in its 
entirety. We state that "we claim our diversity as 
a source of our strength." 
 
And so it is that we spend a lot of time around her
e...in sermons, small group ministries, 
committees, justice work and education...lifting up
 the strengths that are inherent in diversity. 
We lift up diverse gender understandings, diverse c
ultures, colors and ethnicities, diverse sexual 
orientations and presentations, diverse theology, d
iverse opinions on this or that, diverse classes, 
abilities, talents and energies. This is important,
 life changing work, I think. 
 
But this morning I'd like to suggest that one of th
e most important diversities we can lift up...and 
don't always...will be to lift up the diversity of 
our different expressions of grief. Like all 
mammals, we grieve...it™s in our system. But we are
 the ones who have the gift of language as 
well; we are the ones who recognize it as a great h
onor, a terrific gift, a good fortune.   
 
As Richo points out (and here I am unpacking his fi
ne statement that I quoted earlier...), there is 
really no way to avoid receiving the gift. He point
s out that all the givens of life...health, station
, 
status, looks, family, ability and even life itself
...all point to their own end in loss. It™s just th
e 
way the world is. No one has yet come up with any e
xceptions, at least without making a specific 
theological statement. Even the lovely story I told
 to the kids this morning, about the Oaktree and 
the Spruce, accepts the reality of the way the worl
d is.  
 
Yes, it™s certainly possible to react with panic to
 this reality, to respond with desperation, and 
pretend that this is not so, hoping against hope th
at everything, and everyone, and every moment 
can be preserved, yanked back, restored to what it 
used to be, etc. But in the entire history of 
humanity, it has never happened that I know of. Eve
n the famous Easter stories, which speak of a 
man who comes back to life from death, insist it™s 
not 
the SAME life. Before he died, people 
recognized him. "Hey, there's Jesus!" The stories s
peaking about his life 
after
 his resurrection 
always point out that 
no one
 recognizes him. Before he died, he never walked th
rough walls. 
After he was restored, the stories say, he could. C
learly, even the most orthodox interpretations 
of those stories deny that he was 
exactly
 the same person as before. 
 
Mary Stewart addresses this reality in her novel. "
Have you ever thought, when something 
dreadful happens, 'A moment ago, things were not li
ke this: let it be 
then
, not now.... 
any
thing 
but 
now
'?  And so you try and remake 
then
, but you know you can't. So you try and hold the 
moment quite still, and not 
let 
it move on, and show itself." 
 
Letting the moment move on.  

 This is the privilege of grief.  

Letting the moment, the loss,  

show itself for what it is.  

This is the privilege of grief.  

 
Stewart's words sum mourning up beautifully for me.
 And I have to imagine she's talking about 
grief for every loss. Loss of loved one. Loss of jo
b. Loss of health. Loss of expectations. Loss of 
place. Loss of community. Every loss has to show it
self, she says. Every moment has to move 
on. 

 
But letting grief flow forward does not mean forget
ting, or acting as if nothing happened.  Albert 
Hufftickler's poem makes this point almost without 
mercy, it™s so direct. So clear and clean. 
We think we get over things. 

We don™t get over things.         
Amen to that. 
 
Seventeen years after my best friend Stefan died, I
 still light the 
yahrzeit
 (year anniversary) 
candle on the anniversary of his death. His photo i
s the first thing I see when I sit down at my 
desk. I hung his portrait up so that would be so. I
 think of him often, with love, with gratitude, 
and sometimes with quiet tears.  

 
On the day he died, however, 17 years ago, my emoti
ons flowed more freely. Or better, more 
jaggedly. At the hospital, a nurse came in to tell 
Richard, his partner, and me that our crying, our 
wailing, was scaring other people on the ward. Rich
ard looked up with veins in his eyes. I said to 
him, "I'll handle it." I told the nurse with scarce
ly contained anger: "Look, this man, a person we 
loved for many, many years, just died. Our tears an
d our wailing are appropriate to this event. 
It™s how Richard and I begin our grieving. If it fr
ightens people down the hall, I cannot be 
concerned about that. Let them be afraid of whateve
r it is they are frightened of. Frankly, right 
now, they are not my concern."  She blanched a bit,
 said nothing, and left. 
 
Later, we told what happened to the rabbi. He said,
 "I would have said the same thing. You were 
each officially an 
onen
 then."  "An 
onen
?" I asked. "Yes, a person in initial grief, which 
we call 
the 
aninut
 time, which lasts until the burial. You are in sho
ck, you are rent open with powerful 
feelings. During 
aninut
, Jews are not required to do good deeds (
mitzvot
) or recite their dutiful 
prayers. We are free to grieve with the full force 
of our spirits. No restraining rules." 
 
I loved that idea. 
Aninut.
 Unfettered
 grief. No rules. 
 
Now am I saying that wailing and tears and anger ar
e the template for all expressions of grief? 
That those who don't wail are not really grieving? 
Of course not. Both Richard and I weep easily. 
Always have. We both heard baloney about this easy 
weeping when we were children...you 
know, "Boys don't cry," and all that nonsense.  

 
But 
not
 wailing, 
not
 crying, 
not
 getting angry isn't some inferior form of grief, o
r worse, no grief 
at all. 

 
 When my friends were dying of the epidemic in San F
rancisco, I always wailed when I heard of 
their deaths. My partner Phil would then hold me as
 I fell to the floor and curled up like a pillbug 
for an hour, sobbing. It™s my way. He was not afrai
d of my feelings rolling out with such 
intensity. He had the courtesy not to say, "There, 
there now." He just let me wail as long as I 
needed to.  

 
He often loved these same folks I was weeping for. 
But he never wept when he heard. "I just 
don't cry," he told me once. Never have. My family 
just doesn't do that, so I never have." 
 
"But how do you express your grief?" I asked.  

 
"Oh, I just sneeze."  

 
When he said this, I didn't think I heard right. So
 I asked him to clarify. He simply said, "I don't 
cry, I sneeze. You know, ah choo."   

 
"Really?" I asked. "I've never heard of such a thin
g. 
 
"Well, it™s how I grieve." 

 
Sure enough, when our friend Alex's mother called m
e to tell me he had died, and that she 
wanted me to do his service, I fell to the floor an
d wept, and Phil held me as usual. 
 
At the service down in Hollister near his folks' wa
lnut farm, tears ran down my cheeks, even as I 
was doing the service.  When I offered people a cha
nce to tell stories about Alex, Phil stood up. 
He talked about how they met, and just started to s
ay something else when, all of a sudden, on 
this warm summer day, he started to sneeze as if he
 had the worst cold in creation. He sneezed so 
much that he had to sit down. And then I remembered
. His sneezing was him grieving in the way 
he grieved. 

 
And I told myself on that day that I would always, 
during my ministry, lift up the idea that each 
and every grief felt by each and every person is un
ique. There may be some overlap...like I said, 
Richard and I are both easy weepers...but even stil
l, we don't overlap entirely by any means. I 
really don't overlap fully with anyone I know. 

 
Over the years, I've heard folks insist that grief 
always
 has a predictable pattern like the famous 
one Dr. Elizabeth Kubler Ross outlined for us decad
es ago: 
Denial, Anger, Bargaining, 
Depression and Acceptance
. And it™s true, sometimes, that grief, for some pe
ople, opens up 
exactly in that order. Most of the time, my experie
nce has taught me forcefully, it does not. Some 
don't ever bargain, others start off with acceptanc
e, and then enter a state of denial two years 
later. But over my years in the ministry, I have on
ly found people who had totally different 
patterns. Over the last few years, after burying th
ree members of my family, father, mother and 
brother, I've noticed that memory loss and lack of 
focus has hit me hard. Neither of those two 
ideas are specifically on Kubler Ross's list. Maybe
 it™s because I am Belletini, not Kubler Ross. 
 
 When my sister called me up to tell me that our mot
her had died, I was down in Cincinnati with 
my friend Michael, about to enter the store to shop
 for Thanksgiving Dinner at the all-
encompassing grocery store, Jungle Jim™s. It was ra
ining cats and dogs, when my sister called 
me. I had just gotten out of the car to make it int
o the store, but Michael held me right there in 
that rain, and then when we went in, he held me in 
the aisle by the olives, as I did my usual 
wailing. People rolled their shopping carts around 
us without comment. But then, I realized 15 
folks were coming to my house for dinner in two day
s, and that my mother's funeral would not 
be till after Thanksgiving. So with Michael still a
t my side, I shopped. Bought the cheeses I 
needed, the artichokes, the fresh cranberries. Prac
tical, detail oriented things. I stopped crying. 
My memory was working perfectly...I never even got 
my shopping list out of my jacket pocket. 
If anything, I was happy as I went around the store
. Yes, even some kinds of happiness can be a 
disguise grief takes too, at least sometimes. 

 
When I told this to a friend of mine, he was surpri
sed by what I chose to do. "I would have 
thought you would have just gone home and cancelled
 Thanksgiving."  "No," I said, "I wanted to 
do exactly what my mother used to do, which is to c
ook an incredible Thanksgiving Dinner. It™s 
the best way to grieve for her that I can think of!
"  
 
What I am saying this morning is that grieving is a
 privilege for us all, an honor, a piece of good 
fortune, life being what it is. There are a thousan
d ways to do grief work, and all of them have 
something to offer, whether they are noisy or quiet
. But actually letting the moments go forward 
instead of holding them back is important, I think,
 no matter what we do. Grief may be longer or 
shorter in duration...there is no right length of t
ime....but I don't see how it helps to put the brea
ks 
on completely, and live as if there was some escape
 clause you haven't been clever enough to 
find yet.  

 
No, our Mission statement puts it well: the diversi
ty with which we face the ubiquitous and 
completely expected losses in our lives is a streng
th, not a weakness. Whether you cry or not, 
whether you sneeze or write or grow irritable or ge
t down in the dumps, it™s all a moving 
forward, an expression of ?Yes? to your love, and ?
Yes? to the way life really is. As the poet 
says, eventually you will find the shape of your gr
ief, and fit it into the shape of your whole life, 
as an essential part of what makes you as wonderful
 as you are. 
 
And when you do that, you may join my friend Joshua
 who visited here and looked at the words 
in our Mission...with those glowing words asking us
 to consider the strength in our grief 
diversity, and say with him..."This is very deep." 

 
Offering 

The time of offering is the part of the celebration
 where we share responsibility for this place, 
this time, and all that we do here. We do not give 
to the elected leaders in the church, but to 
ourselves, since we are the community. Please be ge
nerous, knowing that we budget a 
percentage of what we give to social justice projec
ts in the larger community. Thanks for all you 
do. The offering will now be given and received. 

 
New Member Ceremony 

