Sunday, January 25, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues yet  repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not  WORSHIP DEVILS, and IDOLS of gold, and silver, and brass, and  stone, and of wood: which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk:  Neither repented they of their MURDERS, nor of their SORCERIES,  nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts." Rev. 9:20,21.  "This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come...  Now as Jannes and Jambres (SORCERERS) withstood Moses, so do  these also resist the truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate  concerning the faith... But evil men and SEDUCERS shall wax worse  and worse, DECEIVING, and BEING DECEIVED. 2 Tim. 3:1,8,13.  "Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some  shall depart from the faith, giving heed to SEDUCING SPIRITS, and  DOCTRINES OF DEVILS; Speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their  conscience seared with a hot iron." 1 Tim. 4:1,2.  Taking the last cited verse first; the sense of the phrase, ­ "in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of demons," ­ I say, the sense of that phrase has been wrongly given by most expositors, as if it meant, "doctrines concerning demons." Bede says: "The true and only tenable exegesis is, not that men shall apostatize by accepting doctrines ABOUT demons, but that they will decline from the Truth of God by taking into their confidence DOCTRINES WHICH DEMONS TEACH." Epiphanius says in his paraphrase that the passage should be translated thus; to wit: "Some shall apostatize from the sound doctrine, giving heed to fables and doctrines which DEMONS teach; for they shall be worshippers of dead men" ­ (i.e., DEMONS, the spirits of the wicked dead), ­ "as they were worshipped in Israel."  The two French Television reporters who were with us last Sunday asked me, at the close of our services, if I thought Antichrist Obama would be assassinated. I said, "NO," because it seems rather clear that he will have power to rule the world "forty and two months," (Rev. 13:5), after which the Lord God will "cast him alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone," (Rev. 19:20), from which he will never get out; to wit: "And the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the BEAST and the False Prophet are, and shall be tormented day and night FOR EVER AND EVER." (Rev. 20:10)  Here we should take note that there is a certain PERIOD of time identified with great specificity in several ways in the Books of Daniel and Revelation; a thing so unique as to require our careful and prayerful attention. Especially since the time PERIOD, generally, referred to, seems to be the exact end-times of the end-times ­ which we are living in! As I was meditating on this certain PERIOD of time in the Revelation, one of our loved ones sent me a copy of eleven pages from an old book speaking directly to the point.  The name of the old book is, A Paraphrase and Notes on the Revelation of St. John, by Moses Lowman (1679-1752). So great a theologian as Jonathan Edwards, it appears, often consulted Lowman's book ­ which is a mighty good recommendation. At page 142, Brother Lowman wrote:  "It appears, that the Representation of the two Witnesses, of the Woman in the Wilderness, and of the Beast, are several Representations of the same Time, or PERIOD, in different Views. The Time for the Witnesses to prophecy in Sackcloth, is a thousand  Sunday, January 25, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  two hundred and three-score Days, (Rev. 11:3). The Woman is nourished in her Place in  the Wilderness, for a Time, and Times, and half a Time, (Rev. 12:14) or three Years and  a half, equal to twelve hundred and sixty Days, according to the ancient Year of three  hundred and sixty Days. And so the Prophecy itself interprets it, (Rev. 12:6). `And the  Woman fled into the Wilderness, where she hath a Place prepared of God, that they  should feed her there a thousand two hundred and three-score Days.' It is further  observed concerning the PERIOD of the BEAST that Power was given to him to continue  `forty and two Months,' a Time equal to three `years and an half, or twelve hundred  and sixty days.' They are therefore to be looked upon as different Descriptions of the  SAME PERIOD, for the more distinct Explication of the Prophecy, and greater Certainty  of its true Meaning."  Thus, Beloved, we can fix the END of the 42 months (i.e., the three and one-half years), because the Beast is cast alive into the lake of fire, never to be heard from again, at Rev. 19:20. It is not clear AT THIS TIME just exactly when we are to BEGIN counting off the 1,260 days; but, if I was Antichrist Obama, and had even a tiny bit of knowledge about the Bible (and since he thinks he's so smart about everything); ­ I say, if I was Obama, I think I would begin experimenting with figures, and dates, and events. Like, maybe his Inauguration Day as President of the United States (January 20, 2009) would be a good date to begin the final countdown of his everlasting doom in the Lake of Fire. Another one of our loved ones said maybe the date he was elected President of the United States (November 4, 2008) would be a good date to begin his countdown to doom.  In any event, it is time to get serious about this matter, because God is now "showing unto His servants things which MUST shortly come to pass." Rev. 1:1. The PERIOD of time just shortly before the END of time has now been identified to us as very likely to be 42 months ­ literally. Moreover, our text suggests that this 42-month PERIOD is characterized as being, first of all, abounding in demon worship, (Rev. 9:20), "giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils." 1 Tim. 4:2.  Two issues at once present themselves about demons; to wit: 1) What are demons? and, 2) How do they manifest themselves? Josephus says that the ancient Jewish theologians and scholars believed that "demons are none other than the spirits of the wicked dead." Practically all of the early church fathers such as Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Origen, Augustine, etc., were of the same opinion. But, who did they mean when they said, the spirits of the "WICKED DEAD?" Some said, the spirits of the "UNSANCTIFIED DEAD." Some used other, and similar, adjectives for the spirits of the unrighteous DEAD.  I believe demons are all without exception the disembodied spirits of the non-elect; who dwell in the pit of the abyss or a compartment of Hell, called the "BOTTOMLESS PIT;" to wit: "And they have a king over them," ­ (probably some high-ranking Satanic fallen angel, of those who followed Satan in his rebellion against God, Rev. 12:4), ­ "which is the angel of the BOTTOMLESS PIT, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue hath his name Apollyon." Rev. 9:11. Hence, you see, that these demons are very, very numerous, being the disembodied spirits of all the reprobates or non-elect, from the beginning of the world; and they have power to work great well-organized mischief on the earth among the children of men.  Now that we know what or who these demons are, let us turn attention to the second issue: How do they manifest themselves? Well, first, they long to be embodied; to wit: "Send us into the swine, that we may enter into them," they besought Jesus, when He would cast them out of the mad man of the Gadarenes. Mk. 5:12.  Sunday, January 25, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  "For he said unto him, Come out of the man, thou unclean spirit. And he asked  him, What is thy name? And he answered, saying, My name is Legion: for we  are many. And he besought him much that he would not send them away out  of the country. Now there was there nigh unto the mountains a great herd of  swine feeding. And all the devils besought him, saying, Send us into the  swine, that we may enter into them. AND FORTHWITH Jesus gave them leave.  And the unclean spirits went out, and entered into the swine: and the herd ran  violently down a steep place into the sea, (they were about two thousand;) and  were choked in the sea." (Mk. 5:8-13)  Much may be learned from this story which was recounted by the blessed Holy Ghost Historian at Mark 5:1-20. And now that we find ourselves in the great PERIOD of time prophesied to abound in demon-worship, we should become VERY proficient in the science/doctrine of DEMONOLOGY. Demons frequently appear in various capacities in the Old Testament and the New, and they themselves, for their part, are expert theologians and king-makers. Evidence is strong for it, that President Obama has already sold his soul to the devil, and is possessed of demons; to wit: He has clearly and irreversibly "departed from the faith, giving heed to SEDUCING SPIRITS, and DOCTRINES OF DEVILS (i.e., DEMONS); SPEAKING LIES IN HYPOCRISY; HAVING HIS CONSCIENCE SEARED WITH A HOT IRON." 1 Tim. 4:1,2.  Antichrist U.S. President Obama brags that he has departed from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of demons ­ that's the way he won over young Americans, by the millions, in his political victory for President. So says his own biographer, Stephen Mansfield. See, The Faith of Barack Obama, Introduction, p. xix. He says polls show that young Americans seventeen to twenty-nine have rejected the traditional Christian faith, in favor of a religious pastiche (i.e., hodge-podge) that works for them; to wit: "They think nothing of hammering together a personal faith from goofy, widely-differing, religious traditions; and many acquire their theology the same way they catch colds: through casual contact with strangers. Thus, when Obama, 1) speaks of questioning certain tenets of his Christian faith, or 2) the importance of doubt in religion, or, 3) his respect for weird, non-Christian religions; the majority of the young instantly relate and welcome his nontraditional faith as a basis for his ­ and their ­ left-leaning politics."  Obama has said he does not believe the Bible, but that the Sermon on the Mount (Matt. Chapters 5,6,7) negates great portions of the Bible and gives support to sodomy and murder. Thus, Beloved, you see how Obama has "departed from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy, having his conscience seared with a hot iron." 1 Tim. 4:1,2. Nobody could be more blood-thirsty when it comes to killing unborn and unwanted babies ­ including the slaughter of his own grandchild if his own daughter should become pregnant through a "mistake."  Beloved. Never forget what this demon-possessed President said about that; to wit: "We've got two daughters 9 years old and 6 years old. I'm going to teach them first of all about values and morals, BUT IF THEY MAKE A MISTAKE, I DON'T WANT THEM PUNISHED WITH A BABY." So, how do you keep them from being "punished," as you say, with a baby? Only one way. KILL THE BABY. Beloved, these are demons talking through Obama's mouth. These are doctrines of demons, speaking lies in hypocrisy. These are "seducing spirits." In fact, these may be the same demons, the same disembodied spirits of the damned, whose name was Legion ­ "for we are many" ­ who indwelt the mad man of the Gadarenes and who later indwelt the suicidal 2000-pig herd of swine, in Jesus' day on earth. If so, one is tempted to feel sorry for the demon spirits assigned by a sovereign God to indwell Barack Obama. Antichrist, indeed. The Beast of Rev. 13&17, indeed.  Sunday, January 25, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  What we have here is a murdering, idol-worshiping, demon-possessed heretic, running loose on society WORLDWIDE, spreading lies about God and the Bible, eloquently yapping about how wonderful it is to sodomize the masses and kill the millions of aborted babies, so as thereby to remedy so-called unborn and newborn "MISTAKES," and free-up more time for fornicating, (divorce and re-marriage style).  Meanwhile, this Antichristic Beast Obama has been sworn in ­ opulently and wildly expensively ­ as President of the United States and Ruler of the Free World, as they say. Yes, Obama, the Antichristic Beast is strutting his stuff ­ especially since he was sworn in! He is a huge phenomenon ­ a spectacle larger than life ­ rivaling in magnificence the foremost monarchs of history, symbolized by Babylonian King Nebuchadnezzar, whose fearful saga speaks for them all ­ including Antichrist Beast Obama; to wit: "All this came upon the king Nebuchadnezzar. At the end of twelve months he walked in the palace of the kingdom of Babylon. The king spake, and said, Is not this great Babylon, that I have built for the house of the kingdom by the might of my POWER, and for the honor of my MAJESTY." (Dan. 4:28-30)  That, Beloved, is the strutting and the swaggering of Obama. That, is discerning the signs of the times (Matt. 16:3); and, That, is rightly dividing the Word of Truth to fit the signs of the times. 2 Tim. 2:15. While Obama struts and preens and swaggers, he is in great danger of meeting the same fate as the tyrant King Nebuchadnezzar, at the hands of the same sovereign God; to wit: "While the word was in the king's mouth" ­ (i.e., words accompanying his strutting, preening and swaggering) ­ I say: "While the word was in the king's mouth, there fell a voice from heaven, saying, O King Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken; the kingdom is departed from thee." (Dan. 4:31)  The case of his grandson Belshazzar may be more appropriate to Obama ­ with his strutting, preening, and swaggering at the pomp and ceremony AND ELEGANT BANQUETING attending his swearing-in inauguration/coronation. The elderly and the faithful prophet Daniel pronounced Belshazzar's doom; to wit: "O thou king, the most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy father a kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honor... But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and they took his glory from him... And thou his son, O Bel-shazzar, hast not humbled thine heart, though thou knewest all this... Then was God's hand sent from him; and this writing was written: Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin. This is the interpretation of the thing: ...Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting... In that night was Belshazzar king of the Chaldeans slain. And Darius the Median took the kingdom, being about threescore and two years old." (Dan. 5:18-31)  Antichrist Beast Obama has done far worse than either of these kings who symbolized Obama, the Final, end-time Antichrist. Obama is doomed.  Amen.  
