Sunday, August 12, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in Zion, and he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem: when the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning. And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defence. And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the daytime from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain." (Isa. 4:3-6.) "Gather yourselves together, yea, gather together, O nation not desired; Before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chaff, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lord's anger come upon you. Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his judgment; seek righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord's anger." (Zeph. 2:1-3.)  Beloved, it may be of more than a little interest to God's elect to know that Zephaniah was an  active participant in the wars of the Lord in the days of good king Josiah. And "the Great Day of  the Lord" is described by that blessed prophet as well or better than any other; to wit: "The great  day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord: the  mighty man shall cry there bitterly. That Day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a  day of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick  darkness, a day of the trumpet and alarm against the fenced cities, and against the high towers.  And I will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind men, because they have  sinned against the Lord: and their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung. Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the Day of the Lord's  wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of His jealousy: for He shall make even  a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the land." (Zeph. 1:14-18.) And now hear the word  of the Lord that came to the prophet Joel upon the same subject; to wit:  "Blow ye the trumpet in Zion, and sound an alarm in my holy mountain: let all the inhabitants of the land tremble: for the Day of the Lord cometh, for it is nigh at hand; a day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds and of thick darkness, as the morning spread upon the mountains: a great people and a strong; there hath not been ever the like, neither shall be any more ever after it, even to the years of many generations. A fire devoureth before them; and behind them a flame burneth: the land is as the garden of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate wilderness; yea, and nothing shall escape them. The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses; and as horsemen, so shall they run. Like the noise of chariots on the tops of mountains shall they leap, like the noise of a flame of fire that devoureth the stubble, as a strong people set in battle array. Before their face the people shall be  Sunday, August 12, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  much pained: all faces shall gather blackness. They shall run like mighty men; they  shall climb the wall like men of war; and they shall march every one on his ways,  and they shall not break their ranks: neither shall one thrust another; they shall walk  every one in his path: and when they fall upon the sword, they shall not be wounded.  They shall run to and fro in the city; they shall run upon the wall, they shall climb up  upon the houses; they shall enter in at the windows like a thief. The earth shall  quake before them; the heavens shall tremble: the sun and the moon shall be dark,  and the stars shall withdraw their shining: and the Lord shall utter his voice before  his army: for his camp is very great: for he is strong that executeth his word: for the  day of the Lord is great and very terrible; and who can abide it?" (Joel 2:1-11)  Now here the Word of the Lord out of the mouth of the prophet Zechariah, regarding the Great Day of the wrath of God -- which is imminent; to wit: "Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, and thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee. For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city. Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle. And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east, and the mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west, and there shall be a very great valley; and half of the mountain shall remove toward the north, and half of it toward the south. And ye shall flee to the valley of the mountains; for the valley of the mountains shall reach unto Azal; yea, ye shall flee like as ye fled from before the earthquake in the days of Uzziah the king of Judah; and the Lord my God shall come, and ALL THE SAINTS with thee." (Zech. 14:1-5.) NOTE: This language surely bespeaks the last of the last days; as, for example, the language of Jude; to wit: "And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands (myriads) of his saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against Him. These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh great swelling words, having men's persons in advantage. But, beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ; how that they told you there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. But ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. And of some have compassion, making a difference: And others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire; hating even the garment spotted by the flesh. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, to the only wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen." (Jude 1:14-25) Also, scattered among the major prophets is language ­ with appropriate contexts ­ that clearly refers in whole or in part to the End of the World, the Day of the Lord, the Great Judgment Day, etc. For example: "The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see. Lift up a banner upon the high mountain, exalt the voice unto them, shake the hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles. I have commanded my sanctified ones (God's Elect), I have also  Sunday, August 12, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  called my mighty ones (Elect Angels?) for mine anger, even them that rejoice in my highness.  The noise of a multitude in the mountains, like as of a great people; a tumultuous noise of the  kingdoms of nations gathered together: the Lord of Hosts mustereth the host of the battle. They  come from a far country, from the end of heaven, even the Lord, and the weapons of his  indignation, to destroy the whole land. Howl ye; for the day of the Lord is at hand; it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty. Therefore shall all hands be faint, and every man's  heart shall melt: and they shall be afraid: pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them; they  shall be in pain as a woman that travaileth: they shall be amazed one at another; their faces  shall be as flames. Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger,  to lay the land desolate: and He shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it. For the stars of  heaven and the constellations thereof shall not give their light: the sun shall be darkened in his  going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine. And I will punish the world for  their evil, and the wicked for their iniquity; and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible. I will make a man (i.e., God's Elect  man?) more precious than fine gold; even a man than the golden wedge of Ophir. Therefore I  will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove out of her place, in the wrath of the Lord of  hosts, and in the day of His fierce anger. And it shall be as the chased roe, and as a sheep that  no man taketh up: they shall every man turn to his own people, and flee every one into his own  land. Every one that is found shall be thrust through; and every one that is joined unto them  shall fall by the sword. Their children also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes; their  houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished. Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them,  which shall not regard silver; and as for gold, they shall not delight in it. Their bows also shall  dash the young men to pieces; and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eye shall not spare children. And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees'  excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. It shall never be inhabited,  neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch tent  there; neither shall the shepherds make their fold there. But wild beasts of the desert shall lie  there; and their houses shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and satyrs  shall dance there. And the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate houses, and  dragons in their pleasant palaces: and her time is near to come, and her days shall not be  prolonged." (Isa. 13:1-22.) God now commands all men every where to repent.  "Because he hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised Him from the dead." (Acts 17:31)  Beloved, now we are talking about the End of the World, the Great Judgment Day, etc. "But we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth against them which commit such things. And thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest them which do such things, and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the judgment of God? Or despisest thou the riches of His goodness and forbearance and longsuffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance? But after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God; who will render to every man according to his deeds: To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honor and immortality, eternal life: But unto them that are contentious, and do not  Sunday, August 12, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, Tribulation and anguish,  upon every soul of man that doeth evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile; but glory,  honor, and peace, to every man that worketh good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile: For  there is no respect of persons with God. For as many as have sinned without law shall also  perish without law: and as many as have sinned in the law shall be judged by the law; (for not  the hearers of the law are just before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified. For when  the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these,  having not the law, are a law unto themselves: which shew the work of the law written in their  hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or  else excusing one another;) In the Day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus  Christ according to my Gospel." (Rom. 2:2-16.)  One of the most remarkable descriptions of the Great Last Judgment came from the lips of the dear Lord Jesus himself when He dwelt and preached here below -- recorded in the twenty-fifth chapter of Matthew; to wit: "When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the Holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: And before him shall be gathered all nations: and He shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats: and he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, and fed thee? Or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? Or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee? And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels: (messengers; NOTE: we read of the elect angels; who, no doubt, refer to the holy angels who remained faithful to God at the time when a third of all angels joined Satan's rebellion; to wit: `I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, AND THE ELECT ANGELS, that thou observe these things without preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality.' 1 Tim. 5:21.) Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels (i.e., messengers): for I was an hungred, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick, or in prison, and ye visited me not. ...Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into life eternal." (Mat. 25:31-46) "And I saw a Great White Throne, and Him that sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away; and there was found no place for them. And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the Book of Life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books... And whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life was cast into the lake of fire." (Rev. 20:11-15) I love you. Amen.  
