


Pope Francis and His Lies
Video
September 27, 2015

Now, the part of the chapter that I want to focus on is beginning there in verse 22, where the Bible reads "Even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all them that believe, for there is no difference, for all have sinned and come short of the glory of God, being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus." Now this week, Pope Francis is visiting the United States. I think that Pope Francis is the greatest false prophet on the earth at this time ...Congregation:	Amen.Pastor:	... as far as the most people listen to him, look to him. He has over a billion people following him, worshiping him literally. The title of the sermon this morning is Pope Francis and his Lies. I'm going to start out here with the quote from Saint ... Not St. Francis, good night ... Pope Francis, because I've got a list of quotes from him, and I just want to show you how this man is a false prophet, and what he teaches is directly contrary to the Bible. You say, "Well, I'm offended by the sermon." Here's the thing though. The Word of God is the final authority. Congregation:	Amen.Pastor:	If he is preaching lies in the face of the Word of God which is the truth, then the truth needs to be preached and he needs to be pointed out as the false prophet and liar that he is. Congregation:	Amen.Pastor:	Now, first of all, here's a quote from Pope Francis. He said this, "The Lord has redeemed all of us, all of us with the blood of Christ. All of us, not just Catholics, everyone. But father, the atheist? Even the atheist, everyone." According to Pope Francis, everyone is redeemed by the blood of Christ, even an atheist. You don't even have to believe in God. You don't even have to believe in Jesus, according to Pope Francis in order to be redeemed. First of all, the fact that he's even calling himself father right there is blasphemy even in itself. Even the name The Pope is blasphemy. The Pope is just another language for the father. The Bible says "Call no man your Father upon the earth, for one is your Father which is in heaven." The Bible says in Matthew 23 that we're not to be called Father, Master or Rabbi. These are terms that are off limits for a religious leader. We should be called pastor, teacher, bishop, elder, but never Father, never Rabbi, never Master. Those names are over the top. Look down at the Bible and let's see if Sat- ... or good night. Why do I keep calling that? Let's see if Po- ... You know why, I'll tell you why. 	There's this really good restaurant called St. Francis, and I eat there all ... I love it. Maybe I'm just hungry. Anyway, look what the Bible says in Romans 3:22 "Even the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all them that believe, for there is no difference. For all have sinned and come short of the glory of God, being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus." Now according to Pope Francis, this redemption is for everybody, even people who don't even believe, even atheist. They're redeemed by the blood of Christ, but keep reading. It says at the end of verse 24 "The redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God had set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God, to declare Isaiah at this time, his righteousness that he might be just, and the justifier of him of him which believeth in Jesus." You see, he's only the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus. The redemption is through faith in his blood. It's not just a redemption where it doesn't matter what you believe. Everybody's going to go in heaven. 	You know, the Bible says "Neither is there salvation and in the other, for there is none other name under heaven, given among men, whereby we must be saved. The name of Jesus, he said 'I'm the way, the truth and the life. No man cometh unto the Father but by me." Pope Francis just gets up and says, "Hey, we're all redeemed. We're all saved. Even atheists are saved." Here's another quote along the same lines from Pope Francis "Since many of you do not belong to the Catholic church, and others are non-believers, say some of you don't believe whatsoever. Non-believers, from the bottom of my heart, I give this silent blessing to each and everyone of you, respecting the conscience of each one of you, but knowing that each one of you is a child of God." He's basically just saying everybody's a child of God. 	Listen to this quote "The Son of God became incarnate in the souls of men to instill the feeling of brotherhood." I thought that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the world. Apparently, he was sent just to instill the feeling of brotherhood. He said all are brothers and all are children of God. That is not what the Bible teaches. Now if you would flip over to John chapter 1, just a few pages left in your Bible, John chapter 1. Let's see what the Bible says in line to this. Francis' messages "Hey, everybody say everybody's redeemed. We're all children of God. We're all brothers and sisters in Christ." What does the Bible say? In Galatians 3:26 it says, "For you're all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. "Congregation:	Amen.Pastor:	What makes us a child of God is our faith in Jesus. Then the Bible says in John 1:12 "But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name." Look, you become a son of God, meaning you weren't one before. When you believe on the name of Jesus, you become a son of God. It's only those who are saved who are children of God, according to the Bible. It's not that we're all just children of God. That's not true. Now also, the thing that keeps coming up in the Scriptures that we're looking at, is the fact that salvation's by believing. This is another thing that the Roman Catholic church does not teach. It's another thing that the Pope would not stand for, because they teach that you have to do works in order to be saved. You have to believe, but also you have to do works. Then Francis, he just eliminates the belief part altogether and said, "Well, just do works and you'll be fine. Just do good." Listen to this, along the same lines he said, "Proselytism is solemn nonsense. It makes no sense. We need to get to know each other, listen to each other and improve our knowledge of the world around us." 	Now, just to explain to you what the word "proselyte" means. It's a word that's used four times in the Bible. The word "proselyte" simply means a person who converts from one religion to another, that's called a proselyte, when you switch religions. He's saying, "Proselytism is nonsense." He's saying, "Trying to get people to convert to Christianity is nonsense," according to Francis. "Remember, we're all redeemed." He says, "Instead, instead of going out and trying to get people to convert to Christianity,' he says, 'Instead we need to get to know each other, listen to each other and improve our knowledge of the world for us." Is that what the Bible says? Improve your knowledge of the world, listen to other religions, get to know other religions. No. The Bible says "Can a clean thing come out of an unclean? Not one." 	The Bible says "Go ye therefore into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature." He says some saved with fear, pulling them out of the fire, hating even the garments inspired by the flesh, that converting people. He's saying "Preach unto them that there's no salvation in any other. That they need to be saved through the blood of Jesus." He said "Pull them out of the fire. Compel them to be saved," the Bible says. Yet, Francis says, "Well, that's just nonsense. We just need to, we just need to learn about the Hindus. We just need to learn how to gain what we can from Islam, and we just need to learn from the Jews, and just get to know each other. Don't try to convert them." No. We ought to try to convert them. Listen. If we don't try to convert them, it shows that we don't love them.Congregation:	Right.Pastor:	We know that the Bible says, "That he that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life. But he that believeth not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him." If we know that God's wrath is abiding on someone, if we know that hell is their eternal destiny, if we know that the Bible says that they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but on pleasure and righteousness, what kind of a person we will be if we wouldn't warn them? The Bible says that we should warn all men, in Colossians chapter 1. If we knew that someone were in grave danger, we would warn them. If the house is on fire, you warn them. If they're about to drink poison, you warn them. You don't just stand by and let it happen and say, "Well, I'm just going to get to know you as you burn in the house on fire. I just want to learn more about you as you go sailing off the cliff in your vehicle." That doesn't make any sense, does it? It does makes sense to somebody who just doesn't believe the Bible.Congregation:	Right.Pastor:	And just doesn't believe that salvation is through Jesus at all. He, "Yeah. We're all redeemed, let's just get to know each other." It's false. Listen to this quote from Pope Francis "Each of us has a vision of good and of evil. We have to encourage people to move toward what they think is good. Everyone has his own idea of good and evil and must choose to follow the good and fight evil as he conceives them. Congregation:	Wow.Pastor:	That would be enough to make the world a better place." He's saying we all have our own ideas of good and evil. They're all different from one another, and all we have to do is just do what we think is good. Look. This is what Pope Francis said. I'm not making this stuff up. Go fact, check this. If you're going to sit there and say, "Oh, I can't believe you're getting on Catholicism." Here's a thing about Catholicism. You can't be a Catholic without acknowledging Pope Francis as the representative of God on earth. That's what Catholicism is all about. If I were to take you this afternoon to a Catholic bookstore, we would walk in there, and there would just be pictures everywhere of Pope Francis. Pictures everywhere of previous Popes. Pictures everywhere of Mary and [inaudible 00:10:35], but the Pope would be everywhere. This is part of the religion, is your following this guy. This guy is your pastor. This guy is your leader. According to Catholicism, he says, "Well, everybody has their own ideas about what's good. As long as they just do what they think is good, that's enough." What about the absolute right and wrong that God had set forth in the Bible?	Now, listen to some Scriptures from the Bible along these lines. In the Book of Proverbs, you don't have to turn there. If you would flip over to I Corinthians 5, I'm going to read for you from the Book of Proverbs "There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death." Just following what you think is good, the Bible says "The end there is the way of death." If you just go with what seems right, now you've got to go what the Bible says is right. Listen to this, Proverbs 3:7 "Be not wise in thine own eyes. Fear the Lord and depart from evil." Proverbs 12:15 "The way of a fool is right in his own eyes. But he that hearkeneth unto counsel is wise." A fool always thinks that he's right, the Bible says. Francis says, "Hey, just go with it, then we would be living a life of foolishness."	The Bible says in Proverbs 16:2 "All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes, but the Lord weigheth the spirits." Look, everybody thinks that what they do is right, that's why they're doing it. If they didn't think it's right, they wouldn't be doing it. I mean, people like to justify their own actions. Pope Francis says, "Hey. As long as you think is right, just do it. Just go with it. That's all you need to do." Proverbs 21:2 "Every way of a man is right in his own eyes, but the Lord pondereth the hearts." Proverbs 30 verse 12 "There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes and yet is not washed from their filthiness." Congregation:	Amen.Pastor:	It says even the filthiest of generations think that they're pure in their own eyes. Congregation:	Right.Pastor:	Isaiah 5:21 "Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes and prudent in their own sight." You know, we can't trust ourselves to decide what's right and wrong. We go with the Word of God to tell us what is right and what is wrong. The Bible says "Whoso trusteth in his own heart is a fool." The Bible says, "the heart is deceitful above all things and desperately wicked. Who can know it?" So long those same lines, here's another quote from Pope Francis "If someone's gay' and he and I don't use that word but he does, 'If someone's gay," and he doesn't mean like if they're happy and cheerful and friendly and nice to be around either.Congregation:	Sodomite.Pastor:	Yeah, they're a Sodomite. "If someone is gay and he searches for the Lord and has good will, who am I to judge? We shouldn't marginalize people for this, they must be integrated into society." Now, let's look what the Bible says, because he says "Who am I to judge?" It's like, "Whoa. Whom am I to judge somebody who's a homo?" Look at I Corinthians chapter 5 verse 1, because this is about fornication, and being a homo is the worst kind of fornication. It's even a worst fornication. The Bible says in I Corinthians 5:1 "It is reported commonly that there is fornication among you and such fornication is not so much as named among the Gentiles, that once you'd have his father's wife, and you're puffed up and if not rather mourned, that he that had done this deed might be taken away from among you. For I verily as absent in body but present in Spirit have decided, who am I to judge?" Is that what it says? No. He says, "I verily is absent in body but present in Spirit have judged already, as though I were present, concerning him that hath so done this deed." 	If someone is in major sin to the tune of fornication, to the tune of Sodomy, to the tune of adultery, should we just say, "Well, who am I to judge?" No. He said, "I've judged already. I wouldn't be even there." Why? Because God's Word is absolute on these things. Now, just flip one page to the right. I Corinthians 6, in case you have any doubt about whether or not it's right for us to judge. This has become the mantra of the atheist today, the mantra of the left wing today is just this "judge not." They take it out of context. They don't get Christ full teaching. Look at I Corinthians 6:2 "Do you not know that the same shall judge the world?" Pope Francis? "And if the world shall be judged by you, are you unworthy to judge the smallest matters? Know ye not that we shall judge angels? How much more things that pertain to this life, if then you have judgement of things pertaining to this life, set them to judge who were least esteemed in the church. I speak to your shame. Is it so that there is not a wise man among you? Know not one that shall be able to judge between his brethren? But he's just saying, "Oh. Who am I to judge?"	The Bible says that even the least esteemed person in the church is qualified to judge matters of this life. We're going to judge angels and the saints. We're going to judge the world. This idea of "who am I to judge" doesn't make any sense. Jesus said in John 7:24 "Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgement." We are to judge, but we're to judge righteous judgement. Here's another quote from him along in the same line. He said, "A person once asked me in a provocative manner, if I approved of homosexuality. I replied with another question, "Tell me, when God looks at a gay person, does he endorse the existence of this person with love or reject and condemn this person? We must always consider the person. Now, here's the thing about Pope Francis's statement here. First of all, he says, "You know, well, when God looks at them, does he reject or condemn?" First of all, the very term "reprobate" literally means reject, and Romans 1 which is all about this issue, uses that word reprobate. Yes, he does reject them. Then he said, "Well, would you condemn them?" What does the Bible say? Flip over to Jude, second to last book in the New Testament is Jude.	While you're turning there, I'll read for you from Leviticus 20:13 "If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination. They shall surely be put to death. Their blood shall be upon them." Now, notice he doesn't say, "They shall surely be integrated into society." Which is what he said, right? He says "They shall surely be put to death, their blood shall be upon them." Listen to, he says right in Old Testament. Okay, let's go to New Testament. Jude verse 7 "Even as Sodom and Gomorrah," which by the way, Sodom and Gomorrah is an Old Testament story, very early in the Bible, Genesis 19, 19th chapter in the whole Bible. "Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication and going after strange flesh, queer flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire." Notice he says, "That story of Sodom and Gomorrah," is present tense today, an example. Thousands of years after Sodom and Gomorrah, Jude is preaching and saying "Sodom and Gomorrah is our example today of those that should afterward live ungodly." He says they are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. Likewise also, this filthy dreamers defile the flesh.	Now, is this Francis' attitude? Is he saying, "Well, this filthy people, but who am I to judge?" That's not what he said, this is like, "Oh man, you know. We don't want to condemn. We don't want to reject. Who am I to judge? I mean, let's integrate them. Let's just bring them in." He says, "Likewise also, this filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominions, speak evil of dignities." Flip a few pages to the left of your Bible towards 2 Peter 2. Just a couple of pages to the left, 2 Peter chapter 2. The Bible says in verse 6 "And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, into ashes condemned them with an overthrow, making them an example unto those that after should live ungodly. And delivered just Lot, vexed with filthy conversation of the wicked. For that righteous man dwelling among them and seeing and hearing vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds. The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgement to be punished." God described them as filthy. God is ready to judge them. God is bringing up Sodom and Gomorrah's an example saying, "Don't think that I've changed on this."	I feel the same about it today as I felt about it, when I poured fire and brimstone on Sodom and Gomorrah. That's an example. See, he doesn't have to do that to every San Francisco that's out there. He just saying "I did it once as an example." It's the eternal fire that they ought to worry about. You know, fire that comes down from the sky and burned up Sodom and Gomorrah, that's temporal, but the eternal fire is hell. Francis is way off pace with this, but what's he doing? Being popular. This is what people want to hear today. They don't want to hear Sodomy condemned. They don't want to hear the homos reviled. They wanted to be accepted and lo- ... I mean it's a popular message when you say everybody saved. Everybody's redeemed. Everybody's going to heaven. Let's not judge anyone. Here's another quote from Pope Francis. He said this, "A church without women would be like the Apostolic College without Mary. Listen to this, the Madonna is more important than the apostles. According to the Pope, the Madonna which is the Virgin Mary, the Madonna is more important than the apostles.	Let's see if that matches up with Scripture, because let's face it. One of the major features of Catholicism is the worship of Mary. You don't believe me? Let's get in the car and let's drive less than two miles and we will enter the city of Guadalupe. When we enter the city of Guadalupe and I know, because I personally have pretty much knocked every single door in Guadalupe. Our church has knocked the door's of Guadalupe about six times. Since I was a part of all six of those times, knocking every single door in Guadalupe, I probably personally knocked most of the doors in Guadalupe myself. I've definitely walked up and down every single street in Guadalupe, even if I didn't knock every door, I walked up and down every single street. Almost every single house has an idol unto Mary. In the front lawn, they have a little shrine, they have a little altar. Everywhere, imagery of Mary. It's called Mariolotry. You know, idolatry around Mary, they worship Mary. You drive down to Mexico, you see the same thing. Drive, even just on the road, you're just driving down the highway, out of the middle of nowhere, just a Mary shrine here, Mary shrine there, Mary shrine here, everywhere. It's extremely common. If we walk in again to the Catholic bookstore, there would be just a multitude of pictures of Mary.	They pray to Mary. They worship Mary, there're images of Mary, they put a big emphasis on Mary. When people think of Catholicism, they think of Mary. That's one of the biggest things that distinguishes Catholicism from Evangelical Christianity or from being Baptist or any other just normal Bible believing Christian. The thing that distinguishes the Catholic from the Christian is Mary, worship. I mean, that's part of the big one. According to the Pope, the Madonna, Mary is more important than the apostles. Let's think about this for a second. How many times is Mary mentioned in the Bible? If we look up how many times Mary is mentioned by name in the Bible, it's 19 times. 19 times in this book. Let's compare that with some other Bible characters. The Lord is mentioned 8,000 times. David, King David, David and Goliath: 1,139 times. Mary: 19. David: 1139. Jesus is mentioned over 900 times. Mary: 19. Moses is mentioned 848 times. Mary: 19. Aaron, I mean and Aaron wasn't really the coolest Bible character ever. Aaron himself is mentioned 350 times. Jacob is mentioned 377 times. Abraham is mentioned 250 times. Listen, the Old Testament King Saul, King Saul is mentioned almost 400 times. Mary: 19. This is the big emphasis for them. I mean, this is their whole ... You know what that tells me? Their religion is not based on this Book at all. Congregation:	Right.Pastor:	Even the Koran mentions Mary more than the Bible. The Koran mentions Mary 35 times or 34 times. I mean the Bible only mentions Mary 19 times in the whole Bible. Why? Because she's not emphasized. In fact, someone even came up to Jesus and a woman cried out in the crowd and she said, "Blessed is the womb that bear thee, and blessed are the pops which thou art sucked. And he said, 'Ye, what a blessed is he that heareth the Word of God and doeth it."Congregation:	Amen.Pastor:	"You'll be more blessed than Mary,' he said, 'if you just hear the Word of God and doeth." What about when Jesus is preaching in Matthew chapter 12, and his mother and his brethren stand without desiring to meet with them. He says, "Who is my mother and who are my brethren?' And he stretched out his hand towards his disciples and say, 'Behold my mother and my brother. For whoso ever shall do the will of my Father who is in heaven,' he said, 'the same is my brother and sister and mother." Yet, they're lifting up Mary as literally a goddess, as literally as being someone that they pray to, worship, greatly emphasize huge emphasis and yet Caleb is mentioned 36 times. Even Caleb. Joshua was mentioned 216 times. Samson is mentioned 39 times. Hezekiah is mentioned a 128 times. Mary: 19. The Apostle Paul is mentioned over a 180 times, because remember, the Pope said, "Hey, the Madonna's more important than the apostles." Okay, well, then why is the Apostle Paul mentioned over a 180 times? In addition to writing 13 of the 27 books of the ... or 14 of the 27 books of the New Testament, if she's more important. What about Peter? He's mentioned a 162 times. Mary's mentioned 19 times. Other Marys. 	You know, there're other Mary's in the Bible like for example Mary and Martha, Mary Magdalene. The other Marys, because there's about four or five other Marys, they're mentioned 35 times, other Marys. Most of the time, when Marys mentioned, it's not even that Mary. It's other Marys that are being mentioned, more than the Madonna so called. You say, "Well, you know. The Bible just doesn't talk a lot about women." Sarah is mentioned 59 times. There's a woman in the Bible, it's mentioned more than three times as many times as the Virgin Mary. What about Esther? Mentioned 56 times. Look, even Jezebel is mentioned 22 times. King Saul's daughter, King Saul's daughter Michal which virtually no one, unless they read the whole Bible or been in church the whole life, has never been heard of. King Saul's daughter Michal is mentioned 18 times. One more mention and she would have tied the Virgin Mary. It's clear that the Bible does not put this huge emphasis on Mary. It says, how can you ignore this? Even the monks, some of them mentions of Mary, some of them are Jesus telling people, "Whoa. You're putting her on two eye of a pedestal." You know, what about when Jesus looked at Mary and said, "Woman, what have I to do with thee?" 	I'm just saying, you know, but to sit there and put her as the mother of God, it's false because of the fact that Jesus Christ existed before his incarnation, before he became flesh. The Bible says "In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God and the Word was God, the same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him. Without him, was not anything made that was made in,' and said, 'And the Word became flesh and dwelt among us and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." Hebrews 7 says of Jesus, "Without Father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but made likened to the son of God, abideth the priest continually." There are two aspects of the Lord Jesus Christ. He was human, but he was also God in the flesh. Here's the thing, Mary was only his mother humanly speaking just of the flesh. That's why even when they called Jesus the Son of David, because he was of David according to the flesh. He even said, "Well, if David calls him Lord, how is he then his son?" What he's showing there is that, "Wait a minute. I'm God in the flesh so I'm above David. I'm above Abraham. I'm above Mary." That's why Mary called the Lord her Savior. She needed a Savior. She wasn't perfect.	She was a great woman, but she does not deserve to be worshiped as a goddess or anything else. Is it from the Bible? No. The bible barely even mentions her, very, very minor character. We can list many, many other people, scores of other characters that are mentioned more times, way more times, hundreds more times. Look if you would at Jeremiah chapter 7. You say where is this? Where is this Mary worship coming from? I'll tell you where it comes from. It comes from eastern false religion, eastern false religion. You see, if you were to go to India, they have been worshiping the great mother, the great goddess for thousand of years, even thousand of years before Jesus Christ. You know, when they're not worshiping the golden calf, and when they're not worshiping Satan, when they're not worshiping serpents and you know, all their different false gods of Hinduism. You know, in Southern India, they have been worshiping the great mother. In fact, they even perform human human sacrifices under this false female deity. This is something that is part of eastern religion, going back thousands of years in India. This is where it come from, it come from the devil, and the Bible talks about it. Because of the fact that in Jeremiah, some of the children of Israel had gotten mixed up in some of these false religions from the east.	Now the thing about this, is that in this passage, she's referred to as the "queen of heaven" that they're worshiping. Even today, Catholics were referred to Mary as the queen of heaven, literally. In fact, I even saw a cemetery in Phoenix that said "Queen of Heaven Cemetery." I've seen a Queen of Heaven in Catholic Church, naming the church after it. Look at Jeremiah chapter 7. It says in verse 18 "The children gather wood and the fathers kindled the fire, and the women knead their dough to make cakes to the queen of heaven and to pour out drink offerings unto other gods that they may provoke me to anger." Now, does this sound familiar? You're basically making a cake and a drink and worshiping the queen of heaven? See, there's nothing new under the sun. Go to Jeremiah 44. You know, if you were here a few months ago, you remember the sermon I did a few months ago, where I showed that Buddhism and Catholicism have the same false teachings, and that Catholicism basically, all the weird stuff that's in Catholicism and you wonder where it came from? It came from Buddhism, because Buddhism is from 500 BC approximately. That's where they get the nuns, the monks. 	Did you ever wonder why there's the Buddhist monks and the Catholic monks, and the Buddhist nuns and the Catholic nuns, and the Buddhist monastery and the Catholic monastery, and the Buddhist have a ...and I'm not going to repeat that sermon, but I went through and showed all the things that they've just imported from eastern false religion. Look what the Bible says in Jeremiah chapter 44 verse 15 "Then all the men which knew that their wives had burned incense unto other gods and all the women that stood by a great multitude, even all the people that dwell in the land of Egypt in Pathros, answered Jeremiah saying, 'As for the word that thou hast spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee. But we will certainly do whatsover thing goeth forth out of our own mouth." That reminds me of what Francis said "Just do what you think is right. Do what you think is good." "To burn incense under the queen of heaven," that's another thing that the Catholics like to do, don't they? Burn incense under the queen of heaven.	"And to pour out drink offerings unto her, as we have done. We and our fathers, our kings and our princess in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem: For then, have we plenty of victuals and were well and saw no evil. But since we left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, we have wanted all things, and have been consumed by the sword and by the famine. And when we burned incense to the queen of heaven, and poured out drink offerings unto her, did we make her cakes to worship her and pour out drink offerings unto her, without our men?" They're saying the men were doing it too. This, I don't understand why this wouldn't go against the grain, for men to bow down and worship a woman. You say, "Oh. You're so misogynistic. Oh, you're chauvinist, sexist, pig." Here's the thing though. You know we as men are wired by God not to be ruled over by women. Congregation:	Right.Pastor:	That's why the Bible says the husband is the head of the wife, as Christ is the head of the church. We, as men have a desire to lead a woman and not to be led by a woman. Women naturally have a desire to follow their husband, not to rule over their husband. Now, our society has tried to engineer that differently, through the brainwashing campaigns in school and TV and media, to try to get women to think that they really want to be powerful and bossy. Atually, it makes women miserable to be in that role that they don't belong in. They're much happier when they get into their proper role, you know, with the strong men leading them. Men are not naturally inclined to want to be in submission unto a woman. It's just kind of strange the whole religion that's based upon the worshiping a woman. It goes against the grain for a man who understands the man's role in the family. The man's ... I mean to understands it in a home, dad's the boss. Then in the marriage, the husband is the boss. To have this attitude where we're worshiping a woman in heaven, and that she's going to somehow tell Jesus how things are going to be, and we go to her to intercede and she intercedes with us to Jesus.	She's even known as the mediatrics, basically a feminine version of the mediator. The Bible says there's one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus. The priest is not a mediator, the Pope is not a mediator, Mary is not a mediator. There's one mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. That is the only mediator. No man cometh unto the Father but by him. The Bible says that we boldly come before the throne of grace and find mercy, and obtain health in time of need through our High Priest Jesus Christ, not through the confessional booth. Not through, you know, all these prayers to saints, and prayers to Mary and all these different people. It's false. Here's the Good News though. In conclusion, those are all the quotes that I have from Pope Francis. You can see that he's a liar. You can that he's a false prophets. He's wrong on salvation. He's wrong on morality. He's wrong on so many things, and yet people are looking to him to day as being a representative of God on the service. People today are crying. They're trying to literally touch the hem of his garment. They're hoping that the shadow of him might pass over them. They want to just touch that foot or kiss that big toe and never wash that mouth again. 	You know what? People think it's a joke, but literally kissing the Pope's big toe is a Catholic tradition. For hundreds, and basically it used to be that they would come and kiss his hand, which is already humiliating yourself, when you bow down and kiss a man's hand. Then, they changed it to kissing his foot. I forget which Pope that changed, but there's a certain historical Pope that said, "You know what, from now on you're going to kiss my foot." They kiss his toe. Then, there's even a statue where they kiss the toe so much the the toe is worn away from all the mouths, wearing away. This is not a joke. This is real. If I ever had a chance to kiss the Pope's big toe, I'll bite it off. Anyway, here's the conclusion of, here's the good news. The good news is that Catholics are some of the easiest people to get saved. Congregation:	Amen.Pastor:	You know, the good ... You say, "Oh, men. You hate Catholics. You're going to hate them " I don't hate Catholics at all. You know if I hated Catholics, I will just tell them, "Hey, you're all saved. You guys are just like, that you're going to heaven." That would be hate because then, it just feels like, "See ya," as they go off into hell. No. The truth is, that Catholics are some of the easiest people to get saved. When I go out soul winning, and I get into a Catholic area, that's usually an area where you're going to get people saved. Why? Because most people are Catholics only out of ignorance. They're born into it. They're sprinkled into it as a baby and they just don't know any better. It's not even that they're just choosing to follow a lie, it's just that they're just raised with it. They don't know any better. Usually, if you can show a Catholic the Gospel from the Bible, they're very likely to be saved. In fact, if I were to choose between talking to a Jew, a Muslim, a Catholic, a Pentecostal, or you know a Mormon, a Jehovah's Witness, an atheist, a Buddhist, a Hindu, the one that would probably be the most likely to get saved is the Catholic. Baptist churches today across America are filled with ex-Catholics, filled with them.	In fact, right now, let me ask, who here used to be Catholic? Put up your hand. Look around the building. This is how many people used to be Catholic. The great news is that the one billion Catholics in this world are ripe unto harvest. They're ready to be saved. We need to get out there, knock doors and say, "Why do you knock the doors in Guadalupe, five, six times? That's why. It's a receptive area. It's an area where you want ... Now of course, you're going to run into the rare, died in the wall of Catholic who actually knows what they believe and is really strong on the doctrines of the church and so forth. The vast majority of Catholics, you know it and I know it, they show up to church about three times a year, just when somebody is getting baptized or getting married or something like that. They're not really that into it, and they're usually pretty open to hearing what the Bible says about the Gospel. If you do a thorough job and show them the Scriptures and make sure that they know that it's by faith and not works, and make sure that they know, "Hey. This is what..." and what I do is first I go to the whole plan of salvation with them. 	I don't just come out right away and say, "You know, Francis ..." and start going after him. Because then, they're just go and shut the door. What I usually do is I start out by just going through the whole plan of salvation like I normally would. Just ask them if they know they're going to heaven, Can I show you? I go through the whole thing, and I show him it's by faith, that it's not by works. I showed them that it's eternal. Then, when I get down to the very end though because sometimes, Catholics could have a tendency to just politely listen to you and then they'll just those will repeat a prayer with you because they're so used to chanting stuff. That doesn't mean that they're saved, because it is our faith that saves us, not just saying words that we don't mean. Therefore, I always get to the end after I give them the Gospel. I say this, I say, "Well, listen. You said you mentioned you were Catholic. The Catholic church teaches something different than what I've been showing you for the past ten minutes. They actually teach that you do have to do works, that you have to perform the sacraments, go to church, do good deeds in order to get to heaven, whereas the Bible is saying that it's just all by our faith in Jesus. It's not of works, lest any man should boast. 	Now, which one do you believe?" That way, I'm bringing them to a point where they have to make a decision, not just, "Well, let me just tag this on to the other thousands of prayers I prayed. They actually understand, "No, no, no. I'm going to stop believing in the wrong way and I'm going to start believing in the right way. I'm going to ask Jesus to be my Savior, putting all my faith in him. Not ask him to be my Savior but really I'm doing the work. I'm doing it through the church, and I'm doing it through Mary and everything else." Usually, when I get to that point if I ask that question "which one do you believe," you'll get one of two answers. You'll get the people that say, "Well, I believe what the Bible says that it's all by faith." You know, and that person has got it. Then, you pray with them and they call upon the Name of Lord and it's a done deal. A lot of times that I'll get to that point, I'll ask that question, and they'll say, "Well, you know. I still believe in what the Catholic church teaches." Then, at the point, "It's all right. Well, you know, think about what I showed you. Have a good day." Move on.	They're not ready to accept the truth. They've heard it, they understood it, but they're just going to stick with tradition. They're going to stick with what they've been handed up. The big word that comes to mind with Catholicism is tradition. Catholics that are really serious Catholics, which I said are kind of rare really. But when you run into this really serious Catholics that really are versed in it, they'll tell you that you don't have the right to interpret the Bible on your own. The church needs to interpret it for you and so forth. Well, one time, I was on this airplane and I was talking to a guy, that was one of these really serious Catholics. We spent hours talking because we're on the plane, we're sitting by each other. There's nothing else to do, captive Congregation, you know. We spent hours talking. This guy was a really serious Catholic and he's telling me the church is what interprets it for you. You can't interpret on your own in [inaudible 00:42:54]. He was part of a branch of Catholicism that was a more fundamentalist branch, so basically they accept everything up until Vatican 2. Vatican 2 was a major overhaul of the Catholic church that took place in the 1960s. 	In Vatican 2, that's when they stopped doing the services in Latin, and started actually doing them in languages that people spoke. They also said, "Hey, you know. The Jews aren't responsible for the death of Jesus," and you know, something like that. They just change some of their doctrine and they changed some of their teachings. They basically just got a lot more liberal and a lot more modernistic in the '60s that this thing called Vatican 2. This guy said, "Well, we believe everything up to Vatican 2." I looked at the guy and said, "Wait a minute. You just told me that you can't interpret the Bible on your own, but that the church is supposed to do it for you. So why are you accepting the first 20 of these ecumenical councils and then you're going to reject number 21, Vatican 2?" He's just like, "Well, you know, uh ... yeah." It's like, "Wait a minute. If you're just going to blindly follow the church as your final authority, then you have to accept Vatican 2. And when they say, 'Hey, it's okay to be a homo, you have to accept that too. Look, whatever they tell you because you're just like whoo, whoo, whoo, you know. I can't interpret the Bible on my own, must follow Roman church.	If you're going to be that way, then you have to accept everything that he's ... Every stupid thing that they say." And who knows what ... Because listen, they haven't always believed the way they believe now. They've changed things. There was a certain time when the infant baptism was introduced, when the sprinkling was introduced. There were certain time when the worship of Mary was introduced, Mary's sinless life was introduced, the ascension of Mary to heaven. I mean, I saw that in the Bible but they teach that Mary ascended into heaven, like Jesus, because she never died. These doctrines were ruled out later. Catholicism is a religion where you just believe what the church tells you. Let me tell you something. This church, Faithful Word Baptist Church is not a church were you're expected to believe what the church tells you. You are expected to believe what the Bible tells you. I'll say it right now. If I get up and preach something that's not biblical, you have every right to walk away and say, "I don't agree with Pastor Anderson on that, because that's not what the Bible says." 	This is the final, I'm not the final authority. I'm just up here preaching, expounding and then it's your job to basically decide whether what I'm preaching is true. If what I'm preaching is not true, then you can go somewhere else and find someone that's teaching the truth. If I am preaching the truth, then you come and be a part of the church and say, "Yes. This is something that I want to follow on because he's preaching the truth." According to the Bible, like Paul said "Follow me as I follow Christ." Whereas the Catholic church is saying that the church is the authority, the Bible is lower on the list, because you're not reading it right. You're interpreting. Whereas the Bible says that the Holy Spirit will guide us into all truth. We don't need a mediator to teach us the Bible, or else we could just never figure it out on our own.	The good news is that Catholics are easy to win to the Lord, and if we love our Catholic co-worker or Catholic neighbor or you know, Catholic acquaintances, then we need to give them the Gospel. We need to show them the truth and preach the truth in love and show them how to be saved. Not get this idea that Catholics are saved because a lot of Baptist even today, they'll, "Oh. Catholics are saved." They're not saved, because they believe the salvation by works. You say, "Well, you say that all the Catholics, all billion Catholics are wrong?" Yes. I'm saying that broad is the way that leads to destruction.Congregation:	Amen.Pastor:	Many there'll be which go into wrath because straight is the gate and narrow is the way which leads them the life and few there be to find it. We need to go out and preach the truth. We need to expose this Francis for the fraud that he is. Let's bow our heads for a word of prayer.	Father, we thank you so much, Lord for the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, and thank you that it is to everyone that believeth, Lord. Lord, we know that for those who do not believe in Jesus, there is absolutely no hope. The Bible says that they're without hope, they have no hope in there without God in the world. Lord, help us to preach the glorious Gospel of Christ unto them, that they might be saved. Please help this fraud, Pope Francis, to be exposed for the lying false prophet that he is, that people would stop following him and worshiping him and realize that he is a deceiver and a devil. In Jesus Name, we pray. Amen.
 
 
