INTRO.- All is not right in America, but all is not wrong either.  Even though America is plagued with many problems?political, moral and spiritual?she is still the greatest country in the world!  Of course, I am biased.  I have known no other.ILL.- Calvin Coolidge once said, ?To live under the American constitution is the greatest political privilege God ever gave to mankind.?  That sounds like he was saying, ?To live in America is a great privilege.?  AND IT IS!ILL.- Herbert Hoover said, ?My country owes me nothing.  It gave me, as it gives every boy and girl, a chance.  It gives me schooling, independence of action, opportunity for service, and honor.  In no other land could a boy from a country village, without inheritance or influential friends, look forward with unbounded hope.?  WE ARE BLESSED TO LIVE IN AMERICA!ILL.- The perfect secretary had been chosen out of 5000 business college contestants.  Pam MacAllister stood out a mile, the judges agreed.  Her typing and shorthand skills were expert.  She had ?vitality, charm, courtesy, intelligence, etc.?  As she was awarded the prize she was brought to the platform and the people cried out, ?Speech!  Speech!?  She stepped to the podium and said, ?BUT I DON?T WANT TO BE A SECRETARY!?Here was a woman with all the right qualifications to be the perfect secretary and yet she didn?t want to be a secretary.  I know that this doesn?t make much sense to most of us, but here?s the point I want to make.  SHE HAD THE FREEDOM OF CHOICE.  She had the right to choose her own way in the world.  We are blessed to live in this land of freedom!ILL.- AMERICA IS FREEDOM...freedom to worship, or not to worship, where we choose, when we choose and how to choose...and to grant the same to every other person.- AMERICA IS FREEDOM...freedom to work, or not to work...to succeed, or to fail...to use our brains, energies and persistence to produce wealth, jobs and security or even to settle for lesser goals.  America is freedom to be ourselves, to let others be themselves.- AMERICA IS FREEDOM...freedom to exercise our power at the polls...to vote for candidates of our choice...to remind our officials that they are elected and to serve and lead, not to rule and oppress.- AMERICA IS FREEDOM...freedom to speak our minds without fear of reprisal...to express our thoughts as readily to our legislatures as to our families; as confidentially to our Congress as to our closest friends.- AMERICA IS FREEDOM...freedom to shoulder responsibilities, to contribute worthy causes, to be good neighbors and caring citizens.- AMERICA IS FREEDOM...freedom to enjoy, conserve and improve the best and greatest country on God?s green earth? the United States of America!  Amen?ILL.- Some years ago Richard DeVos, co-founder of the Amway Corporation, made a comparison of America and what was then the Soviet Union.  He told what America would have to do to equal Russia.We would have to rip up 13 of every 14 miles of our paved highways.  We?d have to scrap 19 of every 20 cars and trucks and destroy over 2000 colleges.  We?d have to destroy 7 out of every 10 single family houses and cut our living standard by 2/3?s!  Any takers?  I don?t think any of us would want to do these things.  AMERICA IS THE LAND OF PLENTY!  Just look around.  ILL.- When I was just a young man starting out in the working world in 1959 there were not many restaurants.  I think maybe Dairy Queen, McDonald?s and I don?t remember what else.  BUT LOOK AT WHAT WE HAVE TODAY?  We have more eating places in Jonesboro than you could count!  We have an abundance of food in America and we eat it too!  We have buffeted our bodies to the point that we are unhealthy.  AMERICA IS THE LAND OF PLENTY!  And it?s not just food.  It?s anything and everything.  Why do you think people in other countries are so envious of Americans?  WE?VE GOT IT ALL.We?ve been blessed!  And God has most certainly blessed America.  Someone put it this way, ?We keep asking God to bless America.  He already has.  Now it?s our turn.?PROP.- In this sermon I want us to consider what our text in Titus 3 reveals about how to bless America.1- Be respectful of governmental authorities2- Be diligent in your work3- Be considerate of all peopleI. BE RESPECTFUL OF GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITIESV. 1 ?Remind the people to be subject to rulers and authorities, to be obedient....?Rom. 13:1 ?Everyone must submit himself to the governing authorities...?ILL.- A wealthy man lay critically ill, ?There?s only one thing that will save you,? his doctor said.  ?A brain transplant.  It?s experimental and very expensive.?  ?Money is no object,? the man said.  ?Can you get a brain?? ?There are three available.  The first was from a university professor, but it?ll cost you $10,000.?  ?Don?t worry, I can pay. What about the second??  ?It was from a rocket scientist.  It?ll cost you $100,000.?  ?I have the money.  And I?d be a lot smarter too. But what about the third??  ?The third was from a government bureaucrat.  It will set you back half a million dollars.?  ?Why so much for the bureaucrat?s brain?? the patient asked.  ?Never been used.?Brothers and sisters, I know that this is exactly how many people feel about some people in our government.  It?s hard to show respect for those whom you consider to be brainless, witless and perhaps spineless, and are trying to make us penniless!ILL.- For example, I have little or no respect at all for Congressman Barney Frank of MA.  Do you know why?  The number one reason is because he is gay, which tells me his thinking is not right.  How could he be for the tradition of the American family, which makes up the majority of the people in the US?Even though we don?t respect certain government officials, Congressmen or otherwise, we must respect the office.  I Pet. 2:13-14 ?Submit yourselves for the Lord?s sake to every authority instituted among men: whether to the king, as the supreme authority, or to governors (for us, police officers), who are sent by him to punish those who do wrong and to commend those who do right.?Respect for governmental authorities may cover many areas of life.ILL.- A policeman said to a woman, ?Here is your parking ticket, maam.?  The woman said, ?And just what you do you do when you catch a real criminal??  The police officer replied, ?I don?t know.  All I ever catch are the innocent ones.?Many times when people get ticketed by the police for speeding or whatever they don?t think they deserve the ticket so they try to argue their way out of it.  I have found that doesn?t work.  Sometimes it just means a bigger ticket.  RESPECT AND SUBMISSION ARE BEST.ILL.- In the mid-60?s when I was a student at Ozark Bible College I had a new 1968 Pontiac Firebird with a 400 CI engine.  Talk about fast!  That car would move, consequently you had to keep your eye on the speedometer.  One afternoon I was cruising down 4th street in Joplin, MO, not paying attention to my speed.  It was a 25 mph speed limit and I was not doing 25 mph.  Suddenly, I looked into my rearview mirror and saw those flashing lights.  I immediately pulled over.  I got out of the car (which is a ?no, no? these days) and went back to the officer.  He said, ?Do you realize you were going 45 mph in a 25 mph zone??  I said, ?No sir, but if you said it, I believe it.?How?s that for respect and submission?  I?ll tell you one thing, it paid off.  He was very nice since I was nice to him.  He spoke pleasantly to me and even more importantly, he demonstrated grace.  He did give me a speeding ticket, but he only made it for 35 mph in a 25 zone instead of 45 mph.  It cost me $20 instead of $40.  Cheap by today?s standards, of course.It pays to show respect to governmental authorities, police and otherwise.  ILL.- Gardel was an 88 year-old poor widow living in Mointaigut, France.  She received a tax bill that needed immediate payment.  Counting up her money, she found she had only enough to pay the bill.  Accordingly, she set out to walk 14 miles to the nearest tax office to pay the bill.  She said, ?We need to take care of our government financially so that it stays democratic.  I don?t have a checking account, and can?t afford the bus fare.  I thought of hitch-hiking, but it isn?t proper for a lady.?  Tax officials arranged to give her a ride home.How?s that for respecting governmental authorities?  We can learn from her attitude and actions.Showing respect for governmental authorities is not only our responsibility as citizens, but it is also a good witness for Christ.  The Christian citizen should be the best citizen.  This doesn?t mean that we will do everything perfect, but it means that we will do the best we can to show respect to authorities and to be law-abiding citizens.To me, this means that we will also pray for the leaders of our country, be patriotic, be flag-wavers, vote in elections, speak out for what is right but in a respectful way.1- Be respectful of governmental authoritiesII. BE DILIGENT IN YOUR WORKV. 1 ?Be ready to do whatever is good.?  RSV ?Be ready for any honest work.?  Amplified ?to be prepared and willing to do any upright and honorable work.?I Thess. 4:11-12 ?Make it your ambition to lead a quiet life, to mind your own business and to work with your hands, just as we told you, so that your daily life may win the respect of outsiders and so that you will not be dependent on anybody.?We are admonished in Scripture to work and to work hard at our work; whatever we do for a living.ILL.- This sign was posted for workers: ?To all employees: Due to increased competition and a desire to stay in business, we find it necessary to institute a new policy.  We are asking that somewhere between starting and quitting time, and without infringing too much on the time usually devoted to lunch periods, coffee breaks, rest periods, story-telling, ticket-selling, vacation-planning, and the re-hashing of yesterday?s TV programs, each employee should endeavor to find some time that can be set aside and known as the ?WORK BREAK.??ILL.- Here was another sign posted for workers; although this one was written in 1858. ?This store will be open from 6 a.m. to 9 p.m. year round.  On arrival each morning, the store must be swept, and counters, shelves, and showcases dusted. Lamps must be trimmed, pens made, a pail of water and bucket of coal brought in before breakfast.  After 14 hours of work, leisure hours should be spent in reading.?Apparently, a hundred years ago people worked very hard! ILL.- Patrick Henry shouted, ?Give me liberty or give me death.?  The next generation shouted, ?Give me liberty.?  And someone said, ?The present generation shouts, ?GIVE ME!??ILL.- Preacher John Wesley traveled 250,000 miles in 40 years on horseback.  He preached 40,000 sermons, produced 400 books, knew ten languages.  At the age of 83 he was annoyed because he couldn?t write more than 15 hours a day without hurting his eyes, and at 86 he was ashamed that he couldn?t preach more than twice a day.  He complained in his diary that there was an increasing tendency to lie in bed until 5:30 in the morning.Obviously, John Wesley was a rare breed of a man.  But the point is: we Christians must never be slackers in our work; no matter what we do!ILL.- One man told his friend: I lost my job because of illness and fatigue.  Second man: Really, how awful!  First man: Yeah, my boss got sick and tired of me!ILL.- Larry Burkett was (passed away 2003) a nationally known Christian lecturer who conducted seminars on how to manage your money.  He received a letter from a non-Christian woman who owned a small business one time. She wrote, ?I?ve had trouble with my employees for years. They will not do an honest day?s work.  They are lazy and rebellious.  I heard your radio program and decided to hire all Christians.  I did, but I have never had a more complaining, griping group of people.  They were always mumbling about something.  I?ve now replaced them with refugees.  The refugees are so grateful to work; they?ll do everything I ask. They don?t grumble and complain.  I think American Christians need to wake up.?Brothers and sisters, I don?t believe what she said is true for all Christian people, but it is apparently true for some.  To bless America we must be good, hard-working people.III. BE CONSIDERATE OF ALL PEOPLEV. 2 ?Slander no one, be peaceable and considerate, and show true humility toward all men.?Gal. 6:10 ?Therefore, as we have opportunity, let us do good to all people, especially to those who belong to the family of believers.?To bless America we must do good to all people and be considerate of all people.ILL.- A Yale University president gave this advice to a former president of Ohio State:  ?Always be kind to your A and B students.  Someday one of them will return to your campus as a good professor.  And also be kind to your C students. Someday one of them will return and build you a two-million dollar science laboratory.?Brothers and sisters, we need to be kind, nice, and considerate to all people regardless of who they are or how much money they have.  Obviously, some people are more inclined to be nice to someone who has money or can benefit them in some way.  But we should kind to all and considerate of all people.ILL.- John Wesley had this for his rule of life:Do all the good you can,By all the means you can,In all the ways you can,In all the places you can,At all the times you can,To all the people you can,As long as ever you can.ILL.- De Tocqueville of France once said, ?America is great because she is good and if America ever ceases to be good, America will cease to be great.?There are definitely people in America who are not good.  They make no pretense about being selfish or self-centered.  They will lie, cheat, steal, deceive, maim, or kill in order to get what they want. And it?s not always the person we think.  It?s not always some addict from the ghetto who does these kinds of things.  Many times they are very prominent people who care about nobody but themselves.  But the Christian is to be different from the rest of the people of the world.  The Christian is to be a good person: thoughtful, considerate of others, kind to others, etc.ILL.- In the old comic strip, THE WIZARD OF ID, one day, Rodney, one of the warriors, came in from battle.  He was bruised and battered, and his horse was crippled.  The king said to him, ?Where have you been??  Rodney the warrior said, ?Out fighting your enemies on the west.  I?ve pillaged, and I?ve burned, and I?ve killed your enemies on the west.?   The king replied, ?But I don?t have any enemies on the west.?  Rodney said, ?YOU DO NOW!?It seems like some people are always looking for trouble, always looking for a fight.  But the Christian is supposed to be peaceable, gentle, kind, considerate of others.Rom. 12:18 ?If it is possible, as far as it depends on you, live at peace with everyone.?Heb. 12:14 ?Make every effort to live in peace with all men...?In other words, don?t go around stirring up people or trouble. Don?t be threatening your neighbor every time he or she does something you don?t like or anybody else for that matter.  Don?t go throwing your weight around.  Don?t go out of your way to cause trouble or make enemies.  Don?t argue all the time with people, thinking you are always right or you are always defending some righteous cause.ILL.- Two women were riding on a train together and began to argue over the window.  They called the conductor and one of them said, ?If this window is open I will catch a cold and die.?  The other woman said, ?If this window is closed, I will suffocate.?  And the two women glared at each other.Finally, the conductor didn?t know what to do so he asked the advice of a man who was sitting nearby.  The man said, ?First, open the window and that will kill one of them.  Then close the window and that will kill the other and then we?ll have some peace around here.?Brothers and sisters, that is not the way to make friends and influence people.  Instead, we should be thoughtful and considerate of others. We should be different from most people of the world.  Be a shining example of kindness and of selflessness.  Always be looking for opportunities to do good to others; to open doors for others, to smile, to speak a work of cheer or kindness to others, to open and close windows for people! Phil. 2:3-5 ?Do nothing out of selfish ambition or vain conceit, but in humility consider others better than yourselves. Each of you should look not only to your own interests, but also to the interests of others. YOUR ATTITUDE SHOULD BE THE SAME AS THAT OF CHRIST JESUS.?CONCLUSION----------------------------------------ILL.- An old Persian legend once pictured four angels watching God create the world.  One said, ?Why did God make it?? Another said, ?How did God make it??  A third said, ?Can I have it??  And the fourth said, ?CAN I HELP TO MAKE IT BETTER??1st - philosophical attitude - why?2nd - scientific attitude - how?3rd - selfish attitude - can I have it?4th - Christian attitude - Can I help to make it better?The United States of America is not what she should be.  And far too many have the wrong attitude about America.  Some question why she is becoming so corrupted.  Others ask, ?how did America get this way??   And others just want all they can get out of America, not thinking of others.  But the Christian person should be asking, ?How can I help to make America better??  ?How can I bless America??1- Be respectful of governmental authorities2- Be diligent in your work3- Be considerate of all people