 1 2007-2-4
 Fundamentalism 
Mark Belletini 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here, 

after a week of snow and bitter cold, 

to worship, to sift experience 

in the fingers of the mind and heart and body, 

to feed our hunger for a kinder world. And so 

 


??
?ˆ
???ˆ?
?
??ˆ???
?
??ˆ??ˆ
?
Sequence
  
Here I am, here you are, within the embrace of some
thing very grand called the Universe. They 
say it began from something smaller than the head o
f a pin. Angels may not dance on the head of 
that pin, as they insisted a thousand years ago, bu
t, I wonder, does that mean, then, that human 
beings are the only ones left waltzing across it? 

 
Here I am, here you are in the United States of Ame
rica, a land with a history that both inspires 
me and makes me weep, a land of both the courageous
 and the corruptible. It™s home to more 
than just the free and the brave, certainly. But, I
 wonder, can I count myself free if others aren™t? 
Or brave, if fellow citizens still sleep in the col
d? 
 
Here I am in my body, here you are in your bodies, 
each the fruit of four billion years of 
evolution. Because of experience, this body, at lea
st, has known both rage and joy. It™s closed 
down in defense and opened in vulnerability. I have
 grown thorns at the same time I open like 
rose.  I have been tight as a bud, but I have also 
blossomed like a tulip. But, I wonder, what is 
Your nature, Ground in which I grow? Or You, Light 
which lifts me from the earth to blossom 
me?  

 
Now I release myself into these questions and let t
hem float in silence. 
 
silence 

 
There are many people with whom I share this world.
 Billions. But, I wonder, who are the ones 
among all those billions that most inhabit my heart
? Are they friends or family? Are they 
opponents or the loud? Are they the quiet or the tr
oubled? Who?                    
 
Since they are here whether I see them or not, I na
me them, whispered, or in the silent sanctuary 
of the heart, so that I may bow to them, and acknow
ledge them at the very center of this 
celebration. 

 
 2 naming 

 
Music is a mystery like the universe, as complex as
 a nation, as vital as a living body. Poetry, 
too, is a place that shelters us, a richness, a hom
e. Let us be so bold as to enter the shrine where 
music and poetry are as one, that something within 
us might blossom. 
 
Readings
  
The First Reading
 comes from George Mardsen™s most excellent study ?F
undament-alism and 
American Culture,? the new edition of 2006. Dr. Mar
dsen is a professor of history at Notre 
Dame University. 

 
In the wake of the Revolution, Americans saw themse
lves as inaugurators of a new order for the 
ages. The new order was conceived as a return to a 
pristine human condition. For Protestants, 
this ideal was readily translated into ?The Bible a
lone should be one™s guide.? 
 
This attitude toward the Bible was closely related 
to religious individualism, and also encouraged 
by revivalism, which lifted up the idea that the in
dividual stood alone before God. The church, 
important, was made up of free individuals. 

 
Fundamentalism is best understood as a sub-species 
of American revivalism, which maintained 
the important distinction between the natural and t
he supernatural. All the key doctrines 
depended on this. The traditional fundamentals---th
e inerrancy of scripture, the Virgin Birth, the 
miracles of Christ, the sub-stitutionary  Atonement
, and bodily Resur-rectionŠall involved the 
supernatural. Hope for the future, thus, lay only i
n divine intervention, not human effort.  
 
This strong revivalist tradition in America doubtle
ss contributed to the tendency to see things in 
terms of simple antitheses (i.e. opposites.)  The r
evivalist believed the universe was divided into 
the realm of God and the realm of Satan, the righte
ous and unrighteous. Revi-valist hymns were 
full of simple contrasts between joy and sorrow, tu
rmoil and rest, weak-ness and strength, 
darkness and light, defeat and victory, purity and 
impurity, guilt and forgiveness, the saved and 
the lost. In this world-view, ambiguity was rare. T
ransitions never occurred gradually, but were, 
like the conversion experience itself, radical tran
sformations from one condition to its opposite. 
 
The Second Reading
 comes from Margo Perkins™ Exploring New Spaces: A D
ialogue with 
Black Women on Religion, Culture, and Spirituality
, 1995. I find this to be a beautiful memoir. 
 
As an African American woman, socialized into the s
outhern Black Baptist tradition, I have 
begun to see Christianity as inextricably bound to 
my identity. Even if I should someday practice 
another religion, the most I will ever be allowed t
o be–is a 
not-Christian
. In any event, 
Christianity seems the inescapable point of referen
ce marking African American identity. 
The rituals, music, and ethos associated with the B
aptist religious practice of my youth provide a 
sense of connection, not just to my family, but eve
n more profoundly, to the history of African 
Americans. I am deeply moved by the songs, by the j
oy of fellowship, and the warm embrace of 
the elders. To have participated in that celebratio
n of thanks and praise is to understand that 
place where Aretha reaches to sing ?Bridge Over Tro
ubled Water? or Sweet Honey In the Rock. 
If it were only these impressions I experienced, my
 relationship to Christianity would not be an 
ambivalent one. 

 
 3 However, there is a strong sense of intellectual al
ienation. I do not give my consent, for example, 
to the sexism, the homophobia, the proselytism, to 
the erasure of individual difference–all of 
which have marked my experience of Christian cultur
e. I further do not consent to the imposition 
in the name of religion of one culture™s values ont
o another, or to the misuse of religious doctrine 
to dominate or exploit. I do not know whether the p
aradox of Christianity, as both a liberating 
and oppressive force in the struggle of African Ame
rican people historically, is one that I can 
ever reconcile. 

 
Sermon 

 
If you can do it without a great deal of inconvenie
nce, take out a dollar bill.  
 
On it, on the opposite side of the George Washingto
n portrait, you will find an incomplete 
pyramid, with an eye within a triangle that finishe
s the pyramid. That, according to its designer, 
congressional secretary Charles Thomas, in 1782, is
 the ?eye of Providence.?  ?Providence? was 
a word used by many Revolutionary Era people as a s
ubstitute for the word ?God.? The word 
?Providence? was favored by people who, like John A
dams, or Thomas Jefferson, were ?deists,? 
that is, folks who believed some Force was behind t
he universe, behind liberty even.  But it was 
not a personal Force, a Person which really could b
e counted on to pay attention to the ?fall of a 
sparrow,? or ordinary human concerns, like some bib
lical portraits of deity insist.  
 
Over the eye, you will find a Latin phrase, 
Annuit Coeptis
. This is an unusual phrase, to be sure, 
with an unstated subject. But it translates best in
to English as ?Providence Favors Our 
Undertakings.?  What undertakings? The founding of 
a new nation, ?conceived in liberty.? 
Underneath both eye and incomplete pyramid, you wil
l find another Latin phrase ?Novus Ordo 
Saeculorum.? This means ?A New Order for the Ages.?
 Our word ?secular? comes from that last 
word, meaning simply ?the ages.? 

 
Now this line on the national seal, 
New Order for the Ages
, is clearly quoted in our first reading, 
by Dr. Mardsen. 

 
In the wake of the Revolution, Americans saw themse
lves as inaugurators of a 
new order for the 
ages. 
The new order was conceived as a return to a pristi
ne human condition. For Protestants, 
this ideal was readily trans-lated into ?The Bible 
alone should be one™s guide.? 
 
A new order. No kings or queens. No people with spe
cial privileges. Just an agreement. A 
covenant between free people. What they called the 
constitution. It wasn™t really a new idea–
 the native Iroquois people governed themselves by s
omething quite similar, and the idea of 
covenant was certainly found centrally in the Scrip
tures–especially in those passages which 
spoke of the nation of Israel before the famous dyn
asty of King David was established by 
violence. As it intones in the Book of Judges more 
than once
:  ?In those days, there was no king 
over Israel, and the people did just as they please
d.? 
 
This individualism and the anti-privilege, anti-aut
hority sentiment echoed in much of the 
writings of the founders of our nation. And, as Dr.
 Mardsen makes clear, these ideas found 
intersection with the revivalist religious movement
s among the Protestants, who made up the 
majority of our nations first colonial inhabitants.
 These revivals were sort of rallies, like you 
might have before a high school football game. Why 
did they arise? Because so many of the 
original and quite passionate religious convictions
 of the Pilgrims and Puritans had thinned out 

 4 over the years, so that attending church became mor
e a cultural thing than a real expression of 
conviction and purpose. Some of the more religious 
folk were concerned that their youth were 
going to abandon the Protestant congregations entir
ely. Many of the younger folk no longer went 
to communion, following the lead, perhaps, of many 
of the more deistic leaders of the nation, 
like George Washington, for example, who always wal
ked out before the Lord™s Supper was 
celebrated at his Episcopal church. Even religious 
liberals, like our own ancestors–I™m thinking 
of Ralph Waldo Emerson–worried about the difference
s between ?received? Unitarianism and 
directly experiential religion in the individual he
art–we would say ?spirituality? in modern 
jargon. Like Washington, Emerson too refused any co
mmunion ceremony that only ritually 
?remembered? someone who had lived long ago. You ca
n™t call Emerson a revivalist, exactly– 
his theology was way too rich, cerebral, complex an
d personal for that. But you can certainly 
suspect with good reason that he was influenced by 
the same basic worries about authenticity 
that bothered more conservative religious folk. And
 he too, like the revivalists, and most 
religious liberals, championed the individual consc
ience and spirit. Thus, there are, as you can 
see, strange overlaps in American religion between 
the very liberal and very conservative, 
between the intellectual and the emotional. 

 
So, little by little, a culture of revivals spread 
across the infant nation. The preaching was stirrin
g 
and long–
hours-
long in some cases. Cool wooden meeting houses were
 abandoned for the 
outdoors. Everything was going to be hip, engaging.
 The music was designed to stir and uplift. 
The lyrics, as Mardsen makes clear, were simplified
. 
Revivalist hymns were full of simple 
contrasts between joy and sorrow, turmoil and rest,
 weakness and strength, darkness and light, 
defeat and victory, purity and impurity, guilt and 
forgiveness, the saved and the lost.? 
The 
compassionate, ethical message of Jesus, that had m
oved a cool deist like Jefferson to write a 
book about him, was reduced by the revivalists into
 the message 
about
 Jesus, Jesus Christ as the 
Savior whose death redeemed the lost. This message 
was called an evangelical message, because 
it was the distillation the evangel, an old word fo
r gospel, according to those who preached it.
  
This revivalist attitude crossed institutional line
s. There was, after all, no First Revivalist church
, 
only Methodists, Presbyterians, Baptists, even some
 Congregationalists, who were changed by 
its emotional outreach. Several new religious movem
ents, which are peculiarly American, were 
generated by decade after decade of revivalism and 
its stress on individual relationships to God. I 
am thinking about Seventh Day Adventism, The Latter
 Day Saints, or Mormon movement, and 
later in the century, the Jehovah™s Witnesses. But,
 as Mardsen affirms, when the Darwinian way 
of looking at things began to enter the public sphe
re, the people from all denominations who 
were affected by the revival movement felt attacked
 and threatened. After all, for almost a 
hundred years, they had been raised that the supern
atural and the natural were different orders of 
reality. Now, here come Darwin and his followers, a
sserting that the whole earth, from every 
mountain range to every deep sea, from every beetle
 wing to every sea slug, from every whale 
eye to every human pupil, could be explained with r
eference to only 
one
 world–the natural 
world. Darwin, of course, didn™t go around bashing 
the supernatural world, nor did most of his 
followers. They weren™t fighting any such battles. 
Scientists were not culture warriors, yet. 
 
But eventually battle lines of a sort were drawn. A
s the 19
th
 century gave way to the 20
th
, men 
like Billy Sunday, a Presbyterian revivalist, went 
around in tents, including here in Columbus, 
and electrified thousands. They demanded decisions–
for or against. Yes or No. No maybes. No 
gray areas. No middle-ground. It was either Heaven.
 Or Hell. Around this time, some of the 
liberal preachers began to see what was happening a
nd decided something needed to be done. 
The Protestant message was being reduced to somethi
ng without either subtlety or reason. So 

 5 some preachers, as I pointed out in a sermon some y
ears ago, including Washington Gladden 
here in Columbus, called out the revivalists as cha
rlatans that had watered the ethical demands of 
the ancient teacher into some sort of fearful wager
 about life after death. The poor and 
marginalized were all around, shivering in the cold
, ministers like Gladden opined, and yet the 
tent preachers were only offering brief spasms of e
xcitement. They were not offering true gospel 
preaching, which was always social, always on behal
f of the poor and outcast, and always 
profoundly ethical. Neither Darwin, or even Marx, a
roused much fear in folks like Gladden, 
who, after all, was himself a socialist, or among o
ur own ancestors. This open attitude threatened 
the revivalists also. 

 
Eventually, between 1910 and 1915, the revivalists 
affirmed some basic 
fundamentals
, as they 
called them, and published their final broadside in
 a series of pamphlets which lifted up the 
absolute inerrancy of scripture, the literal virgin
 conception, the bodily, not symbolic 
resurrection of Christ, the Last Judgment and the B
lood Atonement.  Within years, the revivalists 
were labeled by their few clear teachings as ?those
 
Fundamental
ists.? 
 
Now I know this word is often used to refer to Musl
ims and conservative Jews these days, or 
even certain Hindus.  It™s a strange usage, I™d say
, a journalistic attempt at finding interpretive 
parallels which are not really there. After all, so
-called Muslim ?fundamentalists? cannot teach 
the blood atonement of Christ since they deny he wa
s even crucified in the first place. More 
confusingly, the words ?conservative,?  ?right-wing
 reactionary? and ?fundamentalist? are not 
necessarily synonyms.  Because Protestant American 
Fundamentalism is just that: Protestant and 
American. Really conservative Roman Catholics or Ea
stern Orthodox Christians cannot fairly be 
called ?Fundamentalists? either, although you may c
ertainly find what may be called ?ultra-
Conservative? Catholics and Orthodox teachers, both
 doctrinally and politically. These are 
sometimes called ?integrists.? But real Fundamental
ists, rooted in the revivalist tradition, like 
those at Bob Jones University, spend a lot of their
 time writing books against all Catholics 
everywhere, no matter how conservative some claim t
o be. What I am saying is that just because 
there is a similar rigidity does not mean that ther
e is ?identity.?  Just because there is agreement 
by evangelical fundamentalists and some conservativ
e Roman Catholics on issues like gay 
marriage and abortion does not mean they are the sa
me thing, by a long shot. Oh, listen, I know I 
have no chance at all to convince very many people 
of my case around this–the horse has left 
the barn long ago. But I do want to be clear at lea
st for the length of this sermon. 
 
Now the second reading this morning records a perso
nal journey. Margo Perkins gives a 
beautiful summary of her Baptist upbringing, and ho
w important it is to her identity–she can 
relate to the exciting place where Aretha Franklin 
?reaches? she says, when she is singing a song 
like Bridge Over Troubled Water. She can relate to 
the culture of her age in a rooted way. She 
appreciates community. Hugs. Care. 

 
But, she says, she also experiences intellectual al
ienation from her church. ?I do not give my 
consent,? she writes, ?to the sexism, the homophobi
a, the proselytism, to the erasure of 
individual difference–? she finds in her religious 
upbringing. She does not support churches 
imposing their values on other cultures in this mix
ed culture nation of ours. 
 
Ms. Perkins finds herself in a difficult place. She
 can name the oppressiveness of her 
conservative church background, and expresses her d
isagreement with it. She shows an enviable 
clarity. But she also notes that there is a certain
 liberation that comes from her church experience 
too, liberation supporting her struggle as an Afric
an American. She goes so far as to say that 

 6 even if she were to stop going to church, and cease
 being a member of her Baptist congregation, 
and join some other religion, she would still, at l
east for a while, feel more like a ?not-Christian? 
than say, a Buddhist, or even  Unitarian Universali
st.  
 
Margo Perkins recognizes the complexity of her situ
ation. She recognizes that she has to decide, 
pick, choose, relate, struggle, and refuse to be ri
gid or absolutist as she faces her past and her 
present. Ms. Perkins, no matter if she stays in the
 church, or leaves it, has to relate to her history
, 
her experiences and her emotional memories, her who
le life. 
 
I don™t know if the Baptist church Ms. Perkins atte
nded was a bonafide fundamentalist church. It 
sounds conservative culturally, from what she says.
 But, remember, not all conservatives are 
fundamentalist. But her story is remarkably emblema
tic of many people in America–raised in a 
religious home, but not quite at home within it. Li
ke the original Pilgrims, many of us leave that 
familiar home religion, and venture forth. Some fin
d other religions; some give up religion as 
much as they can. Some leave Christianity. Some go 
deeper into its more conservative branches. 
Some born and raised Unitarian Univeralists don™t l
eave the tradition, but do deepen their 
theology any number of ways. To be authentically re
ligious is to grow and change and deepen. 
 
But the point is, there are many millions here in t
he nation of religious pilgrims who have left 
fundamentalist congregations, too, of whatever deno
minations. I want to be clear here– 
fundamentalism, like revivalism, has no church of i
ts own. There is no such thing as First 
Fundamentalist Church. Fundamentalism is a movement
 across denominational lines. By the 
same token, we aren™t the only religious liberals t
here are, either.  
 
And when I look at the modern face of America, I se
e how clearly the fundamentalist approach 
has made its mark on our culture, and our ways of m
oving through the world. You see, even 
when some fundamentalists leave their religion–many
 do–for secularism, or atheism or some 
liberal church, or Buddhist group–the 
structures
 of fundamentalism often come with them.  
They may leave Christ and Atonement and the Last Ju
dgement behind, but the ?simple 
contrasts?  reflected so clearly in revivalist hymn
ody, are the sort of structure that remains. 
Remember what Dr. Marsden said? 

 
joy and sorrow, turmoil and rest, weakness and stre
ngth, darkness and light, defeat and victory, 
purity and impurity, guilt and forgiveness, the sav
ed and the lost. In this world-view, 
he 
continues,
 ambiguity was rare. Transitions never occurred gra
dually, but were, like the 
conversion experience itself, radical transformatio
ns from one condition to its opposite. 
 
Binary thinking, I call it. Either/or thinking. And
 our secular culture is filled with fundamentalist 
structure, often without any religious content what
soever. Are you part of a Red or Blue state? 
Are you progressive? Then your foes must all be rig
ht-wing nuts! Racist and what? Not racist? 
Feminist? No, Rush Limbaugh™s ?Femi Nazi.? Either y
ou are pro-war or you are a traitor. Either 
you believe in a God who works miracles, or you mus
t be an atheist. Either you are an atheist, or 
you must be a fundamentalist. Or worse, a wishy-was
hy moderate. Either you™re a Haliburton-
supporting capitalist, or you must be one of them s
ocialists, like they have in France. Either you 
are pro-Gay marriage or you are the new Fred Phelps
. Either you are gay or straight–bisexuals, 
I just read the other day in a local gay publicatio
n, really don™t exist and are just deceiving 
themselves. And there is, the article asserts, a st
udy that 
proves 
it! Ah, those 
inerrant
 studies, just 
like those 
inerrant
 bible passages on the tracts stuck in my car door!
  I read this book which 
changed my life–it answers everything. I take this 
supplement which changed my life. I found 

 7 this exercise machine they sell on television that 
will give me 8-pack abs in just two weeks, and I 
don™t have to diet or anything. No slow transition–
 sudden conversion. I used to be–and now I 
am–because I found–  

 
All of this is fundamentalist language.
 It has permeated our culture, even among those, li
ke me, 
not raised in such culture. My point this morning i
s this. Either/or approaches to life are 
dangerous and deceptive. There are almost always ma
ny ways to frame things. The complexity 
of human lives in a complex environment with a 4 bi
llion year complex evolution must not be 
frozen into the modern intellectual ice-cube tray I
 find all around me: Either this, or that. Either 
you are with me a hundred percent, or you are again
st me.  
 
What I am doing this morning is asking us all to be
 on the alert for how unconscious structures, 
seeping into our lives via a uniquely powerful move
ment in American history, can sometimes 
subdue and replace our thoughts and feelings uncons
ciously, dampening our capacity to live a 
free, spiritually well-grounded life, a life that t
hat flows instead of freezes, heals instead of 
harms. 

 
American history, itself, is far wider than the fun
damentalist claim that this is a ?Christian? 
nation. The dollar bill you may still have in your 
hand reminds you that many of our forebears 
were skeptical deists, not proto-fundamentalists. A
nd frankly, the idea of a 
Novo Ordo 
Saeculorum, 
a new order for the ages, on our bills, is not a ba
d one. An revolutionary order based 
not on either/or, but on both/and, based on respect
 for differences, based on understanding and 
serious compassion. What would happen if we took th
at idea seriously, and recognized that, in a 
world of ethnic rivalry, religious conflict, politi
cal corruption, sexual oppression and systemic 
poverty, our nation, with its unique history, so mu
lti-cultural, multi-faith, so skeptical, so very 
complex in its struggles, might, if we claimed our 
deeper heritage, have something better, more 
redemptive, to offer the world than what we offer–a
nd even impose upon it– now? 
 
Offertory
  
Our strength is a common strength. 

Our joy is a shared joy. 

Our responsibilities are joined together. 

We give of our hours to the common endeavor. 

We give of our heart to the common endeavor. 

We give of our livelihoods to the common endeavor. 

We give because our strength is a common strength, 

our joy is a shared joy, 

our responsibilities are real,  

and are joined together. 

Prayer of Encouragement:  

Following the Path 

 
Let™s follow those who lead us well, 

and that we in turn might learn how to better lead.
 Let™s follow those who always question hurt and har
m, and help to answer their anguish by 
offering our healing. 

Let™s follow those who turn away from 

humiliation or violence, and call them heroes and 
sheroes
, not cowards. 

 8 Let™s follow the paths of those who braved trails b
efore us, that we may learn, not their paths, 
but how to brave trails of our own. 

Let™s follow the path of the wise, 

whom we recognize because they never claim to be wi
se,  and never, ever bully. 
Let™s follow those who laugh, who weep, 

who dance, who play, who struggle, who refuse to sh
ame, who refuse to demean, so that we can 
remember what it means to be truly and most honorab
ly human. 
Oh Love, be our guiding star and our compass as we 
follow on. 

