Sunday, April 26, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "For ye, brethren, became followers of the churches of God  which in Judaea are in Christ Jesus; for ye also have suffered like  things of your own countrymen, even as they have of the Jews;  WHO BOTH KILLED THE LORD JESUS, and their own prophets,  and have persecuted us; and they please not God, and are  contrary to all men; FORBIDDING US TO SPEAK TO THE  GENTILES that they might be saved, to fill up their sins alway; for  the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost." 1 Thes. 2:14-16.  Thus are described and identified the "NAUGHTY FIGS" of Jeremiah, chapter 24; which are there said to be so very evil, and bad, that, "they could not be eaten for badness." Jer. 24:2.  "The Lord showed me, and, behold, two baskets of figs were set before the temple of the Lord... One basket had very good figs, even like the figs that are first ripe; and the other basket had very NAUGHTY FIGS, which could not be eaten, they are so bad." (Jer. 24:1,2)  Remember, Beloved ­ it is good to always keep in mind when studying God's Holy Scripture ­ "I have also spoken by the prophets, and I have multiplied visions, AND (I HAVE) USED SIMILITUDES, by the ministry of the prophets." Hos. 12:10. I have rarely had very much use for the 24th chapter of Jeremiah. It seemed to be a little redundant ­ and more for another time and place, than for the here and now. But, like most of the passages of Scripture, sooner or later, a second or third look or so, and BANG! Pure gold! "NAUGHTY FIGS" have now come front and center, loaded with blessings, and with a glorious context; to wit:  "What hath the Lord answered? and, What hath the Lord spoken? ...(Y)e have perverted the words of the living God, of the Lord of hosts... Therefore, behold, I, even I, will utterly forget you, and I will forsake you, and the city that I gave you and your fathers, and cast you out of my presence: And I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame, which shall not be forgotten." (Jer. 23:35-40) Think, nasty, smelly, Christ-rejecting, God-forsaken, Hell-bound Jews, scattered throughout the civilized world, and hated ­ everywhere; to wit: "And as the evil figs, which cannot be eaten, they are so evil; surely thus saith the Lord... And I will deliver them to be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth for their hurt, to be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in all places whither I shall drive them. And I will send the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, among them, till they be consumed from off the land that I gave unto them and to their fathers." Jer. 24:8-10.  Beloved, there is nothing and nobody more thoroughly filthy and contemptible, more vile, debauched, depraved, degenerate, and decadent ­ than the Jews. They are disproportionately engaged in every form of sinful occupation, such as pornography, sodomy, adultery, bestiality, drugs, gambling, childexploitation, slavery, usury, organized crime, etc. Read again our text for today, which is perhaps more accurately descriptive of the dangerous, God-cursed Jews of today than any secular source; to wit:  "(F)or ye also have suffered like things of your own countrymen, even as they have of the Jews; who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own prophets, and have persecuted us; and they please not God, and are contrary to all men; forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their sins alway; for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost." (1 Thess. 2:14-16)  Sunday, April 26, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  Jews whine and lie that they are mistreated, whereas they through systemic fraud and overreaching get  the best of every deal of every kind. Perhaps the best deal of all Jews is to play and gain the part of the  victim. God has given the Jews power to get wealth; to wit: "But thou shalt remember the Lord thy  God; for it is he that giveth thee power to get wealth." Deut. 8:18. This is part of the curse. The nature  of the curse, in its operational affect upon the hateful, greedy Jews, is such that wealth and the pursuit of  wealth is a great curse upon the Jews; to wit:  "But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. For the love of money is the root of all evil; which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows." (1 Tim. 6:9,10) This is an accurate word-picture of the Jews, in their present blind and murderous NAUGHTY FIG dispensation. Beloved, few doctrines of Scripture are more often and more plainly taught than what may be called the "VERY-NAUGHTY/VERY- GOOD FIG" doctrine; to wit: "Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Behold, I will send upon them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and will make them like vile figs, that cannot be eaten, they are so evil. And I will persecute them with the sword, with the famine, and with the pestilence, and will deliver them to be removed to all the kingdoms of the earth, to be a curse, and an astonishment, and an hissing, and a reproach, among all the nations whither I have driven them; Because they have not hearkened to my words, saith the Lord, which I sent unto them by my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them; but ye would not hear, saith the Lord." (Jer. 29:17-19)  Of all the manifestations of the glory of God to the sons of men, none has been more (or,as) glorious than the dedication of the Temple of Solomon about 1,000 B.C., after Solomon's 20-year building project was complete ­ using the thousands of tons of materials accumulated by David before his death; to wit: "And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon concerning the name of the Lord, she came to prove him with hard questions. And she came to Jerusalem with a very great train, with camels that bare spices, and very much gold, and precious stones; and when she was come to Solomon, she communed with him of all that was in her heart... And she said to the king, It was a true report that I heard in mine own land of thy acts and of thy wisdom. Howbeit I believed not the words, until I came, and mine eyes had seen it; and, behold, THE HALF WAS NOT TOLD ME; thy wisdom and prosperity exceedeth the fame which I heard." (1 Kgs. 10:1-7) Thus you see that all was sweetness and light with King Solomon at the time of the Temple's completion and dedication. Think, "very good figs (-type time);" to wit: "And I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord; and they shall be my people, and I will be their God; for they shall return unto me with their whole heart." (Jer. 24:7)  Otherwise, think "evil figs;" to wit: "And I will deliver them to be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth for their hurt, to be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in all places whither I shall drive them. And I will send the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, among them, till they be consumed from off the land that I gave unto them and to their fathers." Jer. 24:9,10.  Sunday, April 26, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  "Wherefore the wrath of the Lord was upon Judah and Jerusalem, and he hath  delivered them to trouble, to astonishment, and to hissing, as ye see with your  eyes." (2 Chron. 29:8)  See also Mic. 6:16, etc. Without any question, the threatenings of God against the Jews have been and are being fulfilled to the full. The Jews are the most despicable, disgusting, filthy, and abominable people on earth ­ all as a direct result of the curse of God upon them. Jews are the butt-end of jokes, reproaches, slanders, taunting, proverbs, bywords and hissings, etc.  This has been the situation with the Jews ­ without change, modification, or abatement ­ for some 2,500 years. The Jews had a great hand in killing Christ, and all the world knows it. But the lying Jews deny it; and they assault anyone even suggesting it, with false and well-orchestrated screams of "Anti-Semite!" Jews terrorize the nations of the Middle East; and with threats of nuclear devastation claim that they have power sufficient to explode the world. Beloved, things are rapidly moving to the end of the world, and upon the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ ­ the time of joyous restitution of all things is at hand. Acts 3:21. We are told to WATCH ­ and especially to watch the FIG tree; to wit: "(Jesus said), Now learn a parable of the FIG TREE; When her branch is yet tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is near; So ye in like manner, when ye shall see THESE THINGS come to pass, know that it is nigh, EVEN AT THE DOORS. Verily I say unto you, that this generation shall not pass, till all THESE THINGS be done. Heaven and earth shall pass away; but my words shall not pass away. But of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father. TAKE YE HEED, WATCH and pray; for ye know not when the time is. For the Son of man is as a man taking a far journey, who left his house, and GAVE AUTHORITY to his servants, and to every man his work, and commanded the porter to WATCH. Watch ye therefore; for ye know not when the master of the house cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the cock crowing, or in the morning; Lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping. And what I say unto you I say unto all, WATCH." (Mk. 13:28-37) Beloved, these words in this short discourse of the Lord Jesus simply vibrate with urgency ­ and the FIG TREE leads off the marvelous array of words. WATCH, watch, watch, watch ­ over and over again says our Lord Jesus ­ "WATCH!" "WHEN YE SHALL SEE THESE THINGS" ­ (Beloved, what things?) ­ "When ye shall see THESE THINGS come to pass, know that it is nigh, even at the doors."  Look at the FIRST RIPE FIGS. The first ripe figs, are the most delicious. The first ripe figs are those which come when her branch is yet tender, and putteth forth leaves. The first ripe figs are "very good." Beloved, look for "these things" ­ look diligently for the "first ripe" figs, such as are in the first basket of Jeremiah's vision; to wit: "The Lord showed me, and, behold, two baskets of figs were set before the temple of the Lord... One basket had very good figs, even like the figs that are first ripe; and the other basket had VERY NAUGHTY FIGS, which could not be eaten, they were so bad (margin, which could not be eaten for their badness). Then said the Lord unto me, What seest thou, Jeremiah? And I said, FIGS; the GOOD FIGS, VERY GOOD; and the evil, very evil, that cannot be eaten, they are so evil." (Jer. 24:1-3)  Sunday, April 26, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  NOTE, Beloved, this is the ultimate fulfillment of our Lord's formal commissioning of us as His Royal  Fruit Inspectors; to wit:  "Beware of false prophets, (commanded the Lord Jesus), which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them BY THEIR FRUITS. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or FIGS of thistles? Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them." (Mat. 7:15-20)  All things considered, our diligent watching and fruit inspecting yields many blessed comforts, not the least of which is the fellowship with 144,000 Jews who will turn to the Lord Jesus as their Savior (these are the "VERY GOOD FIGS" of Jeremiah, chapter 24); to wit: "And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Zion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Father's name written in their foreheads." (Rev 14:1) (Identified in Rev., chapter 7 as exactly 12,000 from each of the twelve tribes of Israel who have been marvelously redeemed by Christ as at Rev. 1:7; to wit:  "Behold, he cometh with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him; and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. Even so, Amen." (Rev. 1:7)  Think of it, Beloved. A time when 144,000 of the world's filthiest, nastiest, most abominable two-legged creatures who ever lived (see, 1 Thes. 2:14-16) are wonderfully saved (Rev. 14), and a nation is born in a day (Isa. 66:8), and, all Israel shall be saved (Rom. 11:26). Of old, the prophets told of a time near the end of the world, when God Himself would perform this amazing feat of pure, divine, sovereign grace; to wit:  "And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications; and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn. In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon. And the land shall mourn, every family apart; the family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart; the family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart; The family of the house of Levi apart, and their wives apart; the family of Shemei apart, and their wives apart; All the families that remain, every family apart, and their wives apart." (Zech. 12:10-14) Wonderful Jews, redeemed by the blood of the Lamb. Their moral description, guaranteed by God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost appears in two verses; at Rev. 14:4,5; to wit:  "These are they which were not defiled with women; for they are virgins. These are they which follow the Lamb withersoever he goeth. These were redeemed from among men, being the first-fruits unto God and to the Lamb. And in their mouth was found no guile; for they are without fault before the throne of God." (Rev. 14:4,5) I love you. Amen.  
