Sunday, February 17, 2008 page 1  Sermon Outline  I give every man the fruit of his doings. Jer. 17:10.  "I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings." (Jer. 17:10) Catch the phrase, "the fruit of his doings." Again, Jeremiah says, "For I have set my face against this city for evil, and not for good, saith the Lord: it shall be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire. And touching the house of the king of Judah, say, Hear ye the word of the Lord...I will punish you according to the fruit of your doings, saith the Lord." Jer. 21:10,11,14. There is the phrase again, "the fruit of your doings." "Give every man according to the fruit of his doings." And, "I will punish you, according to the fruit of your doings." In those verses, and in those phrases, reference is made to a body of laws, statutes and ordinances, by which, or under which, the subjects of that jurisdiction are judged and punished by the king of that jurisdiction. Just as the United States has many thousands of big, heavy books filled with all the laws, statutes, case law and ordinances that somehow, ­ in a convoluted fashion, ­ govern those who enter this jurisdiction. And so it is with all other jurisdictions. And all of them ­ every last one of them ­ all and sundry of them ­ are seriously flawed, perverted, and are discriminatorily and arbitrarily and unfairly applied. Now back to our text. "Thus saith the Lord, I will punish you according to the fruit of your doings." Jer. 21:14. That's all in accordance with Heaven's laws ­ that body of laws, ordinances and statutes that govern all things whatsoever in the Kingdom of God. And we may be sure that they will be strictly and fairly applied. That is a fearful passage in Jer. 17:10; to wit: "I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings." Jer. 17:10. Such passages give us insight into how it will be when we take our places beside the Great King on His throne of massive adjudication in the world to come; to wit: "To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne." (Rev. 3:21)  "But the saints of the most High shall take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever." (Dan. 7:18)  "And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him." (Dan. 7:27)  Sunday, February 17, 2008 page 2  Sermon Outline  All the saints of God (i.e., all the Elect) have a unique and special honor, and they are all without  exception honorable, and they occupy seats or thrones in glory from which they execute God's  vengeance upon the heathen, and from which they administer punishments upon the reprobates  ­ or the non-elect ­ throughout all eternity. All strictly according to the laws, statutes and  ordinances of the Great King, which reflect His judgments ­ (i.e., His opinions, His sovereign  will) -- in writing ­ throughout eternity. All we do is "To execute upon them" (i.e., the non-  elect, whose sins have never been forgiven) ­ "To execute upon them the judgment written."  Psa. 149:9.  To flesh out this doctrine more fully and particularly, see Psa. 149:5-9; to wit: "Let the saints be joyful in glory: let them sing aloud upon their beds. Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a twoedged sword in their hand; To execute vengeance" ­ (i.e., God's vengeance, for the way they treated His people on earth) ­ "To execute vengeance upon the heathen (the non-elect), and (to execute) punishments upon the people (the non-elect): To bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron" ­ (following the rule of construction that the lesser is included in the greater, "kings" and "nobles" here simply means all the non-elect); "To execute upon them the judgment written: this honour have all his saints. Praise ye the Lord." Psa. 149:5-9.  And the prophets of God have been preaching this doctrine since the world began. "And Enoch," we read, for example, "the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, To execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him." Jd. 14,15.  So, you see, "this honour have all his saints. Praise ye the Lord." Psa. 149:9. Not just a few ­ or even a large number ­ of His saints; but "this honour have ALL his saints." Psa. 149:9. Millions if not billions of His saints ­ all engaged year after year, century after century, millennia after millennia, for ever, even for ever and ever, throughout ceaseless ages of time ­ think of it ­ ALL the glorified Elect of God, in splendid array adorning their new bodies, engaged in their adjudicatory service to the Great King ­ applying His great body of laws to particular situations as their case loads of criminals may require ­ and all in vindication of the wisdom, justice, faithfulness, and power, and honor, and sundry other glorious attributes of the triune God.  Look again at our text; to wit: "I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings." Jer. 17:10. How would this area of the King's laws apply ­ for instance ­ to the reprobate Methodist pastor who ­ together with his wife and two kids ­ got killed in a car wreck last week in Tennessee, even as they were helping others clean up the carnage of the tornadoes and storms that killed many people and did much damage last week in Tennessee? That Methodist pastor ­ in all probability ­ went straight to Hell! Without any doubt, he was a fag or a fag enabler. How do we know? Well, he was a Methodist pastor wasn't he? Case closed. We stood with our signs of religious protest and warning, outside the city auditorium in Sacramento, Calif., where 200 such Methodist pastors were performing a wedding ceremony for TWO FEMALES before a big  Sunday, February 17, 2008 page 3  Sermon Outline  crowd of several thousand, inside the auditorium. The two females were employed by the  Methodist church. When Mel White ­ another preacher who left his wife and kids to "marry" a  man ­ I say, when Mel White came to Topeka at the expense of another group of fag-enabling  preachers, to try and get me to soften my Gospel sermons with respect to fags, a gaggle of  Methodist preachers from First Methodist Church were his sponsors.  The Methodist bishop of Eastern Kansas had three sons, two of whom were openly gay, and those two were already dead of AIDS ­ even as they were studying in their Methodist seminary to become Methodist preachers like their father. That Methodist bishop ­ even after his two sons were dead of AIDS ­ AND HIS WIFE ­ continued to actively promote the gay lifestyle ­ using his bully pulpit as a leader over many Methodist churches ­ and with his wife working with him to advance the gay lifestyle among the thousands of young people in the many Methodist churches he led. Think of the influence for evil that such a wicked couple had (and still has) over many thousands of souls. And think of the multiplied additional tens of thousands ­ even millions! ­ influenced for evil by THEIR converts to sodomy. And so on.  Now, consider our text; to wit: "I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings." Jer. 17:10. Therein is contained the law ­ IN PART ­ that governs the Kingdom of God ­ that you must apply to those appearing before you in eternity. "But I will punish you according to the fruit of your doings, saith the Lord." Jer. 21:14. "Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, To execute judgment." Jd. 14,15. "To execute upon them the judgment written; this honour have all his saints. Praise ye the Lord (i.e., Praise the Lord for this great, eternal honor ­ to sit in judgment as co-regent with Christ ­ in blessed fellowship with all the wonderful Elect of God)." Psa. 149:9. Now, just suppose ­ (which is not far-fetched at all) ­ I say, just suppose that one of these Methodist pastors is assigned to your case-load. You must apply Jer. 17:10 ­ among other relevant laws in the jurisdiction of the Great King, "the only wise God." 1 Tim. 1:17; to wit:  "Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, THE ONLY WISE GOD, be honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen." (1 Tim. 1:17)  It may help ­ in taking this law in grasp, to consider a wise, old proverb; to wit: "Any fool can count the number of seeds in an apple; but only God can count the number of apples in one seed." Cut the apple open, carve out the core where the seeds are, pluck them out and count them ­ maybe 5, or 6. THAT'S HOW MANY SEEDS IN ONE APPLE. Easy. But now plant the one seed. When it develops into a tree, it yields a crop of many thousands of apples each year. And each of those apples has 5 or 6 seeds, each one of which, when developed into a tree, yields a crop of many thousands of apples each year. Soon, you will have millions; then billions; then trillions; and so forth, until the number of apples from JUST ONE seed will be INCALCULABLE ­ but they MUST BE CALCULATED. And eternity rolls on, and on.  And so it is with the Methodist pastor who was killed in Tennessee last week. Just by staying in that monstrosity called Methodism, he is lending tacit approval to sodomy. He is saying to all those with whom he has powerful influence, It's OK to be gay. God is a liar. The Bible isn't true or reliable as an infallible guide. What a message to inculcate into young people ­ or  Sunday, February 17, 2008 page 4  Sermon Outline  anybody, for that matter. He will easily have several thousand people within his sphere of  influence, as a primary resource of their moral and spiritual teaching. Those several thousand  people will negatively influence several more thousand, ­ EACH ­ and on, and on, through all  eternity. That's giving him punishment for "the fruit of his doings." Jer. 17:10. Earlier in the  verse, the Lord swore, after a thorough investigation ­ ("I the Lord search the heart, I try the  reins") ­ a thorough investigation, indeed, to give him "according to his ways."  We must carefully make the distinction between these two phrases; to wit: "According to his ways;" and, "according to the fruit of his doings." Human codes punish "according to his ways;" and usually stop right there. The code of the Kingdom of God goes further, and also punishes "according to the fruit of his doings." Put another way, God's code reaches the heart of things, and the heart of fallen mankind; and God's punitive actions pursue the impenitent sinner beyond the grave and throughout eternity. Mankind, when he hears that such are God's concepts, angrily cries out, "Unfair! Unfair!" To which the Elect of God answer, "Who art thou, O man, that repliest against God? And, who art thou ­ O vile creature ­ to tell God what's fair and what's unfair?" Take another example of God's laws offending mankind, as declared by the Lord Jesus Christ himself at Mat. 23:34,35; to wit;  "Wherefore, behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes: and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and persecute them from city to city: THAT UPON YOU MAY COME ALL THE RIGHTEOUS BLOOD shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom YE SLEW between the temple and the altar." (Mat. 23:34,35)  This is an amazing declaration of a still more amazing law of God, of imputation of guilt upon THOSE WHO PERSECUTE HIS PEOPLE. This is further proof of just how greatly God "abhors" (Dt. 32:19) those who persecute His people. God says that He will impute the sins of 4,000 years to the generation then living, BECAUSE THEY PERSECUTE HIS PEOPLE. Starting with Abel (4000 B.C), up to and including Zacharias (840 B.C.). It was not the mere murder of Abel (4000 B.C.) that so enraged the Almighty ­ but rather it was Cain persecuting Abel to the death for preaching the Gospel to him! to wit: "And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the Lord. And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof. And the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his offering: But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect. And Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell...And Cain talked with Abel his brother: and it came to pass, when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and slew him." Gen. 4:3-8.  For that murder, God's law said all the living persecutors were guilty! and would be punished! in Hell! "Unfair! Unfair!" screams the guilty living persecutor. "I had nothing to do with that murder. It was committed 4000 years before I was born." Take that human law argument up with God on Judgment Day. See how it works out for you. That's the law-code of the Kingdom of Heaven. The Methodist pastor doesn't like the fact that he will be prosecuted and punished to endless ages, not only because of his sins, but also because of the millions of those who in chain-  Sunday, February 17, 2008 page 5  Sermon Outline  link fashion were influenced by his protégés, and by his protégés' protégés, his protégés'  protégés' protégés, and on and on throughout eternity.  It is a very complicated process to fully and accurately adjudicate such a matter. But don't worry. We have plenty of time in eternity; and, remember, we have bright, shining minds in our new bodies, and we will eventually figure it all out. And besides, it is highly likely that the innumerable company of angels will help us with that task also, and will function somewhat like our law clerks, in our position as Royal Judges. After all, we are told that the good angels are "All ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation." Heb. 1:14. And we are further told that the elect angels all belong to the church state with us, and that by being members of the same family, the church, we "are come to...an innumerable company of angels." Heb. 12:22. ("For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom THE WHOLE FAMILY IN HEAVEN AND EARTH is named." Eph. 3:14,15.)  These good angels have had a lot of experience helping us, (the Elect), understand very complicated things; to wit: "And I heard a man's voice between the banks of Ulai, which called, and said, Gabriel, make this man to understand the vision." Dan. 8:16. We shall be in every way competent for the task of adjudicating ­ as well as ruling and reigning ­ with Christ. Paul wrote to the Corinthians ­ most unambiguously; to wit:  "Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world? and if the world shall be judged by you ­ (including the weak and sometimes backslidden church members at Corinth) ­ are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters? Know ye not that we shall judge angels? how much more things that pertain to this life?" (1 Cor. 6:2,3)  Beloved, in a very short time now, we shall all be ensconced ­ ("ensconce" means to settle oneself securely and comfortably into a given position) ­ in our new, and glorious, and eternal positions in the World to Come (Eph. 1:21); otherwise called the Life to Come (1 Tim. 4:8); and, sometimes called Everlasting Habitations (Lk. 16:9); A Place Prepared for You (Jn. 14:2); and, our Long Home (Eccl. 12:5). Etc., etc. The mother of James and John, whose name was Salome, the wife of Zebedee ­ as well as her two boys ­ requested that they be given choice positions on their thrones in Glory. Read about it in Mat. 20:20 and Mk. 10:37.  Likewise I have a more modest request, that I humbly and most respectfully make; and that is that the Methodist Bishop for eastern Kansas be assigned to my case load. Also, a few judges and a few more big shot preachers are on my short list of defendants. Why did that Methodist Bishop and his pushy, politicking wife fight WBC? Why did they use their potent influence promoting sodomy ­ in honor of their two fag sons who died of AIDS? How many young people did they corrupt? And how many did those corruptees corrupt? And on, and on, into the billions.  And the beat goes on, as they say, by what the mathematicians call geometric progression. Beloved. These things are very real to us, as they were with Salome. Very soon now, and they will all come to pass. Amen.  
