








Who is that Man?
BY COUNTESS NADINE TOLSTOY


 
BABAíS humour and wit is so subtle and to the point; he will lift the lower moods in laughter and fun making everybody light and alert, freeing from heaviness and limitations of self- consciousness. His greatest words of Truth become alive sparks in wit and inspiration. This subtle way will  stir the joyous qualities in human nature and change its moods accordingly. He likes cheerfulness as a sign of real free response to Him. One in all life, in beauty  and  humour,   in  ugliness and
 
misery, in richness or poverty, He is  the One in all heartsóin joy or sorrow. One moment He works and plays with joy, another moment He plays with pain, turning the game into glimpses of spirituality and greater detachment.
ìFreedom with clipped wingsî, He said as He gave rules of restrictions to His devotees in the Ashram. In the earlier days of our Ashram life one of those present asked whether it was not a blessing to suffer as we are imprisoned in ignorance. ìIt is all
 
















 


blessing'', He said, ''even the lemon soufflet", making allusion to her weakness for sweets.
As He spoke on moods He said: "Sometimes happy, sometimes sad, sometimes jealous, sometimes mad." . . . Turning to one of us He said: "What is it 'mood'?" She answered: "Changeable duality of the personal self". He smiled: "Complicating! There is also a complicating mood..." And it gave stimulation for clear quick grasp in mind and intuition as He was disentangling our mental state.
Speaking on Yoga He said: ''Each one of you has your own Yoga, which implied Truth that we could feel in connection with the subject.
Once we received a most beautiful inner message together with an illustrative allegory. He compared the soul with the bird in the cage: one bird was in the cage which had all doors open, except one; another bird was in another cage with all doors closed, except one and the bird was sitting on the threshold of this open door ready to take flight. So the care for our phyiscal selves He compared with
 
constant	cleaning	of	the	cage, forgetting the bird inside.
To lift the mood of someone He would say smilingly, "Look at her, she looks as if she just got out of the grave"; catching the stimulating intent of this ironical remark she eagerly	says,	"Oh,	I	am	just resurrected",óand it has worked indeed and has chased the shadow. Or He would say, "She looks like an egg without yoke",  alluding  to her blank uninspired state of mind. He compares bad moods to garlic effect; it spreads its contagion. He would call our weaknesses "thorns": don't they create pain when they prickle? Let us go after it before it gets you. This time we have to get the big thorn, in the Ego."
To help the control of the mind He gave a wonderful message about the mastering of the disturbing thoughts to someone in a desperate state of mind: "As long as you don't interpret them in actions you get the opportunity thereby to exercise con- trol." And further, to calm the trou- bled seeker He says: ''If no thoughts assail you, what is the difference between you and the stone that has no thoughts at all?" Yet
 

 
He will show the outlet and the way, saying: "Cease the mental tension, train your mind to pass over thoughts; don't countenance them until such time that you can surrender the mind itself. When the mind is surrendered, there is no question of happiness or un- happiness. Because of the thoughts the past lives' sanskaras are spent awayóthey come and go. It is like wound up alarm clock: it will ring at the appointed time, but only so long as the winding is there, will it ring and run its course; but  take note not to wind it again by indulging into action." "Still if you want to die, die in Me, in my naad, by getting hold of me firmly. That is salvation, that is real dying. Worldly dying is not the thing. Remember that the whole world is a zero. Mind is the universe, mind is the man, the woman, the beast."
ìThe life in the Ashram,î said He, ìis not only the bed of roses but of thorns too.î As His work is in the life, through the life and for the life, as One Life in its ultimate meaning, He links all life events with their spiritual good.
All our inclinations are used
 
naturally for their perfected expression in a detached, im- personal free way. His main concern is to see it is done with love, from the heart: work, write, speak, serve from the heart. . . . and with that He awakens Love. Spiritual life and work is like that canvas on which the design is embroidered and then the canvas thread is pulled out and the design remains embroidered into the cloth.
He makes one rich with love and pure in heart. He says: "Love is GodóLust is Satan." He compares the lustful men to a cart on one wheel. Disentangling men's cons- ciousness from bindings, He makes it free, He says: "Spiritual freedom ought to be the only goal of all, for it includes everything elseómoral, mental, material." That spiritual freedom is the freedom from one's own imperfections, freedom from one's own egoism. Love gives that freedom; but that Love is given as a Grace, as it is pure and universal and can be experienced only by a purified consciousness. The contact with ''that Man'' acts like rays of the Sun, which disperses "within" the mist of our mental clouds and
 

 
sorrows. The first touch of His Rays of Love stir tremendous upheaval in feeling, in Joy, giving a personal conviction directly experienced. One will long for this experience of the heart as a continuous permanent state and all life will become changed in the light and power of that longing. One feels and knows its good, its truth, its pure spiritual quality satisfying the heart; as nothing ever could equal in its happiness!
"Love is the very essence of Godhood," says that happy Man. "But not the spider type love. The spider says: 'Oh fly, for you I have built this palace, come and become one with me.' It is the life-giving love I want, not the life-taking love. All Yoga can be done only with  love. But it needs the Grace of one who himself has that Love. Love holds all keys to all mysteries of life. . .  .  Love awakens." And He works for a permanent climax of existence, for actual fulfilment. The work in Harmony with the spiritual Law and destiny is a sure work, showing its Truth within and without, unfolding its good naturally and spontane- ously, bringing a lasting uncon- ditional happiness as a real
 
true state in the heart of human beings. No hosts of destructive ignorant forces in the world can prevent Life to fulfil itself in Love and Truth.
He calls all to partake of real happiness; the wicked and destitutes, the ignorant and the hungry for real spirituality, the children and the old, the sick and the healthy ones, the rich and the poor. All need the light to be real and happy, all need Truth for guidance in this life.
The fundamental Law of being is One for all. This happy, wise Man said: ''The self is Self's curtain. That is why it is almost impossible to know Self. It is so completely one that unless there is duality the experience cannot be had; but when the duality is there then ignorance creeps in. Eyes cannot see them- selves, unless the mirror reflects them. The sparrow to see itself needs a mirror; but when it sees itself in the mirror, it thinks it is some other sparrow and fights with the reflection. Why? The duality caused by the mirror made the sparrow see itself but ignorance made it  think  its  own  reflection to be another sparrow. Unless there is
 

 
mirror the sparrow cannot see itself and when the mirror comes, the ignorance comes too.
For the soul to know itself the medium of Maya and its creations is necessary. But when Maya and its creations come, ignorance comes too and instead of knowing itself through Maya it goes on fighting with Maya. Ignorance must go, and Soul will know itself."
He likes to go in multitudes, where life is in motion and stir. Is He not there most needed to awaken, where masses in their elementary instincts express intensely their eagerness for sensational pleasures or other strong emotions? It brings out the memories of the past and we can see in Him the Beloved figure of Jesus walking through crowds going to weddings and churchesó giving everywhere blessings, His visible and invisible healing, clean- ing up the polluted atmosphere of temples.
We often went together to Eastern and Western temples and churches. Here He would remain a short while, leaving the invisible sign of His Presence which will reach the sincere hearts in Joy and the guilty ones in a pang of repent-
 
anceóstirring the longing for Light and Loveófor God. Does it matter much if the outer frame of life changes? It is anyhow impossible to control and preview the element of the unexpected in life, or of mass- changes that reflect on individuals. The material things are only "things" anyhow. It is the alive conscious being that matters. It is the moulding of human destiny through the permanent inner transformation that solves all problems. It is what we, ourselves are; it is how we inwardly act or perform the living life that matters; this is the fundamental task; it is in one's possible control on the spiritual plane of existence and it is the universal conscious Goal of life. Those spiritual attitudes exercised amidst difficulties, the steadiness and the continuity of impersonal selfless non-reacting state of Oneness, crowns the Path of Perfection.
To bring it out He utilises all the contrasts in inner and outer life showing us how to remain unat- tached and free in all and any condi- tions: cold and heat, a comfortable bed or a floor to sleep, bread and a simple meal, or a feast in
 

 
abundance for some birthday, or a visit; hardest exertions in work done to the highest degree of capacity and the rest of the easy days following; health and sickness; joys are heart- breaks of emotional crises for the extraction of the ego; the steady continuous work are days of relaxation and at times even dullness of the mind when it takes in the selfish depressing influences of the sub-conscious.
All those instances He uses as an opportunity for developing control in His followers as a chance of exercising the golden rule of equilibrium in detachment, of alert aloofness in inner immunity for the unconditional state of happiness. The lessons are not in words or courses, but in alive samples of living experience; it shows in inward changes the spiritual meaning of perfected existence. When He stirs His work there is no time to waste: life moves, everything must be done in maximum tempo and rhythm for definitely marked degrees of  progress in spiritual consciousness. He trains the heart to become steady in an unaffected, non-reacting state, freed from old habits in thought and
 
emotion. This spiritual training leads to spiritual equanimity born of purity and unselfishness; it wavers not, it swings one not from left to right, from up-down; it becomes an estab- lished inward awareness in fixed continuity, as an outcome of efforts of selflessness and mental renun- ciation.
He says: "Material freedom binds you to Maya and leads to spiritual avoidanceóit is no freedom. The freedom that helps towards Truth  and spirituality is real freedom. But some who have faith and believe in God, lead a life without character  and fail to make any progress, while there are others who do not even believe in God but lead such a noble life that they automatically come closer to God. Whereas atheism is generally born of intellectual vanity, agnosticism may more often than not be the outcome of the intellectual humility. Humble honest agnosti- cism is sure sooner or later to be converted into firm conviction of the Reality of God."
He says also: "Uncontrolled mind plays havoc with your soul.  My  mind is like ocean; all the filth, all  the good and bad is absorbed in it. In
 

 
a small pool filth obsets the water. In the Ocean all is drowned. So is My Mind. Your limited mind becomes stagnant with few bad thoughts. Universal bad thoughts cannot affect My Ocean-like Mind."
So He serves humanity con- tinuously bearing its burdens. One can well see in Him that, as He says: "Selfless service and love are the  twin divine qualities. Only the one who loves can serve. The service he exacts is for your own spiritual benefit; but this service must be spontaneous, willing, whole-hearted, unconditional and expecting no reward. His service is an ordeal that tries body, mind and spirit, or else wherein would the perfection of serving lie if it were  to be easy and  at one's convenience? The body suffers, mind is tormented, but the spirit of the selfless servant of the Master experiences the bliss of satis- faction. Only one who has, can renounce. Only the one who without any question and regardless of consequences serves the God-man, really serves; otherwise it would be just like paid labour. Selfless service and work with all heart without a selfish    motive    and    thought     of
 
results will bring one to real freedom  of Union with God."
One day when His work will be done He will lay aside His body and then His body will be buried in a place assigned and millions of pilgrims will be drawn to this Abode of Peace and Love, to this Abode of Rest, of Hope, of unforgettable memory as a unique place for the comfort of the heart.
As the news about this Man are spreading around He becomes a Centre of all Hope, like an oasis sheltering the tired unhappy pilgrims of  life.  On  one  of  His  birthdays  He has touched the feet of thousands (15 thousand) of poor peasants, untouchables as well as others of all standing in life, in one day without interruption. He  gave  the  blessings of spiritual awakening to those of all castes, creeds, races, ranks, and positions in life. Men as men, as human beings are all in need of enlightenment  and  true  happiness; life is One for One purpose in all creation, says that Free, Happy, Man. His name Meher Baba is  and  ever will be pronounced by all with Love, as Love-Awakening Word as the Eternal
 

 
Symbol of Truth and Perfection.
Meher Baba is the name of the one who loves all equally and who came in person to show the beauty and happiness
 
of Life in Love, in Light, in Freedom. Life will go on and on unfolding the seed of Pure Love planted deep in the hearts of men by the One Eternal Friend of humanityóMeher Baba.
 


 

