 The Language of Flowers 
April 8, 2012  
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
Greeting, Centering
 Kindling
 Opening Words  
    We are here 

 on bright Easter morning
  during the week of Passover 

 to celebrate that we are alive
  and that our joy in life 

 is to blossom together in love.
   

And so, without guarantees,  we lean into joy, and 
bend toward a just way of life, both for our 
own sakes, and for the sake of our children and all
 beings with whom we share the earth. We 
would engage our mission wholeheartedly, with coura
ge, self-questioning, compassion, 
vulnerability and honesty.
  
Singing: Oh We Give Thanks
  
Story for the Children
 (most of which is found again 
in the sermon
 so is not printed here)
  
Music, News and Caring Cards
   

 Easter Exultet for 2012:
            
You must become brother and sister 

to each and every thing, 

so that they flow through you, 

dissolving every difference 

between what belongs to you and to others. 

No star, no petal shall fall... 

you will fall with them 

to rise again 

in every new beginning.       
  
 
Herman Hesse 1908
   Hymn #27 
with flower procession to the table
   Sequence
 Mystery not to be solved, 

like some detective story. 

 Mystery not to be dreaded,  

like sudden news that a friend is missing. 

Mystery not to be mystified all the more, 

like a creaking floorboard in an old house. 

Mystery not to be feared, 

like a hungry roar in the middle of a dark forest. 

But a mystery to be lived, 

this life of ours– 

unexpected! 

something rather than nothing! 

A mystery to be lived: 

red-bud branches aflame in the air, 

apple flower petals floating on the wind, 

shooting stars streaking green at night across the 
path of the full moon, 
the chirp of early birds, 

the purr of a cat in a lap, 

the wag of a dog™s tail, 

the giggle of a child, 

mysteries to be savored, 

women and men and children 

moving toward lives made just and free;  

life! life!  

mysteries to be celebrated, loved, 

life! life! life! 

mystery that is majesty, 

mystery that drops some to their knees, 

lifts others in dance or loud outcries; 

mystery that is not, of need, 

devalued by the mere reality of death, 

or the unfairness of sorrows. 

Life! Life! Life! Life!... 

Mystery too often cloaked until revealed 

in the many beating hearts 

of this community of support 

and strength and spirit; 

mystery that sometimes plays hide and seek 

Life! Life! Life! Life! Life... 

 until we pause to notice 

the reflection of our own heart 

in the untroubled mirror 

of these gathered flowers, 

and this simple silence.... 

  

silence
   

Mystery, life, something rather than nothing! 

Ou
r somethings, 
our
 particulars, 
our 
lives... 
in this safe and sacred moment, 

 we can name aloud, or in the shelter of our hearts,
 the names of those whose lives changed our own: 
those whom we miss, those who bless our memories, t
hose with whom we struggle sometimes, or 
those whom we love with tenderness, or who love us 
in tenderness. 
  

naming
   

Mystery! Life! life! life! Oh that certain interval
s between notes, and certain harmonies, and the 
vibrations in instrument and neck and chest can blo
ssom inside the human heart, mystery within 
mystery. Life itself made more alive, rising more v
ividly within us than it was before the music. 
  

Anthem
   The First Reading 
is taken from a series of poems
 composed in Spanish and English by Juan Pablo Gutie
rrez in 2011 to accompany watercolors of 
flowers painted by my good friend Kevin Woodson, wh
om a number of you met, or remember when 
he created that wonderful curtain of paper human be
ings hanging from the screen some years back. 
Their combined book is called The Language of the F
lowers. These words are parts of two different 
poems.
   In passing, we wave to you, 

from public spaces, 

from empty lots, 

from abandoned sites, 

from wealthy gardens, 

from churches, 

from pagan rituals, 

from atheist gardens, 

from street corners, 

on side walks, 

in makeshift altars.... 

the gentle folds became clear syllables, 

the colors suddenly become action verbs, 

pistils like antennas, 

communicating sentences 

without punctuation marks. 

I turn the page again, 

finding a new awakening... 

everywhere I turned, 

another page appeared 

as I continued to learn 

the language of the flowers. 

  

The Second Reading
 is a perfect piece for today called simply, Flowers
, written by Linda Pastan, 
in 1995.
   

Someone I love is getting married, 

and I am composing poems about flowers, hyacinths 

and lilacs, as if there were something 

 intrinsically bridal about these outgrowths of the 
plant flaunting itself,  
attracting insects and birds 

to the exact and fragrant place of pollen. 

  

And someone I love is dying. 

Flowers will be wanted for her too, 

lilies perhaps, though all that is required 

is a handful of good dirt on a plain pine box, 

and all the funeral bouquets will be sent 

to a hospital somewhere, where the sick will wake 

  

one morning to a confusion of scents. 

I wonder, partly in innocence, 

why everything seems to mean something else, 

and I marvel at how we comfort 

ourselves and each other with the fragile 

symptoms of beauty, with petals 

  

of roses for love, with snowdrops for hope, 

whether we are setting out on a journey 

or simply waving goodbye from the dock 

as the ship pulls out and a wake of tossed flowers 

floats for a little while, delicate as foam 

on the water, before it disappears. 

  

Sermon:
   In a stroke of remarkable Easter-sermon luck, I jus
t read this week about a flower that Russian 
scientists "resurrected." The one I mentioned to th
e children this morning. A seed of a 
silene 
stenophylla
 that was lost in a squirrel's den 30,000 years ago
, (!) then frozen in the permafrost, was 
found by scientists and then planted in modern soil
. It grew, blossomed and produced new seeds 
that will grow into other 
silene stenophylla
 with lovely and quite delicate white flowers. 
  

A "resurrected" flower, the newspapers called it.  
 The word 
resurrected
, of course, is from the 
media, not the scientists who found the seed. The m
edia clearly tried to put a holiday topical spin on
 
the whole amazing event. The particular newspaper I
 read suggested that if we could restore an 
ancient flower, why not resurrect a wooly mammoth a
s well, thus restoring an extinct species from 
some fleshy sample frozen in a snowdrift in Siberia
. 
  

I suppose that is what a lot of folks believe the w
ord "resurrection" means. The restoration, of a 
body that was dead, as the exact person that was th
ere before death. And indeed, some of the later 
gospel stories seem to imply that, since in these s
tories, the post Easter Jesus walks around showing 
people the nail holes in his arms, thus proving tha
t he was the same Jesus who was killed by the 
Roman prefect Pilate's militia a few days earlier. 

  

But wouldn't you know it? The very 
earliest
 proclaimer of the Easter resurrection 
denied
 such a 
clumsy interpretation ....clearly, plainly and pass
ionately.  Paul of Tarsus wrote about this 
resurrection business quite a lot. Now you must kno
w that only 
parts
 of six letters of the 12 found 

 in the New Testament are authentically his. The add
itions by later church folks telling women to be 
quiet have given Paul a pretty bad reputation, unde
rstandably. The later Christians altered Paul's 
radically inclusive ideas because they wanted to fi
t into Roman society, which was decidedly sexist 
all the way. No women senators. No women soldiers. 
No women poets. And no women religious 
leaders except for the Vestal Virgins, a small symb
olic group. But you'll find none of that sexist 
foolishness in the few words that have come down to
 us which are authentically his. Scholars are 
doing an amazing job these days restoring an ancien
t personality, undoing his wrecked reputation, 
and clarifying his urgent message. 

  

Here is what he wrote to some folks in the Greek ci
ty of Korinthos, probably in the spring of the 
year 54:   
(this is my edition of the Eugene Peterson version 
of this letter, which is very 
contemporary in language)
  
"Now
 some skeptic is sure to ask 'How does resurrection 
work? Give me a picture, draw me a 
diagram. What does a resurrected body look like?' I
f you look at the question closely, you realize 
how absurd it is. There are no diagrams or pictures
 describing this. But we do have a parallel 
experience in gardening. You plant a "dead" seed, a
nd soon there is a flourishing plant. But there is 
no visual similarity between the seed and the flowe
r, is there? You could never guess what an apple 
blossom is going to look like by staring at that li
ttle teardrop shaped seed inside the apple, right? 
What we plant in the soil and what comes out of it 
are dramatically different. The planting of a seed 
and rising of a live flower are a mere sketch at be
st, but perhaps this will help you to approach the 
mystery of what I mean by resurrection."
   

And to some folks in Rome he wrote this good news i
n the spring or fall of 56:  "
Remember, you've 
been raised from the dead. A whole, healed, put-tog
ether life right now, with more and more life on 
the way."
   What? Who's been raised from the dead? Jesus? No, t
he people he was writing to in Rome, people 
who had not died in any mortal sense. That's what h
e wrote, and it™s even more striking to me than 
his, "A seed doesn't look like a flower any more th
an a resurrection body looks like the person who 
died." 

  

These ancient passages, written long before the gos
pels, completely undo for me the very common 
and populist assumptions that 
resurrection 
means the resuscitation of some cold corpse, or, la
tely, 
growing a 30,000 year old seed into a 21st century 
flower that looks exactly like those flowers used 
to look like millennia ago. 

  

Paul used the growth of a tiny dark seed into that 
brightly colored blossom to proclaim his idea that 
there 
was
 a resurrection of some sort after Jesus died. But 
for Paul, it was not the kind of 
resurrection that portrays Jesus as a restored fles
hy being rising out of a tomb with a roll-away 
stone. Paul knows of no such story, and so he uses 
the image of a seed growing into a flower to 
speak of the language of life. 

  

The poet Juan Pablo Gutierrez also tells us that fl
owers speak a language. Everywhere they grow 
and blossom, he proclaims with detail. 
In passing, we wave to you, 
he writes:  
from public spaces, 
from empty lots, from abandoned sites, from wealthy
 gardens,
 from churches, from pagan rituals, 
from atheist gardens, from street corners, on side 
walks, in makeshift altars.... 
That's quite a broad 
and diverse list of places where flowers might be f
ound! Then later in his book, Juan Pablo begins 

 to speak in grammatical terms...he speaks of 
clear syllables,
 action verbs,
 sentences without 
punctuation marks.  
All examples of language, of speech, of communicati
on. He sees the diverse 
gatherings of flowers around the neighborhood as a 
colorful text on the page of life: 
I turn the page 
again, finding a new awakening...(might one not als
o say resurrection?) as I continued to learn the 
language of the flowers.
   

Poet Linda Pastan speaks of the language of flowers
 too...referring to the old Victorian notion that 
different kinds of flowers express different ideas 
and emotions:  
with petals of roses for love, with 
snowdrops for hope.  (
In Victorian days, when so many emotions were consi
dered impolitic for 
public expression, there existed a code for the mea
ning of flowers that people might wear in their 
hair or on their lapel, proclaiming their romantic 
feelings for this person or that.) 
  

Pastan mentions weddings, where flowers speak of lo
ve even if there are only three people gathered 
in Slowter Lounge for the ceremony. And she speaks 
of funerals too. Believe me, the gorgeous 
flowers sent by the Board of this church when my mo
ther died spoke loud and clearly of care and 
love and understanding to me. I didn't need a trans
lator from Victorian times one bit. 
  

Linda Pastan even mentions the sailing of ocean lin
ers, where people sometimes toss flowers of 
farewell on the foam of those travelling away from 
home. 
  

Juan Pablo list goes a lot further than Linda Pasta
n's, composing individual poems for well over 40 
distinct flowers in his book, assigning them meanin
gs and speech: the magnolia signs faithful 
relationships, the calla lily (or Alcatraz in Spani
sh) speaks of sexuality; the quince (some gorgeous 
blossoms are blooming beautifully by the rear parki
ng lot of this building, near the bicycle racks) 
speaks of journeys, since the seed of the quince jo
urneyed from China to Arabia, all the way to "this 
garden." Jasmine flowers, he says, speak of the god
dess, and cherry blossoms are the yearly 
proclamation of spring. 

  

Clearly flowers are a rich invitation to considerat
ions and dimensions of life. My friend Kevin's 
amazing spiritual practice...at least as I define t
hat phrase... is to watercolor some local flower in
 his 
local neighborhood most every single morning, rain 
or shine, out in Oakland where he lives. Or in 
Barcelona or Prague or Taiwan if he happens to be t
raveling to one of 
their
 neighborhoods for 
work. By now he has painted a thousand flowers at l
east. All of them speaking to me of nature's 
sheer extravagance, and of a thousand other meaning
s, flower by flower. 
  

And in our own tradition, we celebrate with flowers
...not just every Sunday up here on our focal 
table, but especially today on Easter, when we cele
brate the Flower Ceremony of Norbert Capek. 
Capek, like Juan Pablo, felt that flowers speak too
, speak of inherent value in 
the beautiful diversity 
in beautiful community.
 For him, they were more eloquent than the spoken w
ord. His congregation 
in Prague of a couple of thousand people couldn't h
ave agreed more, continuing to celebrate this 
rite, as we also do in our congregation, 70 years a
fter he was put to death in Dachau by the Nazis for
 
refusing to deny the radical message of the flowers
. 
  

The language of the 
silene stenophylla
 restored by Russian scientists may speak too, but 
I assure 
you, it is not offering us new theological language
 about the meaning of Easter. It does speak, 
though, of the brilliance of the scientists who dis
covered and planted the seed, and it speaks 
eloquently of an earlier age on this earth. It even
 speaks of beauty. But the flower wasn't really 
"resurrected" in the way the media are trying to po
rtray it. 

   

In fact, trying to bring back what lived long ago w
ill often not work at all, even if we could pull of
f 
more spectacular "Jurassic Park" types of restorati
on. The giant dragonfly from the Permian era I 
mentioned to the children this morning, should it b
e restored by some very clever scientist, would 
die again not long after it was brought back to lif
e. The oxygen level back in Permian days was far, 
far richer than in our own era, and insects, becaus
e of the way they take in oxygen, may indeed 
grow large in such an atmosphere; but they will sta
y small in our own era because our oxygen 
percentage in 2012 is so much less. 

  

Even if Jesus, for example, was brought back litera
lly in the flesh, like some folks seem to believe 
he was (and despite Paul's clear denial of that ide
a), he wouldn't last long either. His teachings 
spoke the language of peasant agriculture. We now h
ave agribusiness. They addressed a culture of 
Roman oppression which no longer exists, although G
od knows oppression still exists in other 
forms. Some of his words would not make any obvious
 sense in our day and age, because the 
cultural context is entirely different. And anyway,
 anyone like Jesus walking around and daring to 
suggest...out loud... that people would benefit fro
m sharing 
with
 each other, and listening 
to 
each 
other, and anyone suggesting that the 99% and 1% we
 hear about exemplifies very bad and unfair 
odds wouldn't live very long anyway. He wouldn't ne
ed a Pilate or a Roman recruit to do the 
job...he'd be ridiculed to death on a cross of sarc
asm on Fox News in about five minutes, as soon as 
he opened his mouth. Or considering what is going o
n at the OSU campus these last few weeks, 
someone might just paint a swastika on his forehead
 and shoot him between the eyes with their 
quite legal concealed firearm... for being a Jew.  

  

No, who we are is part and parcel of our era and ag
e.  We can't just live at any time, in any place 
and be ourselves. We are not separate from our cult
ure, environment, age or location. Paul was 
right....the seed of Jesus buried in the ground (or
 for that matter, the seed of Moses, or Gandhi, or 
Susan B. Anthony, or Lydia Marie Child or Martin Lu
ther King...all equally buried in the ground) 
once planted, will grow into something that doesn't
 look like them at all. It will probably look, in 
fact, a lot like us, we who live now, who are alive
 in this culture, we who, as Paul might say, have 
risen already, with more life on the way; we who ha
ve to respond, not to issues that haven't been 
around since the last Caesar died, but to the issue
s of our 
own 
day... with fierce honesty, vibrant 
spirit, and studied resistance on behalf of justice
 for all. It makes absolutely no sense, just as the
 
gospel angel scolded the people looking for Jesus i
n his grave, "to seek the living among the dead." 
No, you seek the living among the living. 

  

Lydia Marie Child, one of the greatest proponents o
f the wisdom of diversity in community in the 
19th century, thought that the flowers she saw grow
ing around her were just like those gospel 
angels proclaiming that powerful message in their h
ieroglyphic language. I agree. Here before us is 
a whole table-full of angels. 

  

The great John Muir, one of most articulate nature 
mystics the world has ever known, wondered 
why Moses wanted to see more Glory, that is, "see G
od face to face." If he had seen the sky and 
flowers around California, Muir mused, he might hav
e thought better of such a request. What's 
more glorious than flowers? he wonders. 

  

But Moses, according to the story, had already seen
 the glory that Capek's flowers would one day 
proclaim, that Lydia Child's flowers would one day 
proclaim, that Paul would one day proclaim, 
namely, that a community of oppressed and trampled 
people can rise up and boldly bud in an act of 

 resistance and freedom. The "more glory" that Moses
 wanted to see was simply for them to accept 
their freedom and stop whining about how difficult 
freedom is. Moses lived all of his life waiting 
for those buds to bloom fully. He died and never sa
w it, nothing, as the scripture says, but "the 
back-parts" of the Glory of God.  Jesus died and ne
ver saw his vision of a more just world come to 
pass. 

  

But we're alive. We™re not like that Siberian flowe
r, grown from a seed which survived in the cold 
from life long ago. We™re more like these flowers, 
on the table before us, a mortal community of 
diversity, in the common vessel of our culture, blo
ssoming not yesterday, but today, not in some 
other time or place, but here and now. Risen and al
ive, not dead. Not just on Easter, but everyday. 
  Offering:
 What is written on the page of tomorrow cannot be r
ead. Nor can we predict every turn and surprise 
that comes our way. Yet we bless our days to come w
ith strength and welcome, by offering of our 
substance for the common good. Some give in more el
ectronic ways, others prefer this ancient way.  
In all cases, what we give, we give freely as a tan
gible sign that our ancient free tradition celebrat
es 
life, rises to restore all that has been fractured,
 and resists coercion in all matters of the spirit.
 The 
morning offering is now given and received. 

  Consecration of the Flowers
 words of Norbert Capek, adapted
 Jolinda Stevens, Religious Education Director      
   Spirit of Life, let these flowers speak to us this 
morning, of our lives here upon the earth. Our live
s 
beneath the sun, beneath the rain, beneath the fall
ing petals and falling stars. 
  

EAST
 May they speak to us, amid diversities of gifts, a
nd diversities of knowledge, and feeling, to 
find strength in our differences, and unity in our 
common, desire to live just and happy lives. 
 
SOUTH
 May they speak to us of the value of true friendsh
ip, where we may share the realities of 
our hidden heart, and support each other. 

 
WEST
 May they speak to us by offering us a portrait of 
a cherished community, where distinctions 
are expressions of beauty, not sources of anxiety. 

 
NORTH
 May we never compete with each other, but cooperat
e together to build a future of peace, 
justice and freedom for all. Let these flowers spea
k their truth to us: that it is not important what 
we 
look like, or whether our efforts are great or smal
l at any given time, but that nevertheless, all of 
us 
are in this together.
  
EVERYONE (LED BY JOLINDA) Breathe in the flowers of
 love. Join your heart to the 
hearts of all who suffer. Let wounds heal, and eyes
 shine again with joy.
    (words from a 
Flower Ceremony hymn by Norbert Capek) 

  

     
     

