New fancies and obsessions
I was convinced, the whole ward commotion was executed in such a way only because of me. In finding of references to me I was already experienced and I discovered in the smallest things secret meanings. While I was lying in the watching hall, the RIAS station sounded through the ward. I always found in the reports allusions to me and the music was also unbearable - constantly "Don't worry, be happy!". It got on my nerves with no end. They wanted to torment me, the guys of the RIAS, I thought. Why could we listen to no East station on the ward? ( because the loudspeaker was connected with the radio of the nurse's lounge and they probably liked to hear RIAS - for the good music.) I did not bear this nerv-shattering sound. Therefore I asked the ward lady doctor to shift me into another room.
I was allowed to move. In the small room on the physician corridor were three beds. Here one didn't hear the radio any longer. Mostly I was alone now, because the other two had either vacation or were in the lounge. My new room was a special. From the outside was a quite normal door, but from the inside in former times still another door or a lattice must have been. A prisoner cell! This assumption expressed also a patient. I was thinking about it. Perhaps were locked up here in former times quite special people, in the Nazi period even political prisoners? I remembered to have seen in a film as such a poor chap had to stand in a cell the whole night, without moving. They had strewn flour over his feet, in order to make a possible movement visible. If he would have moved, he would have been shot.
If I were alone in the room, I began also with standing. I thought, this is again such a stamina test, they required of me. I should testify my solidarity with the former prisoners in this way. I was standing then so there, also in the dark, until someone disturbed me. If I were in the process lying me down, I heard a knocking from somewhere. I interpreted that as holding out signal, and was standing again. I was constantly monitored! In the walls were several black pegs. Perhaps also were micro cameras here inserted?
Sometime I remembered that they always said in the Third Reich "Heil Hitler!". No, it became clear to me, these words you may not even think. And do not express at all. I was still monitored. It would had been a death sin in our GDR state. The more I internally resisted, the more strongly grew this "Heil H..." in me. It was a real obsession. Or like an internal cramp and fight. Every time the brain wanted to try out the "H...", I formulated internally the counter-slogan "Lada Niwa". I had read this advertisement somewhere and used it in such a way as bulwark. This obsession went over several weeks.
When I had birthday, I got chocolates from home as gift. But I did not touch it. I was not allowed to eat it, because the prisoners in its cells also did not get such a thing. I was afraid, the West could focus my razor, that's why I didn't shave myself for a while. I got a reddish 4-day-beard. I remembered to have seen that the Lenin in the mausoleum in Moscow had also such stubble. That was again a test! I should feel myself like this Lenin. During waiting for the chief doctor's round on Monday I shaved myself nevertheless. It would have been an arrogance of me to represent me in the public as a Lenin.
In Armenia bad things happened this time. First an aircraft crash, then an earthquake. When knoting wall-hanging in the occupational therapy the RIAS newscaster got me. Even as I tightened a knot downward, he said: "aircraft crash in Leninakan ...". The West wanted to fool me into believing, I would have to do with it. As in the film "The frights of the Medusa", where a man brings a jumbo jet to the crash only with his eyes. The West wanted impute me supernatural forces! Did I have it?
Now another example of psychotic fancies: At weekend I was again at home. I was with my mother in the kitchen, the radio ran and outside was it already dark. The curtains were not closed yet and I feared the black night. I said: "I close the curtains. It is so black outside!". Thereupon the east newscaster said: "That is a political provocation!". That applies to me, I thought frightened. I had referred to Tschernobyl by mistake. "Tschorno bylo" is called in Russian "black was it" - a black day for the Soviet Union. I should not commentate that additionally.
If I watched television at home, it seemed to me that all shows had a reference to my person whether live or before-produced. Sometimes even in old films with Heinz Ruehmann dealt the actors with my problems and it seemed that they winked at me. This fancy strengthened with the weeks, even if it were now no longer due to acute brain overtaxing. The delusion became independent. The west transmissions I felt complicated and spiteful. They wanted to say to me: You can have everything from us. Come to us! See, what we all can do and what we everyting know about you! We make everything perfectly. We made the Lockerbie jumbo jet crash specially for you! Yes! Go crazy! Kill yourself! You enter history. Humans are weak and enticable.
The east transmissions were good-hearted and simply structured. They wanted to say to me: Do not have fear! You must only hold out! You do not have anything special. That is the love. That can still happen to good humans. We selected you for the test, in order to wipe out the west one. It will be everything well! You may only talk to nobody about it! Otherwise you are seen as crazy and the test is lost. The heart and the goodness must triumph over the perfectly manipulating confusion technique. Hold out! We all assist you!
I was really moved by so much sympathy. It was an unimaginable feeling to know to be spurred from all east actors and - moderators . What had I done to deserve that? It was certainly the test with my unusual heart pain magnet phenomenon. This constellation was quite rare, I thought by myself. With an animal doctor series the east television referred to our doggie at home. How dear! At all the dog was the only one at home, who understood me. I did not need to explain anything to him. He cuddled up to me and made me courage thereby. I couldn't tell anything to my family members about the test. They wouldn't believe it or would not cope with it either. I didn't let show anything.