  March 30, 1997, Easter Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor  
  WHAT JESUS BUILT BY RISING FROM THE DEAD  (Matthew 26:59-64)  
  Now the chief priests and the whole Council kept trying to obtainfalse  testimony against Jesus, in order that they might put Him todeath; 60 and  they did not find any, even though many false witnesses cameforward. But  later on two came forward, 61 and said, "This man stated, ‘I amable to  destroy the temple of God and to rebuild it in three days.’" 62And the high  priest stood up and said to Him, "Do You make no answer? What isit that  these men are testifying against You?" 63 But Jesus kept silent.And the high  priest said to Him, "I adjure You by the living God, that You tellus whether  You are the Christ, the Son of God." 64 Jesus said to him, "Youhave said it  yourself; nevertheless I tell you, hereafter you shall see the Sonof Man  sitting at the right hand of Power, and coming on the clouds ofheaven."  
  Why should you take the resurrection of Jesus any more seriouslythan you  take the arrival of a UFO behind the Hale-Bopp Comet? Or anotherway to ask  the question would be, What’s the basic difference between theChristian  Church - or this local church in particular - and the Heaven’sGate cult of  39 people who committed suicide together last Thursday? We believethat  Jesus Christ rose from the dead, is alive today, and is comingagain to save  his people and to rule the world; and we build our lives aroundthis reality.  They, evidently, believed that apocalyptic circumstances weredeveloping  around the Hale-Bopp comet and they built their lives - and theirdeaths -  around that belief. What’s the difference? Pick your myth, right?  
  Differences Between Christianity and a Cult  
  There are differences between cults and historic Christianity. Letme  mention a few before I tackle this question about the resurrectionmore  directly.  
  1. Christianity is rooted in several thousand years of God’s actsin history,  not merely in the speculations of a charismatic leader. Abraham,Isaac and  Jacob experience a covenant with God which leads to theestablishment of the  people of Israel. This people escapes from Egypt by God’s mightydeeds, and  receives a law and a land and prophets. Two thousand years ofrecorded  history dealing with God’s word and work leads to the fulfillmentof  prophecies in the coming of the Messiah, the Son of God, into aparticular  historical place at a particular time connected to secular,historical people  like Herod and Pontius Pilate. This fulfillment is not narrated inthe New  Testament by one leader in a trance, but by nine reluctant and, atfirst  skeptical, men who were surrounded by people who were so close tothe events  recorded that they could easily have falsified wild and crazyclaims because  it was all so public. Christianity is rooted in real history.  
  2. Because of this connection with history, Christianity hasproduced 2,000  years of schools and scholarship that are accessible to secularscrutiny and  debate. Christianity is not private knowledge. It is publicknowledge. Our  documents are public and open to a natural reading for anyone. Wedo not  claim to have a holy man somewhere who dispenses impossiblemeanings for  clear texts. The book is rooted in real history, not mythology.And  therefore it has unleashed real scholarship and real schools andhas held its  own for 2,000 years of public controversy in the marketplace ofideas.  
  3. Paradoxically, this most historical of all religious movements-  Christianity - has no cultural center, no holy place, no singlecultural  identity, and no single leader on earth. It is the mostmulticultural of all  religious faiths. In other words, it has universal validity andrelevance  across all cultures. It is not attached to any place or people. Ithas  found an indigenous home in every country of the world, and inthousands of  ethnic groupings.  
  4. Christianity has endured the test of time. Again and againpeople have  predicted that Christianity will vanish with the vanishing of aparticular  era. But again and again it has shown that it is as relevant andpowerful in  each new time period as the ones before, even the radically modernones that  many thought would banish all religion.  
  5. At the center of historic Christianity is the absolutely uniquePerson  Jesus Christ. There is no one comparable at the center of anyother cult or  religion. He is unique in his teaching about God and life. He isunique in  his love and his mingling of tender mercy and tough justice. He isunique in  his wisdom and his miracles and his death and resurrection andappearances to  hundreds of people to show that he was alive. Jesus is simply in aclass by  himself among all movements.  
  6. Interestingly, among the thousands of cults in America, thecults that  seem to last the longest (say, Jehovah’s Witnesses and Mormons) doso by  piggybacking on biblical Christianity and keeping their unbiblicalviews of  Christ hidden at the beginning of their inroads.  
  So when I ask the question about the difference between believingin the  resurrection of Jesus and in a UFO behind the Hale-Bopp comet,it’s not as  though the cult of Heaven’s Gate and historic Christianity standon level  ground when they lay claim to our belief. There are good reasonsfor  believing that historic Christianity should be given far moreserious  consideration. But the sad thing is, in many secular minds todaythey do  stand on level ground. Marshall Applewhite, the leader of Heaven’sGate, and  Jesus Christ were both deluded apocalyptic fanatics who were outof touch  with reality. Because there simply is no God. We have moved beyondthat.  The universe is the product of matter + time + chance. So anyclaim to  speak for God, or lead a people to God, much less to be God, isimpossible.  They are all in the same category. There is no God.  
  If He Appeared, Then I Would be Convinced  
  Take, for example, Norwood Russell Hanson, a philosopher ofscience at Yale  until his premature death. He wrote a well-known essay entitled"What I do  Not Believe," about why he was an atheist.  
  Suppose . . . that on next Tuesday morning, just after breakfast,all of us  in this one world are knocked to our knees by a percussive andear-shattering  thunderclap. Snow swirls; leaves drop from trees; the earth heavesand  buckles; buildings topple and towers tumble; the sky is ablazewith an eerie  silvery light. Just then, as all the people of the earth look up,the  heavens open - the clouds pull apart - revealing an unbelievablyimmense and  radiant Zeus-like figure, towering above us like a hundredEverests. He  frowns darkly as lightening plays across the features of hisMichelangeloid  face. He then points down - at me! - and exclaims for every manwho man and  child to hear, " I have had quite enough of your too-cleverlogic-chopping  and word-watching in matters of theology. Be assured NorwoodRussell Hanson,  that I do most certainly exist!"  
  Then he remarks, "The conceptual point is that if such aremarkable event  were to transpire, I, for one, would certainly be convinced thatGod does  exist."*  
  Now here’s the connection with our text. Jesus says, as it were toall the  Norwood Russell Hansons of the modern world, this greatsky-demonstration of  God’s truth and reality is going to happen, much like you havedemanded that  it happen. Look at the second half of verse 64: "You shall see theSon of  Man sitting at the right hand of Power, and coming on the cloudsof heaven."  That means that in the future the sky is going to split, as itwere, and  Jesus is going to appear, alive and real, at the right hand of God- above us  like a hundred Everests."  
  But that demonstration of the resurrection of Jesus and the truthof God in  him, that will persuade every person on this planet, is future andnot  present. Which puts Norwood Hanson, and all of us, in apredicament doesn’t  it? If we wait to see it before we believe in Christ and surrenderour lives  to him, it will be too late (Matthew 25:11-13). But if we act now,what is  the basis?  
  The Whole Universe Will See Him  
  Well, let’s stay right here in this text and back up to ask, Whydid Jesus  say what he said about this great future appearance of the Son ofMan? He  said it because in verse 63b the High Priest, at Jesus’ trial,said, "I  adjure you by the living God, that you tell us whether you are theChrist,  the Son of God." To this Jesus responded, "You have said ityourself;  nevertheless I tell you, hereafter you shall see the Son of Mansitting at  the right hand of Power, and coming on the clouds of heaven." Inother  words, Jesus says, Yes, you put it that way; I put it this way. Inother  words, I am not only the Messiah, the Son of God as you understandhim to be,  but I am more: I am going to die and then afterwards there willcome a time  when the whole universe will see me sitting at the right hand ofGod in  glory.  
  But what prompted the High Priest to ask this man Jesus such anoutrageous  question: are you the Messiah, the Son of God? Nobody has everasked me such  a question. We move back another step in the text. In thismidnight  sham-trial, false witnesses were brought in and said, (in verse61), "This  man stated, ‘I am able to destroy the temple of God and to rebuildit in  three days.’" This is what triggered the question of the HighPriest. He  said (in verse 62), "Do you make no answer? What is it that thesemen are  testifying against you?" What is this? Do you intend to destroythe temple  of God? And do you think you can build it in three days? What kindof talk  is this? What kind of person are you? Are you crazy?" But verse 63says,  "Jesus kept silent."  
  What were these false witnesses referring to? The rumor was outthat Jesus  aimed to destroy the temple of the Jews and rebuild it in threedays. At the  cross, for example, Mark tells us that as he hung there, "Thosepassing by  were hurling abuse at Him, wagging their heads, and saying, ‘Ha!You who are  going to destroy the temple and rebuild it in three days, saveYourself, and  come down from the cross!’" (Mark 15:29-30). It was ludicrous.What did it  mean? Where did this idea come from? Does it tell us anythingabout why we  should believe in this man Jesus and his resurrection before hecomes in  glory at the right hand of God?  
  Destroy the Temple?  
  The answer is found in John 2:18-22. Jesus comes to Jerusalem andfinds the  temple filled with money changers and merchants turning the houseof God into  a market. He weaves a whip and drives them out, saying, "Don’tmake my  Father’s house a house of merchandise" (verse 16). The people areindignant  and say to him (in verse 18), "What sign do You show to us, seeingthat You  do these things?" In other words, they want some evidence that hehas  authority to act like this, calling God his Father in some specialsense and  taking charge of the temple which is the place where people meetGod. What’s  your authority? What’s your evidence that we should yield to youand not  kill you?  
  Then comes the answer in verse 19: "Jesus answered and said tothem, ‘Destroy  this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.’" The peopleare  flabbergasted by such an outrageous response. Verse 20: "The Jewstherefore  said, ‘It took forty-six years to build this temple, and will Youraise it up  in three days?’" Then the writer, John, comments in verse 21 "ButHe was  speaking of the temple of His body."  
  Yes, but don’t miss the point and the meaning of shifting from thetemple in  Jerusalem to the temple of his body. He had just purged the templein  Jerusalem with a whip. He had called it his Father’s house. Thedisciples  had recalled Psalm 69:9, "Zeal for thy house will consume me."They want a  sign for this behavior. Jesus does not say, "I have nothing to sayabout  your temple. I have only a word about my body. No. No. He doeshave  something to say about their temple. He says, Destroy this temple. . . this  temple, the one I just purged, the one you have turned into amarket place.  The one for which I am consumed with zeal.  
  But how? How will they destroy it? How will they bring the entire  sacrificial system of the Old Testament, centered in the temple,to an end?  How will they bring the entire Old Testament priesthoodministering in the  temple to an end? How will they destroy the meeting place withtheir God?  
  The answer is: by rejecting Jesus, the Messiah, and putting him todeath.  When Christ died, Judaism - as it was enshrined in the Temple -died. The  final sacrifice was made. The sacrifice of Jesus ended allsacrifices. The  final High Priest offered himself for the sin of his people. Thepriesthood  came to an end. Forty years later the Romans destroyed the Templein  Jerusalem. But the decisive end came at Calvary when Jesus wasdestroyed.  
  Rebuild it in Three Days?  
  Then, and only then - when that point has been made - does Jesussay in verse  19, "In three days I will raise it up." Now he himself speaks onlyof his  body. From that day on - the day of that destruction in my death -he says,  I will be the temple. No building and no place will ever be thefocus again  of where and how to meet God. I will be the place and the way tomeet God.  I am the Sacrifice needed to cover sin. I am the Priest, the onlyMediator  between God and man. I am the habitation, the dwelling place, ofGod.  
  Henceforth wherever men and women and little children want to meetGod they  may come to me - anywhere, anytime. The forgiveness they need,they find in  me. The intercession they need, they find in me. The God theyneed, they  find in me. I am the new Temple, and there will be no other.  
  One last observation. Jesus gave this awesome word in response tothe  question in John 2:18, "What sign do You show to us, seeing thatYou do these  things?" What sign? What evidence? That you take such authorityand make  such claims? His answer: "Destroy this temple and in three days Iwill raise  it up."  
  These Things are History, not Delusion  
  So to all atheists and agnostics and skeptics we urge this sign,this  evidence. It has three parts:  
  First, they did destroy the temple. Jesus was killed, just like hesaid.  
  Second, Jesus did build the temple again in three days. He rosefrom the  dead, and for forty days appeared to many varied witnesses, evenfive hundred  at one time, many of whom were still living, according to theapostle Paul (1  Corinthians 15:6) - a claim that could have been easily falsifiedin those  days so soon after the event. But it was not, nor could theadversaries ever  produce the dead body of Jesus. He had raised up the new temple.  
  Third, the temple in Jerusalem was destroyed (in A.D. 70), thesacrificial  system of the Old Testament did come to and end. The Old Testament  priesthood did pass away.  
  These things happened. They happened in history. They are not thedelusions  of a cultic leader. They are written large all over 2,000 years ofhistory,  both Christian and Jewish.  
  So I say to every Norwood Russell Hanson on the one side, andevery cultic  dreamer on the other side, Jesus Christ is the divine Son of God.He is  alive and reigning at the God’s right hand in heaven. He will comeone day  in power and great glory and everyone will bow and admit that heis God.  But, in mercy, Jesus has given a sign before that day, that we mayget  ready, by believing in him. He has died, and risen and replacedthe Old  Testament system of meeting God in the temple.  
  He is the temple. And he is the place - the only place - wherehuman beings  can meet God. He is the sacrifice you need, the priest you need,and the God  you long for. Come to him.  
  Copyright 1997 John Piper  Return to Piper's Notes - The 1997Index  Return to Piper's Notes - Front Page   
  
  
