
We are here
  as spring gives way to summer
to lift up our lives, loves, losses and lessons
  with music, word and silence.
Come, Truth, show us the luminous places
  in our lives, where we fear less and love more.
Bestow us to both memory and hope,
  that we may find transforming power 
even when we feel powerless at times. And so

(all) may our reason and our passion
  keep us true to ourselves, true to each other
  and true to those shared visions of what we can together
  become?.

  On this day, 
  a tangle of memories in this room,
  a skein of images from the past.
  Fathers both present and absent,
  Fathers alive and fathers long part of the earth
  on which we walk.
  Fathers angry or controlling
  and fathers' tender and warm.
  Fathers with babes in crook of arm,
  and fathers on battlefields.
  Father's afraid of fatherhood, 
  and men who wanted to be a father to children,
  but could not.
  Godfathers and grandfathers,
  images of God as father,
  both claimed and rejected.
  Fathers weeping and fathers stunned
  by the behavior of their children.
  Father's frustrated and fathers forlorn,
  fathers laughing at table
  and fathers in law coming to love sons
  who are not their own.
  Fathers with and without mothers.
  Fathers loved and father's scorned.
  A thousand images, a thousand memories,
  and before each of them,
  the silence that is appropriate before
  every thing on earth that astonishes us.
  
  Let the silence now flow through us
  like warm summer breezes,
  and astonish us not just with our memories
  but with the wonder that we are here at all,
  alive on the earth, a surprising jewel
  hanging on the vast abyss of space.
  
  (silence)
  
  Astonished by our lives, and knowing that every day of our life is here with
  us in some form or another, we set aside a moment when we can call to mind
  all those men and women, fathers and mothers, sisters and brothers, friends
  and foes who have helped to make us who we are today, with our particular
  joys and particular sorrows.
  
  These we name aloud in an expression of solidarity or hold quietly in the
  arms of our heart.
  
  (naming)

  Blest is this astonishing moment when singers sing, and vibrations fill the
  air, when harmonies and beauties and the cooperation of musicians each with
  each remind us all of what the world could be like if we but got out of our
  own ways.

  I had a friend in college named Rick. He was never without a tidbit of advice
  gleaned from his readings of Zen or Sufi masters. He usually arrived at
  dinnertime at the ramshackle farmhouse that I shared with several friends.
  Each time he would have a different book under his arm. But never food. He
  never cooked, never cleaned up, never expressed his thanks to those of us
  who had done the cooking. It was as if he thought his radiant presence repaid
  our repeated hospitality.
  
  At the time, Rick irritated me simply because he was a hypocritical freeloader.
  But now I must admit that his arrogance bothered me so because it exposed
  my own. The truth is that neither Rick nor I, nor most men, are raised to
  serve. We are raised to achieve. If anything, our goal is to be served by
  mothers or wives or secretaries or assistants, by waitresses and stewardesses.
  We want to be leaders, not servants, heroes, not helpers.
  
  As a boy I attended a Presbyterian church in which service was deemed a Christian
  virtue. Everywhere else, the preeminent masculine virtues were achievement,
  toughness, intelligence, and success. In church, I heard the opposite: the
  meek would inherit the earth. However, the ministers were always men. So
  was the treasurer. The secretary was a woman. So were the Sunday school teachers.
  
  My friends and I grew up thinking that religion was rather sissy. It wasn't
  manly to be interested in spiritual matters. A man could say he believed
  in God, but he shouldn't feel it too deeply. If he did anything to indicate
  that he was seeking a spiritual path in life, we thought him odd.
  
  After we young men reached puberty, we distanced ourselves from the church.
  We did not want to be seen in choir robes. Not any more.
  
  The church was lost to me and my male friends because it seemed too tame.
  We wanted to prove our manhood, and the church offered us no opportunity.
  It asked only for reverence, compassion and patience, sugar and spice piety.
  No wonder the church lost us; ?it was too soft. We went off to prove
  our hardness on the baseball diamond, at boot camp or on the job.

 Husband, thy fleece of silk is black,
  a black adornment;
  lies so close to the turns of the flesh,
  burns my palm-stroke.
  
  Strong legs of our son are dusted
  dark with hair.
  Told of long roads,
  we know his stride.
  
  Hair of man, hair of
  breast and groin, marking contour as
  silver-point marks in cross-
  hatching, as river-
  grass on the woven current
  indicates ripple,
  praise!

  Now the northern forehead of the earth
  tilts toward our star, and there is more light
  now than in winter.
  
  More light.
  
  What was it that Camus said? 
  "In the midst of winter I feel within me
  an invincible summer."
  
  Wasn't summer therefore,
  for Camus, more than a season for berries and lakeside?
  
  Wasn't it an internal tilting toward all that is good,
  gracious and true?
  
  So be it. May we also turn toward
  what light there is that bids us grow and ripen.
  
  Let our loyalties be to you, O Love Unknown
  and Unbegun, that together we might
  bring a summer invincible to our spirits,
  and come to fruition in good season.
  
  Come, summer, come.
  
