  December 18, 1994    Bethlehem Baptist Church    John Piper, Pastor       The Duty: Faith    (John 3:16)       For God so loved the world    That he gave his only begotten Son    that whoever believes in him    should not perish    but have everlasting life.    John 3:16       Introduction       I've tried to structure these messages in a way that will give   you a way of remembering what's in this verse and a way of sharing   it with others.       Suppose someone at work says, "Your one of those born again   Christians, aren't you." You can say, "I don't know if I fit your   category of them or not, why don't we trade viewpoints at lunch   today." And at lunch you can say, "One way to summarize my faith   is with the words of Jesus from the Gospel of John: "For God so   loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whoever   believes on him should not perish but have eternal life."       "So Jesus tells us the danger we are in -- the danger of   perishing. He tells us the design of God to send his Son to rescue   us from perishing. He tells us the duty we have to believe in his   Son. And he tells us the destiny we have if we believe, namely   eternal life instead of perishing."       I hope all the believers who come regularly to Bethlehem will   be able to share that by the time this series is over.       The Duty: Faith       Today we focus on the third "D" -- the duty that we have to   believe. "For God so loved the world that he gave his only   begotten Son, that whoever believes in him might not perish." Let   me focus our attention on this act of believing from several   different angles.       1. Believing is the vital link between your soul and God's   rescuing love.       If we don't believe we forfeit the love of God and remain under   the wrath of God. John 3:36 says, "He who believes in the Son has   eternal life; but he who does not obey the Son shall not see life,   but the wrath of God abides on him."       Believing is our link with the love of God. Notice how Jesus   speaks of God's love-rescue: God so loved the world so that   believers will not perish. One of the ways to express this is that   the Love of God is sufficient to save the world, but efficient to   save those who believe. Efficient means his love actually saves   believers. It is effective in saving them from perishing. The love   of God does not have this effect in the lives of those who do not   believe. They perish.       So believing is absolutely essential. The world divides into   two groups as the gospel moves through it. Those who believe and   those who don't. Those who believe are vitally linked to the love   of God and are rescued from perishing. Those who don't believe   remain under the wrath of God.       Believing is the vital link with the rescuing love of God. It   isn't your race; it isn't your I.Q.; it isn't your church   attendance or religious background or how many mortal sins you've   avoided. It is whether you believe on the Son of God. So what is   that? Believing links you savingly to the love of God.       2. Believing is an ongoing condition of the heart and mind not   a one time act.       The tense of the verbs all through John's gospel makes this   plain. ". . . that whoever believes (not believed) on him might   not perish." The present tense in Greek is an ongoing, continuous   action. John 20:31 tells us why this whole Gospel was written and   makes the continuousness of believing plain. It says, "These have   been written that you may believe (aorist tense: come to believe,   or some manuscripts have present tense) that Jesus is the Christ,   the Son of God; and that believing (present tense: ongoing   believing) you may have life in His name."       Believing is a vital link with the rescuing love of God when   that believing is the ongoing, condition of the heart. It is very   dangerous and unwise to orient on a past decision when pondering   if you are a Christian. The issue is: are you believing in Jesus   Christ the Son of God? Is this the ongoing condition of your   heart?       3. The object or focus of faith is Jesus Christ the Son of God   as given by the Father.       "For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son   that whoever believes in him . . ." -- the Son of God sent by the   Father.       So sometimes Jesus says that believing on the Father who sent   him gives life: John 5:24, "He who hears my word and believes him   who sent me, has eternal life." And sometimes Jesus says that   believing on the Son gives life: John 3:36, "He who believes in   the Son has eternal life." And John 12:44 gives the reason why   both are true: "Jesus cried out and said, 'He who believes in me,   does not believe in me but in him who sent me.'"       For Jesus all genuine believing in him was also a believing in   God -- that God is his Father and that he was sent by the Father   as a revelation of the Father and that to know Jesus is to know   God. So the ongoing believing that links us to the love of God is   believing in Jesus Christ as the Son of God sent by God.       4. Believing includes agreeing in the mind with objective truth   about Christ.       Believing is not a merely subjective or emotional thing. It has   specific truth content -- that is true whether you believe it or   not. Christianity stands in diametric opposition to the relativism   of our day that says, "It's true for me, but I won't make any   claims that it should be true for you." Christ is who he is   whether we believe him or not. As C.S. Lewis said, I think, "An   insane man in a padded cell screaming that there is no sun, has no   effect whatever on whether the sun rises and sets on time."       Truth is truth whether we believe it or not. And genuine   believing in Jesus agrees with the objective truth about Jesus.   For example, in John 17:8 Jesus prays, "The words which you gave   Me I have given to them; and they received them, and truly   understood that I came forth from you, and they believed that you   did send Me."       They understood objective facts about Jesus -- he came forth   from the God the Father. And they believed in those facts.   Believing includes agreeing in the mind with objective truth about   Christ. Therefore we need know and teach concrete truths about   Christ.       5. Believing includes a satisfaction in your heart with all   that God is for you in Christ.       In other words if your believing is only an agreement in the   head with facts about Jesus, your faith is no different that the   faith of devils -- who believe and tremble (James 2:19). Knowing   and agreeing with truths is necessary, but it is not enough. It   doesn't make you a Christian. Believing means being satisfied with   what God is for you in Jesus.       Consider John 6:35, "Jesus said to them, "I am the bread of   life; he who comes to Me shall not hunger, and he who believes in   Me shall never thirst." Believing in Jesus is a coming to him in a   way that satisfies you soul-hunger and your soul-thirst. Believing   is a very powerful thing. It renovates the heart with new   affections. What once satisfied, is now distasteful. Believing is   based on new taste buds in the soul. Once the soul was satisfied   -- or so it thought -- with what the world could offer. Now Christ   is so satisfying to the soul that the world is losing it's power.       Or consider John 14:1, "Let not your heart be troubled; believe   in God, believe also in Me." In other words, believing in what God   is for us in Jesus brings relief our troubled soul. Believing is   not merely an intellectual thing, solving philosophical problems.   It is that. And some of you should devote yourselves to spelling   that out. But believing is also an emotional experience of being   relieved of a troubled heart and a hungry soul.       It is coming to Christ and finding him true and satisfying to   the deepest longings of the soul.       Summary:       1) Believing is our link with God's rescuing love. There's no   rescue without it.       2) Believing is an ongoing condition of the heart not merely a   one time act.       3) The object or focus of believing is Jesus Christ as he is   given by the Father.       4) Believing includes mental agreement with objective truths   about Christ.       5) Believing includes heartfelt satisfaction with all that God   is for us in Jesus.       6. Finally, believing is a work of God, not mere human   initiative.       This does not nullify what we have said already -- that   believing is a human act of the mind agreeing with truth and a   human act of the heart being satisfied with Christ. That is true.   But the Bible teaches that the human mind is blind to spiritual   truth; and the human heart is hard to spiritual pleasures. So how   shall anyone be saved?       The answer of Jesus is given in John 6:44, "No one can come to   me unless the Father who sent me draws him." In John 6:37 he says,   "All the Father gives to me will come to me, and the one who comes   to me I will certainly not cast out." In John 6:65 he says, "No   one can come to me unless it has been granted him from the   Father." (Cf. 1:12-13; 8:47; 10:26; 18:37)       In other words Jesus' answer to the spiritual blindness of the   human mind and the spiritual hardness of the human heart is that   the Father draws them. He takes away the blindness of the mind and   replaces the heart of stone. He grants us to see the truth of   Christ's self-evidencing glory and he gives us a taste for the   all-satisfying beauty of the Lord.       And he does this very simply through the words of truth -- like   John 3:16 and like this sermon (John 17:20). God is at work right   now lifting the veil of the mind and softening hearts. My plea to   you is: don't harden your heart. Don't stiffen your neck. Yield to   the to the word of the Lord this morning. Believe on Jesus and you   shall not perish but have eternal life.       Copyright 1994 John Piper     Piper'sNotes   
