     May 10, 1998    Bethlehem Baptist Church   John Piper, Pastor       By His Grace, For His Name,    Through the Obedience of Faith       (Romans 1:1-5)      
           Paul, a bond-servant of Christ    Jesus, called as an apostle, set apart for the gospel of God, 2 which He promised    beforehand through His prophets in the holy Scriptures, 3 concerning His Son, who was born    of a descendant of David according to the flesh, 4 who was declared the Son of God with    power by the resurrection from the dead, according to the Spirit of holiness, Jesus Christ    our Lord, 5 through whom we have received  grace  and apostleship to bring about the  obedience    of faith  among all the Gentiles for  His name's sake .             This morning we are going to focus on verse 5, and in particular the  three phrases: grace and apostleship, obedience of faith, and  for his name&#146;s sake. We will try to see the  nature  of grace as a  free and undeserved enabling for ministry, the  effect  of grace in the obedience of  faith, and the ultimate  goal  of grace in the glorifying of Christ&#146;s name among  all the peoples.    
       Grace &#150; at the Heart       Grace is a very precious  reality. I hope I can show you from the book of Romans what it is and why it is so  precious. The word is used 155 times in the New Testament &#150; over 100 of them in the  writings of Paul, and almost a fourth of those in Romans (24 times). You cannot comprehend  this book if you don&#146;t comprehend grace. We will see it again and again. It is at the  heart of the book and the heart of the gospel and the heart of God.    But I don&#146;t assume the word communicates now the precious Biblical  reality it was meant to. Today, I would guess that the average person would say grace is  the beautiful movement of an ice skater. Then they might say grace is a short prayer  before meals. And finally, they might say grace is undeserved kindness.    But what is the Biblical reality of grace? Let&#146;s look at Romans  1:5 and its connections. Notice that in verse one Paul began to introduce himself and  speak of his being a bond-servant of Christ and of his calling as an apostle and his  consecration for the gospel of God. Then in verses 2-4, he talks about what the gospel of  God is: it&#146;s planned long before it happens; it&#146;s about God&#146;s Son;  it&#146;s about the fulfillment of Old Testament hopes and the arrival of the Messiah, the  Son of David; and it is about the risen Christ who came forth triumphant from the dead as  reigning Son of God in power.    With that picture of a great, triumphant, reigning Messiah and Lord  before us, Paul can now talk about grace on its proper basis. He says in verse 5,  through  whom  we have received grace. In other words, God&#146;s grace has come to Paul  through the Lord Jesus Christ who was born as a son of David and was raised as Son of God  in power. We may say from what Paul writes later that grace was obtained for us through  the obedience and death of the incarnate Messiah (Romans 3:24-25; 5:18-21); and grace is  poured out through the risen and reigning Son of God in power. There is no grace toward  sinners apart from the life and death and resurrection of Jesus Christ. Verse 5 says  plainly that God gives grace through him, referring to Jesus Christ our  Lord at the end of verse 4.    So grace is a reality that comes from God; and comes through Jesus and  his work for us. It is not something we have a right to. Jesus obtained it for us. We get  it freely because of the obedience and death of another.     
       What is Grace?       But what is it? Well, in this  verse it is connected with Paul&#146;s ministry, his apostleship. Through [Christ]  we have received  grace and apostleship . I take this to mean that his calling  as an apostle was a gift of grace and that he fulfils that ministry by the power of this  grace. So that grace is not just God&#146;s clemency toward Paul&#146;s sin, but is also a  power to enable Paul to do his calling as an apostle.    I base this on what Paul says about the relation between grace and  ministry in chapters 12 and 15. For example, in 12:6 Paul says, We have gifts that  differ according to the grace given to us. And in 12:3 he says, Through the  grace given to me I say to everyone among you . . . In other words, grace is  God&#146;s enabling for various ministries through gifts he gives, and Paul&#146;s gift  includes speaking as an apostle. Similarly in 15:15b-16 Paul says, Grace was given  me from God, to be a minister of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles. So I conclude that  when he says in 1:5, Through whom we have received grace and apostleship, he  means that God not only saved him from his sin, but he also gave him grace to be an  authoritative spokesman for the risen Son of God in power.    
       How Do We Get Grace?       And how does that mean he gave  it to him? Does it mean that he gave it in response to good works? No. Paul said that he  was set apart for the gospel before he was born (Galatians 1:15; Romans 1:1). Grace is not  God&#146;s response to our deserving or meriting. Grace is God&#146;s free gift before we  do anything good, and his enabling of us to do anything good. For example, in Romans 4:4  Paul says, Now to the one who works, his wage is not credited according to grace,  but according to debt (my translation). In other words, grace is not what you get  when you work for somebody: that&#146;s what he  owes  you. Grace is never owed. It  is always a free bonus from the overflow of goodness.    Therefore grace is always received through faith, not earned by works.  You can only receive grace as a gift and acknowledge that it comes to you freely; you  can&#146;t work for it or earn it. Romans 11:6 states the principle: If it  [election] is by grace, it is no longer on the basis of works, otherwise grace is no  longer grace. Grace would not be grace if you earned it by your works. We receive it  through faith. By simply welcoming it as a gift and relying on it.    This is why Romans 4:16 says, For this reason it [= being an heir  of the promise] is by faith, in order that it may be   in accordance with  grace. This is Paul&#146;s way of saying that grace is absolutely free and cannot be  deserved or merited. When grace comes to you it is through faith or not at all.     Grace has its own power. You don&#146;t work it up. It is, in fact,  part of the power referred to in verse 4, where Paul says that Jesus was declared  the Son of God  with power  by the resurrection from the dead. Grace is not  just forgiveness of our sin and mercy on our misery, it is also a divine power that comes  to us through Jesus absolutely freely for the sake of ministry. Paul says in Romans 5:21,  As sin reigned in death, even so grace reigns through righteousness to eternal life  through Jesus Christ our Lord (my translation). Grace is the power of a king: it  reigns and leads mightily to eternal life through Christ.    So we have seen that grace is a  power  from God for ministry  (like Paul&#146;s apostleship). It is  free  and cannot be earned or deserved. It is  received as a gift by  faith,  not merited by works.    
       The Effect of Grace       Now ponder the implications of  this for a moment &#150; for Paul and for you. I mentioned one of them last week. When  Paul calls himself, in verse 1, a bond-servant of Christ Jesus and an  apostle, he means that he  serves  the risen Christ as an apostle. But  now, from verse 5, we know something utterly crucial about that service: it is given and  enabled by grace. He says in Romans 15:18, I will not presume to speak of anything  except what Christ has accomplished through me [that&#146;s the power of grace], resulting  in the obedience of the Gentiles &#150; which is the same aim as 1:5. Paul serves  Christ by the grace with which Christ serves Paul.     I linger over this because if you get it early, the book of Romans will  open to you like a flower. And if you don&#146;t get it, the book will not make sense. And  I linger over it because this is the essence of how God means for you to live your life.  God wants you to read verse 5 and in the end put your calling in the place of the word  apostleship. Apostleship is Paul&#146;s &#150; not mine and not  yours. You might put, Through Christ I have received grace and the teaching  role. Or: grace and singing. Or: grace and studentship. Or: grace and singleness.  Or: grace and widowhood. Or: grace and motherhood. And what you should mean is: God has  freely given me forgiveness and the power to do a calling, and fulfill a role which I  accept by faith.     There is not a role in life that can be lived the way God wants it  lived apart from enabling grace. Being a godly mother or being an apostle is impossible  without the power of grace. So when Paul says, in 1 Corinthians 15:10, that all his  apostolic labor is by grace, you insert your own calling: By the grace of God I am  what I am, and His grace toward me did not prove vain; but I labored even more than all of  them, yet not I, but the grace of God with me. The decisive, enabling power for all  ministry and all service is God&#146;s grace.    Paul is tremendously jealous to exalt grace in his life and in yours.  We should join him in this. Why this is becomes clearer as we look at the next two phrases  in Romans 1:5.    
       The Obedience of  Faith       Through [the living Son of  God risen in power] we have received grace and apostleship to bring about  the obedience  of faith .   So grace is not just received by faith, it aims at faith. God  gives gifts of grace so that we will be his instruments in bringing about the  obedience of faith. This is what I called the  effect of grace .    Now what does the phrase obedience of faith mean? The two  main choices are: the obedience that  comes from  faith (NIV), or the  obedience which  is  faith, because faith is what the gospel demands. As you  might say: acts of courage &#150; acts which come from courage. Or you might  say, Block of wood &#150; the block is wood. Both of these goals (faith and  obedience that comes from faith) are really Paul&#146;s goals in ministry. And it is very  difficult to decide which he means to focus on right here.     But I am moved by Leon Morris&#146;s question: If Paul only means  faith, why use two words to say it ( The Epistle to the Romans  [Grand  Rapids: Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1988], p. 50)? In other words, if Paul only means,  We received grace and apostleship to bring about  faith  among all the  gentiles, then why complicate matters and say, the obedience of faith? I  think the answer is that he really does want us to think not only of the obedience which  faith  is , but also the obedience of love which faith produces (1 Timothy 1:5). We  will see in chapter six that Paul cares a great deal about Christian obedience. And we  will see in Romans 9:32 that obedience is by faith and not as though it were by  works. And we will see in 14:23 that whatever is not from faith is sin.  In other words, in Paul&#146;s mind, all true obedience is the fruit of faith.    Now why is this? Why does all true obedience come from faith? I hope  you can see the answer if you compare what I have said so far about grace and faith. God  gives grace as the power and the enabling for service, which means that grace is the power  and enabling of obedience. So all true obedience is done in the power of grace, not our  own power.     But how do we receive and rely on grace? The answer is by  faith. So you can see why all true obedience is the fruit of faith. It&#146;s the  fruit of faith because God&#146;s grace is given to enable obedience, and faith is the way  we rely on that grace, and so obedience is the fruit of that faith.     So what we have seen so far is that God wants to be the Giver in this  relationship. God wants to be gracious. God wants to be the fountain and the source of our  service and our obedience and our ministry &#150; whether apostleship, or pastor, or  student, or mother, or any other calling. God intends to be the source of enabling,  empowering, sustaining grace. Our job is to trust him and act in reliance on him. This is  the essence of the Christian life.    
       Why Is Everything Dependent on  Grace, through Faith?       And the final question is, Why?  Why does God set it up this way &#150; with everything dependent on his grace through our  faith? And the last phrase in Romans 1:5 gives the answer: Through [Christ] we have  received grace and apostleship to bring about the obedience of faith among all the  Gentiles [= peoples]  for His name's sake . The ultimate goal of all God&#146;s  dealings is that his name (or the name of Christ, who is his image) would be known and  admired and cherished and praised above all other realities.    Romans 9:17 puts it like this: For the scripture says to Pharaoh,  &#145;I have raised you up for the very purpose of showing my power in you, so that my  name   may be proclaimed in all the earth.&#146; God&#146;s aim in history and in all that  happens is that his name be known and worshipped. Verse 5 says that the aim of Paul&#146;s  apostleship is for the sake of the name &#150; that the name of Jesus (which  stands for his character) might be known and loved and treasured and exalted and  glorified.    Now this is why God makes all our salvation and all our ministry and  all our obedience dependent on his grace and makes all our salvation and ministry and  obedience the fruit of faith in grace &#150; because the giver gets the glory. If our  ministry and all our obedience is by grace through faith, then God gets the glory and we  get the help. If Paul relied on himself to serve as an apostle, and if the effect of his  ministry was to bring about the obedience of works, not the obedience of faith among the  gentiles, then the name of Christ would not be praised, Paul would be.    The giver of the power, the enabler of the obedience, gets the glory.  Here&#146;s the way 1 Peter 4:11 puts it: Whoever serves is to do so as one who is  serving by the strength which God supplies; so that in all things God may be glorified  through Jesus Christ, to whom belongs the glory and dominion forever and ever. Amen.  You see how clearly Peter makes the connection: God gets the glory for our service if God  gives the grace for our service, and if we serve by faith in that grace, in the strength  of that grace and not our own.    
       If God Aims for His Own  Exultation, Is He Loving?       The final question that people  often ask about this Biblical teaching is whether a God who aims at the exaltation of his  own name is a loving God. The book of Romans gives two answers to that question. First, in  Romans 10:13 Paul says, Every one who calls upon the name of the Lord will be  saved. So yes, it is loving for God to push his own name and his own glory, because  everyone who calls on that name will be saved. For him not to spread and exalt his name as  our only hope would be unloving of God.    And the second answer is given in Romans 5:2b, where Paul says that  while we stand in grace by faith we exult in hope of the glory of God. In  other words, the glory of God  is  our hope and our salvation and our exultation  &#150; our joy. We don&#146;t just call on the name of the Lord to get something else. We  call on the name of the Lord so that everything that separates us from the Lord will be  overcome by the grace of God and we will have access to the Lord himself. We exult  in hope of the glory of God. Therefore it is loving for God to make the name of God  &#150; that is, the glory of God &#150; the goal of all his grace, because this is the  goal of all our longings.    Is this &#150; is he &#150; the goal of your longings? If so, then the  gospel of grace will make sense and you will embrace it. If not, call upon the name of the  Lord so that he would open your eyes to see the light of the gospel of the glory of  Christ, the image of God (2 Corinthians 4:4).      Copyright 1998 John Piper    Piper's Notes          
   
