Sunday, April 25, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And Asa slept with his fathers, and died in the one and fortieth year of his reign" (2 Chron. 16:13). "And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead, and STRENGTHENED HIMSELF AGAINST ISRAEL... And the Lord was with  Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first ways of his father David, and  sought not unto Baalim; But sought to the Lord God of his father, and walked in  his commandments, and NOT AFTER THE DOINGS OF ISRAEL. Therefore the  Lord stablished the kingdom in his hand; and all Judah brought to Jehoshaphat  presents; and he had riches and honor in abundance" (2 Chron. 17:1-5). "And his  heart was lifted up in the ways of the Lord." (2 Chron. 17:6)  (Gill: "It was engaged in them, was bent and set upon them; he walked in them with great pleasure and cheerfulness, being inspired with zeal and courage; he was fearless and intrepid, and regarded not any opposition he might have or expect to have, in the work of reformation in which he was concerned.") It seemed as though good king Jehoshaphat dedicated his government ­ first of all ­ to the education of his people in the things of God ­ PRIMARILY AS THEY ARE REVEALED IN THE HOLY SCRIPTURES. The Pentateuch, the Psalms, much of the Prophets ­ in short, almost the entirety of the Old Testament was available in the days of king Jehoshaphat. Moreover, the brightest and best of his nation's work force were apparently assigned to the task of educating the masses in the things of God, FROM THE WRITTEN WORD OF GOD; to wit: "Also in the third year of his reign he sent to his princes, even to Benhail, and to Obadiah, and to Zechariah, and to Nathaneel, and to Michaiah, TO TEACH IN THE CITIES OF JUDAH. And with them he sent Levites, even Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, and Zebadiah, and Asahel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehonathan, and Adonijah, and Tobijah, and Tobadonijah; Levites; and with them Elishama and Jehoram, priests. (5+9+2=16) AND THEY TAUGHT IN JUDAH, and had THE BOOK OF THE LAW OF THE LORD WITH THEM, and went about throughout all the cities of Judah, and taught the people." 2 Chron. 17:7-9.  Were they the equivalent of 16 Secretaries of Education, each with a huge staff of helpers and underlings? All with emphasis on theology. Gill: (These named ones were those) "[t]hat dwelt in the several parts of the kingdom; or he sent them, being with him, some of the principal men of his court to see that the people were taught, and oblige them to attend to the instructions that should be given them, and not mutiny and rebel against their teachers; and to let them know what was the king's pleasure on this head, and to back with their authority the priests and Levites, whose proper work it was to instruct, and who therefore were sent with them. No doubt but they were principal persons, and fit for the work they were sent about; and whose lips were to keep knowledge, and at whose mouth the law was to be sought; to wit:  "The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips; he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity. For the priest's lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth; FOR HE IS THE MESSENGER OF THE LORD OF HOSTS." (Mal. 2:6,7)  This blue-ribbon panel of educators taught the people their duty to God and man; and had the Book of the Law of the Lord with them; as the rule of their instruction, and the people's obedience; out of this they taught them, and by it they confirmed what they taught, and enforced it with the divine authority; and thereby inculcated (to teach by urging and/or frequent repetition) in them the fear and worship of God. An immediate consequence of Jehoshaphat's marvelous crusade to educate all the people in the pure Word of God, was that the fear of God fell upon all the hostile nations round about Judah ­ thereby giving king Jehoshaphat a blessed season of peace, wherein his strength and prosperity grew, to the extent that the Scriptures say of him and his kingdom; to wit: "And the fear of the Lord fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands that were round about Judah, so that they made no war against Jehoshaphat. Also some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat presents, and tribute silver, and the Arabians  Sunday, April 25, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  brought him flocks, seven thousand and seven hundred rams, and seven thousand and seven hundred  he goats. And Jehoshaphat waxed great exceedingly; and he built in Judah castles, and cities of  store." 2 Chron. 17:10-12.  It was true that all Judah brought to King Jehoshaphat presents; and he had riches and honor in abundance. In addition, Jehoshaphat had such vast liquid financial resources as to maintain a standing army of one million, one hundred and sixty thousand (1,160,000) mighty men of valor. All battle-ready; to wit: "Prepared for the war." 2 Chron. 17:18. Gill: "And they were all ready to obey the king's orders whenever he should have occasion for them; besides those whom the king put into the fenced cities throughout Judah; and all together, the militia of the kingdom was very numerous and formidable." Thus was the nation and the king and the people blessed of God who undertook a diligent and sincere and massive and nation-wide study of the WRITTEN WORD OF GOD throughout the kingdom; to wit: "And they taught in Judah, and had the book of the law of the Lord with them, and went about throughout all the cities of Judah, and taught the people. AND THE FEAR OF THE LORD FELL upon all the kingdoms of the lands that were round about Judah." (2 Chron. 17:9,10)  Beloved. Is the same divine relief available today to the peoples and nations and kingdoms of the world? Take the United States. What if we had some president like unto Jehoshaphat, who did always those things that pleased the Lord his God, and who used his office in the White House as a bully pulpit to institute a nation-wide educational campaign to teach the people the undiluted written Word of God ­ until all the population of America were proficient in the Scriptures ­ following the pattern laid out by King Jehoshaphat ­ sparing no expense ­ as the first order of his presidency. Beloved. Isn't that exactly what's going on by Obama ­ only for Satan, not for God? Did Obama not pledge to use the office of the presidency as a "fierce advocate" promoting sodomy and abortion? And, as far as one can tell due to Obama's stealth and secrecy, isn't that exactly what Obama is doing; to wit: using the office of the presidency and the public purse as a fierce advocate for sodomites and murderers? No wonder the United States is sucked into one war and military operation after another, and one deadly catastrophe right after another. And, is it not also true, that Westboro Baptist Church ­ for many years now ­ has lifted up voice, as of one crying in the wilderness, warning this nation and the world that, "except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish?" Lk. 13:3.  A good start would be like unto Jehoshaphat's Nationwide Bible Education Crusade. This evil nation ­ America ­ already spends billions upon billions of dollars annually on public education ­ only educating our children from kindergarten to college in the ways of perverted sex by the sodomites and murder by the abortionists. I don't want to hear one word of objection to King Jehoshaphat's crusade on the grounds that it would cost too much tax money. Don't you Satanic morons get the message? Your filthy, godless policies and programs beget endless curses from God Almighty, embroiling you in endless wars and rumors of wars, diseases, floods, famines, and one GodSmack tragedy after another ­ that drowns you in massive debts, destruction and perdition. How easy would it be for the Great God of all Creation and Power to shut off the faucet of His wrath ­ and begin to bless ­ (rather than curse) ­ this nation with endless prosperity and peace ­ as it was with king Jehoshaphat; to wit: "Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honor in abundance?" 2 Chron. 18:1(a). But the last half of that verse introduces a disturbing aspect to Jehoshaphat. Here is the verse in its completed form; to wit: "Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honor in abundance, AND JOINED AFFINITY WITH AHAB." (2 Chron. 18:1)  Beloved. What in the world was Jehoshaphat thinking in thus grievously sinning against God by joining affinity with the murderous monster Ahab (!)?? On its face, this conduct by Jehoshaphat appears to be a blatant violation of a fundamental principle of divine Law inherent in the Godhead itself; which is probably best articulated in the sixth chapter of Second Corinthians; to wit:  Sunday, April 25, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  "Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers; for what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness? And what concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel? And what agreement hath the temple of God with idols? for ye are the temple of the living God; as God hath said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. WHEREFORE COME OUT FROM AMONG THEM, AND BE YE SEPARATE, SAITH THE LORD, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you, And will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty." (2 Cor. 6:14-18)  I said, on its face this conduct of Jehoshaphat appears to be a flagrant violation of God's Holy Law of separation of the clean from the unclean that permeates the Scripture; e.g.: "And of some have compassion, MAKING A DIFFERENCE, And others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire; hating even the garment spotted by the flesh." Jude 22,23. Upon closer examination, all reasonable doubt is removed; to wit: King Jehoshaphat ABSOLUTELY DID most grievously violate God's everlasting law, to his Earth Judgments for sure, and to his Eternal Judgment perhaps; to wit: "Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers...Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you, And will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty." 2 Cor. 6:14,17,18. And, by necessary implication, OTHERWISE, NOT; i.e., Otherwise I will NOT receive you; Otherwise I will NOT be a Father unto you; and, Otherwise you will NOT be my sons and daughters.  Beloved. THAT does not sound like Heaven to me(!). Let us look more closely at the conduct of Jehoshaphat, as it related to Ahab and Jezebel and the northern ten-tribe kingdom of apostate, idolatrous Israel. Upon assuming the throne of the southern two-tribe kingdom of Judah, at the death of his father Asa, the first thing that Jehoshaphat did was to beef up the military forces against Israel ­ thereby revealing that he had a keen knowledge of the dangerous bloody condition of Israel as ruled by Ahab and Jezebel; to wit: "And Asa slept with his fathers ... And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead, and STRENGTHENED HIMSELF AGAINST ISRAEL." 2 Chron. 16:13; 17:1.  Again, he gave evidence of his thorough knowledge of "the doings of Israel," at the early stages of his reign; to wit: "And the Lord was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first ways of his father David, and sought not unto Baalim; But sought to the Lord God of his father, and walked in his commandments, AND NOT AFTER THE DOINGS OF ISRAEL." 2 Chron. 17:3,4. And so, Jehoshaphat could not claim that he had no knowledge of the wickedness of Ahab when he "joined affinity with Ahab," in defiance and violation of the Law of God respecting the separation of the righteous from the unrighteous; to wit: "And be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers." 2 Cor. 6:14(a).  Gill: "This seems to be an allusion to the law in Deut. 22:10, and to be a mystical explanation of it;" to wit: "Thou shalt not plow with an ox and an ass together, Thou shalt not wear a garment of divers sorts, as of woollen and linen together." Deut. 22:10,11. By these and innumerable other symbols, the Lord in His Word has impressed upon the minds of His sheep how important it is to learn the Law of Separation between the Godly and the Ungodly, the Holy and the Unholy, the Saved and the Lost, the Believer and the Infidel. "Come out from among them and be ye separate, saith the Lord." (Here is another place in his Expositor, where Gill is mistaken, in contending that the Law of Separation has no reference to the marital status. That is, a believer may be yoked in marriage to an unbeliever; to wit: "Nor is it to be understood as dehorting (to dehort means to dissuade) from entering into marriage contracts with such persons; though believers would do well carefully to avoid such an unequal yoke, since oftentimes they are hereby exposed to many snares, temptations, distresses, and sorrows, which generally, more or less, follow hereon.")  Sunday, April 25, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  John Rice wrote a book and preached at Bob Jones from the text in Deut. 22:10; to wit: "Thou shalt not plow with an ox and an ass together," wherein Dr. Rice took the exact opposite view, contending that the marriage yoke was PRIMARILY INTENDED, and warning all the young people at Bob Jones not to marry anybody but a strong, born again Christian ­ at your peril, your everlasting peril. Of course, John Rice was 100% right, and I am again disappointed in John Gill. However, neither John Gill, John Rice, nor any other expositor of the sacred Scriptures undertakes to defend Jehoshaphat's blatantly sinful conduct when he "joined affinity with Ahab." (!)(!) A more vital and far more pertinent question would be, IS JEHOSHAPHAT NOW IN HEAVEN? That one little Holy Ghost-inspired verse places the matter in serious doubt; to wit: "Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honor in abundance (i.e., God had mightily blessed the fool), and JOINED AFFINITY WITH AHAB (arguably the most evil man who ever lived)." 2 Chron. 18:1. I say, that THAT short verse ­ standing alone ­ would support the proposition that Jehoshaphat is probably now in Hell.  But there is more ­ much more ­ solid evidence from the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures; e.g., With full and complete knowledge that "Ahab the son of Omri did evil in the sight of the Lord above all that were before him. And it came to pass, as if it had been a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he took to wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Zidonians, and went and served Baal, and worshipped him. And he reared up an altar for Baal in the house of Baal, which he had built in Samaria. And Ahab made a grove; and Ahab did more to provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger than all the kings of Israel that were before him." 1 Kgs. 16:30-33. Furthermore, Jehoshaphat was charged with full knowledge of the Satanic condition of affairs in Israel as described by Elijah in the cave fleeing from Jezebel when questioned by the Lord; to wit: "What doest thou here, Elijah? And he said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts; because the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away." (1 Kgs. 19:14)  Beloved, is it possible for any human being or fallen angel to be as evil as Ahab? And yet; and yet ­ Jehoshaphat joined affinity with Ahab!!! Pledging the lives of his own people in Ahab's war at Ramothgilead. And, Ahab did not go down to visit Jehoshaphat !!! Jehoshaphat went down to visit Ahab !!! To wit: "And after certain years he went down to Ahab to Samaria. And Ahab killed sheep and oxen in abundance, and for the people that he had with him, and persuaded him to go up with him to Ramoth-gilead. And Ahab king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat king of Judah, Wilt thou go with me to Ramoth-gilead? And he answered him, I am as thou art, and my people as thy people; AND WE WILL BE WITH THEE IN THE WAR." 2 Chron. 18:2,3. Whereupon, this jolly twosome went off to war together; Ahab got killed; and goofy king Jehoshaphat nearly got killed. "And Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned to his house in peace to Jerusalem. And Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him, and said to king Jehoshaphat, Shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord. Nevertheless there are good things found in thee, in that thou hast taken away the groves out of the land, and hast prepared thine heart to seek God." (2 Chron. 19:1-3)  Jehoshaphat made common cause in life with the devil himself (Ahab), their families socialized, and their children intermingled and gave to Jehoshaphat a vile daughter-in-law, Athaliah, killing his grandchildren. I do not believe king Jehoshaphat is now in Heaven.  I love you.  Amen.  
