

Beyond You, Beyond Me

  Beyond methods of science, fact, proof over speculation's rim, deep in the
  apple's seed, along the violin's chalked string is a hidden intention,
  unconquered peak.
  
  Beyond the sword's flashing swing over Bikini Atoll, still swirling as ash
  and light is a grain of shameless dust that returns no answer.
  
  Beyond sweet talks and sweet walks and quiet afternoons, is a Sunday in the
  park a strong wind moving men's knotted ties lifting women's skirts, exposing
  surprised desire.
  
  Beyond you, beyond me beyond God's name which shouldn't appear in churches,
  forests or poems like these is a painted wheel turning on the wing of a Phoenix.
  
  Beyond greed, anxiety, nervous coughs is a flame, a summertime where nobody
  feels anybody else up, is a brilliant September a gentle agreement, a quiet
  drop of dew.
  
  Beyond them and us and him and her is the first morning, no echo, no secret
  rage no hammering argument, no shadow, no one to listen, no self in the way
  of creation.

FIELD FLOWERS

  What are you saying? That you want
  eternal life? Are your thoughts really
  as compelling as all that? Certainly
  you don't look at us, don't listen to us.
  
  On your skin, stain of sun, 
  dust of yellow buttercups: 
  I'm talking to you, you staring through
  bars of high grass shaking
  your little rattle - O the soul! The soul!
  
  Is it enough only to look inward?
  
  Contempt for humanity is one thing, 
  but why disdain the expansive field, 
  your gaze rising over the clear heads
  of the wild buttercups into what?
  
  Your poor idea of heaven: absence of change.
  
  Better than earth?
  How would you know,
  who are neither here nor there, 
  standing in our midst?

  Up from the fountain of the universe,
  the free water of stars and clouds to 
  quench my soul's thirst.
  Up from the fountain of the universe,
  the free water of dew on crocus and paper-white petals,
  to quench my bodily thirst.
  Up from the fountain of the universe,
  the free water of my companions,
  who quench my deep human thirst.
  Up from the fountain of the universe,
  a soulful, embodied life of love.
  Praise and amen!
