This month, Dābiq had the opportunity to interview Abū Muqātil at- Tūnusī, the mujāhid who killed the murtadd Mohammed Brahmi (head of the secularist People’s Movement and member of the tāghūt Constituent Assembly) in Tunisia. After greeting the muhājir with salām, we had the following discussion.

dabiq

59

-----------------------------------------------------Page 59-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
INTERVIEW WITH ABŪ MUQĀTIL AT-TŪNUSĪ

THE MURTADD MOHAMMED BRAHMI

DĀBIQ: Why did you kill Brahmi?

AB Ū MUQ ĀTIL: In the name of Allah; all praise is due to Allah; and may blessings and peace be upon Allah’s Messenger. We wanted to cause chaos (tawahhush) in the lands by killing Brahmi so as to facilitate the brothers’ movements and so that we would be able to bring in weapons and liberate our brothers from prisons. This was the main goal behind killing Brahmi in addition to the fact that he worked in the Constituent Assembly making him from the tawāghīt of the country.

DĀBIQ: Was it difficult for you execute the operation?

AB Ū MUQ ĀTIL: All praise is due to Allah. Allah (‘azza wa jall) facilitated the matter so we did not find difficulty. We stayed four hours in front of the home of this tyrant, waiting, until he left the home and entered his car. I then moved towards him and killed him by shooting ten bullets at him.

DĀBIQ: Can you tell us about the assassination of the murtadd Chokri Belaid (coordinator of the Democratic Patriots’ Movement) and the

60 INTERVIEW

brothers who took part in the operation?

AB Ū MUQ ĀTIL: The assassination of Chokri Belaid was carried out by our brother Abū Sayyāf Kamāl Gafgāzī (may Allah accept him). Our brother Lutfī az-Zayn (may Allah accept him) was with him in the operation. Abū Zakariyyā Ahmad ar-Ruwaysī (may Allah accept him) helped the two brothers in executing the operation. Our brother Ahmad ar-Ruwaysī was killed recently in a battle against the apostates. He had been imprisoned in Tunis for issues from his past, and alhamdulillāh, Allah guided him in prison and his practice became good. He began making the adhān in prison and attending the lessons given by the brothers despite the harassment from the tawāghīt. When the revolution happened in Tunisia, he was able to escape with the brothers from prison. He then joined the brothers in Libya and took part in some battles with the brothers. When we established a training camp in Libya, he became one of the brothers in charge of the camp. He would train the brothers, as he excelled in the military field. Thereafter, when we started smuggling arms into Tunisia, he helped us despite having a 15-year prison sentence on him in Tunisia. The brother did not hesitate. He came with us, took the risk, and smuggled

THE MURTADD CHOKRI BELAID

-----------------------------------------------------Page 60-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
the weapons. After the assassination of Chokri Belaid, he became wanted. So he went back to Libya and continued training the brothers there and sending brothers to carry out operations inside Tunisia. Thereafter, alhamdulillāh, the brother was in Sirte and joined the Islamic State there, pledged allegiance to it, and became responsible for a training camp there. He would train the brothers. Alhamdulillāh, he was killed facing the enemy, not fleeing. We ask Allah to accept him and make us join him in the Gardens of Eternity.

DĀBIQ: Why did you decide to perform hijrah to Shām after the operation against Brahmi? AB Ū MUQ ĀTIL: I decided to perform hijrah to Shām because most of the brothers I used to work with were either killed or imprisoned and all the roads for me to continue jihād in Tunisia were cut off. Alhamdulillāh, by performing hijrah to Shām, I was blessed with witnessing the revival of the Khilāfah.

DĀBIQ: Can you tell us about your experience in jihād?

AB Ū MUQ ĀTIL: My religious practice started in 2002. I came to Shām to study the Sharī ’ah. In 2003, after the Americans entered Iraq, I went to Iraq and stayed there about a month. Thereafter, we were betrayed by some of the hypocrites there and were forced to leave. I then went to France. I then prepared for another journey and joined Jamā’at at-Tawhīd wal-Jihād with Shaykh Abū Mus’ab az-Zarqāwī (rahimahullāh) in Fallūjah. I stayed there for about six or seven months. I then left Fallūjah to Shām so as to receive my family but was arrested there. I stayed nine months in the Far ’ Filistīn prison. I was then deported to France and remained imprisoned there for seven years. I then left back to Tunisia and started planning on establishing jihād in Tunisia with my brothers. Libya was next to us and weapons were widespread there. So we went to Libya and established a training camp there. We would

INTERVIEW WITH ABŪ MUQĀTIL AT-TŪNUSĪ

train brothers there and at the same time we would work to smuggle weapons into Tunisia. Our brother Kamāl Gafgāzī (may Allah accept him) executed the first assassination so that we could create chaos in the lands. The matter succeeded but some of those associated with jihād there, may Allah guide them, went out and defended the former government institutions and thereby ruined our mission. We tried again with Brahmi and the same occurred. After all these attempts I decided to go to Shām and join the Islamic State there.

DĀBIQ: It is well known that the tāghūt “Zine El Abidine” Ben Ali was from the worst of the tawāghīt, yet the number of Tunisians in the ranks of the Khilafah is so great. How was this possible? Also, do you have a message for the tawāghīt of Tunisia, both the secularists and so- called “Islamist ” tawāghīt?

THE HUMILIATED TĀGHŪT BEN ALI

AB Ū MUQ ĀTIL: As for the number of Tunisian brothers who have joined the ranks of the Khilāfah, then all this is from the grace of Allah (‘azza wa jall). This tyrant and fool, Ben Ali, would not leave an opportunity for someone

dabiq

61

-----------------------------------------------------Page 61-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
INTERVIEW WITH ABŪ MUQĀTIL AT-TŪNUSĪ

to practice the religion even if it were “practice” according to a false manhaj. He would wage war against them all and throw them into prison. This was good for the brothers and led to the spreading of the correct manhaj in Tunisia.

As for my message to the secularist tawāghīt of Tunisia, then I say to them: Observe what is happening to your kāfir brothers in Iraq, Shām, and other lands. This will be your end, by Allah’s permission, upon our hands, inshā’allāh. There is nothing between us and you except slaughter. As for my message to the tawāghīt of Tunisia – those who are considered “Islamists” – then I say, has not the time come for you to repent to Allah (‘azza wa jall) and realize that the ideas you hold and the paths you tread, including that of the elections, have not brought you any results except for kufr? As for the Islamic State, then it took the path of the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam), and here it is, an established state in Shām, Iraq, Libya, Yemen, Nigeria, Sinai, and other lands. So wake up, fear Allah (‘azza wa jall), and return to your religion.

DĀBIQ: Do you have any comments on the recent operation in Tunis (the Bardo Museum attack)? ABŪ MUQĀTIL: The operation delighted us and healed our hearts. We hope that the brothers there follow this path, rely upon Allah, and inflict massacres upon the enemies of Allah. Through operations like this, terror enters the hearts of Allah’s enemies. Inshā’allāh, the brothers there will follow this path. They should be certain that operations like this are not impossible. The brothers carried out this operation while the Bardo Museum is beside the Tunisian Parliament – one of the most guarded places – and still, alhamdulillāh, Allah facilitated for the brothers to enter it and kill their enemies. We ask Allah (‘azza wa jall) to accept the martyred brothers and have mercy upon them.

DĀBIQ: Can you tell us about your imprisonment in France?

62 INTERVIEW

AB Ū MUQ ĀTIL: I ask Allah to protect us from imprisonment, amputation, and fracture. I ask Allah (‘azza wa jall) to release our brothers in all the prisons. Prison was difficult. We would face humiliation and discomfort from these kuffār. But at the same time, it was a great gate for da’wah to Allah (‘azza wa jall) and to explain this manhaj and this path to the imprisoned youth. Finally, prison is the school of Yūsuf (‘alayhis- salām). And in all conditions, all praise is due to Allah.

DĀBIQ: Do you have a message for the brothers in France?

AB Ū MUQ ĀTIL: I call them to wake up and fight the enemies of Allah for Allah’s cause. By Allah the Great, you would wake up and fight them if you came here and saw what they do with their planes, how they terrify the women and children, and how they strive day and night to destroy this state, and by Allah’s permission, they will never be able to do so. I call them to follow the method of the brothers who executed operations in Europe. Weapons are easy to acquire in those countries. Rely upon Allah (‘azza wa jall). I also say to them, do not look for specific targets. Kill anybody. All the kuffār over there are targets. Don’t tire yourself and look for difficult targets. Kill whoever is over there from the kuffār.

DĀBIQ: Do you have a message for the kuffār in France?

AB Ū MUQ ĀTIL: I say to them, soon by Allah’s permission you will see the banner of lā ilāha illāllāh fluttering over the Elysee Palace. The Islamic State is close now. Between us and you is the sea. By Allah’s permission, the march is advancing towards you. And inshā’allāh, your women and children will be sold by us in the markets of the Islamic State.

DĀBIQ: Jazākumullāhu khayrā. We ask that Allah blesses you.