 1 Fear and Difference 
March 27, 2011 
Rev. Mark Belletini 
 
Kindling, Welcoming, Centering, Kindling, 

 
Opening Words: 

 We are here 

after days of thunder and daffodils 

to worship, to celebrate the gift of life, 

to claim our power, to face our limits, 

and to learn to neither feed our fears 

nor deny the realities of joy or courage. 
 And so, we pledge to journey together along the way
s of truth and affection, as best as we 
can name them now, or may learn them in days to com
e; that we and our children may be 
fulfilled, and that we may speak to our world in wo
rds and lives of peace, justice and 
goodwill. 

 
Singing
  
 
Story  
Big Al 
 
Announcements, Affirmation, Breathsong
  
Sequence  
(have people make a tea bowl of their hands) 
 
The spring world begins to blossom.   

Look! Every crocus is a freshly written haiku. 

Every forsythia, every cherry branch  

paints a poem on a scroll  

to hang in the shrine of my heart. 

It™s spring in Japan now too. 

Petals float down from trees surrounded by water 

clogged with the heartbreaking evidence  

of real human lives little different  

from yours or mine, save that they are no more. 

Before the loss of ten thousand lives, 

the Buddha still refuses to speak, 

the mirror on the altar of the Shinto temple cracks
,  
the priests weep, and grief grasps at thin air. 

Closer to home, no earthquakes, just television sta
rs ranting, worries about new wars and lost 
work, and the death of colorful movie stars. Behind
 it all, the usual talking heads who jabber, 

 2 jabber, jabber about everything, even though they k
now nothing, not least their own heart. 
Would that they too might be as silent as the Buddh
a. 
 
Before the silent witness of the ten thousand, I no
te all the radiation and death tolls floating on 
the airwaves, and yet I note this too: the cherry p
etals also float in Japan, landing on the wet and 
broken shoji screens on the muddy ground, filling e
ven the tea-bowl of our open hands, here so 
far away from Japan, with their soft, silent witnes
s. 
silence 
 
Our hearts having gone out to the ten thousand and 
all who loved them, they go out now to our 
closer lives, to those we miss, to those we love, t
o those with whom we struggle, to those who 
love us even when we have a hard time loving oursel
ves. These we name aloud in quiet voice, or 
keep sheltered within the shrine of our silent hear
ts. But now we turn to them–that we might 
worship with our whole lives.   
naming 
 
9:15 AM   It™s all part of the world. It™s all part
 of our lives. News of the great earthquake, the 
chirp of the most minor bird. It™s all part of the 
song. 
 
11:AM   The witness of music has the power to trans
mute the jabber jabber of frightening things 
into something playful and not scary at all. Blest 
is the witness of music. 
  

Anthems:  9:15  A Minor Bird (Robert Frost) 

                  11:00 Jabberwocky 

 
The First Reading 
comes from Jacob™s Circular Letter, otherwise known
 as the Epistle or 
Letter of James. It™s found in the New Testament. M
artin Luther hated this book and wanted to 
rip it out of the scripture, if for no other reason
 than it refuted his central message. We are not 
sure when it was written within 30 or so years.  It
 claims to have been written by someone named 
Jacob (James in English, for some unknown reason), 
traditionally identified as Jesus™ brother, 
although scholars debate that, because the Greek is
 so polished. We think it wasn™t written to 
any group in any particular city, but that it circu
lated around to urban Jewish communities. 
Remember, the people we often call the Early Christ
ians thought of themselves as Jews, since the 
word Christian was not invented until much later. I
n support of this, note the word ?synagogue? 
used in the letter. This is my own translation from
 the Greek.   
 
My dear family, take note. All of you.  Please. Lis
ten to others first; speak to others second; 
express your anger to others, last. For your anger,
 of itself, does not bring about God™s justice. 
 
So dig out the stuff that™s spoiling inside you, an
d toss out the compost seething there, and 
instead,  spread it in the garden inside you where 
reason has been planted, the reason which can 
make you whole.  

 
It makes no sense to listen to reason, however, if 
you don™t put it into practice. Anyone who 
listens to reason, but doesn™t practice it, reminds
 me of when I look into a mirror, recognize 
myself, and then walk away and forget what I look l
ike. But if you pay attention to the Torah, the 

 3 law that liberates us, and then put that liberation
 into practice, you will not forget what it says. 
And, you will find happiness in the practice. 

 
If you claim the word ?spiritual? for yourself, but
 just keep blathering all the time, you™re fooling 
yourself, and your so-called ?spirituality? doesn™t
 mean anything. Spirituality that originates with 
God our true parent is more like this: to take care
 of the needs of destitute widows and orphans, 
and to keep 
yourself
 unsnared by the dominant system. 
 
O my family! Don™t play favorites. Let™s imagine so
meone coming into your synagogue dressed 
to the nines–jewelry, fashionable apparel.  And at 
the same time, someone comes into the 
meeting wearing worn, even tattered, clothes. If yo
u pay special attention to the first, saying, 
?Here™s a good seat for you, right up front,? but s
ay to the second, ?Hey you, go stand over 
there,? or even, ?Sit down on the floor near me so 
I can keep an eye on you,? have you not 
clearly made a judgment as to who belongs and who d
oesn™t? Listen, you seem to be confused. 
The poor are rich in faithfulness, and even exempli
fy God-given citizenship in the Realm of 
Justice and Honesty we are trying to establish. But
 isn™t it often the folks who ?have it all,? who 
are the people slandering your noble name, exploiti
ng you, and dragging you into court all the 
time? If you really were paying attention to our ex
cellent Torah, where it is written ?You shall 
love your neighbor as you love yourself,? 
that™s
 when you™re really ?well off.? But when you 
show favoritism, you err, and trample on the Torah,
 which then will trample on your conscience. 
Make sure you act as if you really believe that the
 Torah sets you free, for when you don™t show 
compassion to others, you can™t expect any yourself
. Isn™t compassion for all always better than 
dividing us all into the ?haves? and the ?have-nots
?? 
 
The Second Reading 
is from the poet Marge Piercy, who, like me, and se
veral others in this 
congregation, grew up in the City of Detroit, once 
called Detroit the Beautiful, now, one of the 
saddest cities in the United States of America. It™
s called 
Motown, Arsenal of Democracy 
and it 
dates to 2006.
  Fog used to bloom off the distant river 

turning our streets strange, elongating  

sounds and muffling others. The crack 

of a gunshot softened. 

 
The sky at night was a dull red: 

a bonfire build of old creosote soaked 

logs by the railroad tracks. A red 

almost pink painted by factoriesŠ 

 
That never stopped their roar 

like traffic in canyons of New York. 

But stop they did and fell down 

ending dangerous jobs that paid. 

 
We believed in our unions like some 

 4 trust in their priests.  We believed in Friday  

paychecks sure as winter™s ice curb-to-curb 

 
Where older boys could play 

hockey dodging carsŠwooden 

pucks, sticks cracking wood 

on wood. A man came home 

 
With a new car and other men 

would collect around it like ants 

in sugar. Women clumped for showers Š 

Wedding and babyŠwakes, funerals 

care for the man brought home 

with a hole ripped in him, children 

coughing.  We all coughed in Detroit. 

We woke at dawn to my father™s hack. 

 
That world is gone, as a tableau 

of wagon trains. Expressways carved 

neighborhoods to shreds. Rich men 

moved jobs south, then overseas. 

Only the old anger lives there 

bubbling up like chemicals dumped 

seething now into the water 

building now into the bones. 

 
Sermon 

 
The unbelievable event in Japan more than two weeks
 ago has captured the imagination, and 
kindled the horror, and grief, of the entire world.
 Kozma Albert, the Unitarian minister at our 
own congregation™s partner-church in Bölön, Rumania
, actually sent me a letter about how it 
affected the hearts of that congregation over there
–this, from our partner church, which itself 
has suffered flooding in their area, a truly terrib
le winter, and which has struggled for months 
with bureaucratic nightmares out of Bucharest conce
rning the use of one of their buildings, 
which would have tempted me to throw in the towel m
onths ago. 
 
Yet, as we all know, other events are also claiming
 our hearts and mind. They have been briefly 
eclipsed by this disaster, but they are still vibra
nt.  In several states in our union, including our 
own state of Ohio, as well as Wisconsin and Michiga
n, we read of unprecedented 
demonstrations. In Wisconsin, these are especially 
big, with upwards of 75,000 gathered to 
confront and rail against the power-plays disguised
 as policy. I was at our own statehouse one 
day when the paper estimated the crowd to be over 5
000–nothing to sneeze at on a Tuesday 
afternoon at 1 PM; a work-day for those who have da
ytime jobs.  People are demonstrating about 
many things, to be sure, but the right to negotiate
 via unions, the right to have a voice in one™s 
own livelihood, is certainly central.   

 5  
?We believed in our unions like some 

trust in their priests.  We believed in Friday payc
hecks sure as winter™s ice curb-to-curb.? 
 
Of all the lines, in Marge Piercy™s poem about Detr
oit, my birth-town, that™s the one that stands 
out for me. The gunshots, the pollution reddened su
nsets, playing in the streets, the baby 
showers–all that too. But the lines about the union
s really stood out for me. After all, I didn™t 
grow up surrounded by golf-green lawns and white pi
cket fences. I grew up with crab-grass 
lawns and stories of picket lines. I grew up with t
he sure knowledge that paychecks were reliable 
on Friday–
because
 of the voice of the unions. 
 
My father grew up working in auto factories. I work
ed one too, making leaf-springs for Dodge, 
to help put myself through school, but my father wo
rked in them before the unions.  My 
grandfather was actually one of the folks that work
ed to get the union into Ford, and from him I 
heard tell of strikes and pickets. I learned new vo
cabulary words: a ?scab? was not just a booboo 
on my knee-cap. 

 
My father remembered the twelve-hour days, and what
 Piercy justly calls the ?dangerous? 
working conditions at the great Ford Rouge Plant, b
ut he also told us about what kind of 
nonsense he experienced before the unions came to t
he factory. His immediate boss had no use 
for Catholics– or the children of immigrants with l
ots of vowels in their last names. Seeing in 
the opening of my father™s shirt that my father wor
e a scapular around his neck (scapular, that is, 
a little cloth talisman dedicated to a saint), his 
supervisor routinely mocked him. ?Stupid 
Mackerel Snapper dago,? he would say. My father had
 no one to go to–this WAS his boss– 
and put up with it, no easy deal for him, I assure 
you, since anger was swift and hot for him. 
Until one day, the bossman actually reached 
into 
his collar and lifted out the scapular, and then 
ridiculed my father while holding it in his hand. M
y father was terrified. This was his boss. But 
he was being ridiculed, and the gift his mother had
 given him was being ridiculed. So my father 
got out of the way of his own anger, made a fist, c
ursed the fool out– and was fired. He fumed 
about this event for many years. We heard the repla
y over and over again as he held forth at the 
supper table. ?This wouldn™t have been allowed had 
the union been there,? he said one day. 
 
Yet, when he was older, and a supervisor himself at
 the power company, he changed his mind 
about unions. He insisted that they had lost their 
focus. He insisted they had over-stepped their 
original vision. But even so, he never stopped tell
ing the story of how terrified he was of his 
bigot boss, and how there was nothing he could do a
bout it, and still keep his job. 
 
This month, I have been reflecting on the words ?di
versity? and ?difference.? Listen, when I lift 
up the word ?diversity,? as I have all this month, 
I am clearly lifting up a vision of all different 
kinds of people, different in culture, religion, wa
y of life, sexuality, and so forth, learning to 
work and live and worship together side-by-side in 
a pluralistic and cooperative community. 
 
But, sadly, there are diversities that exist, diffe
rences between us, which can actually paralyze us 
with fear. Make us feel threatened. We may get so s
cared we can™t even imagine trying to live 

 6 side by side with those whose difference from us is
 not one of gender, color or culture– but one 
of brutal power.  

 
I know a woman up in Detroit who voted for the gove
rnor there, the governor who, like so many 
these days, has abolished collective bargaining rig
hts. This woman has been told that she can just 
expect to get a 15 percent cut in her pay, and that
 she will have to pay a large share of her health 
insurance from now on, and that if she is going to 
complain about it, she can just go find another 
job, which, in Michigan, I assure you, is a laughab
le idea. This is brutal power. This is a threat, 
plain and simple.  ?Do what we say, or you™re toast
.? 
 
This is a terrible situation. It prompts my fear fo
r the nation, fear for the state, fear especially f
or 
the future I share with you all. This is not a live
-and let-live situation diversity. This is not, ?yo
u 
marry whom you want to marry, and I™ll marry whom I
 want to marry.? This is not ?I™ll eat 
vanilla at Jeni™s, you eat chocolate.? No, this is 
something else. This is: ?I am different from you. 
You are different from me. Our diversity boils down
 to this. I have power. You have none. I will 
run you over if you don™t go along with what I prop
ose. So, start shaking in your boots, curtsey 
nicely and kowtow.? 

 
This is diversity that is not our strength (in the 
words of our mission statement), not our joy, not 
the path to excellence and gratitude. This is a dif
ference of power that simply paralyzes with 
fear. It involves the threat of, and actual, loss o
f jobs and livelihood, the diminishment of aid for 
those who cannot survive without it (they exist! th
ey exist! they™re people!), and a trivialization 
of educational opportunities for our children. This
 is a diversity that threatens to make much of 
what I value disappear, like one of those old table
aux of ?wagon trains,? to quote Marge Piercy. 
 
Now when I talk about being afraid of differences, 
I want to be clear that I am not talking about 
what happened in our story this morning. There, a t
ruly homely large fish is isolated because 
smaller, sleeker fish are afraid of him. His size a
nd his shape are 
perceived
 as frightening. He is 
not using his size to bully or brutalize. There is 
no policy here, no philosophy, no agenda; just a 
big homely, lonely fish, rudely isolated by those w
ho want others in their life 
to look comfortably 
like them
. The story is saying: I might be put off at first 
by a different way of dressing; I might be 
put off by a different look, some ethnic head-scarf
, or some Technicolor tattoo; I may be put off 
at first by either a cultural shyness or flamboyanc
e–or some unusual piercing–but none of 
these differences display an absolute disparity of 
power. They may briefly surprise or shock, but 
they do not frighten me at a visceral level. And I 
can learn to live with them. 
 
But the demonstrations in and around several Midwes
t Statehouses tell me that we™re talking 
about much deeper fears, not a surprise uniqueness 
I™ll simply outgrow. Like the demonstrations 
blossoming all over North Africa and Middle-East, t
hese demonstrations not only express fear, 
but real and indeed, growing, anger. 

 
Which brings me to the insightful letter of James. 
Whoever he was, the author is 
very
 clear about 
the basics of good religion– care for widows and or
phans, love your neighbor as you love 
yourself. Your gathering, he says, can be as divers
e as possible: women and men, the sick and 
the healthy, the marginalized and the successful-- 
every nationality and color and economic 

 7 status, every personality type, differing ability, 
and look. Good! But remember, the poor, the 
widows and orphans always come first. The love of n
eighbor always comes first. That™s basic, 
James says.  

 
I agree.  

 
The author also comments on anger as a response to 
life™s issues. His clear advice? Show your 
anger 
last
. Listen first, the author says, speak second– 
then, when you have all the facts, if need 
be, 
show your anger. After all, anger, without all the 
facts, without thoughtfulness in its 
expression, doesn™t actually accomplish anything, a
nd we™re here for accomplishment, right?–
 accomplished loving, accomplished caring for those 
pushed over the edge of care by the 
?dominant system.?  The Greek there is usually tran
slated as the ?world–? but that makes it 
sound as if the material world is somehow bad, whic
h it most certainly is not. Most 
knowledgeable translators outside traditional theol
ogical models no longer translate it as 
?world,? but more as I have. So the author tells us
 that our best spiritual practice, 
after
 providing 
for the widows and orphans, is to keep 
ourselves
 unsnared by ?the dominant system?–those 
unfeeling systems that put profit before people, gr
eed before grace, privilege before purpose. The 
dominant systems, in fact, can be recognized easily
 because they 
completely turn James™ advice 
upsidedown
– they 
begin
 with anger–anger that people express needs, anger 
that people want 
equality and access, anger that anyone would disagr
ee with them, anger that sharing is required 
by justice–and 
then
, they proceed to speak, but only to tell us to los
e our voice or else. Finally, 
they get to the listening stage–but since the power
s that be tell us they are revving up their ?bus 
to run us over,? it will be hard to hear us anyway,
 won™t it? Those busses are noisy! 
 
But look, James is not letting anyone off the hook,
 or allowing anyone to feel righteous. Even 
though we may be fearful at times, and angry, he as
ks us to examine 
our own
 attitudes toward 
diversity, using  class as an example–do 
you yourselves
 divide people into the haves and have-
nots by how you welcome people into your life? Best
 to work on that issue yourself, James says, 
while you prepare to engage with those who frighten
 
you.  
 
And the engagement has to be there–real engagement,
 not staged debates between parties, or 
between religions–those are rarely helpful in my ex
perience–just the converted shouting at the 
converted. A waste–. 

 
No, engagement has to be personal, varied and passi
onately rational. The demonstrations, yes; 
but also phone calls to those leaders who will take
 the time to listen (they actually pay attention 
to those things!) It means taking time, as rare a c
ommodity as that is, to write real letters, to brin
g 
up real questions crafted with our best reason, and
 supported by our research. The BREAD 
organization we are part of has this down well, I t
hink. It™s one reason why I favor it so much. 
The questions we raise up in this fearful time, bot
h as individuals, and as people joining together 
in a larger voice, always need to be forged from th
e ancient principle James lifts up from the 
Torah–
?loving our neighbors as we love ourselves.?
   That remains basic, no matter how angry 
or afraid we may feel.  

 
 8 It™s possible, I say, for us to get back to a diver
sity that strengthens us, not weakens us, one that 
energizes us rather than makes us afraid or angry. 
To do that means we will have to not let the 
anger and fear live in our bones, as Marge Piercy s
ays it does in the despairing citizens of 
Detroit, now stripped of both their unions 
and
 their formerly thriving industries. It 
does
 mean 
transforming our fears into anger. But not 
leading 
with that anger, as the self-anointed do. It 
means transforming that anger into well-thought out
 reason, carefully wrought plans, creative 
responses, self-awareness, mindfulness, organizatio
n, 
anything
, in short, that is 
not
 some new 
form of hand-wringing despair. Many unions may inde
ed need reform–few deny that, since 
every human institution needs that now and then. So
me of them may indeed need fierce reform, 
and a return to their original vision.  But these c
ollectives to voice common concerns were not 
founded on despair, but on faith–faith that it migh
t actually be possible, in James™ words–to 
live in the realm of justice and honesty–together. 

 
We may have no power to stop earthquakes in Japan, 
or flooding in Rumania. But we do have 
the power to work together to transform the differe
nces in our modern world so that they are not 
a source of fear any longer, but our clearest invit
ation to optimistic, patient, uncomplaining, and 
effective justice work. 

 
Offering 

We set aside this time for members and friends to o
ffer gifts in support of the work of this 
community. Thank you, whether you give today in the
 basket, or whether you give by mail, or 
by computer. We thank you. We cannot do this work w
ithout your support. And by the way,  
in a congregation like this, 
we
 and 
you
 mean the same thing. We support ourselves. We make
 it 
happen. The ushers will now come forward. 

 
Ceremony of Installation
  
Mark introduces New Pastoral Team Members    

 
Eric 

In the life of a liberal religious congregation, we
 put people before beliefs, and persons before 
forms. Being present to each other in both joy and 
sorrow, rejoicing and suffering, is a mark of 
our religious practice. 

 
The ordained ministers of this church including the
 minister emerita, as well as soon-to-be 
affiliated ministers Suzan McCrystal and Kathleen F
owler, plus, our Chaplain, Dick Dawson, 
embrace among their ministries the pastoral or cari
ng services. In this we are supported and 
helped by the Caring Committee and the Neighborhood
 Network, which help people in time of 
trouble with meals and rides to and from medical ap
pointments, among many other things. 
 
Mark 
To these ministries, the congregation has added the
 Pastoral Team. The first team was 
installed eight years ago. Today, we hereby install
 the new members of our team. 
 
Pastoral Team members extend the care of this congr
egation to those going through a time of 
prolonged hardship, grief, hospitalization or loss 
of work. Know that they each understand 

 9 confidentiality, promising to keep the sacred stori
es of every human life safe. They have been 
trained to do this work, and Eric, Dick and I hereb
y acknowledge them as persons of character, 
compassion and commitment, worthy of trust. 

 
Dick 

With Eric and Mark, and on behalf of the members of
 this congregation and its leaders, I hereby 
install you as members of the Pastoral Team of Firs
t Unitarian Universalist Church. Working 
with the ministers and the Caring Committee and Nei
ghborhood Network to live out our values 
of compassion and service one-on-one, I commend you
 to the congregation as servants of the 
heart. 

  

 #1012
 in New Teal Book 
  

   
