FEELINGS OF INFERIORITY
  
   
   
   10. By "feelings of inferiority" we mean not only inferiority feelings
   in the strictest sense but a whole spectrum of related traits: low
   self-esteem, feelings of powerlessness, depressive tendencies,
   defeatism, guilt, self-hatred, etc. We argue that modern leftists tend
   to have such feelings (possibly more or less repressed) and that these
   feelings are decisive in determining the direction of modern leftism.
   
   11. When someone interprets as derogatory almost anything that is said
   about him (or about groups with whom he identifies) we conclude that
   he has inferiority feelings or low self-esteem. This tendency is
   pronounced among minority rights advocates, whether or not they belong
   to the minority groups whose rights they defend. They are
   hypersensitive about the words used to designate minorities. The terms
   "negro," "oriental," "handicapped" or "chick" for an African, an
   Asian, a disabled person or a woman originally had no derogatory
   connotation. "Broad" and "chick" were merely the feminine equivalents
   of "guy," "dude" or "fellow." The negative connotations have been
   attached to these terms by the activists themselves. Some animal
   rights advocates have gone so far as to reject the word "pet" and
   insist on its replacement by "animal companion." Leftist
   anthropologists go to great lengths to avoid saying anything about
   primitive peoples that could conceivably be interpreted as negative.
   They want to replace the word "primitive" by "nonliterate." They seem
   almost paranoid about anything that might suggest that any primitive
   culture is inferior to our own. (We do not mean to imply that
   primitive cultures ARE inferior to ours. We merely point out the
   hypersensitivity of leftish anthropologists.)
   
   12. Those who are most sensitive about "politically incorrect"
   terminology are not the average black ghetto-dweller, Asian immigrant,
   abused woman or disabled person, but a minority of activists, many of
   whom do not even belong to any "oppressed" group but come from
   privileged strata of society. Political correctness has its stronghold
   among university professors, who have secure employment with
   comfortable salaries, and the majority of whom are heterosexual, white
   males from middle-class families.
   
   13. Many leftists have an intense identification with the problems of
   groups that have an image of being weak (women), defeated (American
   Indians), repellent (homosexuals), or otherwise inferior. The leftists
   themselves feel that these groups are inferior. They would never admit
   it to themselves that they have such feelings, but it is precisely
   because they do see these groups as inferior that they identify with
   their problems. (We do not suggest that women, Indians, etc., ARE
   inferior; we are only making a point about leftist psychology).
   
   14. Feminists are desperately anxious to prove that women are as
   strong as capable as men. Clearly they are nagged by a fear that women
   may NOT be as strong and as capable as men.
   
   15. Leftists tend to hate anything that has an image of being strong,
   good and successful. They hate America, they hate Western
   civilization, they hate white males, they hate rationality. The
   reasons that leftists give for hating the West, etc. clearly do not
   correspond with their real motives. They SAY they hate the West
   because it is warlike, imperialistic, sexist, ethnocentric and so
   forth, but where these same faults appear in socialist countries or in
   primitive cultures, the leftist finds excuses for them, or at best he
   GRUDGINGLY admits that they exist; whereas he ENTHUSIASTICALLY points
   out (and often greatly exaggerates) these faults where they appear in
   Western civilization. Thus it is clear that these faults are not the
   leftist's real motive for hating America and the West. He hates
   America and the West because they are strong and successful.
   
   16. Words like "self-confidence," "self-reliance," "initiative",
   "enterprise," "optimism," etc. play little role in the liberal and
   leftist vocabulary. The leftist is anti-individualistic,
   pro-collectivist. He wants society to solve everyone's needs for them,
   take care of them. He is not the sort of person who has an inner sense
   of confidence in his own ability to solve his own problems and satisfy
   his own needs. The leftist is antagonistic to the concept of
   competition because, deep inside, he feels like a loser.
   
   17. Art forms that appeal to modern leftist intellectuals tend to
   focus on sordidness, defeat and despair, or else they take an
   orgiastic tone, throwing off rational control as if there were no hope
   of accomplishing anything through rational calculation and all that
   was left was to immerse oneself in the sensations of the moment.
   
   18. Modern leftist philosophers tend to dismiss reason, science,
   objective reality and to insist that everything is culturally
   relative. It is true that one can ask serious questions about the
   foundations of scientific knowledge and about how, if at all, the
   concept of objective reality can be defined. But it is obvious that
   modern leftist philosophers are not simply cool-headed logicians
   systematically analyzing the foundations of knowledge. They are deeply
   involved emotionally in their attack on truth and reality. They attack
   these concepts because of their own psychological needs. For one
   thing, their attack is an outlet for hostility, and, to the extent
   that it is successful, it satisfies the drive for power. More
   importantly, the leftist hates science and rationality because they
   classify certain beliefs as true (i.e., successful, superior) and
   other beliefs as false (i.e. failed, inferior). The leftist's feelings
   of inferiority run so deep that he cannot tolerate any classification
   of some things as successful or superior and other things as failed or
   inferior. This also underlies the rejection by many leftists of the
   concept of mental illness and of the utility of IQ tests. Leftists are
   antagonistic to genetic explanations of human abilities or behavior
   because such explanations tend to make some persons appear superior or
   inferior to others. Leftists prefer to give society the credit or
   blame for an individual's ability or lack of it. Thus if a person is
   "inferior" it is not his fault, but society's, because he has not been
   brought up properly.
   
   19. The leftist is not typically the kind of person whose feelings of
   inferiority make him a braggart, an egotist, a bully, a self-promoter,
   a ruthless competitor. This kind of person has not wholly lost faith
   in himself. He has a deficit in his sense of power and self-worth, but
   he can still conceive of himself as having the capacity to be strong,
   and his efforts to make himself strong produce his unpleasant
   behavior. [1] But the leftist is too far gone for that. His feelings
   of inferiority are so ingrained that he cannot conceive of himself as
   individually strong and valuable. Hence the collectivism of the
   leftist. He can feel strong only as a member of a large organization
   or a mass movement with which he identifies himself. We are asserting that ALL, or even most, bullies and ruthless competitors suffer from feelings of inferiority.
   
   20. Notice the masochistic tendency of leftist tactics. Leftists
   protest by lying down in front of vehicles, they intentionally provoke
   police or racists to abuse them, etc. These tactics may often be
   effective, but many leftists use them not as a means to an end but
   because they PREFER masochistic tactics. Self-hatred is a leftist
   trait.
   
   21. Leftists may claim that their activism is motivated by compassion
   or by moral principle, and moral principle does play a role for the
   leftist of the oversocialized type. But compassion and moral principle
   cannot be the main motives for leftist activism. Hostility is too
   prominent a component of leftist behavior; so is the drive for power.
   Moreover, much leftist behavior is not rationally calculated to be of
   benefit to the people whom the leftists claim to be trying to help.
   For example, if one believes that affirmative action is good for black
   people, does it make sense to demand affirmative action in hostile or
   dogmatic terms? Obviously it would be more productive to take a
   diplomatic and conciliatory approach that would make at least verbal
   and symbolic concessions to white people who think that affirmative
   action discriminates against them. But leftist activists do not take
   such an approach because it would not satisfy their emotional needs.
   Helping black people is not their real goal. Instead, race problems
   serve as an excuse for them to express their own hostility and
   frustrated need for power. In doing so they actually harm black
   people, because the activists' hostile attitude toward the white
   majority tends to intensify race hatred.
   
   22. If our society had no social problems at all, the leftists would
   have to INVENT problems in order to provide themselves with an excuse
   for making a fuss.
   
   23. We emphasize that the foregoing does not pretend to be an accurate
   description of everyone who might be considered a leftist. It is only
   a rough indication of a general tendency of leftism.
   
