 2008-10-19 The Beauty of it  MLB 

 
Opening Words 

 
We are here  

 welcomed by the bright, open arms of autumn 
  to yield our illusions for deeper realities, 
  to link our hands across the generations  
and claim our place among all those  

who also wondered at their kinship  

to farthest star and nearest rose.  

  

And so, though our ways of thinking and feeling abo
ut the meaning of our days may 
differ, we agree to journey together, side by side,
 face to face. Within this circle of 
strong spirit, mutual care, and ethical vision, may
 we ourselves remain open to 
being transformed by a welcoming heart and emerging
 justice. 
Sequence 

 
A rose is a rose is a rose
 said the poet. 
Would it be just as true if I said it  

in another language? 

Une rose est une rose est une rose
– 
Or does the flower we call the rose, 

but which in Paris they call 
la rose
  
mean something different in their hearts, 

evoke something distinct in their lives? 

Among the Inuit people of the far north,  

when they look up at the night sky,  

someone might point and say 
tatkresiwok,
 whereas in Paris, they might call the same 
bright white wheel in heaven 
la lune
.  
Is it the same thing? Or is a moon like a white gri
n over a barren and icy tundra a very 
different thing from a moon that shines through the
 poetry of Verlaine and Anais Nin 
over a glass of rosé set on a café table along the 

Boulevard des Capuchines? 

In Vladivostok right now, 

on the East Coast of Russian, 

tishina
 is falling over the city as the night 
grows deeper, and the traffic thins out. 

Tishina
 doesn™t fall in Columbus, OH. 
Silence does, we say, during the middle of the serv
ice after a bell sound intones. 
But is it or is it not the same thing? 

 
silence 

 
Love is love is love is love. 

Nevertheless, sometimes love takes the form  

 of hugs or letters. 

Sometimes it takes the form of a delicious 

supper or a tender gift. 

And sometimes, it takes the form of names in 

the middle of a service, spoken aloud or simply 

remembered in the silent heart, names 

that express our connections and love and 

struggles and love and sorrow and love 

and beauty and love. 

Let the names be present. 

 
names 

 
Music is music is music is music. 

It is all languages and none. It is the beauty 

that heals hearts, and blesses our lives. 

 
Readings 

 
The First Reading
 comes from retired archbishop Desmond Tutu™s deeply
 moving book 
No Future Without Forgiveness written in 1999 after
 his difficult work with the Truth and 
Reconciliation committee of South Africa. 

  

On my first visit to Nigeria, I happened to travel 
to northern Nigeria in a plane piloted by 
Nigerians.  Coming from South Africa where blacks d
id not do such work, I really grew 
inches with pride in black achievement.  The plane 
took off smoothly.  Then we hit 
turbulence.  At one moment we were at one altitude 
and the next we had left our 
stomachs up there as the plane shuddered and droppe
d.  I was shocked at what I 
discovered Œ I found I was saying to myself, ?I rea
lly am bothered that there™s no white 
man in the cockpit.  Can these blacks manage to nav
igate us out of this horrible 
experience??  It was all involuntary and spontaneou
s.  I would never have believed that I 
had in fact been so radically brainwashed.  I would
 have denied it vigorously because I 
prided myself on being an exponent of black conscio
usness, but in a crisis something 
deeper had emerged:  I had accepted a white definit
ion of existence, that whites were 
somehow superior to and more competent than blacks.
  Of course those black pilots were 
able to land the plane quite competently.   

 
We shouldn™t underestimate the power of conditionin
g.  That is why I hold the view that 
we should be a little more generous, a little more 
understanding, in judging perpetrators 
of human rights violations.  This does not mean we 
will condone what they and the white 
community in South Africa did or allowed to happen.
  But we will be a little more 
compassionate in our judgment as we become a little
 more conscious of how we too 
could succumb as easily as they.  It will make our 
judgment just that little less strident 
and abrasive and possibly open the door to some bei
ng able to forgive themselves for 
what they now perceive as weakness and lack of cour
age.  It might then persuade them 

 perhaps to be a little more willing to acknowledge 
their frailty and make them more ready 
to accept accountability.   

 
The Second Reading
 comes from The Rose Has No Why, an essay by the pol
itical 
theologian Dorothee Soelle 

 
What does the rose tell us?  
The rose has no why; it blooms because it blooms. I
t notes 
not itself, asks not if it be seen. 
In this couplet, the poet Silesius summarizes his a
nswer to 
the question of the meaning of life. Whereas we ord
inarily think we are more than a rose, 
belonging to a higher order of being, he makes the 
rose the image and exemplar of true 
being. It is without purpose, not there for some ot
her reason, not for use, but meaningful 
in itself. For what is beautiful is holy all by its
elf. It is not a means to something else.   
 
For many years I have been engaged in the peace mov
ement, & the question I am asked 
most often is, of course, the one about success:  
What is the point of it all?
  But I have 
come to realize that any thinking that is oriented 
solely toward success is essentially 
cynical. For the rose has no why, and one has to do
 some things, even when they meet 
with no success now. 

 
Sermon 

 
I™ve been trying to lift up varying aspects of the 
concept of forgiveness this month. 
Today, I want to continue to do so by telling a sto
ry I first told here some 9 years and two 
months ago. I would wager that most people in this 
room have not heard me tell the story, 
since summer services in those days were not as wel
l attended, and there are many, many 
people who have joined the congregations since then
. So I thought it was time to tell this 
story again, since it remains one of the most movin
g, most instructive, and most beautiful 
stories I know from my life. 

 
It is a story more beautiful than even the lovely s
tory of the lemons this morning, a story 
which says that when confronted with a wound to the
 spirit, as Rosalinda experienced 
when her beloved lemons were stolen, it™s possible 
to come up with a totally unexpected 
solution, one which takes into account the personho
od of the one who has done the 
wounding.  Archbishop Tutu, in his moving confessio
n, recognizes that all of us can end 
up brainwashed from the systemic matrix of hatred a
nd blame that we live in, whether in 
the States or South Africa. Even a man as great as 
he is, with a capacity for facing the 
hard truths of Apartheid head on and not giving int
o despair, found himself thinking 
things that are totally irrational, yet clearly imp
lanted in all of our heads by a larger 
system of degradation and dishonesty that divides t
he human race into the privileged and 
unprivileged by birth. 

 
And Dorothee Soelle, a German theologian whom I hea
rd speak many times,   prepares 
me to understand this story I am going to tell by r
eminding me that sometimes, 
expressions of forgiveness are not purposeful acts,
 deliberately chosen to gain some 
useful and specific result, but 
beautiful 
actions, springing from the heart just like art and
 
music, or springing from the earth just like a rose
. Sometimes, two people can recognize, 

 like Tutu recognized, that we are all caught up in 
a web of national and international 
blame, distortion, innuendo and deception, which so
metimes we mistake for real truth, 
even though something deeper in us, something holy 
in us, something beautiful in us, 
knows better.  

 
Tutu felt that this very fact should invite us to a
 deeper compassion, a sense of actual 
camaraderie even with folks we have been taught wer
e once our enemies. A sense of 
mutual recognition, despite any deep cultural diffe
rences. Now, please, no action of 
violence is condoned by such forgiveness. No one ne
ed praise those who allow violence 
to befall their neighbors. But the beauty of this s
tory reminds me that it makes no sense to 
pack compassion off in a safe somewhere forever, ei
ther.  
 
You may have to learn how to speak a new language i
n order lift up this compassionate 
forgiveness. You may, as in our children™s story th
is morning, have to learn a different 
form of generosity, one that is, as they say, count
er-intuitive. But I know I myself can™t 
argue with the title of Tutu™s great book: without 
forgiveness, there is no future. And I, 
for one, would very much like to see one. 

 
So, here it is. From the autumn of 1985 to midsumme
r 1987 I was lucky enough to chair 
the Celebration Planning committee for the IARF Gen
eral Congress in Palo Alto 
California. IARF stands for the 
International Association for Religious Freedom. 
It is an 
interfaith association of relatively liberal and fr
ee-thinking religious groups, and its major 
concerns are world peace and religious cooperation.
 The Unitarian Universalist 
Association has been a part of this interfaith comm
unity for decades. It also involves 
Unitarian and Free Christian groups in England, Wal
es, Scotland and Ireland, the 
Unitarian congregations in Central Europe, both Hun
garian and Czech-speaking. It 
involves the few Huguenot groups that remain in Eur
ope, the German Free Religious 
Association, the indigenous Unitarian Church of Lag
os Nigeria, the several Unitarian 
groups in India and Sri Lanka including the Khasi H
ills churches and the Brahmo Samaj. 
It involves Visayan-speaking Universalist groups in
 the Philippines, a number of Asian 
Buddhist groups, the largest of which is the Rissho
 Kosei Kai. And last but not least, it 
involves the Tsubaki Grand Shrine, an ancient Shint
o temple in Japan. 
 
Now Shinto is not much known in this country. I cer
tainly never heard much about it 
growing up, or I confused it with Buddhism. But I w
as lucky. Early in my career I had a 
chance to meet the High Priest of the Shinto Shrine
, Yukitaka Yamamoto, when he came 
to the States for a visit. He invited several Unita
rian Universalist ministers to have a 
sashimi dinner with him. I accepted the invitation.
  
Before Yamamoto arrived, however, I read extensivel
y about Shinto practices and 
Japanese customs so I personally would not cause an
 international incident during supper. 
Somehow I got through the incredible four-hour feas
t with my cultural sensitivities intact.  
 
So you can see that as I was working on this IARF C
elebration Commission I had at least 
some working knowledge of the Shinto religion. I kn
ew that the Tsubaki shrine had never 
cooperated with the wartime government of Japan, an
d I learned that Shinto was only one 

 of a hundred religions in Japan, including many kin
ds of Buddhism, Christianity, and 
newer religions, like Oomoto, and Ittoen.  

  

Let me tell you just a little about Shinto for a mo
ment, for those of you who might like to 
know. Shinto is an ancient indigenous Japanese reli
gion. It has no scripture, no savior, no 
prophets, and no universal theological texts. It ha
s no written creed, but it does use an 
elaborate ritual. Shinto altars are often crowned, 
interestingly enough, with a mirror. 
Offerings, like sake and sacks of rice, are often p
resent.  Chanting the prayers or 
norito
, 
bowing to the 
kami
 or spirit in the shrine, and offering the 
tamagushi,
 or evergreen 
branch, are typical practices of Shinto worshippers
.   
 
The Shintoists celebrate the 
kami
, which is a word at once singular and plural. 
Kami
 is 
sometimes translated as god or goddess, or even God
 capital G, but all the Shinto priests I 
know...and I know quite a few by now...translate th
e word 
kami 
as Great Nature; this 
seems most sensible to me, considering the non-west
ern origin of the tradition. ?God? is 
such a western metaphor, after all. 

 
But I™m so glad I knew something about Shinto when 
I started my work for the IARF 
because I had to work with Shinto leaders while pla
nning the Celebrations. And 
Buddhists, too, and ?unitarian? Hindus and Hungaria
n-speaking Unitarians. The planning 
involved translators, and 
outrageous 
theological subtlety...you see, the Hungarian 
Unitarians pray to the one God, the Shintoists to 
kami,
 which can be plural, the German 
Frei Religiose Gemeinde 
routinely refuse all God-talk, and the Buddhists do
n™t even have 
a concept of God. The diversity at an IARF Congress
 outstrips the diversity of this or any 
UU congregation a thousandfold. 

 
For example, my planning committee at first wanted 
to honor the four elements, earth, 
air, fire and water, in the common Worship Celebrat
ions. But my Shinto friends told me 
that the Japanese have 
five 
elements, (earth, air, fire, water and 
metal
) and don™t like the 
number 4, so that didn™t work. I think we went back
 to the drawing board at least a 
hundred times. 

 
Eventually we got it all together. It proved to be 
one of the greatest experiences of my 
life. For example, I was privileged to work with th
e great poet Maya Angelou, whom we 
engaged as our main preacher at Stanford Chapel.  

 
I was exhausted by the time the meeting started, bu
t the week-long conference came off 
with only small hitches. My committee finally worke
d out the theological problems in the 
services we prepared by walking theological tightro
pes strung tighter than the strings on a 
violin. But, in the end, all our care, our attentio
n to authentic detail, paid off. The 
Celebrations were all beautiful and meaningful for 
all involved. Hard work often does, 
indeed, pay off. 

 
 During the week, conferees also met in small group
s, predecessors, I™d say, to our own 
Covenant Groups. Since my big work was finally almo
st wrapped up, I attended the 
group assigned to me. My group, like the others, wa
s supposed to meet for six days from 

 10 to 11:30 in the morning to participate in struct
ured interfaith dialogue. My group 
consisted of folks from what was then Czechoslovaki
a, some women from Japan, both 
Buddhist and Shinto; a Brahmo Samaj from Calcutta, 
a Canadian Unitarian woman, a 
Transylvanian Hungarian speaker, a Filipino ministe
r, a Nigerian Unitarian and a 
Huguenot from Switzerland. A number of us spoke Eng
lish, but over half of us did not, 
or did so with very limiting accents. Translators w
ere supposed to come to every group to 
help facilitate our interfaith, international conve
rsation. Unfortunately, there was an 
organizational glitch, and our group was the only o
ne that did not get any translators. 
 
We wondered what to do. But we couldn™t talk to eac
h other about what to do. We 
couldn™t even discuss whether to break up and join 
other groups with translators. 
 
Then one woman suggested something wild. She sugges
ted, with gestures, that we meet 
anyway, but that we come up with our 
own
 language, one common to us all. It took a 
while for her to make her point, but we suddenly al
l got it. It seemed zany, but together 
we set out to create a new language. We used pictog
rams and symbols...you know, 
squares, circles, zigzag lines, triangles....that w
ere easy to draw. I wrote them down on 
the board, taking people™s suggestions. We conveyed
 their meanings by mime until 
everyone understood. 

 
We came up with symbols for birth, and death, and m
arriage, and divorce, and children, 
and work, and catastrophe, and love, and grief, and
 school, and graduate, and religion, 
and anger, and peace, and prayer, and meditation, a
nd God, and Great Nature, and doubt, 
and faith,, and farm, and city, and home, and sickn
ess, and war, and community and 
family and parents and relatives and friendship and
 move and stay and old and young and 
ecstasy and despair. All together, we created almos
t 80 symbols together in a single day. 
 
For the next six days, each of us had 20 minutes to
 tell the stories of our lives using the 
common language symbols writing them on a horizonta
l timeline on the blackboard. 
 
Now listen. Maya Angelou is great, but these storie
s were even greater. My work for two 
years putting together three worship celebrations i
n twenty languages was difficult and 
wonderful, but these morning autobiographies were e
ven 
more 
difficult and wonderful. 
 
I heard one man describe the sound of the tanks on 
the cobblestones as the Soviets rolled 
into Praha/Prague. I heard love stories to rival Ro
meo and Juliet or David and Jonathan, 
and family horror stories to make the biblical stor
ies of Abraham, Sarah and Hagar look 
tame by comparison. 

 
I choked at the loss of children and the breaking o
f lives by war and poverty. I heard of 
religious experiences in temples or churches that t
ransformed lives, and I heard of 
betrayals and misery too big for my small heart to 
bear.   
 
I don™t know if this made-up language freed people 
to go deeper than they would have 
gone in their own language, but all the folks who s
hared their lives were very forthright 
and honest and self-revealing. It was beautiful. 

  
One morning the Canadian Unitarian rose and told th
e story of how she had went to 
school in the States and met her American sweethear
t. They got married in 1939. The war 
was clearly approaching. He entered the service, an
d ended up stationed in Hawaii. 
 
Dec. 7
th
 1941 came, and Pearl Harbor went up in a cloud of 
smoke. So did her husband™s 
life. She wrote the symbols for death and catastrop
he on her time line and wept a bit.  We 
all wept a bit too. 

 
Later that morning, the Shinto woman got up. She to
ld of being born in Hiroshima, but 
meeting her husband in Tokyo where she summered wit
h her grandparents.  The war 
came, bringing difficult times for her and her fami
ly. Her husband was in the armed 
forces. He was stationed first in Osaka and then to
ward the end of the war in Nagasaki. 
Then she wrote the symbols for death and catastroph
e on the board, drew a line through 
the symbol for 
husband
 with a little atomic mushroom cloud next to it. Sh
e too wept a 
little as she did this. And so did we. 

 
But then she paused, and glanced over at the Canadi
an woman. She walked toward the 
place she was sitting. And the Canadian Unitarian w
oman who lost her husband at Pearl 
Harbor understood at once, and got up and came over
 to meet the Japanese Shinto woman 
who lost her husband at Nagasaki. Then they simply 
looked in each others™ eyes for a 
moment, recognized each other, and embraced and fel
l over each others shoulders and 
wept a good deal and for a very long time.  And so 
did the rest of us. 
 
This event was the center of the IARF conference in
 1987 for me. Not Maya Angelou. 
Not my hard work with my committee for two years. N
ot the thrill of helping to lead 
worship in 20 languages. But this. 
An embrace and some tears between two strangers 
who all at once recognized that they were not stran
gers. 
 No theology of forgiveness 
could express that basic truth any better.  And I f
or one understood immediately why I 
am involved in the liberal church. The liberal chur
ch for me is 
the institution that 
supports me as I struggle to proclaim that stranger
s are not really strangers. And that 
such a message is not only useful, but as utterly, 
utterly beautiful as the best of roses.
  
Offertory 

 
We give to support the circle that supports us. We 
give by contributions of time and 
money and welcome and heart, but we give.   

 
By way of computer banking on some Tuesday, or by a
 check on Sunday, we give. 
We give for the purpose of support. 

And we give just for the joy of giving, 

like Rosalinda giving away her lemons. 

But we give. 

 
Autumn Norito 
(in the form of a Shinto Prayer, with claps) 
 
 The sermon is over. 

The readings are in the past. 

But here we are now 

under the warm wooden pyramid 

designed by the architect 

so many years ago, 

on a carpet woven for this place. 

Below that the foundation, 

the clay, and the faint traces of the people 

who opening their eyes on yellow trees 

centuries ago, the Hopewell and Adena. 

It is autumn for us now. The earth™s axis 

is tilting just so, 

even though we cannot feel it  

in our bones. 

Inside, roses. Outside, the leaves blow red 

and brown and orange 

across the green grass. 

Within our hearts, the images of the morning 

blow across the fields of our inwardness. 

Light outside. Light inside. 

Light in poetry. And light in singing. 

  

