Sunday, July 1, 2007 page 1  Sermon Outline  Perilous Times ­ The Last of the Last Days  "This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come." 2 Tim. 3:1. Last of the last days? We have been led to believe from the signs of the times (Mat. 16:3) and from Scripture rightly divided (2 Tim. 2:15) that these are indeed the last of the last days. What does the word "perilous" mean here? See, Strong #54667 from #54665 and #5490 (through the idea of reducing our strength, such that obstacles and chasms become impassable, as having now become too much for us, as impossibly difficult, dangerous, furious, fierce, perilous). In the last of the last days, Paul gives Timothy 19 distinct and separate Satanic characteristics of the evil people all around us (2 Tim. 3:2-5) ­ that we must watch out for; and then adds this additional warning: "But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived." 2 Tim. 3:14. And then Paul ­ in the twilight of his life and of his ministry ­ gave Timothy some wondrous advice and holy counsel as to exactly how we should and must conduct ourselves when the dangerous and perilous times come upon us; to-wit: "But continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them; And that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus. All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; That the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works." 2 Tim. 3:14-17. And, supplementing such glorious advice, this word to the Philippians: "Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to you, to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it is safe. BEWARE OF DOGS (fags and fag-enablers), beware of evil workers, beware of the concision (formalistic Arminian churches)." This passage says the same thing three different ways ­ for effect ­ and that we give it the solemn respect and careful attention it deserves. Those who do not beware of fags and fag-enablers have not been made "wise unto salvation" (2 Tim. 3:15) and are either in Hell now, or soon will be. It is a glorious privilege and an eternal honor that our Heavenly Father has chosen us to be his messengers in these last of the last days. "So thou, O son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from me." Ezek. 33:7. What a glorious privilege! That the Lord God has chosen us to be His voice in these awesome last days of the last days! "I have set thee for a tower and a fortress among my people, that thou mayest know and try their way. They are all grievous revolters, walking with slanders; they are brass and iron; they are all corrupters." Jer. 7:27,28.  Sunday, July 1, 2007 page 2  Sermon Outline  By God's grace, we have been most faithful watchmen on the tower: "Therefore thou shalt speak all these words unto them; but they will not hearken to thee; thou shalt also call unto them; but they will not answer thee. But thou shalt say unto them, This is a nation that obeyeth not the Lord their God, nor receiveth correction; truth is perished, and is cut off from their mouth." Jer. 7:27,28. "But the Lord is the true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting king; at his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the nations shall not be able to abide his indignation." Jer. 10:10.  We warn you again, America, "The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the nations that forget God." Psa. 9:17. We have been planted by the Lord God right here in the big middle of this evil nation and this evil world to inspect the fruits and judge the works and read the handwriting on the wall ­ and to warn the nations of their irreversible doom soon to come. The once-majestic American ship of state is floundering in heavy seas (as the sailors put it) ­ without a rudder, a compass, or a pole star to guide them ­ under the direction of international sodomite criminals. This band of pirates ­ fags and fag-enablers ­ has nothing but contempt for the Bible and the rule of law. Fags & fag-enablers have hijacked America and are now in full domination of the nation at all levels of government, and in control of all levers of power and reins of restraint, check, and guidance. They have only one agenda ­ the sodomite agenda ­ and have unabashedly betrayed America ­ undermining and subverting each and every foundational pillar upon which this once-great nation was built.  Around the globe, America ­ which just a few decades ago was viewed with awe and respect, and as a giant among pigmy grasshoppers ­ is now considered nothing but a cheap suit and a loud mouth: "And thou shalt become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword, among all nations." Deut. 28:37. En Masse, foreigners consider all Americans to be boorishly arrogant, abrasive, and contemptuous of others. But more important than the opinion of the nations is the opinion of God Almighty about America. Without doubt, "The sin of Judah (America) is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond; it is graven upon the table of their heart, and upon the horns of your (pagan) altars." Jer. 17:1. Without doubt, God's bitter hatred, abhorring, and despising of America runs deep, wide, and eternal. "The sin of Judah (America) is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond; it is graven upon the table of their heart, and upon the horns of your (pagan) altars." Jer. 17:1.  Sunday, July 1, 2007 page 3  Sermon Outline  God is America's Terrorist God is now America's arch Enemy and Terrorist; as when the barbarous Babylonians had laid final siege to Jerusalem and were battering down the gates; and when wicked king Zedekiah sent men to Jeremiah requesting him to seek God's help against the fierce, blood-thirsty Babylonians. Then came God's chilling announcement of doom; to-wit: "Then said Jeremiah unto them, Thus shall ye say to Zedekiah; Thus saith the Lord God tof Israel; Behold, I will turn back the weapons of war that are in YOUR hands, wherewith ye fight against the king of Babylon, and against the Chaldeans, which besiege you without the walls, and I will assemble them into the midst of this city (as your cruel and blood-thirsty conquerors). And I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand and with a strong arm, even in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath. And I will smite the inhabitants of this city, both man and beast; they shall die of a great pestilence. And afterward, saith the Lord, I will deliver Zedekiah king of Judah, and his servants, and the people, and such as are left in this city from the pestilence, from the sword, and from the famine, into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those that seek their life; and he shall smite them with the edge of the sword; he shall not spare them, neither have pity, nor have mercy." Jer. 21:3-7. Without doubt, this pronouncement of horrific doom against ancient Israel is now applicable to sodomite America. Interestingly, more holy counsel and advice on how we should and must conduct ourselves if we would survive and overcome in these last of the last days of dangerous and perilous times, follows that advice to continue in the things which we have heard (2 Tim. 3:14); to wit: "I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom; Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine...But 1) watch thou in all things, 2) endure afflictions, 3) do the work of an evangelist, 4) make full proof of thy ministry." 2 Tim. 4:1,2,5. More plainly observable, solid, objective evidence that these are the last of the last days, is the proliferation of institutionalized scoffing by the masses of mankind at the notion that God's wrath is about to be poured out to the max; to-wit: "Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his coming (to execute judgment)? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation. For this they willingly are ignorant of, that by the word of God the heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water and in the water; Whereby the world that then was, being overflowed with water, perished. But the heavens and the earth, which are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men." 2 Pet. 3-7.  Sunday, July 1, 2007 page 4  Sermon Outline  There have always been scoffers (wishful thinking, really) at the idea that God Almighty will conduct a huge Day of Judgment, and send the masses of mankind to a fiery Hell for eternity. But today, gigantic church denominations with great heavily endowed seminaries with well-paid seats of learning ("Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth." 2 Tim. 3:7.), research and investigation, and libraries. All to prove that there is no coming "day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men." 2 Pet. 3:7. Their thesis is the ever-popular and universally-agreed-to doctrine: God loves everybody, willy nilly, and unconditionally. Any voice raised in opposition is viciously vilified and marginalized ­ and the weapon used to vilify and marginalize is "scoffing" ­ hence, institutionalized "scoffing;" to-wit: "Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, And saying, Where is the promise of his coming (to judge and cast into Hell)?" 2 Pet. 3:3,4. Here's more, plainly-observable, solid, objective evidence that these are the last of the last days; to wit: a great, massive, universal falling away from the Truth (ie., the Doctrines of Grace, aka, Calvinism); to wit: "Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils." 1 Tim. 4:1. Indeed, from the mouth of the Lord Jesus Himself comes frightening word of worldwide apostasy - (a universal falling away from the Truth) - in the last of the last days just before His return in power and glory; to wit: "Nevertheless, when the Son of man cometh, shall he find (the) faith (of God's Elect) on the earth?" Lk. 18:8. And, "Let no man deceive you by any means; for that days hall not come, except there come a falling away (universal apostasy) first." 2 Thes. 2:3. It would certainly appear, Beloved, that we are in the last of the last days. John Gill calls these, "the last days of all, when all the world wonders after the Beast; and indeed, such will be the degeneracy in the last days of all, that the doctrine of faith will scarcely be found in the world." "What shall we say to these things? (T)he coming of the Lord draweth nigh." Jas, 5:8 "Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord." 1 Corinthians 15:58 "And let us not be weary in well doing; for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not." Galatians 6:9 "Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might." Ephesians 6:10 And, "Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord." Philippians 3:1 "Rejoice evermore." 1 Thessalonians 5:16. Amen.  
