Nature never has been, never will be, and never is at war with man.” —Shri Meher Baba 
We have seen that throughout social life the individual realises himself in and through his social relationships, and that any "self­centredness” in his outlook excludes from his life many valuable possibilities of his life, and on the whole makes it poor. This feature of self-transcendence which is so characteristic of a developing personality is still more pronounced in religious experience. In religious consciousness there is self-maintenance through complete self-surrender. 
Religious consciousness must be carefully distinguished from (1) the pursuit of moral values in social life, and also (2) from the pursuit of impersonal values like scientific truth or beauty. Moral values as well as other impersonal values are looked upon as creations of the finite individual in time, although these values may be regarded as having their source in an eternal reality. But in religious conscious­ness the ideal is regarded not as a creation of a finite individual but as an eternal reality, although the act of his contacting that reality may be in time. The implications of religious consciousness, therefore, need separate discussion. 

Any account of human indivi­duality which does not consider the significance of religious conscious­nesss is bound to be incomplete. Like other aspects of human experience religious experience also has its own validity. But here also, as in other spheres of experience, the only way to establish validity is to bring out the internal incon­sistency in the diverse deliverances of the experience, and to show that these are not contradicted but supported by findings based on other aspects of human experience. 
Religious experience has an 
* Continued from August 1939 issue. 

important contribution to make to any complete philosophical theory about the nature of the universe or of the individual, and to treat it as an unimportant and illusory subjective phenomenon is to fail to grasp its real significance. As Bradley has pointed out, "The man who demands a reality more solid than that of religious conscious­ness knows not what he seeks."* With regard to the nature of the individual, too, we must view with mistrust and suspicion any merely “a priori” theories which do not do justice to the concrete forms of experience characterising his con­scious life; and religious exper­ience is the deepest form of human consciousness. 

Religion cannot and need not be based on anything except religious consciousness. It cannot be derived from any philosophy which does not in its data already include religious consciousness. All that philosophy can do and must do is to interpret religious experience and make it yield its contribution to the theory of individuality. 
The essence† of religious experience centres round the 
HUMAN PERSONALITY 
relation of value to reality. As Hoffding has pointed out, "The feeling which is determined by the fate of value in the struggle for existence is the religious feeling."* The individual asks with a certain amount of uneasiness whether life is meant to realise some eternal signi­ficance or whether it is merely an accidental episode in "the blind hurry of the universe from vanity to vanity''.† And religious faith answers that, in spite of alI the appearances to the contrary, the individual must act as if all the drama of his life has some meaning. 
to science if he surrenders his faith in the conception of the necessary law. If he cannot find the law in a particular complex of events, he does not rush to the conclusion that there is no law operative in them. But on the contrary he assumes that there is a law there, if only he knew it. In the same way, religious faith is not staked so much on any specific values as on the principle of value. 
It admits that many particular values might be incapable of being realised by the individual. But it uncom­promisingly rejects the view that 

It assumes that the ultimate nature of reality is such that it will not make the appearance of human values impossible, but will, on the contrary, permit their appearance and preserve them. 
In this form, faith is not peculiar to religious consciousness. Even science and everyday life proceed upon a similar faith of their own. It is true that if the individual discovers in science some exception to a law which he believes to be true, he is ready to revise his notion of the law. But there would be an end 
Life is a twice-told tale 
Told by an idiot, 
Full of sound and fury 
Signifying nothing.”‡ 

It takes its stand on the harmony of reality with some value which would belong to the life of the individual under all possible circumstances. The religious faith at its minimum does not say that any specific values must ultimately prevail in the future, but that the general principle of value does always prevail. The real formula in this case 
is not that “the truth will prevail”, but that "the truth prevails ". 
Such a religious faith, however, is not explicitly present in the minds of all the individuals. It is often preceded by a feeling of uneasiness resulting from the contemplation of the fate of the values. In the absence of religious consciousness, contemplative indi­viduals almost always have a sense of insecurity about the fate of human values.* There seems to be no guarantee that the universe at large has any sympathy for the ideals of the individual. And this apprehension produces some men­tal unrest. 
But it is possible to exaggerate the practical importance of this mental unrest. It has rarely that vital significance which might damp man's enthusiasm in his life or its ideals. Strictly speaking even in the extreme case of a would-be suicide, there is some kind of faith in the possibility of life itself. Hope, however dim, reigns in the  hearts of all even when they are in the presence of death or suffering. Men would not otherwise go to battlefields or welcome martyr­doms or live in the vicinity of active volcanoes. The sense of uneasiness about the fate of human values is not by any means a fundamental trait of human nature: where it exists it is, so to speak, super-induced by reflective consciousness. It is very curious and significant that even at this stage the individual does not surrender his aspirations, but in a stoic spirit builds them "on the firm foundation of unyielding despair''.† He begins by facing and accepting the facts of life; such as death and impermanence, and makes himself immune from the tyranny of his environment by renouncing of his own accord many of his desires. Here again Russel's remarks are 

instructive. He says, "To abandon  consciousness only, and it is  
the struggle for private happiness,  generally reached through the  
to expel all eagerness of temporary  experience of "conversion". In this  
desire, to burn with passion for  experience the individual gets rid  
eternal things, this is emancipation,  of his mental unrest concerning the  
and this is the free man's worship."  fate of values and becomes secure  
There are thus beginnings of a  in the faith and the conviction (in  
religious faith even in instances  spite of many events and facts  
where religious consciousness is  which seem to suggest the contrary)  
not particularly pronounced. But  that life has an ultimate meaning  
the fully developed religious faith  which can be, must be and will be  
is a characteristic of religious  realised.  
