     May 24, 1998   Bethlehem Baptist Church   John Piper, Pastor            The Called of Christ and the Loved  of God    Part Two       (Romans 1:6-7)      
           Paul, a bond-servant of Christ    Jesus, called as an apostle, set apart for the gospel of God, 2 which He promised    beforehand through His prophets in the holy Scriptures, 3 concerning His Son, who was born    of a descendant of David according to the flesh, 4 who was declared the Son of God with    power by the resurrection from the dead, according to the Spirit of holiness, Jesus Christ    our Lord, 5 through whom we have received grace and apostleship to bring about the    obedience of faith among all the Gentiles for His name's sake,  6 among whom you also    are the called of Jesus Christ; 7 to all who are beloved of God in Rome, called as saints:    Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.         
          The Called of Jesus  Christ       Last week we focused on the  phrase in verse 6, the called of Jesus Christ. The Christians in Rome, and the  Christians in Minneapolis are the called of Jesus Christ. I argued that this  means Christians are called  by God  to belong to Jesus Christ (Romans 8:30; 1  Corinthians 1:9); and that this call of God is not just an invitation, but is the kind of  call that creates what it commands. I closed the message with a reference to 2 Corinthians  4:4-6 where Paul says that the reason people do not see the truth of Christ in the gospel  is that the god of this world [Satan] has blinded the minds of the unbelieving so  that they might not see the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the image  of God. In other words, human unbelief and demonic blinding conspire to make the  gospel look like a stumbling block or like foolishness (1 Corinthians 1:23).     So how is it that anyone comes to faith? Paul said that two things were  necessary. In 2 Corinthians 4:5 he says, We preach . . . Christ Jesus as Lord, and  ourselves as your bond-servants for Jesus&#146; sake. The first thing needed is the  preaching of Christ from a servant life. Christ must be preached and shown. No one can  believe apart from the gospel. We must tell the gospel to people and show it to people.    But Paul knows from painful experience, and so do many of you, that  people whom we love hear the gospel and see our servanthood, but do not believe so as to  be saved. Which is why Paul went on, in 2 Corinthians 4:6, to mention the second thing  necessary for someone to come to faith. Not only must the gospel be preached from a  servant life, but God himself must supernaturally give divine, spiritual light or sight to  the heart. For God, who said, &#145;Light shall shine out of darkness,&#146; is the  One who has shone in our hearts to give the Light of the knowledge of the glory of God in  the face of Christ.    This is what Paul means by the call of God (1 Corinthians 1:23-24).  Just as God in the beginning of creation brought about light by a simple word of call:  Light shall shine out of darkness, so now, in the unbelieving and  demonically-blinded heart, God issues an omnipotent, light-giving call. And the effect of  the call is that we no longer see the gospel as a stumbling block or as foolishness, but  now we see the Light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of  Christ. In other words, what once looked stupid or boring or meaningless or  irrelevant or weird now looks beautiful and precious and desirable, so that we freely  reach out and embrace it.    In other words, when Paul says in Romans 1:7 that Christians are  the called of Jesus Christ, he means that God has spoken to our hearts so  powerfully that we have been wakened from the sleep of unbelief, and our blind eyes have  been opened to see Christ for who he really is, and our hardness of heart has been taken  away, and we have been raised from spiritual death &#150; just as Christ raised Lazarus by  simply calling him &#150; Lazarus, come forth (John 11:43). And the result of  all of this is that now we see the greatness of Jesus in the gospel and we trust him and  love him and value knowing him above all things. And so we are the called of Jesus  Christ. We live among the gentiles (as verse 6 says), but we belong to Jesus &#150;  and not the way a person belongs to the Democratic Party or to a labor union or to the  Minneapolis Club, but we belong to Jesus by an omnipotent call of God that creates what it  commands.    
       The Call Comes from God&#146;s  Love for You       Now today I want to deepen and  sweeten the experience of your call by showing you two things: that your call comes from  the love of God which he has specifically for you; and that it ushers you into a realm of  God&#146;s love that no one knows but those who receive it. The reason I choose to stress  this is simply because the next crucial word in our text is beloved of God.  Verse 7: . . . to all who are  beloved of God  in Rome, called as saints: Grace  to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.    To all who are beloved of God in Rome. They are the  called of Jesus Christ and the beloved of God. O, know yourself this  way, Christian! You are the called of Jesus Christ, and you are the  beloved of God.    
       God&#146;s Love for the World       Now, what does this mean? I want  to enlarge your vision of the love of God. I don&#146;t want to shrink it. I want to  enlarge it. For many people, the only way they have every conceived of the love of God is  that he loves the world, and therefore he loves everyone in the same way. And indeed he  does   love the world. Jesus said in Matthew 5:44-45, Love your enemies . . . so that you  may be sons of your Father who is in heaven; for  He causes His sun to rise on the evil  and the good, and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous . In other  words, God&#146;s love is as broad and as general as the rising sun and the falling rain.    And John 3:16 says, For God so loved  the world  that he  gave his one and only Son, that whoever believes in him shall not perish but have eternal  life. In other words, we may offer eternal life to every person on this planet who  will put his faith in Jesus, the Son of God. And it was the love of God that sent his Son  so that offer could be made to the world.    So in at least these two ways God&#146;s love is broad and general: he  sustains the unbelieving world with sunshine and rain, and he offers eternal life, at the  cost of his Son, to any and all who will believe.    
       God&#146;s Love for His Called  Ones       But is that all that Paul means  in Romans 1:7 when he writes,  . . . to all who are beloved of God in Rome?  Doesn&#146;t this sound like he is saying, Among all the people who live in Rome, I  am writing to the ones loved by God? In other words, doesn&#146;t it sound like he  is saying that those who are called by God to belong to Jesus Christ are loved by God in a  special way, not that they are loved because everybody else in Rome is also loved by God?  If I write a letter to Noël and say, I write you, my beloved Noël, be strong and  be encouraged by the grace of God, would anybody really say, the reason he calls her  beloved is because he loves every woman the way a Christian should, and, since  Noël is a woman, she too is loved by Pastor John, because he loves all women? No. Nobody  would say that. Rather, if I write, To my beloved Noël, everybody would  assume there is a special love that I have for Noël.     I don&#146;t think Paul wants us to miss this in Romans 1:7. I  don&#146;t think he wants you, Christian, to say, God calls me &#145;beloved&#146;  because he loves everybody the same, and, since I am part of everybody, I am also  beloved. That&#146;s not what verse 7 means. Paul says, I write to all who are  beloved of God in Rome. But he does not mean everybody in Rome. He is writing to  those who are the called of Jesus Christ. So the love that he has in mind here  must be different from the love that God has for everybody in Rome &#150; just like I  would have in mind a different love when I say, to my beloved Noël. I  don&#146;t mean that there is no love in my heart for other people. I mean I have a  special love for Noël. I have a covenant love for Noël. I chose Noël to be my wife. And  I made a covenant with her. And we sealed it with sacred vows. And God sealed it in heaven  (Matthew 19:6). And now the love between Noël and me is utterly different from the love I  have for any other woman or man. Even though there are others I would die for.    I said, I want to enlarge your vision of the love of God. I don&#146;t  want to shrink it. In other words, if I can persuade you that God loves the called  of Jesus Christ with a special covenant love, I don&#146;t want you to conclude that  he is less loving than he would be if he only loved the world in general and equally, but  made no covenant with his bride the church. I want to argue from the Scripture that God  holds out love to the whole world, but that he chooses his wife, the called of Jesus  Christ, and loves her (you, Christian!) with a special, precious, covenant love.    
       God&#146;s Love that Puts the  Fear of God in the Heart       Now I think that is implied in  the very wording of verse 7, to all who are beloved of God in Rome. But you  may not see it so clearly here. So let me give the bigger Biblical picture very briefly.     In the Old Testament, God promised that someday he would make what he  called a new covenant with his people (Jeremiah 31:31), an everlasting  covenant. And the wonder of this covenant is that in it the love of God does not just  offer safety to people, but promises to keep them safe from destruction. So, for example,  in Jeremiah 32:40 God promises, I will make an everlasting covenant with them that I  will not turn away from them, to do them good; and I will put the fear of Me in their  hearts so that they will not turn away from Me.    Do you see what kind of love this is? This is more than the general  love of invitation and offer. This is a love that puts the fear of God in the  heart (similar to 2 Corinthians 4:6). This is the kind of love that works powerfully  so that [we] will not turn from God. This is not a general love for all. It is  a special love that puts the fear of God in our hearts and keeps us from turning away.  This is the new covenant.    Now when Jesus comes into the world, he comes to die and purchase the  privileges of this new covenant for us with his blood. So in Luke 22:20, Jesus says, at  the Last Supper, This cup which is poured out for you is the  new covenant in My  blood . So the blood of Jesus, in a very special way, was poured out to secure  the promises of Jeremiah 32:40 &#150; that God will put the fear of him in our hearts and  keep us from turning away from him. This is a very special and precious love. This is what  you should feed on daily. This is sweet and this is strong. To know that you are loved in  this way is the very heart of Christian assurance. That God has called me, that he has  shone in my heart to give the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, that he will  work omnipotently to keep me, and bring me to everlasting glory &#150; this is what it  means to be the beloved of God.    
       Who Can Separate Us from  the Love of Christ?       Let&#146;s see this illustrated  in Romans 8. In verse 35 Paul asks, Who will separate us from the love of  Christ? In other words, Is there any way that Jeremiah 32:40 and the new  covenant will be broken or nullified in the life of the called of Jesus Christ  (see Romans 8:30)? Remember, in Jeremiah 32:40 God promised that he would work in his  covenant people so that they will not turn away from Me. That will be  Paul&#146;s answer here.     He asks in Romans 8:35, Will tribulation, or distress, or  persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword [separate us from the love of  Christ]? And he answers in verse 37, [No, rather] in all these things we  overwhelmingly conquer  through Him who loved us . Notice what keeps us from  being separated from the love of Christ: we are kept from separation through Him who  loved us. So verse 35 asks, Who will separate us from the love of  Christ? And verse 37 answers: Nothing will separate us! And the reason given is that  we overwhelmingly conquer through him who loves us. Or to put it simply and  bluntly: the love of God keeps us from being separated from the love of Christ. Will  the called of Jesus Christ be separated from him? No! Why? Because God loves  us! The covenant love of God triumphs in preserving his own.    Then to confirm it again, Romans 8:38-39 attributes total triumph to  the keeping power of the love of God in our lives: For I am convinced that neither  death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things to come,  nor powers, nor height, nor depth, nor any other created thing,  will be able to  separate us from the love of God , which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. In other  words, the special, covenant love of God for us will triumph over everything that tries to  destroy our faith and pull us away from God.    This is not the general love of God that offers eternal life to the  world, nor is it the sustaining love of God that gives sun and rain even to his enemies.  This is the love of God for his bride, his chosen people. He calls us from death to life,  and he keeps us from falling away. And, as Romans 8:30 says, he will bring us to glory.  Those whom he called he justified, and those whom he justified he glorified.  This is the new covenant love of God. I will put the fear of Me in their hearts so  that they will not turn away from Me.     This is what Paul means in Romans 1:7 when he says, to all who  are  beloved of God  in Rome. And it is what God means when he says to you  Christians today: You are the called of Jesus Christ; you are my loved ones. I have chosen  you for my own; I have called you; I have justified you; I will keep you; I will work in  you what is pleasing in my sight (Hebrews 13:21); nothing will separate you from me;  because I love you with an everlasting love. You are my beloved.     O that God would grant you to know this love. Grasp it. Savor it. Rest  in it. Be freed and made radical and risk-taking by it. And spend the rest of your life  commending it to everyone you know. And if you do not yet know it, receive it now. Is not  God even now speaking to your heart? Is he not even now revealing the beauty and truth of  Christ who died for sinners so that everyone who believes in him might be saved? Believe  in him. I urge you on behalf of God, believe in his Son!    End     
    Texts that connect the love of God with election: Colossians 3:12; 1  Thessalonians 1:3; 2 Thessalonians 2:13.     Text that connects the love of God with sovereign grace in conversion:  Ephesians 2:4-5.       Copyright 1998 John Piper    Piper's Notes         
