Sunday, August 18, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 1  Dover AFB is the place in Doomed-America where uniformed vultures hang about waiting on the  dead bodies of soldiers, that you sacrifice for your sins, to come home in body bags. Putrid dead  bodies, they must eat up those bodies before they smell up the whole place. They are professional mourners, who attend with great pomp and circumstance to their dead carcasses! What's wrong  with you people? Do you think God is going to honor your idolatrous worship of the dead, when  those dead soldiers are the direct byproduct of your proud sin! Get real! God says your tables are  full of vomit! God is laying the dead bodies of your young men and women down at the feet of  your altars, to your great shame.  "The priest and the prophet have erred, they stumble in judgment, all tables are full of vomit and filthiness," (Isa. 28:7-8.)  "And I will lay the dead carcases of your children before your idols, and will scatter your bones round about your altars," (Ezek. 6:5.) Dover AFB is the epicenter of your great rebellion against God, and is full of dead bodies and puffed-up-fag-loving NASCAR drivers (they've got a race track there, so the rebels can let off steam after worshiping the dead, by bowing down before yet another idol). So Westboro Baptist Church pickets you and reminds you that you have turned the country over to the fags, so your soldiers are coming home in body bags. And that your soldiers die for same-sex marriage.  "Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him; and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him," (Revelation 1:7.) If you fear God, you would join us in reminding this nation from top to bottom that God is their #1 enemy. For more than 22 consecutive years, now, this humble little church has preached the gospel on the streets of this evil country -- and around the world -- every single day. Mind you, I did not say most days. But, EVERY SINGLE DAY, without exception. Last Friday, August 16, 2013, we issued our press release for Week 1156 of the Great Gage Park Decency Drive. Westboro Baptist Church observed Week 1156 of protests against public sodomy at Gage Park, with the same Gospel message, "Thou shalt not lie with mankind as with womankind; it is abomination." (Leviticus 18:22.), knowing that it is America's only hope. We have been determined that the nation shall hear, and that the world shall hear. God's command:  "Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression." (Isa. 58:1.) "Show" means to get in their faces and make it crystal clear. America's sin is that of Sodom: societal acceptance/respect for a soul-damning, nation-destroying "gay" lifestyle.  Sunday, August 18, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 2  America is "deeply (irreversibly) corrupt." (Hosea 9:9; 2 Chr. 36:16.) Westboro Baptist Church  has a commission:  "Son of man, cause (America) to know her abominations." (Ezek. 16:2.) In spite of peril, toil and pain our course be onward still, we sow Topeka's barren plain. We'll reap on Zion's hill. In these years of plain warning from God at the mouth of Westboro Baptist  Church, you have not listened, but instead have gotten worse and worse. Now you marry fags and  push same-sex marriage all over the globe. America leads the way, teaching the nations to be  perverse.  Every person in the world who takes the name of Christ has a duty to join Westboro Baptist Church in crying out against this grievous wrong, and warning the world that this was the sin that doomed all mankind before the flood. This is the sin that will bring the next doom to all the world. Stop sitting around like you have lockjaw, you phony lukewarm "Christians." Get up early and warn your neighbor about the deadly consequences of this smash-mouthed sin against God. Your leaders have put the bulls-eye of God's wrath on you by signing laws that pander to the mob of rabid insatiable fags. Your leaders are to blame with their perpetual lies on God. You brutes pretend this is a political issue. Hogwash! Same-sex marriage is blatant rebellion against God, and a sure sign that the Second Coming of Christ draws nigh:  "As it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man. They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and the flood came, and destroyed them all," (Luke 17:26-27.) "The wicked are reserved to the day of destruction; they shall be brought forth to the day of wrath," (Job. 21:30.) "I also will choose their delusions, and will bring their fears upon them; because when I called, none did answer; when I spake, they did not hear; but they did evil before mine eyes, and chose that in which I delighted not." (Isa. 66:4.) "And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie; That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." (2 Thess. 2:11-12.) "Even as Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh (the Bible's way of saying filthy nasty fag sex), are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire." (Jude 7.) I love you. Amen.  
