Sunday, August 22, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Take, my brethren, the prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience. Behold, we count them happy which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy." James 5:10,11. "By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt; for he had respect unto the recompence of the reward. By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king; for he endured, as seeing him who is invisible. Through faith he kept the passover, and the sprinkling of blood, lest he that destroyed the firstborn should touch them. By faith they passed through the Red sea as by dry land; which the Egyptians assaying to do were drowned." Heb. 11:24-29. "For when Moses had spoken every precept to all the people according to the law, he took the blood of calves and of goats, with water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book, and all the people, Saying, This is the blood of the testament which God hath enjoined unto you. Moreover he sprinkled with blood both the tabernacle, and all the vessels of the ministry. And almost all things are by the law purged with blood; and without shedding of blood is no remission. It was therefore necessary that the patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with these; but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the FIGURES OF THE TRUE; but into HEAVEN ITSELF NOW TO APPEAR IN THE PRESENCE OF GOD FOR US." Heb. 9:19-24.  Beloved. There is no more precious scene described for us in all the world than that of our dear Lord Jesus ­ NOW, at the present time ­ depicting the Savior appearing in the presence of God FOR US; bearing, symbolically, His own holy blood of the everlasting Covenant ­ proof that His own undertakings for ratification of the Covenant have been fully met.  "Look," says Thomas Brooks (1608-1680), "as in human courts there is the guilty, the accuser, the court, the judge, and the advocate; so it is here, where Christ is the Great Advocate for His people, the Great Favorite in the Court of Glory, and He is always at Gods right hand, ready on all occasions, to present our petitions to His Father, to pacify His anger, and to obtain all noble and needful favors for us, (Rom. 8:34); to wit: "Who is he that condemneth? it is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us.") And Christ is our Great Advocate to plead our cause effectually for us; to wit: ,,My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an ADVOCATE WITH THE FATHER, Jesus Christ the righteous. 1 Jn. 2:1."  Beloved. Look upon this magnificent scene: Heaven is the Court, God's Elect is the Guilty Person, Satan is the Accuser, God is the Judge, and our dear Lord Jesus is the Mighty Advocate for God's Elect. Now look, again: The case is called. Satan arises to enumerate the heinous crimes and sins against each of God's Elect. It is obvious that Satan and his minions from Hell have done their investigatory work and their discovery work quite well; to wit: "And the Lord said unto Satan, Whence comest thou? Then Satan answered the Lord, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it." (Job. 1:7) And the Lord said unto Satan, Hast thou considered ­ (i.e., opened a complete file on ­ and filled with complete details on ­ all the sins of) ­ all God's Elect. Look now how the wisdom of the apostle Peter filled Heaven's Court, which he once wrote:  Sunday, August 22, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  "To the strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and  Bithynia, Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through  sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus  Christ; Grace unto you, and peace, be multiplied. ... Be sober, be vigilant; because  your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may  devour; Whom resist stedfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are  accomplished in your brethren that are in the world. But the God of all grace, who  hath called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a  while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. To him be glory and  dominion for ever and ever. Amen." (1 Pet. 1:1-2;5:8-11)  "He ever liveth to make intercession for us." (Heb. 7:25)  Brooks: "Now in Heaven He appears in the presence of God for us, (Heb. 7:25), as a lawyer APPEARS in open court for his client, opens the case, pleads the cause, and carries the day. The verb, emphanisthenai, translated, ,,to appear, signifieth APPEARING CONSPICUOUSLY, and openly, and notoriously, and boldly. Further, the whole compact and agreement between God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ, about the redemption of Gods Elect people, was really and  solemnly transacted in open court; or, as I may say, in the High Court of Justice Above, in the presence of the Great Public Notary of Heaven ­ viz., the Holy Ghost; who being a third person of the glorious Trinity, of the same divine essence, and of equal power and glory, makes up a third legal witness with the Father and the Son. They being, after the manner of earthly kings, THEIR OWN WITNESSES ALSO; to wit: 1 Jn. 5:7 ­ ,,For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. Three, (1.) Indeed, the practice of earthly kings ­ whereby they are witnesses to their own oaths, ­ derives ­ presumptuously ­ from the sovereign practice of God Almighty as set forth in Holy Writ; to wit: "For when God made promise to Abraham, because he could swear by no greater, HE SWEAR BY HIMSELF, Saying, Surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee. And so, after he (Abraham) had patiently endured, he obtained the promise. For men verily swear by the greater; and an oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife. Wherein God, willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, CONFIRMED IT BY AN OATH; That by two immutable things" ­ (i.e., God's promise, and God's oath) ­ "in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation (comfort), who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us; Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast, and which entereth into that within the veil, Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an high priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec." Heb. 6:13-20.  Now, Beloved. May we not form up and plead such beautiful and substantial declarations in our daily prayers and supplications? After all, "He that cometh to God must believe that HE IS, and that HE IS A REWARDER OF THEM THAT DILIGENTLY SEEK HIM." Heb. 11:6. Does it not please our Heavenly Father for us to use the very language of the Holy Ghost in Scripture when we come boldly unto the throne of Grace, there to obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need? See, Heb. 4:16. Have we not received a kingdom which cannot be moved or shaken, and do we not speak a new and glorious language of Zion? "Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear; For our God is a consuming fire." See, Heb. 12:28,29. "The Lord loveth the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. Selah. ... The Lord shall count, when he writeth up the people, that this man was born there. Selah." (Psa. 87:2,3,6)  Sunday, August 22, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  "For our conversation (or, rather, citizenship) is in heaven; from whence also we look  for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ; Who shall change our vile body, that it may be  fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able  even to subdue all things unto himself." (Phil. 3:20,21)  "Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through THE BLOOD OF THE EVERLASTING COVENANT, Make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is wellpleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen." (Heb. 13:20,21)  Now, Beloved, through a sincere and serious consideration of this EVERLASTING COVENANT, spoken of in my last text above; and more particularly, the BLOOD OF THE EVERLASTING COVENANT; we may with confidence form up comfortable pleas to the Father, in the name of the Son, and solemnly witnessed by the Holy Ghost; to wit: "For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one. And there are three that bear witness in earth, the spirit, and the water, and the blood; and these three agree in one. If we receive the witness of men" ­ (and we certainly do, every day in human courts somewhere; and mankind stands to lose ­ and often does lose! ­ life, limb, property, reputation, and all that mankind holds dear, on nothing more than the witness of men) ­" the witness of God is greater; for this is the witness of God which he hath testified of his Son. He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in himself; he that believeth not God, hath made him a liar; because he believeth not the record that God gave of his Son. And this is the record, that God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. He that hath the Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son of God hath not life. These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God; that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the Son of God. ... And we know that we are of God, and the whole world lieth in wickedness. And we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life." 1 Jn. 5:7-20.  Now, The BLOOD OF THE EVERLASTING COVENANT, simply means the DEATH which Jesus Christ agreed to undergo in the place and stead of His Elect ­ the details of which were recorded in the CONTRACT, or the AGREEMENT, also known as the EVERLASTING COVENANT. This blessed COVENANT was hammered out and agreed to by all the parties thereto ­ Father, Son, and Holy Ghost ­ in eternal ages past ­ in the Great Council Hall of eternity. Each and every one of God's Elect were present and represented by their mighty Lawyer and Advocate, even Jesus Christ the Righteous; Who also caused their names and descriptions to be duly and faithfully recorded in that part of the Covenant identified as THE LAMB'S BOOK OF LIFE; to wit: "My God, I would not long to see, My fate with curious eyes, What gloomy lines are writ for me, Or what bright scenes may rise. In thy fair book of life and grace, O may I find my name, Recorded in some humble place, Beneath my Lord the Lamb!" (Dr. Watts' Lyric Poems).  "Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because YOUR NAMES ARE WRITTEN IN HEAVEN. In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes; even so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight." (Luke 10:20,21)  "And there shall in no wise enter into it (Heaven) anything that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie; BUT THEY WHICH ARE WRITTEN IN THE LAMB'S BOOK OF LIFE." (Rev. 21:27)  Sunday, August 22, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  Now, Beloved, with so much holy and beautiful Scripture in hand, we can refer you to a few more  citations of additional supporting passages, and then suggest some prayers, ala Thomas Brooks. In  a play on words, Mr. Spurgeon used to advise his ministerial students that, if they felt a little dry, they should drink from the Brooks ­ meaning that they should read from the sermons of Thomas Brooks to refresh their souls; e.g., to wit: "Now from the serious consideration of this compact,  covenant, and agreement, that was solemnly made between God and Christ, touching the whole business of mans salvation or redemption, I may form up this tenth plea as to the ten scriptures  that are in the margin,* that refer to the great day of account, or to a mans particular day of  account. O blessed God! I have read over the articles of the covenant of redemption that were  agreed on between thyself and thy dearest Son; and I find by those articles that dear Jesus has  died, and satisfied thy justice, and pacified thy wrath, and bore the curse, and purchased my  pardon, and procured thy everlasting favor; and I find by the same articles that whatever Jesus  Christ acted or suffered, he did act or suffer as my surety, and in my stead and room. O Lord !  when I look upon my manifold weaknesses and imperfections, though under a covenant of grace,  yet I am many times not only grieved, but also stumbled and staggered; but when I look up to the  covenant of redemption, I am cheered, raised, and quieted; for I am abundantly satisfied that both  thyself and thy dear Son are infinitely ready, able, willing, and faithful to perform whatever in that covenant is comprised, Isa. 38:16,17 ("O Lord, by these things men live, and in all these things  is the life of my spirit; so wilt thou recover me, and make me to live. Behold, for peace I had  great bitterness; but thou hast in love to my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption; for thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back.") Men may fail, and friends may fail, and relations may  fail, and trade may fail, and natural strength may fail, and my heart may fail, but the covenant of  redemption can never fail, nor the federates, who are mutually engaged in that covenant, can never fail."  "Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory. Whom  have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire beside thee. My  flesh and my heart faileth; but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for  ever." (Psa. 73:24-26) "What though my sins have been great and heinous, yet they are not greater than Christs  satisfaction; he did bear the curse for great sins as well as small, for sins against the gospel as  well as for sins against the law, for omissions as well as for commissions. Assuredly the covenant  of redemption is a mighty thing, and there are no mighty sins that can stand before that covenant. The greatest sins are finite, but the merit of Christs redemption is infinite. All the Egyptians were  drowned in the Red Sea. There remained not so much as one of them; even to carry the news of  the disaster. There is not one of my sins for which Jesus Christ hath not purchased a pardon! and for which he hath not made my peace with God."  Think of it, Beloved: "There is not one of my sins for which Jesus Christ hath not suffered and satisfied the law. Though my sins are innumerable, more than the hairs of my head, and more than the sand of the sea, yet they cannot bring me under the curse. Now Christ my surety, that he might redeem me from the curse, hath taken upon him the whole curse. Gal. 3:13. I know that there is no summing up of my debts, but Christ has paid them all. Woe had been to me for ever, had Christ left but one penny upon the score for me to pay. Christ has cancelled all bonds, and therefore it is but justice in God to give me a full acquittal, and to throw down all bonds as cancelled, saying, ,,Deliver him, I have found a ransom;" to wit: "If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to show unto man his uprightness; Then he is gracious unto him, and saith, Deliver him from going down to the pit; I HAVE FOUND A RANSOM." (Job 33:23,24)  I love you. Amen.  
