  For the last two weeks we have emphasized the goodnews that God is is a mountain spring and not a watering trough. The good news is that GOD'S overflowing fullness is magnifiedand OUR longings are satisfied in the simple acts of thirstingand drinking.    When we turn from all the pop and fizz and bottledbeverage of the world and get down on our knees beside the mountainspring of God's living water, we honor him and glorify him andmagnify him as the only source of lasting joy.  And in the veryact of magnifying him we satisfy ourselves because this is thewater we were made to live by.    This is the best news in all the world -- that Godis the kind of God whose zeal to glorify his name comes to fullestexpression in an act which satisfies the longings of my heart. This means that whenever I am most thirsty and most desperateand most in need of help I can encourage my soul not only withthe truth that there is a merciful impulse in the heart of Godbut also with the truth that the source and power of that impulseis the zeal of God to act for the sake of his own name.  I can pray with the psalmists, For thy name'ssake, O Lord, pardon my guilt, for it is great (25:11). Help us, O God of our salvation for the glory of thy name,and deliver us (79:9). For thy name's sake, lead meand guide me (31:3).    We have seen that precisely because God loves theglory of his own name, he also takes pleasure in those who hopein his love and those who express their hope in prayer.  Two weeksago we said that when you hope in God you glorify God as the fountainof deep and lasting joy.  Last week we said that when the uprightpray they simply give expression to that God-glorifying hope. And today we go one step further and say that obedience to Godmakes that God-glorifying hope visible and proves that it is realin our lives.  Our text is 1 Samuel 15:22, Has the LORD asgreat delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeyingthe voice of the Lord?  The answer is clearly NO.  The Lorddelights far more in obedience than in the performance of worshipceremonies without it.  There are two questions that I want to try to answerwith you this morning.  1) Why does God delight in obedience? And 2) is this good news?  Is it good news to hear that whatpleases God is obedience, or is it just a discouraging burden?  Before we focus on these two questions let's be surewe have the setting clear in our minds.  When Israel came out of Egypt and passed throughthe wilderness the Amalekites attacked them.  We read about itin Exodus 17:8-16.  God gave the Israelites victory, but the evilwas never forgotten.  In Deuteronomy 25:17-19 God said,   Remember what Amalek did to you on the way as youcame out of Egypt, how he attacked you on the way, when you werefaint and weary, and cut off at your rear all who lagged behindyou; and he did not fear God.  Therefore when the Lord your Godhas given you rest from all your enemies round about, in the landwhich the Lord your God gives you for an inheritance to possess,you shall blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven;you shall not forget.  Finally the iniquity of the Amalekites is completeand the Lord commands Saul, the first king of Israel, to executethe sentence against the Amalekites.  The command is given in1 Samuel 15:2-3,  Thus says the Lord of hosts, I will punishwhat Amalek did to Israel in opposing them on the way, when theycame up out of Egypt.  Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroyall that they have; do not spare them, but kill both man and woman,infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass.  So Saul gathered his army and went against the cityof Amalek.  He warned the Kenites to clear out if they wantedto spare their lives (v. 6).  And then he destroyed the Amalekitesfrom Havilah as far as Shur, east of Egypt.  But verse 9 describes the fatal disobedience of Saul.   But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the bestof the sheep and of the oxen and of the fatlings, and the lambs,and of all that was good, and would not utterly destroy them;all that was despised and worthless they utterly destroyed.   The Lord saw this disobedience and he repented thathe had made Saul king (v. 11).  Just a brief word in passing aboutthis divine repentance.  It says in verse 29 of this chapter that theGlory of Israel will not lie or repent; for he is not a man, thathe should repent.  I take this to mean that the repentingwhich God does (e.g. in v. 11) is not like the repenting man does. In fact, it is so different it is in one sense not a repentingat all, as verse 29 says.  It is not based on ignorance or deceit. The repenting of God is the turning of his heart in a new directionbut not one that was unforeseen.  God does not repent becausehe is caught off guard by some turn of events.  That would indeedbe like man.  But the Glory of Israel is not a man that he shouldrepent.  When the Bible says that God repents, it means that heexpresses a different attitude about something than he expressedbefore, not because any turn of events was unexpected, but becausethe turn of events makes a different attitude more fitting toexpress now than it would have been before.    Samuel is angry at this turn in God's attitude towardSaul and he cries out to God all night (v. 11, cf. 12:23).  Theresult of his night of prayer is a firm resolve to do what Godsays.  He rises early in the morning and finds out (v. 12) thatSaul has gone to Carmel, set up a monument for himself and proceededto Gilgal where he was first made king (11:15).  So Samuel goes to meet Saul, and (in v. 13) Saulsays, Blessed be you to the Lord; I have performed the commandmentof the Lord.  Samuel asks (in v. 14) what the sound of bleatingsheep and lowing oxen means if Saul really destroyed everythingthe way God said.  Then (in v. 15) Saul blames it on the people: Theyhave brought them from the Amalekites; for the people spared thebest of the sheep. . .  But nothing Saul says will worknow.  He has disobeyed the commandment of the Lord and he finallyadmits it in verse 24:  I have sinned; for I have transgressedthe commandment of the Lord and your words.  Now our first question is this: Why is God so displeasedwith disobedience?  Or positively, why does God take so much delightin obedience?   WHY GOD DELIGHTS IN OBEDIENCE AND HATES DISOBEDIENCE   I see at least five reasons in this story why Godhates disobedience and takes pleasure in obedience.  I'll mentionthem in the order from least to most serious, as it seems to me.   1.  Disobedience shows a misplacement of fear.  Notice verse 24: Saul said to Samuel, 'I havesinned; for I have transgressed the commandment of the Lord andyour words, because I feared the people and obeyed their voice.'  Why did Saul obey the people instead of God?  Becausehe feared the people instead of God.  He feared the human consequencesof obedience more than he feared the divine consequences of sin. He feared the displeasure of the people more than the displeasureof God.  And that is a great insult to God.  Samuel had said twiceto Saul and the people in 12:14 and 24, Fear the Lord, andserve him faithfully with all your heart.  But now the leaderhimself has feared man and turned away from following God (l Sam.l5:ll).       Saul tried to persuade Samuel that it was a nobleintention that led him to disobey God and keep the best sheepand oxen alive (v. 21).  He said they wanted to sacrifice theseto the Lord in Gilgal.  But the Lord had given Samuel insightinto the true motive of Saul and the people.  We see it in hiswords in verse 19:  Why then did you not obey the voice of the Lord?  Why did you swoop on the spoil, and do what was evil in thesight of the Lord?  They swooped down on the spoil like hungry birdseager to fill their bellies.  This word, swoop onis used back in 14:32 to describe how the people swooped downon the spoil when the Philistines were defeated.  It says, Thepeople flew upon the spoil, and took sheep and oxen and calves,and slew them on the ground; and the people ate them with theblood.  When Samuel says in 15:19, Why did you swoopon the spoil, and do what was evil in the sight of the Lord?he implies that the people were driven by an overweening desirefor the pleasures of all that meat.  (Remember, those who sacrificeget to eat the meat.)  Their pleasure was misplaced.  It shouldhave been in God.  But they delighted more in the meat of sheepand oxen than they did in the smile and fellowship of God.  Thisis, of course, a great insult to God, and therefore very displeasingin his sight.   3.  Disobedience shows a misplacement of praise.   When Saul had defeated the Amalekites the first thinghe did was build himself a monument.  Verse 12: It was toldSamuel, Saul came to Carmel and behold, he set up a monument forhimself.  Evidently Saul was more interested in gettinga name for himself than in making a name for God through carefulobedience to his word.  He had misplaced praise from God to himself.  This sin becomes even worse when you read verses17-18:    And Samuel said, Though you are little in yourown eyes, are you not the head of the tribes of Israel?  The Lordanointed you king over Israel.  And the Lord sent you on a mission,and said, Go, utterly destroy the sinners, the Amalekites, andfight against them until they are consumed.  Why then did younot obey the voice of the Lord?   Back in 9:21 Saul had seemed amazed that God wouldchoose him to be king over Israel when he was from the smallesttribe, the tribe of Benjamin, and from the least of the familiesof his tribe.  And he should have been amazed!  If he wanted honorhe should have been amazed and satisfied with the honor that Godhad given him.  This is Samuel's point here in verse 17 -- whyare you driven by a lust for human glory when God has in factgiven you a glorious privilege as the head of the tribes of Israeland the anointed king of God's people?  But Saul was not content with the glory of God andthe honor of being his chosen king.  He wanted his own glory andhis own praise.  And the submissive path of obedience does notoffer that kind of praise and glory.  And so he did things hisown way.   4.  Disobedience is as the sin of divination.   Now we are on explicit textual ground.  This is thevery reason Samuel gives why disobedience is displeasing to Godin verse 23.     (22b) Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice,   and to hearken than the fat of rams. (23)  For rebellion is as the sin of divination.   God had put divination in the same category withhorrible things that he hates in Deuteronomy 18:10.  There shall not be found among you any one who burnshis son or his daughter as an offering, any one who practicesdivination, a soothsayer, or an augur, or a sorcerer, or a charmer,or a medium, or a wizard, or a necromancer.  For who ever doesthese things is an abomination to the Lord.  Why is rebellion and disobedience as the sin of divination?  Divination is seeking to know what to do in a way that ignoresthe word and counsel of God.  And that is exactly what disobedienceis based on.  God says one thing, and we say, I think that I willconsult another source of wisdom -- namely, what?  MYSELF!  Disobedienceof God's word puts my own wisdom in the place of God's and thusinsults God as the only sure and reliable source of wisdom.   5.  Disobedience is idolatry.   This is what Samuel says in the last half of verse23:   For rebellion is as the sin of divination, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry.   When God says one thing and we consult the littlewizard of our own wisdom and then stubbornly choose to go ourown way we are idolaters.  We have not only chosen to consultourselves as an alternative to God, and thus become guilty ofdivination, but we go beyond that and actually esteem the directionof our own mind over God's direction and become guilty of idolatry. And worst of all, the idol is our own self.  So it stands to reason that God will be displeasedwith disobedience because at every point it is an attack on hisglory.      It puts the fear of man in the place of the fearof God.     It elevates pleasure in things above pleasure inGod.   It seeks a name for itself instead of a name forGod.   It consults the wisdom of self instead of being satisfiedwith the will of God.   And it sets more value on the dictates of self thanon the dictates of God and thus attempts to dethrone God by givingallegiance to the idol of the human will.   But obedience, being the exact opposite, in all thesethings enthrones and honors God.  And therefore God has pleasurein obedience.  Now we turn to the second question we raised at thebeginning: Is this good news?  Is it good news to learn that Godtakes delight in obedience, or is that just another burden?   IS IT GOOD NEWS THAT GOD DELIGHTS IN OBEDIENCE?   I think it is good news.  And there are at leastsix reasons why I do.  We only have time to mention them briefly.   1.  God's delight in obedience is good news becauseit means he is praiseworthy and reliable. If he did not delightin obedience he would be a living contradiction:  loving his gloryabove all things and yet not pleased by the acts that make hisglory known.  He would be two-faced and double-tongued.  His beautywould vanish and with it all our delight!  And he would be unreliablebecause you can't trust a God whose values are so fickle thathe exalts himself one minute and approves of insults the next.  2.  God's delight in obedience is good news becauseit guarantees the promise that someday the glory of God will indeedfill the earth the way the waters cover the sea. If God wereindifferent to disobedience there would be no certainty that theage to come would be rid of all God-dishonoring behavior.  Butbecause he hates disobedience and loves obedience we can be surethat our longing for a world full of God's glory will surely cometo pass.  3.  God's delight in obedience is good news becauseit shows that God's grace is a glorious power and not just a flimsytolerance of sin.  The glory of God's grace is seen not just inthe fact that God overlooks the sins of believers but also inthe fact that it gradually and finally and victoriously eradicatesthose sins.  If God did not delight in obedience, the glory ofsovereign grace might never be seen in its sin-conquering power.  4.  God's delight in obedience is good news becausehis commandments are not too hard.  They are only as hard to obeyas the his glory is hard to cherish and his promises are hardto believe.  Deuteronomy 30:11 says, This commandment whichI command you this day is not too hard for you.  And 1 John5:3 says, This is the love of God, that we keep his commandments. And his commandments are not burdensome.  5.  God's delight in obedience is good news becauseeverything God commands us is for our good.  And so what God isreally delighting in when he delights in our obedience is ourdeep and lasting joy.  Deuteronomy 10:112-13 says,   And now, Israel, what does the Lord your God requireof you, but to fear the Lord your God, to walk in all his ways,to love him, to serve the Lord your God with all your heart andwith all your soul, and to keep the commandments and statutesof the Lord which I command you this day for your good.  6.  And finally God's delight in obedience is goodnews because the obedience he loves is the obedience of faith. And faith means banking our hope on the mercy of God.  And mercymeans that our obedience does not have to be perfect; it onlyhas to be penitent.  If you confess your sins, he is faithfuland just and will forgive your sins and cleanse you from all unrighteousness(1 John 1:9).   God is still a mountain spring and not a wateringtrough.  Obedience is not a bucket brigade to fill his need. Obedience is the irrepressible public relations effortsof those who have tasted and seen that the Lord is good.  
