 Christmas Eve 2008 10 PM 

Mark Belletini 

 
Welcome,  

Prelude,  

Kindling 

Opening Words
  
We are here 

under the hidden arch of December stars 

to worship in the windy dark night, 

and sing the carols, and tell the story 

as we once again think with our hearts 

and feel with our minds 

to bless the ancient feast of Christmas with joy. 

 
And blest all the more is that stubborn imagination
 which insists that tomorrow™s 
peace might begin today. Blest is good will towards
 all. Amen. 
 
Carol 225 O Come O Come Emmanuel 

 
Sequence
  
And what would it be like, 

if on this indigo candlelit night, 

we could borrow the eyes, 

and take loan of the heart 

of new parents gazing at their newborn? 

What would it be like 

if we could then gaze upon the world 

with those same eyes, 

and respond to it with that same heart? 

Would we want to do anything for that world? 

Would we want to hold it close, 

even when it cried out,  

especially when it cried out? 

Would we feel awe and tenderness 

much of the time, 

astonished that the world is   

struggling, hungry, reaching, learning 

to smile? 

If we could hold the world against us 

like we might hold a child, 

and feel that sweet warmth against 

our own breast, 

would we weep in joy and laugh in hope? 

 Would we see new stars in the sky, 

and feel the wise gathering around us 

to remind us that everything is a gift 

more precious than any gold, or incense, 

even ourselves, even the world of our lives? 

Could we smile then, 

filled and emptied of hope™s imagination 

at the exact same time, 

and keep a long, luscious, and perfect silence? 

 
Silence for a time 

 
Music 

 
 
The First Reading
 this evening is from Luke™s gospel, written some s
ixty years after the 
death of Jesus, probably in Antioch. 

 
The Emperor Augustus issued a decree calling for a 
census of the whole inhabited world. 
This was the first census, actually, the one which 
the Syrian governor, Quinrinius, 
organized in the East. So a man named Joseph, who h
ad been working in the Galilee, 
traveled south with Mary, his fiancée, to Bethlehem
, which was where his family home 
was located. Mary was due to give birth any day. An
d indeed, it was while they were in 
Bethlehem that Mary gave birth to her first-born ch
ild. But because Joseph™s home was 
crowded, they took their newborn to the part of the
 house where the animals were 
sleeping, to use the feeding trough as his first cr
ib. In that manger they laid him, 
wrapping him up tight according to custom. 

 
Nearby some young sheepherders were keeping a night
-watch on their flocks. Suddenly a 
messenger from G-d appeared to them, and a bright l
ight blazed around them, and they 
were all scared to death. 

 
But the messenger comforted them with these words: 
?Don™t be scared. I bring good 
news! I bring you joy! For today in the village a c
hild has been born, who is the anointed 
one of G-d, a savior. This is how you will distingu
ish him. Like every newborn he is 
wrapped up tight, but a cattle-feeder serves as his
 cradle.? 
 
Suddenly, the messenger was joined by a whole choru
s of angels, singing praises.  
?The glory of God is this:  

  peace among the people, 

  and good will toward all.?   

 
Carol #231 Angels We Have Heard 

 
The Second Reading
 comes from the theologian Rosemary Radford Reuther,
 her earliest 
book, The Radical Kingdom, 1970
 
  
Within the bounds of present life, struggle itself 
is its own reward.  It is in the process of 
struggle against debased existence, with the attend
ant demands for becoming more 
sensitive, more self-disciplined, with a constant r
esetting of one™s sights upon the vision 
of salvation, that one is closest to the secret of 
human life.  Such a struggle, even in its 
failure and disappointment, is–a time of community,
 commitment, and ecstatic 
hopefulness, the highest point of living.  The time
 of expectation is the time when we 
come closest to experiencing the spirit dwelling in
 the human community.  In such a time 
of struggle one feels closest to one™s sister and b
rother.  One glimpses what true family 
and community might mean.  

 
Carol # 238 Within the Shining 

 
The Third Reading
 comes from the ecstatic poet, the Rumi of America, 
as I call him, 
James Broughton. This is his Confession, written in
 1983. 
  

Even if I never arrive 

 I shall keep departing 

I believe in the unreachable, 

the unlikely, and the unmentionable. 

 
Moses never got there 

 Jesus never got there 

Buddha went there but came back 

Lao-Tzu simply packed up and left 

 
Anywhere that I await 

 my traveler™s alert 

I rely upon the dimensionless, 

the immediate, and the imperishable. 

 
Imagination is  

 my praise of truth 

The beauty of humanity 

is my hope and my sorrow 

 
Wherever I may be landing 

 or hoping for takeoff 

I swear by affection, 

Exuberance, and clarity 

 
Carol #232  The Hills Are Bare At Bethlehem 

 
Homily
  
 I had a very different sermon prepared for this eve
ning, and I tossed it just a few hours 
ago. A more sparkling, effervescent sermon, it was.
  
As I was just finishing the last rewrite of the tex
t, my sister Lynne called and told me that 
our brother Robert, a recovering alcoholic, had rel
apsed. He was a complete mess when 
she went to pick him up and bring him to our parent
s™ house for Christmas Eve. Yellow 
eyes, unkempt, depressed.  Drunk. Unable to stand u
p.  
 
We spent a long time talking about what to do next.
 We still don™t know–after all, it™s 
Christmas Eve, not the best time to pursue detox op
tions. 
 
But I was aware that I just didn™t have it in me to
 deliver a sermon based on the reality 
that I was part of before my sister called. The tou
gher reality that seizes my heart now has 
to be the basis of my reflections tonight. There ca
n be no clarity, no affection, no honesty, 
no real exuberance for the holiday without facing t
he harder truths. After all, hope is the 
theme of this season, remember. And hope is not che
ap optimism, which is often just a 
cowardly sense of entitlement, but rather, hope is 
the mainspring of a life that neither 
denies the past nor romances the future. 

 
But it seems to me that hope in the midst of hard r
eality is the 
purpose
 of the Christmas 
story Luke tells. A story of poverty, heavy taxes, 
and a difficult family situation is hardly 
a pretty tale for children all dolled up with pink 
bows. Birth itself is not an easy 
thing–.ask any woman. –especially back in those day
s. The shepherds in the story may 
have had a wondrous experience, but from all we kno
w about the shepherds of ancient 
times, their reputation wasn™t much better than a g
ang of modern thugs. They were not 
the kind of folks anyone would want crowding into t
heir maternity room–
  
The Christmas story is a story with lots of tough e
lements in it. But think. How many 
stories of people you know are not fraught with har
dship and difficulties? Most life-
stories I can think of, my own story included, and 
yours, fill the bill almost as well as this 
ancient story. 

 
And yet, in the midst of the Christmas story, which
 makes the difficulties plain and 
obvious, we hear–like some far off angel-song–that 
something remarkable is still 
possible in this world. Something like hope is stir
ring. Something that might not be as 
obvious as the march of legions, the sound of the w
ar trumpet, or the clatter of coins on 
the tax table. But still something–tender skin, ski
n still red and wet, a voice crying out, 
new life.  

 
A fresh start. 

 
The story doesn™t describe the birth as miraculous 
at all. According to what we know 
from medical manuals of the time, like the writing 
of Soranus of Ephesus, the birth 
depicted in the story was very typical. Doctor Sora
nus recommended that newborns be 
laid in a nest of hay, a pressed down channel of th
e house cattle feeder, so that the child 
wouldn™t be able to turn over. Wrapped up tight in 
small strips of cloth already moistened 

 with olive oil, the baby was protected from acciden
tally hurting its own eyes with its 
roaming hands. Both pre-natal and post-natal care f
or peasant babies was quite 
sophisticated. Just because people are poor doesn™t
 mean they don™t know anything, you 
see. Just because the Romans were oppressive didn™t
 mean everyone just gave up. Just 
because taxes were high and unfair didn™t mean peop
le just laid down and died. 
 
No, they lived and struggled to make the best life 
they could.  
 
And please, they weren™t waiting around for a Messi
ah to come along either. That is a 
Sunday School fairy tale. It is simply not true. Oh
, there were a few eccentric folks in 
Judea who talked about anointed characters that mig
ht come along one day–always in 
the plural, mind you, never anything called ?THE me
ssiah.?  They imagined there might 
be a clever anointed priest one day who would help 
explain things better. Or some wiley 
warrior king who would work with the priest to push
 foreign oppression away. But they 
were not sitting around waiting for some special go
dlike being to be born and change 
everything once and for all, make the world perfect
, bring heaven down to earth and 
fasten it tight. No, none of that. 

 
The reason people teach this fairy tale is because 
of theology. The earliest students of 
Jesus knew him as a person, a fellow peasant. But t
hose who came after him didn™t know 
him as a peasant, only as an idea, the subject of w
onderful stories. So they tried to fit him 
into their theological framework to try and make se
nse of these stories. So they took all 
of these strange ideas of anointed characters from 
the fringes of Judaism, and said that he 
was, in Hebrew, ha-meshiakh, in Greek ho-khristos, 
or in English, The Messiah, or the 
Christ. They were taking all of these distinct idea
s and combining them into one super 
Messiah. It was their way of trying to show how muc
h they thought of him. How much 
they regarded him. How much they loved him. But wit
hin only 40 years of his death, 
people like Paul were calling him, not by his name,
 but by this newly invented tribute. 
Christ Jesus, Paul called him, not Jesus, the son o
f Mary, or Jesus of Galilee. 
 
But he himself was just a peasant artisan. Born in 
a poor family, probably somewhere up 
in the Galilee. Born of parents who were not, I rep
eat, not, waiting for a Messiah. 
 
Oh, they were waiting of course. Just not for a Mes
siah. They waited for the crops to 
come in. They waited for the midwife to arrive on t
ime for the birthing. They waited for 
the honey production to finish. They waited for the
 wine to ferment. They waited for the 
bread to rise. They waited for the storm to pass, t
he temper to soften, the love to return, 
the child to fall asleep. They were, I think, a lot
 like us. 
 
They had to struggle to get by. Like us. The econom
y wasn™t any better then than it is 
now. Ups and downs. Bad decisions and terrible cons
equences. But Rosemary Radford 
Reuther has this to say about struggle:  

 
Within the bounds of present life, struggle itself 
is its own reward.  It is in the process of 
struggle against debased existence, with the attend
ant demands for becoming more 

 sensitive, more self-disciplined, with a constant r
esetting of one™s sights upon the vision 
of salvation, that one is closest to the secret of 
human life. 
  

The secret of human life. Large words, those.  

 
Yet somehow they ring as true to me. 

 
Struggle is its own reward. What does that mean? I 
think of the struggle my family will 
now be facing with my brother™s deep despair, his d
ebased sense of self and vision. I 
think of the decisions that will have to be made, t
he struggle to understand. Rosemary 
Reuther continues: 

 
Such a struggle, even in its failure and disappoint
ment, is– a time of community, 
commitment, and ecstatic hopefulness: the highest p
oint of living.  The time of 
expectation is the time when we come closest to exp
eriencing the spirit dwelling in the 
human community. In such a time of struggle one fee
ls closest to one™s sister and brother.     
 
Indeed. 

 
I think of my family of origin, my brother and my s
ister, a family no different in many 
ways from that ancient family we lift up each Chris
tmas. Mediterranean peasants. Living 
with expectations, yes, they, for the next crop and
 for the storm to pass, yes, we, for my 
brother™s life to become honest and healthy again, 
but struggling and struggling to live 
out lives in the midst of all that expectation. 

 
But, like they had in ancient times, we too have a 
few tools to help us as we struggle. 
 
Mary was not an educated gynecologist, like Soranus
 of Ephesus. But she had a peasant™s 
sense of medicine, and peasants, as I often remind 
us, were not at all foolish. She very 
well understood the uses of olive oil, strips of cl
oth and a bed of hay. 
 
My sister and I are not professional alcoholism wor
kers. But we are not foolish either. 
We have a peasant sense of psychology, and understa
nd the uses of patience, and direct 
naming of issues, supportive conversation, and inte
rventions. Heck, we even have the 
internet, the yellow pages, and wise friends too! 

 
Just as, in the story, the couple has to travel far
 before the birth begins, so will my sister 
and brother and I. We will start on that journey ma
ny times perhaps, and perhaps the 
outcome will not be as beautiful as in the Christma
s story–who knows? It™s hardly like 
hope comes with promises tied to it with bows.  But
 in the words of James Broughton: 
Even if I never arrive 

 I shall keep departing 

I believe in the unreachable, 

the unlikely, and the unmentionable. 

 
 I do believe in my brother™s sobriety. I know that 
many struggles, many journeys, DO 
end in transformation, in new birth, in unmentionab
le angels cartwheeling in the 
background and singing lovely theology: God™s glory
 is not like Caesar™s, full of sound 
and fury, pocked with weapons and cruelty: it™s peo
ple, ordinary people, peasants and 
everyone, at peace, getting along, cooperating, hon
est, and not afraid. It™s good will and 
all that. 

 
But the struggle itself, says Reuther, is the rewar
d. The struggle to be honest, to embrace 
the difficult. And this is the struggle my sister™s
 phone call offered me tonight. Not the 
gift I was expecting. But a sacred call nonetheless
. 
 
And so I close this little Christmas Eve homily, th
is sermon preached on this o so holy 
night of candlelit stories when the imagination is 
at its yearly peak, with these words of 
Broughton: 

Imagination is my praise of truth 

The beauty of humanity 

is my hope and my sorrow 

 
Wherever I may be landing 

 or hoping for takeoff 

I swear by affection, 

Exuberance, and clarity 

 
Music 

 
Offertory
  
Blest is our shared hope, our common life, 

and the circle of our community, which 

is enriched each year at this time by visitors and 
guests. Blest is our circle of care, 
celebration, and hope. 

 
Let the offering we now give and receive 

be a sign of our own vision of a world 

transformed by mutual cooperation and 

a steady peace. 

 
 
 
 
Blessing of Bread and Light
  
The bread is a sign that no one may be kept away fr
om the table. As said the man whose 
mythic birth is celebrated tonight: ?They shall com
e from North and South and East and 
West, all of them–and feast together–? 

 
 The firelight is a sign that though each human ligh
t is welcome and worthy, together in 
community we make a greater light, one that may ill
umine the world. 
 
Blest is the bread of life. Blest is the light of l
ove. Blest is this night, o holy night of love, 
o holy night of light, story, silence, song and pea
ce. Amen. 
 
Candlelighting
 while music plays 
 
at the end, hold hands if possible and sing  

 
Silent Night, holy night 

all is calm, all is bright, 

round yon virgin mother and child 

holy infant so tender and mild 

sleep in heavenly peace,  

sleep in heavenly peace. 

 
Blessing 

 
May the peace and hope proclaimed by this night ser
vice begin in our lives as we move 
toward the new year. Let it radiate out from our li
ves like light from a thousand candles. 
This being so, let there be peace, let there be hop
e, let there be love. Amen. 
 
Music 

Kindling the Christmas Candelabrae 

Silent Nocturne 

Circle Carol 

Blessing of the Assembly 

The Closing Act of Communion 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
