and we are but the players thereof", according to Shakespear's wisdom, similarly our spiritual training was continuous and only the setting changed. The Master-Director assigned the roles, and each played them according to their capacities. Certainly part of Shri Baba’s training is to develop our "peace within", though in the midst of active, pulsating life. Seclusion, when given by the Master to one of his disciples, is for the better fulfilment of the work at hand and not for personal satisfaction; however, solitude was not our part during these six months journey. This is what outsiders sometimes have difficultiy in understanding, as they seem to expect spiritual living to be a cloistered existence with inward contemplation. But Shri Baba leads us along the path in service of others. Some give the service of art or writing; for example, some directly participate in the Master's external work among human­ity, while others give services, as St. Teresa has expressed it: "If obedience employs you in outward things, know that even if you are in the kitchen, our Lord moves amidst the  pots and pans helping us both within and without." Whatsoever the duty, the first step in the field of service is to think of others more than oneself, and the last step is to truly love all others more than oneself. Christ who had completely transcended the ego gave love to those who crucified Him. This is the state of perfection. 
It would seem that Shri Baba’s spiritual work of the tour had reached its highest pitch during the stay at Ajmer (Rajputana). There were so many sidelights to the great search­light turned on by the Master there, that it was utterly impossibie for an ordinary individual to follow all, but each disciple sensed it in his own way and felt its irnport and momentum, as at no other place on this journey of spiritual experience. At Ajmer the Master particularly was on a search for souls—lost souls, advanced souls, mad souls, spiritually-dazed souls and those who had attained to the perfected stage of Sainthood. When Shri Baba stirs, events and circumstances move quickly. 
From the earthly point of view one could call the 

Master's activities search, though from the spiritua1 pattern, each of these destined souls were but "coming unto their own". The appointed hour for them to meet the Master had come—no clockwork could be more precise, no fate more accurate. The rare souls on the plane of spiritual advancement with whom intuition had become Knowledge, knew beforehand of the Master's coming, and only the outer contact had yet to be made. Others less advanced on the Path were intuit­ively drawn towards Shri Baba by circumstances that might ordinarily be termed "coincidence". Still others, unconscious as to the Cause behind their inward spiritual longing, came, as would the "blind" led by the helping hand of another. The lost souls seemed just of themselves to stray like sheep into the fold; while the eratic impulses of the mad, by the law of average, proved that day to be sane! 
A bungalow at Ajmer was arranged in advance for the Master's party which proved to be on a quiet corner, nevertheless just off the main artery leading into the heart of the city. Two of the household were assigned the strenuous tasks, which was for one of them to prepare food for any number of strange souls who might come to Shri Baba at any hour of the day, and the other was to prepare hot water over the charcoal burners in large quantity and be ready to carry them herself in buckets-full, at any moment, for the Master's use in giving the beneficial bath to the selected men. What strange inter­weaving of fates, Shri Baba brings about! For example, here were two Western women, one from London and the other from New York, serving the spiritual advanced souls of the East in such arduous fashion. The Master sent his specially chosen men disciples out here and there in Ajmer, at his directions to "fish" for souls. The task, in its ramifications, is unbelievable. At first one by one with infinite patience these strange souls are persuaded to leave their nooks and crannies. One of the first located was a man who had sat for four years in the railroad station, where nothing had persuaded him to leave, not 

even when boiling water had been thrown over him by the Station Master. Finally this official resigned himself to the fact that there was something unusual in this man, and allotted him a place where he might remain. The man who had taken upon himself the task of doing his spiritual work for humanity in the throughfare of a railroad station, had still the physical scars of the burns which were meant to dissuade him. Yet he was ultimately brought to Shri Baba after years of being seated in one place. 
The Master, working in his own way, did not go out to contact these spiritual men directly, which would have made the task easy for the disciples if these advanced souls could but gaze upon his face; but the disciples must follow Shri Baba's directions implicitly and at the same time be ingenious enough to find the ways and means to carry them out. It would require the disciple in each case to tell his own tale in order to relate the many incidents leading up to the final success of persuading such adamant characters to forsake their 
accustomed ways which seem so peculiar to us laymen, and then to bring them over to the bungalow where Shri Baba was staying. Upon arrival of this spiritual man from the station, the Master bathed and fed him as a little child. Did Christ not say, "Except ye become as little children, ye cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven?" 
When I first saw this man, he had been clothed by Shri Baba in a new white garment (kafni) and he was seated on a chair in the Master's own room. His short pointed beard, downcast eyes and holy expression, reminded me strikingly of the well-known painting of Christ after the scourging was over and someone had placed a white garment upon him. Only the crown of thorns was lacking from the present scene; but the transcendent, meek expression radiated from his face. This innocent, I thought, was daily seated amongst the judging Sanhedri, and today, possibly for the first time, was without "thorns"! Tomorrow again he would be at his railroad station amongst the crowds, but today, in Shri Baba's pre­

sence, he looked transfigured. 
Why is this beneficial bath by Shri Baba necessary, or for these selected masts, why the feeding with the Master's own hands? To those who believe, it is a spiritual matter under­stood with the intuition. To those who are privileged to witness such transformation of consciousness as is brought about by the Master through his personal touch and the simple mediums of water and food, the matter is one of direct revelation. But to those whom such matters are alien, I can but refer them to parallels in scriptures of all the great Masters. In the New Testament of the Christians, water is used as regenerative force, such as in baptism which is considered to give "spiritua1 re-birth". The simple act of giving of bread by Christ became later a sacrament when at the "Last Supper" He said: "Take, eat this bread in remembrance of Me." Who can under­stand with their ordinary reasoning the full spiritual import of such happenings on this earth in the days of Christ? We know, however, that the greatness of a Master consists in 
taking the common daily things of life, and through their usage they become a blessed sacrament. With every physical symbol is a spiritual meaning. Christ said: '' I shall give ye bread from which ye shall never be enhungered and waters from which ye shall never thirst." Since Christ's day these holy acts have become mere rituals of the Church, rather than living realities in everyday life of humanity. 
I witnessed in Ajmer men come to Shri Baba who had long given up the world for life of the spirit and held fast to their own beliefs and faiths, yet were racked and weary, soul tortured, or dazed upon the Path. I have seen them leave the presence of the Master after the beneficial bath cleansed in body and spirit, and with the unmis­takable expression of regeneration upon their faces. It was like seeing a garden of humanity, purified and shining, after celestial rains. The stirring of the spirit by the touch of a Master, if one has the privilege to witness it, is far more self-evident than when one sees and knows that a man is glad, or a man is 

sad. This state of bliss cannot be hid; it radiates from one's very being. 
Another interesting ascetic was one whom Shri Baba directed his disciples to locate in the grave-yard, outside of Ajmer, where he has lived for a number of years under a tomb­stone. In the day time this man wandered forth, and the disciples had to make several trips before he was at last found. Always there were several persons seated around the particular tomb, whether he was there or not, and through carefully placed questions the disciples of Shri Baba were able to learn some­what of the holy man's accustomed ways. All in the locality regarded him as a saintly person, and it seemed that he had many devotees throughout Ajmer. He was described as a man who was "always happy''. Apparently in the realm of action this ascetic did very little, but his happiness was of the quality which radiated out to others even from the depth of his recess, and the place was looked upon as holy ground because of his presence. His devo­tees came to sit nearby, and indes­cribably they always went away happy, After hours of search, the disciples of Shri Baba finally located the ascetic in the bazaar where a crowd was following him. How were the disciples to take him to the Master? It was surely not. easy for them, being strangers in the place, and the followers might easily become fanatic even if the holy man himself consented to come with them. So they, too, followed after the holy man for a considerable time, and saw, as they passed through the narrow streets of the poor quarter, what respect was paid him. Every­where in the bazaar there were vendors who offered him food, but rarely he would accept any offering, yet this was one of the infrequent occasions when he came out ·to eat. Mostly he passed the accepted small amount of food to the poor here and there along his route. A trail of hap­piness seemed to be left behind him either from those to whom he gave or from those from whom he took. 
The disciples chanced to speak with a tonga (Indian type of carriage) driver of their intention of taking the holy man with them, and the driver instantly seemed to understand and offered to cooperate. The disciples had already asked the ascetic to come with them, but he had shown no outward sign of hearing; but they did not, through their previous experiences, take it necessarily in the negative, because holy men often know the short-comings and reactions of their followers, and concerning their own plans are, therefore, seemingly secretive. But the actual happening came about through the ingenuity of the tonga driver whom "chance" had at hand. When carrying out Shri Baba's orders, the disciples in all parts of the world have so often experienced finding these "angels" of help. The tonga driver adroitly drew the holy man into a tea shop, when he passed near, and thus separated him from the crowd which was all the time growing· larger. Thus some of the followers passed by without noticing the fact. Then to the amazement of others, including the disciples of Shri Baba, the ascetic allowed himself to be suddenly swept up in the arms of the 

driver and placed bodily into the tonga, which was driven away at top speed. Then it was that the disciples of Shri Baba had to be most alert as their spiritual "pry" seemed escaping. They concentrated on Shri Baba's wish in the matter and at the same instant decided to give chase in another tonga which then had come in and fortunately was not far off. The chase, however, lasted but a moment, for just around the bend of the road the first tonga stopped, and they were permitted by the holy man to transfer him into their tonga and thus bring him to the Master—whom indeed he already knew in his advanced state of knowing. Shri Baba bathed the holy man as is his particular way in treatment of the masts or other advanced souls. When the time came at the end of the day for him to go, this holy man did not want to leave Shri Baba's presence. So it was that he remained until the Master departed from Ajmer, some deep-forged link drawing him spiritually. The outward fact that he remained with Shri Baba leaked out someway to his many devotees 

and impressed them more than possibly any miracle that the Master could perform for them otherwise, for they knew the qualities of their holy man and that none other had deflected him in the slightest from his course. But when the Sun of spirituality shines, the rays them­selves are but the reflections of the greater power. 
Previously to our arrival in Ajmer, Shri Baba indicated to us that there were two spiritual agents there who were highly evolved souls on the fifth and sixth planes of conscious­ness, and that they would come to him during his stay there. Further­more that we should see them. Upon hearing this, my mind recalled the fact of the two "sentinels" at either end of the ghats at Benares who sat in the ancient stronghold of spirituality continuing the spiritual link with the ages, and also of the saint we had the rare privilege of seeing outside of Delhi, and who, Shri Baba said, were the spiritual guardians of their diatricts. When one is with a Master such as Shri Baba, many scriptural meanings little understood before, suddenly become alive and take on actuality in the present as well as reality in the past. For example, regarding the spiritual guardianship of a people or a district the sentence of the Prophet Ezekiel took on new light: "The word of the Lord came upon me, saying, Son of Man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel." The old Testament is replete with such "watchman" prphets. Now I thought with conviction, why should only the lands of the past be so blessed? 
This section of Rajputana is one of the most spiritual in India. In the past a very great saint, named Khwaja Moenuddin Chisti, worshipped by Mohamedans and Hindus alike, came from Arabia and had his abode in this locality. His spiritual influence was so vast that eventually he died a martyr to local religious orthodox feeling that was very fierce in those times. Today Ajmer is considered, due to his life and martyrdom there, to be the "Mecca" in lndia for Mohamedans; and Hindus alike come to worship at his tomb in countless numbers throughout the year. It proved 

that in one of the narrow streets radiating off the saintly shrine, one of these spiritual agents referred to by Shri Baba had his abode. One day, during our three weeks stay in Ajmer, the Master took us to visit this ancient sacred place which, at the present time, is carefully guarded by priests who collect all the fees they can, but with it all they cannot spoil the spiritual atmosphere which one senses is very profound. However, the reverence of the Wes­tern disciples for the holy life of the past could not be expressed, for the priests of the present time would not permit any Westerners to approach the actual resting place. Yet can one complain, for did not the petty prejudice of Western Christians call at times those who worship Eastern religions "heathens"? We today are following One who in his pure life and spiritual love knows all mankind as God's children, as indeed all Perfect Masters of all times have done. Just as we were leaving the large area of the shrine and had returned to our bus, an ascetic man with glowing eyes passed close to the window where Shri Baba sat. Recogni­tion passed between them, and then we drove off as if nothing special had occurred. Later Shri Baba sent two of his mandali back to this section to search out the man, and he was eventually found lying in a kind of gutter, completely uncon­scious of the body and immersed in spiritual bliss. He was brought to the Master and remained throughout the stay. This man was tall and slim in build, of medium age, and had a noble bearing. During the days with the Master he appeared always inwardly exalted, and his eyes had an intensely burning look, seeming to be seeing things afar. His artistic looking hands were constantly moving and gesticulating as if in conversation with unseen entities and sometimes as if he were leading an unheard heavenly choir. His speech, which was seldom, seemed disconnected to those of the men disciples who were in attendance, but Shri Baba told us that all what the man uttered had spiritual mean­ing. Sometimes even at night we would hear him singing in a deep sonorous voice like the chant of a priest, so loudly, 

that the sound carried through the walls into our quarters. During the days that he stayed under the Master's roof, he bathed him and fed him with his own hands, and at the same time gave him a spiritual push. This period of sojourn for this "child of God" was a spiritual home-coming. His state of bliss was extraordinary and continuous. 
Shri Baba told us that he was one of his spiritual agents on the fifth plane, and during the time he was with the Master he had been spiri­tually advanced. The second spiritual agent in Ajmer was found through the guidance of a tipsy tonga driver. Such strange humans are often pieces in the picture-puzzle which in life fit in no place, but under the influence of a Master such as Shri Baba become the missing and important piece which completes the picture. This particular driver was a unique character who claimed to be the oldest tonga driver in Ajmer, and in fact he knew everyone; but most important was that he knew the nooks and crannies where the asce­tics and other spiritually advanced souls had 
their abodes. It was most useful to Shri Baba's disciples, and they were in the habit of engaging him daily. He was a very honest old fellow of rather disreputable looks, wearing a coat and cap too large for him. In fact he was so honest that he told the disciples each day how much he had drunk the day before, but added that it was his only vice. He came to know the Master, and it would not be unusual if by now even this sole vice had disappeared. However, one day he said that he would bring a special saint, only he must go alone. Thus the second spiritual agent of the district was brought to the Master. This man lived somewhere in the thickly settled part of the city in a place which he had not left for three years. He was a man in super-conscious state, of large powerful frame and with a beard which was long and expressively characteristic. His eyes were of a dominate nature, deep-seated and powerful. Day by day this "watchman" sat in one place and spiritually oversaw the city. Three times altogether he was brought to the Master, and the 

disciples of Shri Baba who later  on the sixth plane of spiritual con- 
accompanied him, said that those  sciousness. A number of such  
who knew about this spiritual man  evolved souls will be in the Master's  
used to come and sit in his presence  " Universa1 Ashram" later.  
silently for hours at a time. He was  Whether on the journey there were  
definitely regarded in the region as a  sinners or whether there be saints,  
saint. The East knows the benefit of  they all came to Baba, whose name  
being in the presence of holiness, and  means Father, as little children. That  
the devotees. were content to bask in  is the most beautiful part of my  
his light. Shri Baba confirmed the  spiritual experience with a modern  
fact that he was  Sadguru,  
. 
