 1 2007-12-16 Radical Ideas 
 
Opening Words
  
We are here, 

as winter approaches with snow and wind, 

to worship, to remember that our stories 

are but small chapters in far greater stories 

of both radical heritage and blossoming cosmos. 

 
And so, with renewing joy, we say: 





?
??ˆ

?
 
Sequence
  
The snow comes with beauty and danger. 

Just like beauty and danger arrive at other times o
f the year. 
The holidays come with joy and resistance. 

Just like joy and resistance arrive at other times 
of the year. 
The carols of the season are repeated over and over
. Just like the popular songs are repeated over 
and over at other times of the year.  

 
The year has its seasons and cycles, O Love. Yes. B
ut no matter if it™s dark or light, holiday or 
ordinary day, morning or afternoon or night, it™s a
ll woven together into one living, the joy 
and
 sorrow, one fear 
and
 exaltation, one seductive culture 
and
 the resistance to it; one beauty 
and 
the 
danger joined together. So, come O Love. Weave your
self into this, our silence, and wrap us for 
a time in the quilt of your comforting strength and
 warmth in the midst of it all. 
 
silence 

 
Joys and sorrows are woven together with  

our lives of work and play and worship. 

Our whole lives flow into this brief morning time. 
Let us pause, therefore, to remember 
the rest of our lives, our loves, losses, laughter 

and tears, and name the ones which call 

to us today, either in our inner quiet, or whispere
d into this our house of praise. 
 
naming 

 
O Love, let silence process into music now, 

and music to word, and word to flesh, and 

flesh to life, and life to the comfort of gratitude
.  
 
Readings 

 
 2 The First Reading 
comes from the Tanakh, or Hebrew Bible. It™s from t
he book of Daniel, 
a fanciful, non-historical book written at the time
 of the first Hanukkah, the present celebration 
of which ended this week. It was meant to be critic
al of the Greek culture, and to encourage 
resistance. The story is set almost 400 years earli
er in a fictionalized account of the Babylonian 
era. 

 
Long ago, the emperor of Babylonia, Nebuchadnezzar,
 captured Jerusalem and took all the 
Judean royalty to the great city of Babylon as pris
oners.  He ransacked the temple in Jerusalem 
and looted its precious plate for his own treasury.
   
 
He ordered his Lord High Chamberlain to choose some
 of the young men of the Judean nobility 
for service in the palace Œ fine, good-looking, wel
l-educated, bright and clever young men Œ and 
to teach them to speak the Babylonian language.  He
 made them a handsome allowance for rich 
food and wine.  They were to be given three years™ 
education. 
 
Among those chosen were four young men, Daniel, Han
aniah, Mishael and Azariah.  The Lord 
High Chamberlain renamed them with Babylonian names
 Œ Bel-teshazzar, Shadrach, Meshach 
and Abednego. 

 
Daniel was sincere. He made up his mind that he wou
ld not deny his religious convictions by 
eating un-kosher food.  He explained this to the Lo
rd High Chamberlain, and asked him not to 
make him do anything against his conscience.  Now t
he Lord High Chamberlain rather liked 
Daniel. But he said to him: ?It™s the emperor I™m a
fraid of. His orders must be obeyed; he 
decided what food you should be given.  If, at the 
end of your first session, you weren™t as fit as 
the others, I™d be executed.? 

 
Daniel talked to the guard in charge of the four of
 them. ?Please test our theory for ten days,? he 
said.  ?Lentils and water are all we want.  In ten 
days™ time compare our fitness with the fitness 
of the others.? 

 
The guard agreed.  When the ten days were over, the
 four of them looked better and fitter than all 
the young men who had been given the rich food and 
wine the emperor had ordered.  That settled 
the matter.  They could have the food of their cons
cience. 
 
The Second Reading
 comes from a very fine scholarly paper written by R
ev. Dr. Susan Ritchie, 
the minister of our neighboring congregation up in 
Lewis Center. She is considered by her 
colleagues, especially me, to be the historian par 
excellence among Unitarian Universalist 
clergy in these present days. She is speaking of ou
r Unitarian ancestors in Hungary around the 
mid-15 hundreds. I will speak of the Edict of Torda
 in the sermon. Just be aware it was issued to 
guarantee religious toleration in Hungary. And Fere
nc David, mentioned in this 
reading, is one of our religious ancestors, 

the first Unitarian Bishop in Europe. 

 
The borders between the Ottoman and Hungarian cultu
res were, in this period, crossed, 
renegotiated, and re-crossed.  The basis for the Ed
ict of Torda was established, not only in 
Francis David™s mind, not only in European humanist
 influence, not even through the direct 
political and legal influence of the Ottoman Empire
.  The grounds for religious toleration were 
also prepared for in the everyday lives of actual p
ersons, who experienced the negotiations of 
intermarriage before any legal proclamation of tole
ration, and who knew the attractions of Islam 

 3 and the safety it accorded progressive Protestants,
 before the publication of any theological 
treatise.  

 
Could it be that toleration, that most precious inh
eritance of the Enlightenment, has always been 
a shared East/West undertaking?  It is especially i
ronic that while we praise the progressive, 
diversity-promoting character of our earliest state
ments of religious toleration, we have also 
defined them heartily as products of liberal Europe
an genius.   It is well past the time for the 
paradigm of shared understanding.  
  
Sermon 

 
History, we say, is something that supposedly happe
ned long ago, and often quite far away. 
Some people like to study history anyway, reading b
ooks on kings and queens, wars and 
religious heresies– with relish. Others find histor
y difficult, dull, boring, and even, some say, 
irrelevant.  

 
But whether we study it or not, I™d like to propose
 this morning that history is not only 
something that happened long ago and far away. Hist
ory, even our own particular Unitarian 
history, is around us all the time. It™s there when
ever we make decisions as our ancestors did, or 
hold an ideal against strong odds. We are not, afte
r all, the first to make decisions, or hold ideals 
tenaciously–our whole history is packed with folks 
who did just that.  
 
At its best, historical study allows us to look at 
the world through many eyes, not just the eyes of 
our own private and personal experience. When histo
ry reminds us that what we have 
experienced in our own lives others have experience
d before us, it can even help us to make 
sense of a sometimes very strange world. 

 
?Oh, I understand now. That™s why that happens!?  B
ut it can do more than that:  it can 
sometimes lift up a vision of hope when hope is dif
ficult to see.    
 
But, before I lift up history at its best, I™d like
 to start off by suggesting that, at the very 
least
, the 
stories that underlie our present age are still aro
und. Just in really nifty disguises. 
(And here I 
have to thank Susan Ritchie for the following bit o
f history fun.) 
 
For example, you and I can go to almost any bakery 
or even supermarket and buy something 
called a 
croissant.
 It™s a flaky, buttery pastry that sometimes, with 
butter and jam, is breakfast, 
and sometimes turns out to be lunch, when it™s stuf
fed with egg salad. 
 
I have always assumed Parisian bakers first invente
d it, because the word is French after all.   
 
But I was wrong. Croissants were first baked in the
 city of Wien, or what we call in English 
Vienna. In the year 1526, about 150,000 troops unde
r the leadership of Suleyman the 
Magnificent, Sultan, or emperor,
 of the Ottoman Empire, camped outside the walls of 
Vienna, 
preparing to attack and push his vast Empire well i
nto central Europe. They had already claimed 
the city of Buda in Magyarország, the country which
 we call in English, Hungary. 
 
The bakers in Vienna had little hope. They were sur
e the overwhelming Ottoman forces would 
triumph. Still, they grit their teeth and fought ba
ck in the only way they knew how–being 
bakers, with baking. They saw the Ottoman flags fes
tooned with the crescent moon design across 

 4 the green cloth, and all at once they knew what the
y had to do. They created a pastry in the shape 
of that crescent moon so that people could tear at 
it with their teeth–and yet be fed. 
 
To everyone™s surprise, including Suleyman™s, a ser
ies of weather disasters, including terrible 
rainstorms, and spates of both sickness and deserti
ons, raged through the camp, serving to 
weaken the Ottoman resolve. They finally retreated 
without attacking. They never went any 
further into Europe after that. 

 
But to this day, we still eat croissants. Almost 50
0 years later, we still eat the symbol of the 
Ottoman Empire. History is not lost forever–it only
 takes on disguises. 
 
Now you may be surprised to learn that Ottoman Isla
mic history has unexpected connections to 
our own history, if we call ourselves Unitarian Uni
versalists. After all, one place you could 
surely find Unitarians in Europe in those days, as 
now, was in the Hungarian territories in 
Europe, which bordered on the Ottoman Empire. A man
 named Ferenc David  (or Francis David, 
as we say in English, with first names first, not s
econd, as in Hungarian) was the court preacher 
of a man named Zsigismond Zapolya Janos (or in Engl
ish, King John Sigismund), the reigning 
monarch in a territory of Hungary called by the str
ange title: ?That place on the other side of the 
forest,? or in Latin, Transylvania.  

 
Both of these men, Ferenc David and  Zapolya Zsigis
mund Janos, had lived in or near Buda 
when the Ottomans ruled there. Both of them had lea
rned something about Islamic toleration 
policies. They carried this knowledge with them whe
n they moved over the mountains to 
Transylvania. 

 
In fact, it would seem that they both knew of an ed
ict which came out of Buda, from the Pasha, 
or Ottoman governor, there. A group of conservative
 Catholics were angry at a Lutheran cleric 
for preaching sermons which undermined their influe
nce in the area. They asked the Pasha to 
have the pastor driven away, or even killed. But he
 responded with these words, in the form of an 
edict, as Dr. Susan Ritchie makes clear in another 
part of her paper: 
 
?Preachers of the faith invented by Luther should b
e allowed to preach–everywhere to 
everybody. Whoever wants to hear, freely, and witho
ut fear, should be able to listen and receive 
the word without any danger.? 

 
Two decades later, when  Zsigismond Zapolya Janos w
as ruling in Transylvania, he helped issue 
the famous Edict of Torda, saying pretty much the s
ame thing as the Pasha did, down to the 
Edict™s appeal to the privilege of individual heari
ng, thus lifting up freedom of the individual 
conscience. This was a very radical and quite moder
n idea indeed. It allowed Catholics, 
Lutherans, Reformed Church folks and Unitarians to 
live side by side without clubbing each 
other on the head all the time, which was rather th
e practice elsewhere in Europe. In our usual 
telling of our  history, Zsigismond Zapolya Janos i
s given credit for this radical idea of religious 
toleration, of each individual left to make up his 
or her mind according to conscience. Now the 
Edict of Torda was indeed a 
radical
 idea (that is, an idea which got down to the 
radix
, that is, the 
root of things) It was largely new to European thou
ght. Tolerance after all had not been a 
European virtue since the fall of Rome. But religio
us tolerance was not a rare idea in Muslim 
lands. And Torda was based, clearly, on another Edi
ct, one from a Muslim voice. From a Muslim 
empire where religious tolerance was already such a
 byword that today, Jews consider that age, 
and their settlements within that empire in that ag
e, to be one of their golden eras. 

 5  
But underneath this radical idea I find another ide
a. And this is the idea of 
uncontrolled mutual 
influence.  

 
Mostly, history is the story of folks trying to con
trol influence. You don™t allow yourself to be 
influenced by your Catholic or Lutheran or Unitaria
n or Jewish or Muslim friend. You burn them 
at the stake instead, or imprison them or ridicule 
them. You get rid of them. You purify your life 
of foreign cultural influence and reestablish your 
control over it.  
 
In short, what I am asserting is this: the history 
of the world, tragically, is most often told in 
terms of ?them? and ?us.? 

 
They
 invaded 
us
. 
We 
discovered this idea and 
they
 used it. 
They
 were in conflict with 
us.
 We
 were at war with 
them. 
And sure, there is some truth in this. All you have
 to do is look at the 
European colonists and the Native nations here on t
hese American continents. But,  just 
some
 truth.  For the boundaries of the world have always
 been perforated. And the edges of the world 
have ever been frayed. 

 
Susan Ritchie points out that Muslims didn™t just l
ive in some remote 
there,
 while our ancestors 
lived in the local Hungarian 
here
. No, Europeans and Muslim individuals knew each ot
her the 
whole while. They were neighbors. They married each
 other. Mixed families, with Protestants, 
Catholics, Unitarians, Jews and Muslims, all sittin
g around the holiday table, were surprisingly 
common back then. It™s not some new-fangled America
n melting-pot idea, as if we invented 
even 
that
 idea in the first place. Muslim/Christian weddings
 were not rare. Unitarian/ Muslim 
friendships were not odd back then, any more than m
y friendship with my Muslim friend Babar 
is odd now. The idea of mutual tolerance was not ju
st an edict. It was already being practiced by 
a large part of the community. The Edict of Torda, 
as in the case of the original Buda edict of the 
Pasha, was not offering a novel idea that had never
 been heard before. Or practiced. No, both 
edicts, I have to surmise, were issued simply to ma
ke sure that the fanatics, as in the case of the 
people who wanted to have the Protestant pastor kil
led, did not put a stop to what had already 
begun. 

 
And these friendships were not just at the peasant 
level. Zsigismund Zapolya Janos, good King 
John of Transylvania, was well known to the Emperor
™s family in Istanbul. The emperor, says 
Susan Ritchie, had even dispatched a man to watch t
he young prince being nursed, to make sure 
he was being well taken care of. 

 
And Suleyman brought many young Unitarians from Hun
gary to his court, since he respected the 
Unitarian theological opinion very highly. 

 
In fact, the anti-Unitarian factions in Europe, fro
m east to west, often used just that fondness as a 
way of bashing our ancestors. ?Why, they are nothin
g more than a bunch of nasty Muslims 
infiltrating Christian Europe.? 

 
But we were never Muslims, because the Muslims of t
he Ottoman Empire never required us to 
convert to Islam, contrary to what the American pre
ss and Christian right try to say about 
Muslims these days. They liked us as we were. In fa
ct, they helped to translate our religious 
literature into Arabic and Turkish for us.  

 
 6 But why did they help us to translate our religious
 literature into those languages, since we were 
Hungarian speakers? Because, as in the case of the 
Biblical story of Daniel and the healthful 
lentils, many of the brightest young minds of the e
ra were brought to the Ottoman court, where 
they were educated with the best schooling possible
, and treated with the greatest respect. There 
is ample evidence that many a young Unitarian livin
g within the Muslim empire rose to high 
office and responsibility, without ever being requi
red to give up their religion. They, in fact, 
brought their European wisdom and expertise into th
e Ottoman world, just as lentils and good 
health came to the court of Nebuchadnezzer. 

 
Now this history may sound like a story of men, lik
e so many histories told today. But it is not. 
Queen Isabella Jagiello, Zsigismund Janos™s mother,
 appreciated the exchange of ideas with the 
Ottomans. With her liberal upbringing in Poland, he
r intellectual rigor, her favorite book written 
by the radical humanist Erasmus tucked under her ar
m and well-read, she was able to engage 
fully with the cultural exchanges that marked the p
rogressive spirit of that age. Without Isabella, 
the story of our Unitarian ancestors in Hungary wou
ld never have come to pass. Her diplomacy 
and her steady, non-anxious style enriched the real
m of Transylvania---after all, it was she who 
ruled, with the encouragement of Suleyman, as her i
nfant son Janos Zsigimund grew to 
manhood.  

 
Modern historians with a progressive eye also note 
that what we now call ?same-gender? 
relationships were also tolerated in the Ottoman Em
pire. So, in full view of the Ottomans in his 
court, Janos Zsigismund Zapolya lived out his life 
with a man named Gaspar Bekes. And he was 
never either mocked or attacked because of it. This
, in the 16
th
 century, a time not famous for 
peace, love, justice and tolerance. 

 
This history, our history, is the story of perforat
ed boundaries and frayed edges.  
Like the children™s story this morning, Scribblevil
le
, our story talks of the power of singular 
individuals to make a difference. 

 
Our story is the story of the power of influence an
d individual conscience to challenge an unjust 
world.   

 
However:` 

If I needed to be right above all else, I would not
 want to hear these stories.  
If I needed to be certain above all else, I would n
ot want to hear these stories. 
If I felt entitled to be just where I am without be
ing challenged, I would not want to hear these 
stories. 

If I was convinced the whole world is divided into 
them
 and 
us
, I would curse these stories. 
If I thought I knew exactly what the following word
s mean, once and for all: male, female, 
transgender, intellectual, emotional, spiritual, bl
ack, white, brown, yellow or red, gay, bi, 
straight, athletic or practical or old or young or 
idealistic or religious or Catholic or Protestant o
r 
Jew or Muslim–I would wince when our history was to
ld.  If I thought that things or categories 
had some essential reality, some diamond-hard quali
ty beyond any outside influence, then I 
would 
really hate 
these stories. 
  

Then I would try to disdain history, say it™s borin
g, say it has nothing at all to do with my own 
life in the present world. Then I™d get up, leave t
he house, go off to some comfortable café, and 
sit down for a cup of coffee from Arabia, and a nic
e buttered croissant.  
 
 7 No, for me, the power of our history is that it ill
uminates our possibility, and illustrates our 
theological center, the very one our critics don™t 
imagine that we have.  Our history tells us that 
we can, in deliberate community, influence each oth
er spiritually outside any hierarchical 
control. We can influence each other to engage in w
ell-planned social justice work without guilt 
or shame being a motivator. We can influence each o
ther to celebrate holidays as we need 
to–with richness and welcoming joy, or quiet and pr
ivate peace, the whole way influencing 
each other with kindness, counsel, compassion and l
ove. 
 
So how, I wonder, is it even possible, that history
, our history, could ever be boring? And 
who, I wonder, are we influencing right now with ou
r lives, our decisions, our tolerance? 
 
Offering 

 
Our strength is a shared strength. 

Our joy is a shared joy. 

Our responsibilities are a shared commitment. 

This moment is the opportunity we offer 

to share the strength and joy by the giving 

of pledged gifts. The offering will now be 

given and received in the circle of our shared comm
unity. 
 
Gaudete! 
(An adapted form of the medieval hymn always sung o
n this Sunday in December, for 
a thousand years.) 

 
Gaudete, gaudete!  Tempus adest gratiæ 

Hoc quod optabamus, carmina lætitiæ 

amore reddamus. 

 
Soon arrives the days of forbearance that we™ve bee
n desiring. Let us lovingly sing, rejoicing. 
  

 Omnia natura mirante, mundus renovatus est 
 cum rosae. Porta clausa pertransitur. 

 Ecce!  Amor, simili asteram, invenitur. 

 And all of nature marvels, 

 the world is renewed again with roses.   

 The gates once closed now seem to open. 

 Behold! Love™s there, like a star, waiting. 

   

 Ergo nostra cantio, psallat iam  
 in pulchritudo; benedicat nunc 

 Spiritus Vitae in iubilo. Amen. 

 Therefore let us, like a choir, 

 now sing a canticle in beauty.  

 Let the Spirit of Life  

 now be blessed with joy. Amen. 

