Sunday, October 17, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Listen O isles, unto me; and hearken, ye people, from far; The  Lord hath called me from the womb; from the bowels of my  mother hath he made mention of my name." Isa. 49:1.  Here is a majestic summons from the Great God Almighty, the Creator of all things, visible and invisible ­ ("For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers; all things were created by him and for him," Col. 1:16. See also the glorious scene on display early in the Book of the Revelation; to wit: "And when those [four] beasts, [i.e., living creatures, or faithful pastors] give glory and honor and thanks to him that sat on the throne, who liveth for ever and ever, The four and twenty elders, [i.e., faithful New Testament churches] fall down before him that sat on the throne, and worship him that liveth for ever and ever, and cast their crowns before the throne, saying, THOU ART WORTHY, O LORD, TO RECEIVE GLORY AND HONOR AND POWER; FOR THOU HAST CREATED ALL THINGS, AND FOR THY PLEASURE THEY ARE AND WERE CREATED." Rev. 4:9-11.) It is God the eternal Son in conference with God the everlasting Father touching upon certain great and marvelous things regarding the Everlasting Covenant.  From a tiny spot at the far eastern end of the Mediterranean Sea, the Blessed Pre-incarnate Christ called for and demanded the attention of the entire earth ­ all the inhabitants of the world ­ to discuss the details of the calling out of an Elect Remnant of Jews and Gentiles who, in an acceptable time to come, would repent of all their sins and look to Christ for salvation. What a glorious thing! And this amazing visitation of divine mercy to all the peoples of earth began during the ministry of Isaiah (740-680 BC), and described much of the earthly life, times and ministry of our dear Lord Jesus.  Listen again to the general call of the pre-incarnate Christ to all peoples of the earth; which, we can have no doubt, they heard; to wit: "LISTEN O ISLES, UNTO ME; AND HEARKEN, YE PEOPLE FROM FAR." Isa. 49:1(a). Gill: "All such that dwell in countries beyond the sea, it be usual with the Jews to call all such countries isles that were beyond the sea to them; Christ is the great Prophet of his church, and is alone to be hearkened unto, and in all things." Remember the message from God the Father to the Disciples of Christ delivered upon the Holy Mountain of Transfiguration; to wit: "And after six days Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into an high mountain apart, and was transfigured before them; and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light. And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him. Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here; if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. WHILE HE YET SPAKE, BEHOLD, A BRIGHT CLOUD OVERSHADOWED THEM; AND BEHOLD A VOICE OUT OF THE CLOUD, WHICH SAID, THIS IS MY BELOVED SON, IN WHOM I AM WELL PLEASED; HEAR YE HIM. And when the disciples heard it, they fell on their face, and were sore afraid. And Jesus came and touched them, and said, Arise, and be not afraid. And when they had lifted up their eyes, they saw no man, save Jesus only. And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, saying, TELL THE VISION TO NO MAN, UNTIL THE SON OF MAN BE RISEN AGAIN FROM THE DEAD." (Matt. 17:1-9) This amazing mountain top experience was recounted again and again throughout Peter's life, no doubt, fortifying and comforting him in his afflictions; and when death drew near, he used the event to drive home the superiority of the written word of God even if the dear Lord Jesus should  Sunday, October 17, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  deign to meet with His Father and a select group of honored members of Westboro Baptist Church  atop, say, Pike's Peak, in Colorado. Beloved, it has pleased God to reveal Himself and His will  and His eternal purposes in a Holy Book of Written Scriptures ­ all as being a "more sure word of  prophecy;" to wit:  "For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty. For he received from God the Father honor and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount. WE HAVE ALSO A MORE SURE WORD OF PROPHECY; WHEREUNTO YE DO WELL THAT YE TAKE HEED, AS UNTO A LIGHT THAT SHINETH IN A DARK PLACE, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts; Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man; but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." (2 Pet. 1:16-21)  Beloved, our Father communicates continually with His children, through the Bible and through providence (i.e., the Signs of the Times). Moreover, the Lord God Almighty communicates with all mankind continually; and He advises of the fact and the nature of such communications. Furthermore, a solemn warning from the Holy Ghost attends those who harden their hearts and despise God's Holy communications; to wit: "Wherefore (as the Holy Ghost saith), Today, if ye will hear his voice, Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of temptation in the wilderness." Heb. 3:7,8. An example of how God communicates continually with the sons of men may be seen in the 49th Psalm for the sons of Korah; to wit:  "Hear this, all ye people; give ear, ALL YE INHABITANTS OF THE WORLD; Both low and high, rich and poor, together. My mouth shall speak of wisdom; and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. I will incline mine ear to a parable; I will open my dark saying upon the harp. Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of my heels shall compass me about?" (Psa. 49:1-5)  Gill: "This is the principal thing that all are before called to hearken to. This the wisdom and understanding the psalmist had been meditating upon, and was about to utter; this is the parable he inclined his ear to, and the dark saying he would open; namely, THAT A SAINT HAS NOTHING TO FEAR IN THE WORST OF TIMES; WHICH IS A RIDDLE TO THE NATURAL MAN. Rabbi Aben Ezra interprets ,,the days of evil as the days of old age, as they are called, Eccl. 12:1 (,,Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them.), which bring on diseases, weakness, and death; in which a good man has no reason to fear; as that he should want the necessaries of life, since they that fear the Lord shall want no good thing; or that he should not hold out unto the end, seeing God, who is the guide of youth, is the staff of old age, and carries to hoary hairs, and will never leave nor forsake; and though the wicked man in old age has reason to be afraid of death and eternity at hand, the saint, God's Elect, has not; but may sing, on the borders of the grave, O death! Where is thy sting? 1 Corinthians 15:55. Also days in which iniquity abounds, and error and heresy prevail, are evil days; and though the good man may fear he shall be led aside by the ill example of some, or by the craft of others; yet, he need not, since the foundation of God stands sure, (,,bearing this seal; the Lord knoweth them that are His, and, let them that name the name of Christ depart from evil [2 Tim. 2:19]). ...Moreover, times of affliction and persecution are evil days (to wit: ,,See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, Redeeming the time, because the days are evil. Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is. [Eph. 5:15-17]. ,,Finally, my brethren, be strong in  Sunday, October 17, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  the Lord, and in the power of his might. . . . For we wrestle not against flesh and blood [only,  i.e.], but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world,  against spiritual wickedness in high places. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may BE ABLE TO WITHSTAND IN THE EVIL DAY, and having done all, to stand.  Eph. 6:10-13.); And such will be the evil days of the hour of temptation that shall try (the earthdwellers in the end days); (to wit: "Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will  keep thee from the hour of temptation, [which shall keep them FOR the hour of temptation], which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth." Rev. 3:10.) Yet the  righteous man need not fear, since it is always well with him, let his case and circumstances be  what they will. Yea, the day of death, and the day of judgment, are days of evil to wicked men; and therefore they put them away far from them (Amos 6:1,3 ­ "Woe to them that are at ease in Zion. ... Ye that put far away the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to come near."); but believers  have reason to rejoice at them, the day of their death being better than the day of their birth (Eccl.  7:1); and the day of judgment will be the time of the glorious appearance of Jesus Christ to render them their eternal reward."  Now notice, Beloved that all these foregoing articles of our most sacred religion are to be heralded to all mankind throughout the inhabited earth; to wit: "HEAR THIS, ALL YE PEOPLE; GIVE EAR, ALL YE INHABITANTS OF THE WORLD." Psa. 49:1. Just as we have a non-delegable duty to preach it ­ they have a solemn, unavoidable duty to hear it (i.e., to warmly receive it, embrace it in all its glorious parts, and allow it to run and have free course in their lives). I have thought much lately about the proposition that we at Westboro Baptist Church have been gifted of God so marvelously with such an abundance of Gospel light, that it is with us as it was with the apostle Paul, who said, "I am debtor both to the Greeks, and to the Barbarians; both to the wise, and to the unwise. So as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the gospel to you that are at Rome also." Rom. 1:14,15. He spoke elsewhere in terms of necessity and compulsion and woe upon himself if he failed, neglected or refused to adequately proclaim the Gospel; to wit: "FOR IT WERE BETTER FOR ME TO DIE, THAN THAT ANY MAN SHOULD MAKE MY GLORYING VOID (i.e., Paul's glorying within himself that he derived from self-sacrificing service to our dear Lord Jesus Christ). For though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of; for necessity is laid upon me; YEA, WOE IS UNTO ME, IF I PREACH NOT THE GOSPEL!" 1 Cor. 9:15,16.  Beloved, my mind returns again and again to the glorious state of things in the grand economy of our Father, whereby He sees to it that there is always a witness on earth to the divine Truth. As the end draws near, there are fewer and fewer of His messengers to mankind ­ until there are scarcely any at all, which is a certain Sign of the Times that the end of the world is imminent. "And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord. As for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the Lord; MY SPIRIT THAT IS UPON THEE, AND MY WORDS WHICH I HAVE PUT IN THY MOUTH, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever." (Isa. 59:20,21)  I happened to notice the other day that when God called Moses to lead the children of Israel out of Egypt, He AT THE SAME TIME CALLED CO-WORKERS; to wit: "For I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of servants; and I sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam." (Micah 6:4)  Sunday, October 17, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  And they were all three related to each other. Each one supernaturally called of God, by an impulse upon the heart, no doubt. Furthermore, when Moses died, we read of the smooth, chain- link transition from Moses to Joshua, as provided by Isa. 59:20,21; to wit: "Now after the death of Moses the servant of the Lord, it came to pass, that the Lord spake unto Joshua the son of Nun, Moses' minister, saying, Moses my servant is dead; now therefore arise, go over this Jordan, thou, and all this people, unto the land which I do give to them, even to the children of Israel. Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have I given unto you, as I said unto Moses. ... There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life; as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee; I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. Be strong and of a good courage; for unto this people shalt thou divide for an INHERITANCE the land, which I sware unto their fathers to give them. ONLY BE THOU STRONG AND VERY COURAGEOUS, that thou mayest observe to do according to all the law, which Moses my servant commanded thee; turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest prosper withersoever thou goest. This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do according to all that is written therein; for then thou shalt make thy way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success. Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed; for the Lord thy God is with thee withersoever thou goest." (Josh. 1:1-9) Now, Beloved, these are the dominant qualities and characteristics of God's Elect: Be strong and of a good courage to divide an inheritance for God's people; be strong and very courageous to obey God's law; have not I commanded thee? be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed; for God is with thee withersoever thou goest. To what end? Is it not to Conquer Canaan, destroy the Canaanites, and divide the promised land of Canaan among the Lord's people? "Be strong and of a good courage; FOR UNTO THIS PEOPLE SHALT THOU DIVIDE FOR AN INHERITANCE THE LAND, WHICH I SWARE UNTO THEIR FATHERS TO GIVE THEM." (Josh 1:6) Beloved, an INHERITANCE has been promised to us by our Father ­ which includes our new bodies ­ the sine qua non of it all ­ for time and for eternity; to wit: "Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ; Grace unto you, and peace, be multiplied. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, To an INHERITANCE incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you, Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time." (1 Pet. 1:1-5) John Brown says the sense is, our inheritance ­ new bodies and all ­ is fully ready; to be REVEALED, APOKALUPTO, to shine forth, same as word used in Book of Revelation (Jesus: I go to prepare a place for you and return.).  I love you. Amen.  
