" Lectionary Commentaries &amp;nbsp SINGLES' SUNDAY LECTIONARY COMMENTARY Sunday, November 15, 2009 R. Janae Pitts, Guest Lectionary Commentator Associate Pastor, Mississippi Boulevard Christian Church, Memphis, TN Lection ? Matthew 19:10-12 (New Revised Standard Edition) ) His disciples said to him, ?If such is the case of a man with his wife,  it is better not to marry.? ) But he said to them, ?Not everyone can  accept this teaching but only those to whom it is given. ) For there are  eunuchs who have been so from birth, and there are eunuchs who have been made  eunuchs by others, and there are eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs for  the sake of the Kingdom of heaven. Let anyone accept this who can.? I. Description of the Liturgical Moment For generations, the Church has lifted marriage as a chief aspiration of  Christian life, leaving single people waning under a cloud of stereotypes and  inadequacy. In the wake of societal factors that substantially limit the  quantity of marriageable partners, singleness has become a lifelong reality for  many. For others, singleness is an intentional decision. For still others, it  is a means for complete abandonment to Christ and the work of the Kingdom. Singles Sunday draws singles-focused ministry onto the ecclesial main stage,  affirming singleness as a valued part of the faith community and a high call to  Kingdom service. Singles Sunday offers a healthy and helpful perspective of  singleness and the various ways it benefits Christ?s Kingdom. Created as an  opportunity to celebrate and affirm the significance of single persons in the  work of the Church, Singles Sunday illumines the contributions of this often  misunderstood demographic. Chris Jackson addresses some of the stigmas/myths  attached to singles in his work, Black Christian Singles Guide to Dating and  Sexuality . Jackson points out at least three myths often attached to  singles: 1) if you are single, you are lonely; 2) If you?re single, you must be  searching; and 3) if you are single you must be gay (if you are male and over  30). 1 II. Biblical Interpretation for Preaching and Worship: Matthew 19:10-12 Part One: The Contemporary Contexts of the Interpreter Serving in pastoral ministry and having never been married, I witness firsthand  the prejudices waged against single people in the black church. Despite one?s  spiritual discipline, professional training, or ministerial experience,  pastoral search committees prefer married pastors, couples seek married  counselors, and congregations select married people rather than single people  as spiritual custodians (Deacons and Elders). Perhaps it?s due, in part, to our  society?s flawed characterization of singleness as a disposition toward sexual  promiscuity or its unsubstantiated correlation between singleness and  instability. In any case, several stigmas accompany singleness, especially  people who have never been married and are of a certain age. The church has wronged single people by identifying singleness as a holding  pattern until ?the right one? comes along, instead of viewing it as a holy  opportunity for complete abandonment to Kingdom service. Perhaps the rise of  divorce among black Christians and the proliferate use of online matchmaking  services indicate that our pursuit of married life has squandered our  opportunities for purposeful singleness. One can only hope that churches will  stop using Singles Sundays as opportunities to chide people for having sex  outside of marriage, enjoying evenings out that married people may now have  forsaken (but actually fondly miss), and urging singles to offer more free time  to the church because it is assumed that they have more time to offer. Our  focus text boldly celebrates the significance and holy passion of those who  choose singleness (celibacy) for the sake of the Kingdom. Part Two: Biblical Commentary Our focus text is the conclusion of a conversation initiated by Pharisees who  test Jesus about acceptable terms of divorce. The structure of this pericope  can be illustrated this way: A 1 ? Pharisees ask Jesus about acceptable terms of divorce (Matthew  19, v. 3) B 1 ? Jesus responds to the Pharisees -6) A 2 ? Pharisees ask Jesus about acceptable terms of divorce  B 2 ? Jesus responds to the Pharisees -9) C ? The  disciples give a retort ) D 1 ? Jesus gives a challenging disclaimer ) E 1 ? Jesus responds to disciples a-c) D 2 ? Jesus? challenging disclaimer d) While verses 3-9 concerning divorce have parallel passages elsewhere in Matthew,  Mark and Luke, our focus text, verses 10-12 concerning eunuchs, has no parallel  passages in any of the Gospels. Given the uniqueness of our focus text, and  Jesus? central role in it, several exegetical and interpretive opportunities  arise. First, Jesus hints that one?s aversion to the difficulties of marriage does not  equip him or her life as a eunuch. After hearing that infidelity is the only  acceptable reason for divorce, and that remarriage after divorce for another  cause is a transgression punishable by death, the disciples make a critical  claim. Imagine their surprise as Jesus dismisses their claim by outlining three  reasons to remain single: being born a eunuch, becoming a eunuch by injury or  medical procedure, or making one?s self a eunuch for the sake of the Kingdom.  Jesus uses the socially sensitive term ?eunuch? to respond to the disciples. In  this, Jesus shifts the imagination away from marriage and its legal and  religious burdens to an anatomically imperfect, non-sexual way of life with far  reaching implications. In this, one sees the folly of the disciples? claim in  equating their aversion to the burdens of marriage to the acceptance of  lifelong celibacy. Perhaps this is why Jesus says, ?Not everyone can accept  this teaching but only those to whom it is given.? Jesus not only suggests that it is a difficult teaching, but that it may be too  difficult for his disciples. While eunuchs were well-trusted keepers of royal  harems and household officers, due to their anatomical abnormality, they were  barred from the temple and ritual worship. 2 Because of their  impotence, they had limited currency in the social structure of fathers who  begat sons. Yet, Jesus affirms that the call of the Kingdom may lead people to  accept this socially dejected and largely shameful public persona for a purpose  of much greater depth and significance. It reminds us that the Kingdom may move  us to an uncommon display of sacrifice. One would think this is within the  scope of discipleship; yet, Jesus states twice that everyone cannot accept this  teaching. How awkward for any of his disciples to admit that he was one to whom  this teaching had not been given! It should be no surprise that some disciples  had difficulty understanding the extreme self-surrender one would endure for  the Kingdom. They had yet to fully understand the lengths to which Jesus would  go. Jesus additionally stakes a counter-cultural claim in suggesting that a  self-made eunuch can participate in the sage of the Kingdom of heaven. In  Jewish tradition, marriage is considered an essential human relationship.  ?Rabbis condemned the man who rejected his normal human impulses and failed to  produce children, charging that it was ?as if he shed blood, diminished the  Image of God, and made the Shekhinah depart from Israel.?? 3 These  people were loathed in most religious communities. Jesus would have been well  aware of the stigma and contempt toward celibates. Yet, he disregards the  social and religious landscape and identifies this one who, according to public  opinion, shames himself and makes him a welcomed participant in God?s  government on Earth. Jesus places the humiliated one in a positive relationship  with the Kingdom of Heaven. A great sermonic and hermeneutical interpretive opportunity lies in the  irony of Jesus as teacher and Jesus as eunuch. Like the eunuch he  describes, Jesus, being fully human, denied his human affinity for sexual  companionship and gratification in order to accomplish a purpose of much  greater depth and significance. He voluntarily restrained his human sexual  impulses and failed to produce children because he is inextricably enmeshed in  securing God?s government on Earth. How fitting it is for Jesus to instruct  this audience about his own experience as a man, his purposeful restraint and  deep commitment to the Kingdom of Heaven. Moreover, Jesus ?made himself? a  eunuch. It was not a mystically or divinely deployed characteristic freeing him  from effort or struggle. At every milestone, an opportunity for  self-preservation and self-gratification existed, but Jesus willingly extended  himself to the limit of human sacrifice. Let anyone accept this who can. Celebration This text teaches us to celebrate self-abandonment to Kingdom service and our  purposeful sacrifice to a call that has eternal significance. In it, we share  in Christ?s sufferings. In it, we understand more fully that we have a high  priest which can be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, he was in all  points tempted as we are, yet without sin (Transalation of Hebrews 4:15). Descriptive Details The descriptive details of this passage include: Sounds: Frustration in the disciples? tone of voice );  and Sights: An adversarial husband and wife ); three ways in  which one becomes a eunuch ); the beauty of the Kingdom of heaven 2). III. Other Sermonic Comments Make your Singles Sunday (which also doubles as Young Adult Sunday in many  churches) more than a Sunday for listing the behaviors that singles are to  avoid. Instead, celebrate the role of singles while avoiding attempts to rope  in more to do work for the church because of an unsubstantiated belief that  they are more available or interested. Suggested song: ?I Surrender All.? (Traditional hymn.) Notes 1. Jackson, Chris. Black Christian Singles Guide to Dating and Sexuality .  Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1999. 2. Wood, D.R.W. and I. Howard Marshall. New Bible Dictionary . 3rd ed.  Leicester, England. Dowers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1996. 3. Eisenberg, Ronald L. The JPS Guide to Jewish Traditions .  Philadelphia, PA: The Jewish Publication Society, 2004. &amp;nbsp The BIG IDEA (2009) Homelessness January 2009 Literacy and Education February 2009 Economic Empowerment March 2009 Ministering to Persons Who Have Disabilities and Special Needs April 2009 Affordable Housing May 2009 Health and Wellness June 2009 Prison Ministy July 2009 Innovative Worship August 2009 Crime and Violence Prevention September 2009 Pastoral Care and Counseling October 2009 Substance Abuse November 2009 HIV/AIDS December 2009 <!-- .yalc-cls { width:255px; height:308px; padding: 0px !important; margin-bottom:15px; } .yalc-cls ul { list-style: none; margin: 0 0 0 0 !important; padding: 0; } .yalc-cls ul li { list-style: none; margin:0px; padding:0px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 0 no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 87px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px 0 no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -87px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 51px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -87px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -138px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 52px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -138px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -190px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 53px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -190px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -243px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 65px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -243px no-repeat; } --> HOME RESOURCES THE ONLINE FORUM TEACHING VIDEOS THE SPOTLIGHT CORNER 2013 Units Kwanzaa - Thursday, December 26, 2013 Watch Night - Tuesday, December 31, 2013 Multimedia Videos Audios "
