" Lectionary Commentaries &amp;nbsp LECTIONARY COMMENTARY Sunday, November 15, 2009 Hyveth B. Williams, Guest Lectionary Commentator Senior Pastor Campus Hill Church ? A Seventh-day Adventist Community, Loma  Linda, CA and Doctor of Ministry Advisor at Andrews University Theological  Seminary, Berrien Spring, MI Lection ? Ephesians 2:14-22 (New Revised Standard Version) ) For he is our peace; in his flesh he has made both groups into one and  has broken down the dividing wall, that is, the hostility between us. )  He has abolished the law with its commandments and ordinances, so that he might  create in himself one new humanity in place of the two, thus making peace, 6) and might reconcile both groups to God in one body through the cross, thus  putting to death that hostility through it. ) So he came and proclaimed  peace to you who were far off and peace to those who were near; ) for  through him both of us have access in one Spirit to the Father. ) So then  you are no longer strangers and aliens, but you are citizens with the saints  and also members of the household of God, ) built upon the foundation of  the apostles and prophets, with Christ Jesus himself as the cornerstone. 1) In him the whole structure is joined together and grows into a holy temple  in the Lord; ) in whom you also are built together spiritually into a  dwelling-place for God. I. Description of the Liturgical Moment A community is generally defined as a group of people, or organisms, living in  and sharing the same environment, interests, beliefs, resources and purpose. A  number of other conditions may be present and common, such as being perceived  or perceiving itself as distinct in some respect from the larger society in  which it exists. With the advent of globalization, a 21st century definition of  community must also include diversity even as it eschews homogeneity. As I write, the first African American President of the United States has taken  office. He has also announced his cabinet in an unprecedented approach to  leadership that promises significant change during the worst global economy and  terrorist climate in history. On him are pinned the hopes of many who have  dreamed that the pernicious disease of racism will be eradicated from the soul  of our nation. This great man of courage stands calm and firm, deeply rooted in  the knowledge that it is his God-ordained moment to be all that he was created  to be for himself, his family and ?we the people,? whom he has been called to  serve. His election ushers in the opportunity of an unparalleled time of  healing and bridging communities. It is also a favorable time for the African  American church to effectively model a Biblical reconciliation that is greater  than the moderate accomplishments of the larger Christian Church. II. Biblical Interpretation for Preaching and Worship: Ephesians 2:14-22 Part One: The Contemporary Contexts of the Interpreter In Christianity, emphasis is placed on sharing, participation and fellowship  according to a common life and rules (Acts 2:41-47) in communities. The  congregation I serve is blessed with people representing sixty-five nations.  The flags of these nations adorn our sanctuary platform in a powerful symbol of  unity in diversity. These flags represent more than national pride; they are a  testimony in microcosm that the longed-for ?healing of the nations? promised in  Revelation 22:2 is taking root in various communities. They also express the  earnest commitment to bridging communities so that people of a variety of  ethnicities experience reconciliation with God and each other. Part Two: Biblical Commentary The Apostle Paul addressed this epistle to a very cosmopolitan audience in the  eastern Mediterranean, where Oriental and Occidental culture and religion  convened. For Paul, preaching the gospel of Christ in the ancient world normally began  among the Jews (Acts 18:19; 19:8). It is, therefore, reasonable to conclude  that they were well represented among the converts in Ephesus but, according to  reports in Acts, the contemporary conditions of prejudice often resulted in  conflicts rather than reconciliation of Jews and gentiles. Expulsion of  believers from synagogues and even violence and imprisonment of evangelists  occurred regularly. So intense were some of these cultural and racial tensions  that Paul himself was arrested and condemned by the Jews in Jerusalem on the  basis of a trumped up charge that he took an Ephesian, Trophimus, into the  temple. He was accused of defiling their holy place by this conduct (Acts  21:27-33).  Perhaps these and other mitigating conditions form the basis  of the theme in this pericope that is undeniably a call for unity in diversity. The cause of human estrangement from God and alienation from each other is sin.  The ancient rabbis, however, taught that it was a sign of the loss of divine  favor. They spoke of gentiles who were far from the privileges of the covenant  people of God as being ?made nigh? only as proselytes. 1 They negated  the truth that Christ gave himself as a sacrifice for the sin of the whole  world (Jn. 3:16; 12:32; 2 Cor. 5:19; 1 Jn. 2:2). But, Paul, a Jew (Phil.  2:5-6), speaks of a far greater, more fundamental and wonderful way to approach  equality - ? by the blood of Christ ? (Eph. 2:13). For instance,  converted gentiles and all people disenfranchised by race, class or creed, have  moved from being ?without Christ?  to being ?in Christ Jesus,? having  found new life in him. Consequently, those who had been far off from  God, with a great gulf dividing them from his covenant people, were made nigh in him whose life, death and resurrection has broken down all humanly  constructed barriers to unity in communities. In verse 14, Paul was obviously preoccupied with what, to him, was the greatest  division of all that separated Jews and gentiles - a dividing wall ,  that is, the hostility between them , both literally and spiritually.  The barrier was obvious in the temple proper and the Court of the Gentiles in  Jerusalem. There, a stone wall bore an inscription in Greek and Latin ?which  forbade any foreigner to go in, under pain of death.? 2 This caused a  great deal of conflict and, sometimes, even violent protests leading to  imprisonment or death for Jews and gentiles alike. Paul happily asserts that, ?Race and national distinctions as the main things of  importance, vanish in Christ,? 3 and are replaced by ?peace.? Not  only can it or should it be said that Christ brings peace into the human  experience, He is our peace then, now and always! Whatever may have  caused divisions before ? race,  class, or creed ? Jesus came to earth to  be the Prince of peace and reconciler (2 cor. 5:18) according to the prophets  who foretold his advent (Is. 9:6f; 53:5; Mi. 5:5; Hg. 2:9; Zc. 9:10). The  barriers of Judaism against gentiles, therefore, hold no significance as far as  the standing of any before God who made a way for the separated to become one  in Christ. In verse 16, the twin themes of reconciliation of humans to God  and to one another are inextricably intertwined throughout this passage and  underscored in this verse. Through the cross , on which Jesus died, the  hostility/enmity or sin was slain as he bore our  transgressions and made possible our forgiveness. He, therefore, reconciled not  only Jew and gentile but also all people of different divisions into a new  humanity in one body . In addition, in verses 17-18, Paul alludes to the words of the Prophet Isaiah  (3:7; 57:19) regarding the preaching of peace. Although these Old Testament  verses did not originally speak of the way of peace for gentiles, the Apostle  found apt application in them to this wonderful new reality in Christ. Paul  teaches us that just as peace was made real to all through the cross, now also,  through his Church and community of committed disciples, the message of peace  and reconciliation must be lived in the world. Paul adds that through Him , Christ, we have access . . . to the Father .  The Greek prosagoge ? ?access,? could also be translated as  ?introduction.? Through a prosagoge in oriental courts, a person was  brought into the presence of the king. Christ is our prosagoge through  whom there is a way, a door (Jn. 10:7, 9; 14:6), to God. By him, sinners of all  races who have been saved by grace through faith are reconciled and given the  privilege of coming boldly before the throne of God (Heb. 4:16) and say, ?Abba  Father? (Rom. 8:15). At verses 19-20, the Apostle specifically addresses the gentiles, speaking  emphatically of the change in their status and position. Before, in relation to  the covenant people of God, they were strangers- xenoi and aliens- paroikoi ,  i.e. people who might live in the same country without even superficial rights  or privileges of citizenship. That is ?no longer? the case, for ?you  are citizens with the saints and also members of the household of God.? Jesus referred to himself as the chief cornerstone (Mt. 21:42), the one  set in the foundation to bind the building together. Paul applied this building  metaphor to the community of believers, i.e., the Church, indicating that it  rests on the unique event of salvation of which Jesus Christ is the foundation. Within verses 21-22, the meaning of the word ?cornerstone? is made clear in that  it is in Christ that the whole structure is joined together and grows  into a holy temple, or an edifice fully framed together. It is a work  in progress. The Church cannot be described as a complete building until Jesus  comes again. Neither will reconciliation or the healing and bridging of  communities be accomplished in a day. We are, however, growing toward what is  the intended purpose of God. We see this truth more evidently as we note that  the actual word used for temple is not the general term ? hieron describing  the entire temple precincts, but naos , the inner shrine or special  meeting-place between God and the people of God. Naas was the most  holy place where the presence and glory of God were visibly manifested in the  Shekinah. When Christ came, he became the Word made flesh and dwelt among  humans (John 1:14; 2:19-21) making the temple obsolete as the divine dwelling  among us. Today, he makes his habitation in the hearts and lives of those who  allow him entrance by his Spirit (1 Cor. 6:19). Celebration This passage is cause for the people of God to rejoice that God is reconciling,  healing and bridging communities in both the spiritual and natural world. God  is doing what some believed would never be possible in America. No, everything  is not perfect, but thanks be to God for the changes that have come.  The  house of America?s political leader, a house built by slaves, is now home to a  black man. Churches that were once segregated by toxic history, and age-old  suspicions, are worshipping together and bridging divides and the more we come  together in church, the more we can come together outside of church. Descriptive Details The descriptive details in this passage include: Sounds: The echoes of bulldozers breaking down ancient walls  and partitions/fences/hedges of prejudice. The noise of spears being hammered  into instruments of peace, in the organism in which Christ is the foundation.  This sound is accompanied by shouts of joy as all people receive the good news  of reconciliation; Sights: Standing outside the text in our generation, one cannot  help but observe old prejudiced, jaded and jaundiced eyes that are forced to  watch the new relationships between Jews and gentiles in a world where people  are allowed to marry, worship and work together in unity. We are eyewitnesses  of a new equality where Christ is Peacemaker between races, classes and  nations; and Smells: The fragrant aroma (Eph. 5:2) of salvation which, when  inhaled, transforms the heart, soul mind and body. Reconciliation when applied  like a salve (Rev. 3:18) gives sight to eyes blinded by prejudice and, as a  second hand odor, is a perfume permeating society, bringing peace and healing  to communities. III. Other Sermonic Comments Two points emerge at the end of this passage. First, verse 21 ends with ?in the  Lord? and verse 22 ends with ?in the Spirit.? They emphasize what we know by  faith and experience, that it is only by a person being in Christ and the  Spirit that we become habitations where God can dwell. Second, we are reminded  how far removed the Apostle?s inspired thought is from our individualistic  concepts. His thoughts dwell on the community of Christians as the ?holy  temple,? one organism indwelt by the living Christ, and not a series of  fragmented, conflicted denominations. Unity, from Paul?s perspective, is not a matter of organization, but of the  sharing of the life, duties and ideals of the Church. In this passage he calls  believers from the old way of thinking and behaving, and away from that which  hindered full expression of cooperation. He puts away personal rivalries to  bring about real reconciliation and true healing in the family/communities of  God. Notes 1. Quotation from the Rabbinical writings in Ephesians and Colossians . The  International Critical Commentaries . T.K. Abbott, 1899. p. 60. 2. Josephus Antiquities VIII. 3:2 and The Wars of the Jews v.  5, vi. 2.4. Such an inscription was also reported to have been discovered by  the French archaeologist M. Cleremont Ganneau in 1871. 3. Robertson, Thomas. Archibald. Word Pictures in The New Testament: Vol.  IV,  The Epistles of Paul . Nashville, TN: Broadman Press, 1931. p.  536. &amp;nbsp The BIG IDEA (2009) Homelessness January 2009 Literacy and Education February 2009 Economic Empowerment March 2009 Ministering to Persons Who Have Disabilities and Special Needs April 2009 Affordable Housing May 2009 Health and Wellness June 2009 Prison Ministy July 2009 Innovative Worship August 2009 Crime and Violence Prevention September 2009 Pastoral Care and Counseling October 2009 Substance Abuse November 2009 HIV/AIDS December 2009 <!-- .yalc-cls { width:255px; height:308px; padding: 0px !important; margin-bottom:15px; } .yalc-cls ul { list-style: none; margin: 0 0 0 0 !important; padding: 0; } .yalc-cls ul li { list-style: none; margin:0px; padding:0px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 0 no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 87px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px 0 no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -87px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 51px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -87px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -138px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 52px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -138px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -190px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 53px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -190px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -243px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 65px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -243px no-repeat; } --> HOME RESOURCES THE ONLINE FORUM TEACHING VIDEOS THE SPOTLIGHT CORNER 2013 Units Kwanzaa - Thursday, December 26, 2013 Watch Night - Tuesday, December 31, 2013 Multimedia Videos Audios "
