" Lectionary Commentaries &amp;nbsp MARTYRS? SUNDAY (ALL SAINTS DAY) (REMEMBERING SLAIN HEROES AND HEROINES) LECTIONARY COMMENTARY *I  Remember I Believe By Bernice Johnson Reagon I don?t know how my mother walked her trouble down I don?t know how my father stood his ground I don?t know how my people survive slavery I do remember, that?s why I believe I don?t know why the rivers over flow their banks I don?t know why the snow falls and covers the ground I don?t know why the hurricane sweeps through the land every now and then Standing in a rainstorm, I believe I don?t know why the angels woke me up this morning soon I don?t know why the blood still runs through my veins I don?t know how I rate to run another day I am here still running, I believe My God calls to me in the morning dew The power of the universe knows my name Gave me a song to sing and sent me on my way I raise my voice for justice I believe Sunday, November 1, 2009 Lewis Brogdon, Jr., Guest Lectionary Commentator Ph.D. Student in Renewal Studies at Regent University, Virginia Beach, VA Lection - Revelation 7:13-17 (New Revised Standard Version) ) Then one of the elders addressed me, saying, ?Who are these, robbed in  white, and where have they come from?? ) I said to him, ?Sir you are the  one that knows.? Then he said to me, ?These are they who have come out of the  great ordeal; and they have washed their robes and made them white in the blood  of the Lamb. ) For this reason, they are before the throne of God: and  they worship him day and night within his temple, and the one who is seated on  the throne will shelter them. ) They will hunger no more, and thirst no  more; the sun will not strike them, nor any scorching heat; ) for the  Lamb at the center of the throne will be their shepherd, and he will guide them  to springs of the water of life; and God will wipe away every tear from their  eyes.? I. Description of the Liturgical Moment Martyrs? Sunday is a time that commemorates those whose lives have been lost for  the cause of justice and righteousness. In the New Testament, a martyr was one  who, in life, bore witness to their faith in Christ and was celebrated once  they died. In early Christian history, martyrs were those who lost their lives  during imperial persecution because of their devotion to Jesus Christ. In the African American religious tradition, Martyrs? Sunday is a special day  that celebrates the fine line that our people have walked between life and  death and how meaning has been carved out of experiences that were meant to  destroy our people. This liturgical moment, like many special days in the life  of the African American faith community, is a somber and yet celebrative time;  because, through the years, there have been so many painful goodbyes?but, this  text testifies to what so many of our foreparents knew, in spite of the  goodbyes here, on the other side, all martyrs for the faith will receive a  triumphant welcome, because they have overcome the world. II. Biblical Interpretation for Preaching and Worship: Revelation 7:13-17 Part One: The Contemporary Contexts of the Interpreter Though there was, is, and always will be cause for celebration for the  accomplishments and achievements that blacks have made in America, the 400 year  sojourn of blacks in America has been overwhelmingly painful. Slavery,  characterized by dehumanization and economic exploitation, as well as decades  of segregation and legalized oppression, has left the black community  permanently scarred. In the midst of this painful history, countless lives have  been lost, especially the lives of my black brothers?many whose blood has paved  the way for African American advancement. My brothers have been whipped,  gagged, hunted with dogs, lynched, harassed, beaten, miseducated, and  incarcerated, during ?the great tribulation.? In my life, I have said goodbye to a father and grandfather, in their early 50s.  I spent my formative years in the projects in Virginia and have seen my friends  from those projects either arrested or dead before age 30. Being a black male  in America, from the 1600s to the present, has included far too much  familiarity with trouble or in the words of our text, ?the great tribulation.? Part Two: Biblical Commentary The book of Revelation represents the culmination and consummation of God?s  redemptive work in the world through the work of Jesus Christ. It was written  sometime between 92-96 CE by John, who was exiled on the isle of Patmos during  the reign of Emperor Domitian. Interestingly, the book combines apocalyptic  literature with epistolary and prophetic segments woven throughout the text. As  an apocalyptic text, it represents a genre that employs symbols, numbers, and  figurative language to conceal its message to its enemies, as well as to  authentically reveal the truth of God?s victory over oppression and all forms  of evil. As a prophetic text, it includes sections that contain references to  prophetic figures, oracles, messages of judgment for oppressors, and hope for  the oppressed. Theologically, the book of Revelation addresses human suffering  in the world, the mystery of divine providence, judgment of evil, and victory.  In other words, this apocalyptic text speaks a word about tribulation (trouble)  in the world. The Scene The heavenly scene described in Revelation 7 is a dramatic and powerful  depiction of the central truth of the apocalypse of Jesus Christ. A great  multitude stands before John, as a witness that trouble does not always last.  In Revelation 7:9, John sees a multitude ?that no one could count from every  nation, from all tribes and peoples and languages.? As a result, he asks two  questions: who are these people and where did they come from? This week?s  passage also contains images of victory: coming out of tribulation, having  one?s robe washed in the blood of the lamb 14), and a multitude before  the throne of God serving God continually 15). In addition, there are  heavenly images that tell us that the righteous will abide under the tabernacle  of God :15-16) and experience the Lamb of God as shepherd 17). The Social Situation Aspects of apocalyptic literature reflect and resonate with the black  experience. Like John on the island of Patmos, we know what it is like to  experience exile and imperial oppression. Africans of the Diaspora have faced  unjust political, social, and religious power over the course of our 400 year  sojourn in America. Revelation?s message of facing darkness with hope, because  of eschatological realities, is meaningful in the black religious tradition. In  the black Pentecostal-Holiness tradition of my formative years, we used to sing  a song that says, ?I Am So Glad That Trouble Don?t Last Always.? This song  seems to strike at the heart of the message of the book of Revelation. Trouble  in this world happens, just as Jesus said it would. In fact, in the Johannine  literature tribulation or overcoming tribulation in the world is often  mentioned (John 16:33; 1 John 5:5; 2 John 7; 3 John 10-11; Revelation 2:9-10,  3:10). In this tradition, faith in Christ is not an exemption from adversity.  However, the book of Revelation reinforces the message of this song: that  trouble does not have the final word, because Jesus has overcome the world.  Revelation serves as a fitting conclusion to the New Testament canon, because  it makes clear that trouble does have an ending date. The Identity of the Martyrs On Martyrs? Sunday (All Saints Day), as we commemorate our heroes and heroines  whose lives were lost for the faith, it is good to know that among the  multitude stand a host of black ancestors who now don robes of glory. Who are  these people--these martyrs? They are the thousands upon thousands of captured  Africans who died in the mid-Atlantic, the African slaves who were mercilessly  killed at the hands of brutal slave masters, the thousands killed during the  Jim Crow years, the thousands who died and continue to die because of the  vicious cycles of poverty and violence that eat at our inner cities and rural  towns. Finally, and most importantly, they are those who have called on the  name of Jesus Christ, who is both the Lamb of God and king of the heavenly  host. John saw them standing before the Lord on that glorious day. In the  world, they were called ?nobodies.? History does not even remember, nor record,  many of their names, but they are somebody in the eyes of God. In the eyes of  the Almighty, they are children of the Most High God. In this text, they are  clothed in robes of victory. The Location and Legacy of the Martyrs The second question, ?Where did they come from?? is significant in this  apocalyptic text. In this text, both persecution and oppression are carried out  by corrupt officials of the Roman Empire. This multitude is unique, because  they have come out of the great tribulation. It is an interesting fact that  both the church of the first century and the black church faced imperial  persecution and oppression. What is even more significant about this connection  is that we know that the early Church was not crushed under the weight of  unjust and abusive political power. The witness of the first century church  serves as a source of encouragement to the black church whenever it faces  tribulation: the instruments of hell (economic oppression, unequal justice, and  ?spiritual wickedness in high places?) will not prevail. Celebration Revelation 7:14 describes the multitude in words that elicit a celebrative  response. The elder says, these are the ones who came out of the great  tribulation. A central part of the mystery and genius of black spirituality is  the ability to use celebration in a way that imparts strength for the journey  ahead. Black spirituality does not celebrate the fact that there is injustice  in the world. Instead, black spirituality accepts the fact that the great  tribulation will be faced by the faithful and boldly asserts that one is  neither defined by tribulation nor confined to tribulation. God?s people go  through and come out of tribulation. Why? Because trouble don?t last always. Descriptive Details The descriptive details in this passage include: Elders - John turns to one of the elders and asks for  understanding about the great multitude. In the African and African American  cultures, elders are prominent figures who provide insight, wisdom, and  oversight. Elders remind us of the importance of the wisdom of the ancestors. People clothed in white robes - Black martyrs clothed in white  robes is a particularly problematic image, because the color white has been  used in ways to reinforce white supremacy, while simultaneously demonizing the  color black. Great care needs to be taken when employing this image. For  example, it should be explained to listeners that the use of the term white, in  this context, does not in any way relate to race or ethnicity. Washing robes - This evokes images of the days of slavery and  reconstruction. The blood of the Lamb - This is arguably the most important  image in the passage, because it reminds readers that coming out of the  tribulation is only possible because of the shed blood of Jesus Christ on the  cross. The great multitude overcame because they not only persevered in the  face of persecution and oppression, they believed in Jesus Christ. The efficacy  and the necessity of the shed blood of Jesus is a truth that must remain  central in black preaching. Hunger no more/Thirst no more - This powerful image reminds  readers of the economic and social conditions of most blacks in America. Many  know about hunger and thirst, because African Americans are socially deprived  and inordinately experience poverty. Scorching heat - (It reads ?sun beat down? in the NAS version.)  This brings to mind another powerful image from the days of slavery when our  ancestors worked in the cotton, indigo, rice, and tobacco fields, under  heat-stroke causing temperatures. III . Recommendations for the Study of Revelation Commentaries on Revelation: Blount, Brian K. Can I Get A Witness: Reading Revelation through African American  Culture . Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox, 2005. Mounce, Robert. New International Commentary on the New Testament: The Book of  Revelation . Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans Publishing, 1998. Kistemaker, Simon J. New Testament Commentaries: Revelation . Grand  Rapids, MI: Baker Books, 2001. Morris, Leon. Tyndale New Testament Commentaries: Revelation . Grand  Rapids, MI: Eerdmans Publishing, 1994. *Bernice Johnson Reagon. ?I Remember, I Believe.? Special thanks to Dr. Reagon  for the use of this song in print and audio. &amp;nbsp The BIG IDEA (2009) Homelessness January 2009 Literacy and Education February 2009 Economic Empowerment March 2009 Ministering to Persons Who Have Disabilities and Special Needs April 2009 Affordable Housing May 2009 Health and Wellness June 2009 Prison Ministy July 2009 Innovative Worship August 2009 Crime and Violence Prevention September 2009 Pastoral Care and Counseling October 2009 Substance Abuse November 2009 HIV/AIDS December 2009 <!-- .yalc-cls { width:255px; height:308px; padding: 0px !important; margin-bottom:15px; } .yalc-cls ul { list-style: none; margin: 0 0 0 0 !important; padding: 0; } .yalc-cls ul li { list-style: none; margin:0px; padding:0px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 0 no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 87px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px 0 no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -87px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 51px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -87px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -138px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 52px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -138px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -190px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 53px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -190px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -243px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 65px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -243px no-repeat; } --> HOME RESOURCES THE ONLINE FORUM TEACHING VIDEOS THE SPOTLIGHT CORNER 2013 Units Kwanzaa - Thursday, December 26, 2013 Watch Night - Tuesday, December 31, 2013 Multimedia Videos Audios "
