" Lectionary Commentaries &amp;nbsp FIRST SUNDAY OF ADVENT &amp; WORLD AIDS DAY LECTIONARY COMMENTARY Sunday, November 29, 2009 Delman Coates, Guest Lectionary Commentator Pastor, Mt. Ennon Baptist Church, Clinton, MD Lection ? Isaiah 60:19-22 &amp; Matthew 22:34-40 (New Revised  Standard Version) Isaiah 60:19-22  The sun shall no longer be your light by day, nor for brightness  shall the moon give light to you by night; but the Lord will be your  everlasting light, and your God will be your glory. ) Your sun shall  no more go down, or your moon withdraw itself; for the Lord will be your  everlasting light, and your days of mourning shall be ended. ) Your  people shall all be righteous; they shall possess the land forever. They are  the shoot that I planted, the work of my hands, so that I might be glorified.  ) The least of them shall become a clan, and the smallest one a  mighty nation; I am the Lord; in its time I will accomplish it quickly. Matthew 22:34-40 ) When the Pharisees heard that he had silenced the Sadducees, they  gathered together,  and one of them, a lawyer, asked him a question to  test him ) ?Teacher, which commandment in the law is the greatest?? 7) He said to him, ?You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and  with all your soul, and with all your mind. ) This is the greatest and  first commandment. ) And a second is like it: ?You shall love your  neighbor as yourself.? ) On these two commandments hang all the law and  the prophets.? I. Description of the Liturgical Moment The World Health Organization established the observance of World AIDS Day in  1988 to help government and non-profit organizations increase awareness of the  HIV/AIDS epidemic. 1 It is observed annually on December 1. According  to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, there are 33.2 million  people worldwide living with HIV/AIDS. 2 In the United States,  approximately 38% of the AIDS deaths are among African Americans. 3 In recent years, African American church leaders have made a more concerted  effort to educate their congregations on the impact of HIV/AIDS in the African  American community. These efforts involve addressing the general silence within  many churches about HIV/AIDS, its transmission, and matters of sex and  sexuality more broadly. Advent marks the season on the Christian calendar for celebrating the birth of  Jesus Christ. Advent, which means ?coming? or ?arrival,? is a time of hope and  anticipation. As Christian churches celebrate the hope embodied in the birth of  Jesus Christ, they simultaneously anticipate his return to reconcile the world  to God. This dual celebration of past and future reminds us that Christ has  already come as our hope of salvation, that he is among us in the world today  as our source of comfort and strength, and that he will come again to reign in  victory with all power in his hands. 4 The union of World AIDS Day and the First Sunday of Advent is fitting because it  enables clergy leaders to relate the hope of God in Christ to the experience of  those living with HIV/AIDS. Observing Advent and World AIDS Day at the same  time provides a perfect opportunity for the church to show the depths of God?s  love and the breadth of God?s saving grace for all of God?s children. II. Biblical Interpretation for Preaching and Worship: Isaiah 60:19-22 Part One: The Contemporary Contexts of the Interpreter As pastor of a traditional black Baptist church, I am acutely aware of the  social stigmas surrounding HIV/AIDS. This is in large part buttressed by the  general theological conservatism in the pulpit and in the pews, particularly on  issues of human sexuality, and sexual health and responsibility. I have  attempted to address this in a variety of ways.  First, I have sought to  give members a broader set of theological and interpretive tools for responding  to complex social issues. Secondly, I look for opportunities to dispel latent  assumptions about ?who? has HIV/AIDS, and who is likely to contract it. In one  sermon, for example, I mentioned that with the availability of male enhancement  drugs in recent years (and we all know the brands), seniors represented one of  the fastest growing groups contracting HIV/AIDS as unprotected sexual activity  increases among seniors. 5 By modeling a culture of compassion, I  have found more and more of my members approaching me about their struggles  dealing HIV/AIDS in their families. This led me to start an annual HIV/AIDS  Awareness Day in our church to help equip members with the necessary resources  to address this issue with compassion. Part Two: Biblical Commentary The first Sunday in Advent traditionally represents expectation, hope, or  prophecy (in some traditions). It is a time when the church not only celebrates  the hope of the coming Christ, but also yearns for healing and deliverance of a  fallen and broken world. 6 Consequently, on this Sunday, African  American churches, in anticipation of the coming Messiah, reflect on the wounds  of the world that encompass sickness, war, injustice, discrimination, poverty,  oppression, and all manner of evil. The anticipation of the coming Messiah, however, is not a time for prayer and  reflection alone; but rather, the church must take an active role in reaching  out to those who are crying out under the weight of despair. Many in the  African American community who are living with HIV/AIDS have lost hope. They  are disillusioned by the rejection of many African American churches. They face  unimaginable fear and misinformation around HIV/AIDS. They are despairing over  endless doctor?s appointments, challenges in securing medication, and  complications associated with the disease. Moreover, many feel isolated and  stigmatized by their families and their communities. They are dogged by one  challenge after another. Isaiah 60 has a word for them?God has not forgotten  us. The general scholarly consensus is that the Book of Isaiah was written by  multiple authors and subject to extensive redaction. The ?author(s)? of Isaiah  60 are commonly referred to as Trito-Isaiah or Third Isaiah, and the chapter  contains prophetic interpretations of historical events expressed as poetic  visions of the unfolding of God?s plan for the restoration of Jerusalem. The  statement in verse 21, ?They are the shoot I have planted, the work of my  hands? lends credence to the assertion that these prophetic visionary  descriptions are based upon actual historical events. While it is difficult to  precisely locate Isaiah 60:19-22, its poetic language should be read against  the backdrop of Jewish efforts to return and rebuild Jerusalem amidst a host of  spiritual challenges from within the community, and a myriad of social  challenges from without. Despites these challenges, Isaiah 60 encourages God?s people to take  responsibility for their own actions, while reminding them of God?s promises to  the covenant community.  Third Isaiah reminds returning exiles to hold on  to their mission as a light to the world because God has not forgotten them. Verses 19-22 return to the imagery of light and glory present at the beginning  of the chapter. This writer provides a glimpse into the future glory of Zion  when Israel will arise out of her darkness because the Lord will be the light  for the returned exiles. The restoration of God?s people in the city of peace  comes as the reign of God brings righteousness, prosperity, and hope. It is  important that the word ?righteous? in verse 21 not be interpreted in light of  Protestant theological definitions or ideas of justification.  Here, the  writer is in all likelihood envisioning an idyllic age when the entire  community of God?s people is vindicated by God. This will be a great time of  rejoicing, for in the New Jerusalem there will be no more suffering, no more  sickness, no more trials, and no more tribulations. The New Jerusalem will  serve as the light to all nations. As a result, there will be no need for the  sun or the moon to continue on its cycle because the glory of God will be their  everlasting light. These verses conclude with the assertion that God is active  in human history because the Lord ?will accomplish this quickly.? In our second passage, Matthew 22:34-40, Jesus has just confounded the Sadducees  with his teaching on the question of the resurrection. They were attempting to  determine whether the teachings of Jesus contradicted the teachings of Moses.  In like manner, the Pharisees now seek to aggressively interrogate Jesus about  another highly debated theological question of the day. Their query had to do  with which of the many commandments in the Law of Moses was the greatest. These  religious scholars were accustomed to categorizing the Mosaic laws in a manner  that would enable them to privilege the more important or ?greater? laws, and  regard as secondary those of lesser importance. The Pharisees sought to engage  Jesus in one of their many legal disputes with hopes of getting him to deny or  usurp the authority of Moses. Doing so would enable them to discredit Jesus in  the eyes of the people. Contrary to their expectations, Jesus roots his response within the Mosaic legal  tradition by subordinating the entire framework of the Law to two related  commandments. The first commandment comes from the Shema , the Jewish  confession of faith found in Deuteronomy 6:5, and emphasizes the responsibility  of God?s people to love God with their entire being. The second commandment is  a quote from Leviticus 19:18, and emphasizes the responsibility of God?s people  to show their love of God by loving their neighbor. This commitment to the  ethic of love is not just emotional, but is behavioral and involves the total  self. Jesus? response makes the case that the essence of true religion is not in  religious debate and disputation, but rather manifests itself in caring for the  welfare of others. All of the other ceremonial and moral laws are met through  the application of these two commandments. Love, not meticulous ritual  observance, becomes the guiding theological principle for evaluating the  spiritual life. With that said, the reader should avoid the tendency to place  Love and Law in opposition as is common in some theological readings of this  text. Instead, the principle here is that God?s Law is the law of Love. They  are inseparable. Challenge Regardless of one?s theological stance on matters of sex and sexuality, the  question becomes whether clergy leaders can develop a language of love and a  culture of compassion in the church where people can receive help, hope, and  healing. Every African American congregation should have an awareness  initiative that focuses on education, prevention, provides HIV/AIDS screening,  and/or establishes a community of support for those living with or supporting  loved ones with the disease. Pastors and clergy leaders can also set the  example by getting tested before their members, and encouraging parishioners to  get tested as well. This is a season of change. Let us end the stigma and stop  the silence around HIV/AIDS so that we can stop its spread. Descriptive Details Isaiah 60 and Matthew 22 have the following descriptive features: Isaiah 60: 19-22: Sights : The sun and the moon ? the great luminaries of heaven  ); the light ? to illuminate ); day ? radiance ); brightness  ? the splendor, brilliant glorious appearance ); night ? darkness and  obscurity; glory- the brightness of the heavenly bodies ); a shoot - the  spiritual growth of Israel as the branch and God as the righteous vine );  the hand of God planting ? God has planted the nation on a firm foundation 1); Time : Everlasting - continuous existence ); forever ?  infinite ); Sounds : Mourning - sighing, groaning,  expression of grief or physical distress of Israel. Taste : The salty tears from Israel?s groanings ); and Direction : Down ? the light shone upon Israel shall not go down  or get dimmer ). Matthew 22: 34-40 Sounds : Silenced ? the hush of the Sadducees  in response to Jesus ); gathered ? the hurried assembling of the  Pharisees ); and Sights : Gathered ? the huddling of the  Pharisees ) greatest ? which command is highly significant ). III. Resources General Information Balm in Gilead, The Black Church Institute for HIV/AIDS. Online  location: www.balmingilead.org Fact sheets Download HIV/AIDS fact sheets then, post them on bulletin boards, share with  local newspapers, and distribute them at events! Online location: www.hhs.gov/aidsawarenessdays/days/black/index.html Read the CDC?s HIV Incidence data. Online location: www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/surveillance/incidence.htm Websites AIDS.gov : the gateway to Federal domestic  HIV/AIDS prevention, testing, treatment, research information. PEPFAR.gov : the official website of the  President?s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief. worldaidscampaign.org : for  brochures and information about events worldwide. Mobile Resource To find an HIV Testing location near you, send a text message with your zip  code to KNOWIT (566948) or visit www.hivtest.org . Notes 1. World Health Organization. ?Who and HIV/Aids.? Online location: http://www.who.int accessed 5 August 2009 2. United States. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Aids Awareness  Days. ?World Aids Day.? Online location: www.hhs.gov/aidsawarenessdays/days/world accessed 5 August 2009 3. The Avert organization. ?HIV and African Americans.? Online location: http://www.avert.org/hiv-african-americans.htm accessed 5 August 2009 4. Biddle, Perry H. Jr., Ed. Preaching the Lectionary: A Workbook for Year C .  Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox, 1991. p. 27 5. Entwisle, Stephen. ? HIV/AIDS and the Older Person .? Pdf online  location: http://www.aidscalgary.org/resources/publications.cfm ;  See also, ?Who is at Risk: Elderly.? Online location: http://www.aidscalgary.org/education/whoisatrisk/elderly.cfm accessed 5  August 2009 6. See Hessel, Dieter T., Ed. Social Themes on the Christian Year: A Commentary  on the Lectionary . Philadelphia, PA: Geneva, 1983; and Preaching and  Worshipping in Advent, Christmas, and Epiphany . Nashville, TN:  Abingdon, 2005. pp. 163-169. &amp;nbsp The BIG IDEA (2009) Homelessness January 2009 Literacy and Education February 2009 Economic Empowerment March 2009 Ministering to Persons Who Have Disabilities and Special Needs April 2009 Affordable Housing May 2009 Health and Wellness June 2009 Prison Ministy July 2009 Innovative Worship August 2009 Crime and Violence Prevention September 2009 Pastoral Care and Counseling October 2009 Substance Abuse November 2009 HIV/AIDS December 2009 <!-- .yalc-cls { width:255px; height:308px; padding: 0px !important; margin-bottom:15px; } .yalc-cls ul { list-style: none; margin: 0 0 0 0 !important; padding: 0; } .yalc-cls ul li { list-style: none; margin:0px; padding:0px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 0 no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 87px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px 0 no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -87px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 51px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -87px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -138px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 52px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -138px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -190px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 53px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -190px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -243px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 65px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -243px no-repeat; } --> HOME RESOURCES THE ONLINE FORUM TEACHING VIDEOS THE SPOTLIGHT CORNER 2013 Units Kwanzaa - Thursday, December 26, 2013 Watch Night - Tuesday, December 31, 2013 Multimedia Videos Audios "
