" Lectionary Commentaries &amp;nbsp WOMEN?S DAY LECTIONARY COMMENTARY Sunday, September 27, 2009 Cynthia Rembert James, Guest Lectionary Commentator Pastor, Landmark Ministries, Oakland, CA Lection ? 2 Chronicles 9:1-9 (New Revised  Standard Version)  When the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came to  Jerusalem to test him with hard questions, having a very great retinue and  camels bearing spices and very much gold and precious stones. When she came to  Solomon, she discussed with him all that was on her mind.  Solomon  answered all her questions; there was nothing hidden from Solomon that he could  not explain to her.  When the queen of Sheba had observed the wisdom of  Solomon, the house that he had built,  the food of his table, the seating  of his officials, and the attendance of his servants, and their clothing, his  valets and their clothing, and his burnt-offerings that he offered at the house  of the Lord, there was no more spirit left in her.  So she said to the king, ?The report was true that I heard in my own  land of your accomplishments and of your wisdom,  but I did not believe  the reports until I came and my own eyes saw it. Not even half of the greatness  of your wisdom had been told to me; you far surpass the report that I had  heard.  Happy are your people! Happy are these your servants, who  continually attend you and hear your wisdom!  Blessed be the Lord your  God, who has delighted in you and set you on his throne as king for the Lord  your God. Because your God loved Israel and wished to establish them forever,  he has made you king over them, so that you may execute justice and  righteousness.?  Then she gave the king one hundred and twenty talents of  gold, a very great quantity of spices, and precious stones: there were no  spices such as those that the queen of Sheba gave to King Solomon. I. Description of the Liturgical Moment The idea and purpose of Women?s Day was presented by Nannie Helen Burroughs, a  courageous, visionary and bold dreamer, devoted to assisting black women and  girls in developing their biblical and technical skills. Burroughs tied  education and skill preparation to improving possibilities for gainful  employment. She presented her plan for Women?s Day to the National Baptist  Convention in Memphis, Tennessee in September 1906. Burrough?s work, to which she attached the theme ?Know and Grow,? eventually led  to the purchase of several properties and the founding of a series of training  schools for women and girls in Washington, D.C., in 1907 and 1909. Today, the  Burroughs school boasts 125 students with instruction in biblical studies and  an impressive core curriculum. 1 This lone woman?s tireless efforts  and determination created an enterprising legacy of economic empowerment,  educational scholarship and social influence for future generations. Women?s Day in the African American church became a metaphor for women trained  for public speaking, authentic leadership and, participation in the activities  and programs of the black church. Burroughs? simple proposal for a special day  has had profound untold impact, inspiring women and broadening the reach of the  black church. II. Biblical Interpretation for Preaching and Worship: 2 Chronicles 9:1-9 Part One: The Contemporary Contexts of the Interpreter Historically, Women?s Day within African American churches has been an annual  day of celebration. A day when women dressed uniformly in white confidently  demonstrated their ability to conduct worship services and raise money. I can  vividly recall the starched white dresses or the linen white suits of the women  with corsages neatly pinned over their hearts. Suddenly, women viewed  exclusively as homemakers led the worship service with great pride and  equivalent pomp. Often, Women?s Day included a rally or stewardship component  where the women sought to exceed the funds raised on Men?s Day. Women?s Day  Services, in their original as well as in their modern form, tangibly point to  the equality of persons in the family of God. In today?s context, the fact that women seek and receive the endorsement of the  two main political parties for top offices in the country and numerous  mainstream church denominations have officially endorsed and elevated women to  top ecclesiastical positions has an undeniable bearing on how this passage is  viewed. The sense of destiny and leadership for women is evident, whether  reading about Nannie Burroughs? work, former Secretary of State Condoleezza  Rice or the Queen of Sheba, each of whom epitomizes Burroughs?s motto, ?Know  and Grow.? Each is best viewed as more than a single woman; each represents a  world of giftedness and treasure. A world of possibility awaits those who  prepare and pursue learning even when it leads them through unfamiliar venues. Burroughs and the Queen of Sheba mirror the same type of passionate pursuit  which reaps a world of wisdom and increase for future generations. The text  reveals a tenacious sense of personal responsibility in the face of  extraordinary obstacles. The Queen of Sheba had to travel a great distance with  her caravan in order to quench her thirst for wisdom. Her desire to see and  hear Solomon with her own eyes and ears is commendable. Consequently, she reaps  a harvest of influence. The queen both questioned and observed Solomon?s  kingdom. Using these methods, she tested his reputation and confirmed that his  wisdom far exceeded its reputation. Part Two: Biblical Commentary 2 Chronicles 9:1-9 provides information and numerous themes that can be  explored. The text underscores the importance of diligent seeking and study,  responsible inquiry, and generosity. The queen is independently wealthy, but  explores the kingdom of a more renowned leader, taking him gifts of spices and  precious stones. As with any leader, she must bring value to the table and, in  exchange, gains access and new wealth and knowledge. The queen was a Gentile  who was welcomed and received by the covenant Israelites. She returned to her own country armed with more than financial wealth. The myths  surrounding this queen abound. However, it is reasonable to surmise that the  queen was a conduit who carried the teachings of Judaism back to her homeland. 2 This passage encourages people, and particularly women, not to be confined to  traditional borders but to venture in search of new wisdom and relationships.  This Gentile queen is celebrated in the Old and New Testament and presented as  a model of those who listen rather than reject instruction. This occurs because  Solomon is willing to share his wisdom. Like Solomon, the Church should be  generous in sharing its principles and its wisdom. Some have suggested that the text was predictive of the Magi who would later  come bearing similar spices for the Christ child. The analogies are nearly  endless, as each level of review is rich with instruction for wealth  accumulation. This wealth, which includes education and power is to be shared.  The feature which most needs to be emulated is the Queen of Sheba?s willingness  to seek wisdom and the absolute necessity of wisdom as a quality of progressive  leadership. Burroughs said it best, ?Know and Grow.? The text emphasizes the queen?s coming followed by repeated actions, ??she came  to Jerusalem to test him... .? The imagery is rich with movement; e.g., camels  bearing spices, and gold and other precious stones. The dialogue between  Solomon and the Queen of Sheba has depth. Her observations were not limited to  any one sphere of Solomon?s kingdom. The queen observed the far-reaching and  shaping influence that wisdom had on the many levels of life and conduct.  Solomon?s house, his meals, his affiliations, those in his employ, their  clothing, conduct, values, and worship were all evidence of Solomon?s faith and  God-given wisdom. The implication is that one?s faith and spiritual wisdom  should inform every aspect of one?s life and the lives of those who come under  one?s influence. The text also suggests that the queen?s witness of Solomon?s wisdom was  transformative. The passage paints an atmosphere of cooperative exchange rather  than competitive envy-leaving both parties and countries enriched by the  dialogue and collaboration. The people themselves are also worth further exploration by those who would  preach and teach this text. Sheba was a wealthy country which had developed  longstanding trade routes. The people were believed to be tall, coarse-haired,  and straight-haired and possible descendants of the Cushites from Cush of the  Bible. The text is heavily laden with useable themes for Women?s Day. The most obvious  theme is to draw parallels between what Nannie Burroughs intended by creating  her, ?Know and Grow? plan, which encouraged women to nurture leadership in each  other; and the Queen of Sheba, who is a ready example for women in leadership  whose participation has traditionally been questioned. The text is equally  valuable as a tool for strengthening the presence and role of men and boys in  the family because of the complementarily way in which the two monarchs  related. Folklore has it that the bond between the two was a lasting and  enduring one. The strengthening of male and female roles is ultimately aimed at  strengthening the life of the family. This passage suggests that, although the Queen of Sheba had a strong sense of  enterprise and obvious savvy about cultures, travel, and politics, these skills  are insufficient without an adequate faith base which contributes to the  wholeness and health of an individual and his or her faith community. It is  also important to underscore the fact that the queen did not arrive  empty-handed. Quality leadership must be equipped to negotiate and have  something to offer as well as be able to receive from others. Leadership ideas  are prominent in this text. The queen was not fearful of questioning and she  clearly commanded the respect and attention of Solomon. One has the impression  that they met monarch to monarch not superior to subordinate. Artificial  barriers were overcome, and the two exchanged tangible and intangible wealth. This text may prompt those church venues which have not embraced women in equal  roles to re-examine their prejudices. The Queen of Sheba is even remembered by  Jesus. He references the Queen of Sheba in the New Testament and memorializes  her in perpetuity. The Queen of Sheba is mentioned as the ?Queen of the South?  in Matt. 12:42 and Luke 11:31, where Jesus indicates that she and the Ninevites  will judge the generation of Jesus? contemporaries who rejected his message. Celebration The Good News is that, in Jesus Christ, we have one who is greater than Solomon.  He bids us to tell him all of our heart ? to bring to him all of life?s  riddles. There is no searching his understanding, and he is altogether lovely,  nothing more could be desired of him. We do not have to travel far like the  Queen of Sheba; we merely have to open our hearts and minds and we too will  find that the half has never been told. If you give Christ the treasure of your  life, he will become the treasure of your heart. He will give us more than we  have to give him ? eternal life, and eternal joy. He is the King who reigns  forever and is faithful to reward those who diligently seek him. Descriptive Details The descriptive details in this passage include: Sights : Gold, frankincense, and myrrh; the  Queen of Sheba traveling with her great caravans; plush silks and robes;  elaborate clothing; endless rows of officials and militia belonging to  Solomon?s court; adoring crowds of people getting a glimpse of the king and  queen; long caravans loaded with treasures from Ethiopia or Yemen; coronet  players accompanying the parades through the streets; Sounds : The trampling of camels hoofs; the interchange of the  king?s merchants and the queen?s people as they exchange precious stones and  wood; the sound of music; and feasting as Solomon shows off his kingdom and his  wealth; and Smells : Fragrant spices; baking bread;  roasting meats; and the odor of perfumes. III. Additional Information for Preaching and Teaching The text is a marvelous springboard for challenging women from their homes or  traditional settings to explore new ventures and to use their learning for the  betterment of others. Women can testify to how the wisdom of women in their  lives has blessed them just as all of those in Solomon?s Kingdom were happier  or blessed because of his wise leadership. Wisdom scriptures say, ?Wisdom has built her house.? The pillars of wisdom  highlight characteristics of the Queen of Sheba: prudence, persistence,  courage, honesty, patience etc. Sermon Ideas: Compare and contrast the Queen of Sheba with the Ninevites. Compare the Queen of Sheba with the woman in Song of Solomon using folklore  references. Notes 1. Gantt, Alice. ?Women?s Day.? Permission granted for use by the Black  Congregational Ministries Committee, NCCCUSA. Copyright October 1995. 2. For details on myths and legends of the Queen of Sheba see, Pennacchietti,  Fabrizio A. Three Mirrors For Two Biblical Ladies Susanna and the Queen of Sheba  in the Eyes of Jew, Christians, and Muslims . Piscataway, NJ: Gorgias  Press, 2006; and Gartmer, Rosanne. Meet the Queen of Sheba . Valley  Forge, PA. Judson Press. 2001. pp.29-38. 3. On the Internet, information can be found at the following sites: Bird, Jerry W. ?In the Queen of Sheba?s Footsteps.? Africa Travel  Magazine . Online location: http://www.africa-ata.org/holyroute_3.htm accessed 3  March 2009; ?Exhibition: Treasures From Ancient Yemen.? Joseph Hotung  Great Court Gallery:British Museum . London WC 9. June-October 2002.  Online location: http://www.al-bab.com/yemen/data/sheba2002.htm accessed 3 March 2009;  ?The Dynasty of Moses and the Queen of Sheba.? Hope of Israel Ministries .  (Eccleasia of YEHOVAH). Online location: http://hope-of-israel.org/dynmoses.htm accessed 3 March 2009 Additional Reference: Budge, E. A. Wallis. The Queen of Sheba and Her Only Son Menyelek (I); Being the  ?Book of the Glory of Kings? (Kebra Nagast) a Work Which Is Alike the  Traditional History of the Establishment of the Religion of the Hebrews in  Ethiopia, and the Patent of Sovereignty Which Is Now Universally Accepted in  Abyssinia As the Symbol of the Divine Authority to Rule Which the Kings of the  Solomonic Line Claimed to Have Received Through Their Descent from the House of  David . Charleston, SC: BiblioBazaar, 2007. &amp;nbsp The BIG IDEA (2009) Homelessness January 2009 Literacy and Education February 2009 Economic Empowerment March 2009 Ministering to Persons Who Have Disabilities and Special Needs April 2009 Affordable Housing May 2009 Health and Wellness June 2009 Prison Ministy July 2009 Innovative Worship August 2009 Crime and Violence Prevention September 2009 Pastoral Care and Counseling October 2009 Substance Abuse November 2009 HIV/AIDS December 2009 <!-- .yalc-cls { width:255px; height:308px; padding: 0px !important; margin-bottom:15px; } .yalc-cls ul { list-style: none; margin: 0 0 0 0 !important; padding: 0; } .yalc-cls ul li { list-style: none; margin:0px; padding:0px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 0 no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 87px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px 0 no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -87px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 51px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -87px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -138px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 52px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -138px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -190px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 53px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -190px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -243px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 65px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -243px no-repeat; } --> HOME RESOURCES THE ONLINE FORUM TEACHING VIDEOS THE SPOTLIGHT CORNER 2013 Units Kwanzaa - Thursday, December 26, 2013 Watch Night - Tuesday, December 31, 2013 Multimedia Videos Audios "
