" Lectionary Commentaries &amp;nbsp SECOND SUNDAY OF ADVENT LECTIONARY COMMENTARY Sunday, December 6, 2009 Aaron L. Parker, Guest Lectionary Commentator Pastor, Zion Hill Baptist Church, Atlanta, GA and Associate Professor,  Morehouse College, Atlanta, GA Lection - Matthew 3:1-12 (New Revised Standard Version)  In those days John the Baptist appeared in the wilderness of Judea,  proclaiming,   ?Repent, for the kingdom of heaven has come near.?  This is the one of whom the prophet Isaiah spoke when he said, ?The voice  of one crying out in the wilderness: ?Prepare the way of the Lord, make his  paths straight.?? Now John wore clothing of camel?s hair with a leather  belt around his waist, and his food was locusts and wild honey. Then the  people of Jerusalem and all Judea were going out to him, and all the region  along the Jordan, and they were baptized by him in the river Jordan,  confessing their sins. But when he saw many Pharisees and Sadducees  coming for baptism, he said to them, ?You brood of vipers! Who warned you to  flee from the wrath to come? Bear fruit worthy of repentance. Do  not presume to say to yourselves, ?We have Abraham as our ancestor?; for I tell  you, God is able from these stones to raise up children to Abraham.  Even  now the ax is lying at the root of the trees; every tree therefore that does  not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.  I baptize you  with water for repentance, but one who is more powerful than I is coming after  me; I am not worthy to carry his sandals. He will baptize you with the Holy  Spirit and fire.  His winnowing fork is in his hand, and he will clear  his threshing floor and will gather his wheat into the granary; but the chaff  he will burn with unquenchable fire.? I. Description of the Liturgical Moment Derived from the Latin term ? adventus ? (or ?coming?), Advent is the  first season of the Christian liturgical year. Traditionally, it includes a  period covering four Sundays, beginning with the Sunday closest to November  30th and ending at sundown on Christmas Eve. As the word and the time period  suggest, Advent focuses on anticipating and preparing for the coming of Jesus,  the Christ. This sense of anticipation and preparation covers all three dimensions of time.  We look back to see and learn from the manner in which the first century  ancients longingly anticipated and prepared for the first coming of the  Messiah. We look now for ways in which the Anointed might appear in our current  circumstances. We also expect and get ready for a future manifestation of the  Christ of God in a world that still needs comforting, healing and  reconciliation. African Americans have historically had an earthy first-hand experience with  this idea of Advent. For enslaved Africans in the Antebellum South, ?Christmas  was the most festive holiday of all? because ?the slaves received three to six  days off to celebrate?? 1 Anticipation surely accompanied the  time period preceding this celebratory occasion. II. Biblical Interpretation for Preaching and Worship Part One: The Contemporary Contexts of the Interpreter For many Americans, particularly African Americans, a sense of anticipation akin  to that probably felt by those about whom the author of Matthew 3:1-12 wrote  loomed large in the period immediately prior to and following the historic  election of the first acknowledged African American President of the United  States of America, Barack Obama, on November 4, 2008. This heightened  anticipation was supported by at least three major factors: gross failures of  the preceding White House Administration; a worldwide economic crisis; and the  eloquent and pragmatic promises of hope from Mr. Obama. Many people of faith look to the new, young President to perform a task similar  to John?s, the eccentric figure in our text, by preparing the way for God to  address some of the most pressing issues of our day. This awesome task,  however, does not belong to him alone. We all must join President Obama and  John in this preparatory mission if we want to experience a fresh coming of the  Christ into our troubled and travailing times. Part Two: Biblical Commentary This text belongs to the introductory portion of Matthew?s teaching gospel.  Unlike Luke?s narrative, which provides religiously infused biographical  material on the principal character of this pericope (Luke: 1; 2), this  evangelist abruptly presents the raw, rustic personality, John the Baptist, as  the striking forerunner of the Messiah, Jesus. As forerunner, John serves as  the principal preparer for the coming of a new age wherein God?s will reigns in  the lives of those who accept God?s Christ. We may interpret his preparatory  role as taking on four forms in this text: a preparatory message, a preparatory  appearance, a preparatory critique, and a preparatory announcement. Ministering in a desert of the southern province of Judea, John delivered a preparatory  message of repentance -3) based upon the nearness of the  ?kingdom of heaven? (an equivalent term to the ?kingdom of God,? meaning the  domain or era of God?s perfect rule). His call to repent or to turn from  wantonness and wickedness prepares the way for God?s kingdom. It urges a  fatally flawed people to wrestle their attention away from a wayward, enslaving  lifestyle and to direct it toward the approaching age of God?s righteous,  liberating realm. This spiritually-charged activity, according to the  Isaiah-40:3, qualifies John as ?the voice of one crying out in the wilderness,?  who prepares the way for the Lord. John?s preparatory appearance  involves his countrified clothing  and simple, nature diet. His raiment of camel?s hair and a leather belt  immediately connects him with the prototype of Israelite prophecy, Elijah the  Tishbite (see II Kings 1:8). The food, locusts and wild honey, suggests his  utter dependence on God to provide sustenance, which likewise ties him to the  ninth century BCE  prophet, who had to rely on divinely-directed ravens  for survival by the brook Cherith (I Kings 17:4-6). This literary association  signals that John comes as a disturber of the peace ? that is, of the  pseudo-peace that is built on injustice, exploitation and idolatry. As an  Elijah-like figure he prepares the way for the coming Christ. This disturber role becomes even more evident in John?s overt preparatory  critique .  Representatives from two elite, normally opposing,  Jewish religious/political parties, the Pharisees and the Sadducees, show up in  the desert for baptism by John. Instead of baptizing them, however, John, as it  were, reads their ignoble intentions and greets them with a flagrant insult,  ?You brood of venomous snakes.? He then raises a rhetorical question,  challenging their sincerity. After this, he admonishes them to live lives  (?bear fruit?) that demonstrate the type of repentance about which he preaches.  Going immediately back into attack mode, John disparages their claims of  privilege as supposed ?children of Abraham,? saying, ?God is able to make  descendants of the great patriarch out of rocks? ). John concludes his  critique of the Pharisees and Sadducees with a stern warning of imminent divine  judgment. This preparatory critique helps to prepare for the Christ?s coming in  one of two ways: it either offers an opportunity for repentance to those who  would oppose God?s reign of righteousness in the world, or, if that fails, it  at least identifies those who would attempt to thwart the approaching  kingdom. Matthew?s presentation of John the Baptist as the forerunner of the Christ of  God concludes with a preparatory announcement . The announcement is  this: one more powerful, more worthy, more Spirit-filled, more fiery is on his  way. This One will come as judge of the world, to be sure, but also as savior.  This portion of the preparation, therefore, is both warning and hope, fear and  faith, condemnation and redemption, law and grace. Celebration Christ as contemporary Spirit is still coming into the world. So, John?s  preparatory presentation excites us to the point of crying out in eager  anticipation, ?Come, Lord Jesus. We seek the forgiveness you bring, the grace  you bestow, the love you share, and the fresh, liberating anointing you give.? Descriptive Details The descriptive details in this passage include: Sounds: The loud, urgent, crying voice of John the Baptist 2, 7b); the tramping feet of the crowd going down to the Jordan River to be  baptized ; the disturbance of the River as people were baptized ; Sights: The barrenness of the wilderness ; John?s rustic  clothing ; the crowds ; the Jordan River ; the regal robes of  the Pharisees and Sadducees ; Smells: Camel?s hair ; the muddy waters of the Jordan ); Tastes: Locusts and wild honey ; and Textures/Feelings: The roughness of camel?s hair and the  smoothness of leather ; the temperature of the Jordan River as people  were baptized . III. Other Comments John the Baptist, in this text, is described primarily as a voice. His words,  divinely anointed and spiritually propelled, became his defining trait, his  most glaring attribute, his badge of identity. As a voice, he published sacred  tidings that would alter the course of human history in a most radical way. He  was just a voice: no frills, no fanfare, no artificial props, no masks, no  pomp, no empty ritual, and no pretense. Looking back at John inspires us to  celebrate the authentic voices of our African American journey (a long and  impressive list of which can be found in Gayraud S. Wilmore?s Black Religion and  Black Radicalism . 1983). 2 But the world today is still in need of voices, who will dare cry out in the  wilderness ? in the socio-economic-political wilderness, calling for sincere  and sustained efforts to address such massive problems as starvation, AIDS,  genocide, educational failure, the criminal justice system, and war; and also  in the ecclesiastical/religious wilderness, where too much shallowness,  hypocrisy, insincerity, pretension, apathy and dishonesty still abide. Such new  voices will help prepare the way of the continuously approaching Kingdom of  God. Recommended Song ? Kumbaya, Traditional African American Tune Notes 1. Raboteau, Albert J. Slave Religion: The ""Invisible Institution"" in the  Antebellum South . New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 1978. p. 224. 2. Wilmore, Gayraud S. Black Religion and Black Radicalism: An Interpretation of  the Religious History of Afro-American People . Maryknoll, NY: Orbis  Books, 1983. 3. This famous spiritual?s earliest manifestation can be found in?Gullah,? the  creole or pidgin dialect spoken by former slaves living on the Sea Islands of  South Carolina and Georgia. ?Kumbaya.? Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia .  Online location: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kumbaya&amp;oldid=310096771 accessed  5 July 2009 &amp;nbsp The BIG IDEA (2009) Homelessness January 2009 Literacy and Education February 2009 Economic Empowerment March 2009 Ministering to Persons Who Have Disabilities and Special Needs April 2009 Affordable Housing May 2009 Health and Wellness June 2009 Prison Ministy July 2009 Innovative Worship August 2009 Crime and Violence Prevention September 2009 Pastoral Care and Counseling October 2009 Substance Abuse November 2009 HIV/AIDS December 2009 <!-- .yalc-cls { width:255px; height:308px; padding: 0px !important; margin-bottom:15px; } .yalc-cls ul { list-style: none; margin: 0 0 0 0 !important; padding: 0; } .yalc-cls ul li { list-style: none; margin:0px; padding:0px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 0 no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 87px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px 0 no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -87px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 51px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -87px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -138px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 52px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -138px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -190px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 53px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -190px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -243px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 65px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -243px no-repeat; } --> HOME RESOURCES THE ONLINE FORUM TEACHING VIDEOS THE SPOTLIGHT CORNER 2013 Units Kwanzaa - Thursday, December 26, 2013 Watch Night - Tuesday, December 31, 2013 Multimedia Videos Audios "
