" Lectionary Commentaries &amp;nbsp YOUTH DAY (YOUTH AND HEALTH) LECTIONARY COMMENTARY Sunday, October 25, 2009 Brandon McCormack, Guest Lectionary Commentator Doctoral Student, Vanderbilt University Graduate Department of Religion,  Nashville, TN Lection - 1 Corinthians 3:16-17 (New Revised Standard Version) ) Do you not know that you are God?s temple and that God?s Spirit dwells  in you? ) If anyone destroys God?s temple, God will destroy that person,  For God?s temple is holy, and you are that temple. Proverbs 3:5-8  Trust in the Lord with all your heart, and do not rely on your own  insight.  In all your ways acknowledge him, and he will make straight  your paths.  Do not be wise in your own eyes; fear the Lord, and turn  away from evil.  It will be a healing for your flesh and a refreshment  for your body. I. Description of the Liturgical Moment Youth Day, in many African American churches, occurs with varying degrees of  regularity, from once a year to every fifth Sunday. This exciting day in the  life of the church is an opportunity to highlight the gifts and talents of the  young people within the church through song, liturgical dance, dramatic  presentations, spoken word and other appropriate creative expressions. Youth  Day also serves the distinct purpose of focusing attention on issues that are  particularly relevant to young people in and beyond the church. In this case,  the focus is upon issues at the intersection of African American Youth and  Health. II. Biblical Interpretation for Preaching and Worship: 1  Corinthians 3:16-17 and Proverbs 3:5-8 Part One: Contemporary Contexts of the Interpreter As I write, we are at a point in our history where the health of our young  people is increasingly at risk. HIV/AIDS is not only spreading rapidly through  the African American community, but it is affecting the lives of increasingly  younger members of our community. Various forms of violence, ranging from the  physical to the psychological, plague black communities threatening the health  of the young and the vulnerable. Beyond these oft-quoted realities, the health  of African American youth is jeopardized in subtler but equally deadly ways.  Addressing the health issues of African American youth will necessarily extend  beyond individualistic and often moralistic calls to ?make better choices?  (especially with reference to their sexuality), though such demands for  personal responsibility must be addressed. Equally important, however, will be  addressing the ?principalities and powers,? or the larger social, political,  and environmental issues which adversely affect the health of the entire  African American community, and our youth in particular. It is with this  broader understanding of ?health? and the societal conditions which impinge  upon the health of our young people, that I approach the lectionary scriptures  in search of a life-giving word. Part Two: Biblical Commentary In the first text, Paul is most likely addressing the Corinthians collectively,  arguing that as a corporate body or the church, they are the temple of God,  whose Spirit dwells in the midst of them. Divisions among the Corinthians  threatened to tear the community apart?thus, threatening the health of the  body/temple. Paul?s reminder that they are the temple of God and that those who  would defile God?s temple would be destroyed, should be considered in light of  Paul?s larger efforts to unify the church and restore health to the community.  Of course, this text also has individual implications. Later in this letter  (6:19), Paul employs the metaphor of the temple again to speak of the  Corinthians? physical bodies. So, then, 1 Corinthians 3:16-17, might well be  read with this latter verse in mind. As human temples, indwelt by God?s Spirit,  the Corinthians very bodies were to be treated with reverence, as ?sacred  space? not to be ?defiled? or ?destroyed? either by the Corinthians themselves  or anyone else. Paul presses the latter claim further, by insisting that anyone  who would ?destroy? God?s temple would be met with the force of God?s judgment. The second text is a classic example of Hebrew wisdom literature. In this  particular text, the writer is seeking to establish reliance upon the Lord, as  the foundation of true wisdom. Those being instructed in the ways of wisdom are  counseled always to, ?Trust in the Lord with all of [their] hearts,? and  not to rely solely on their own insights. At the risk of encouraging a  dangerous anti-intellectualism or unreflective faith, the writer argues for a  sort of ?epistemological humility? or, in other words, recognition of the  limits of one?s own ability or capacity to know and a subsequent dependence  upon God for guidance. God?s providential guidance is promised to those who  have adopted such a posture of humility, in light of one?s own finitude and  God?s infinite wisdom. Following this divine guidance should lead one to seek  to avoid ?evil.? This text now points back to the first text, as verse 8  asserts that humbly following God?s guidance will prove to be ?healing for your  flesh and a refreshment for your body.? These texts have several implications for sermons concerning African American  youth and health. In a society that has a long historical track record of  devaluing, dehumanizing and even destroying black bodies, naming the bodies of  African American youth as ?God?s temple? takes on new and significant meanings.  To name that which has been, and unfortunately continues to be, demonized as  the site of God?s indwelling Spirit is indeed subversive. To make such a  hermeneutical move is to declare ?sacred? that which has been viewed,  represented and treated all too often as inherently ?profane.? As ?sacred  space,? the bodies of young African Americans are to be regarded and treated  with a reverence appropriate for any space occupied by the divine. To defile or  destroy these young black temples, according to the text, is to invite God?s  judgment. Many implications for the health of African American youth flow from the  reverence of the bodies of God?s people called for in this text. To begin with,  young black people must come to understand themselves as God?s temple  and regard their own bodies, minds and souls as deserving of reverence and  healthy treatment. For African American youth, reimagining themselves as  ?sacred? will undoubtedly mean praying for God?s wisdom to avoid the kinds of  risky behavior, which leave the temple vulnerable to all manner of sickness,  disease, violence and other forms of physical harm: such as, (but not limited  to), unprotected sexual activity, illegal drug and alcohol abuse and gunplay.  Also, adults must see African American youth as sacred bodies and not just  ?ganstas,? thugs, lost causes, hoochies, future prison inmates and absentee  baby daddies. If we begin to see them as young princes and princesses, future  presidents, engineers, teachers, parents, preachers, and more, then they will  more quickly see themselves and treat themselves the same way. Adults in the  congregation must also be challenged to reconsider what it means to reverence  the young people in our congregations and communities as bearers of the divine  Spirit. Of course, the call to reverence the body as God?s temple is not limited to the  individual but includes concern for others as God?s temple, as well. When we  are able to view others with such divine insight, we are then responsible for  treating others? bodies as ?sacred space,? worthy of our reverence. The implications of this text are even broader than this. Many of the threats to  young African American?s health and the causes for health disparities between  young blacks and other racial and ethnic groups are not simply on the personal  or interpersonal level but on broader social and political levels. Working  toward increasing the health of young African Americans will mean also  addressing larger structural issues, such as high concentrations of poverty,  which inevitably lead to more dangerous environments, leading to riskier  decisions which put people of all ages, but particularly youths, at risk. In  addition, environmental issues, including the location of toxic waste dumps,  landfills and highly polluting factories in African American communities, which  tend to be largely ignored within African American Churches, have alarming  effects (e.g., increasing the risk of asthma and other health conditions) upon  the health of young African Americans. These temples are our children. If we do  not fight to save them, no one will. Celebration While the Corinthian text makes clear claims about the sacredness of the body as  a temple and the ethical implications for the treatment of God?s people?s  bodies (our own and other?s), the text from Proverbs initially sets out wisdom  for avoiding harm. In the last verse of the proverb, there is wisdom for  ?healing? and ?refreshment? of bodies that have suffered from mistreatment. The  text suggests that humbly walking in the presence and guidance of God is in  itself ?healing? (whether or not a ?cure? is involved). Walking with God is  ?renewing? and ?life-giving? to bodies that have not been treated with  the requisite reverence due a child of God; and, God will give us our due. Young people can celebrate God?s pronouncement of the sacredness of their bodies  in a culture that has attempted to render them profane. Further celebration  comes from the fact that God?s guiding presence is ?healing? and ?renewing? to  mistreated bodies. Descriptive Details The descriptive details in the passage include: In 1 Corinthians 3:16-17: Temple/Spirit/Holy: These three terms combined evoke a strong  sense of the sacred or that which is to be reverenced/respected and set apart; In Proverbs 3:5-8: Straight Paths: This metaphor calls to mind moral wisdom, and  direction as well as righteous living; and Healing/Refreshment: These words evoke powerful images of  restoration, renewal and redemption, which can be contrasted with other images  that might characterize bodies that have not been treated as sacred. III. Other Material for the Sermonic Moment For more information concerning black youth in general and black youth and  health in particular, see the website for the Black Youth Project, sponsored by  the Center for Race, Politics and Culture at the University of Chicago. Online  location: http://blackyouthproject.uchicago.edu/ accessed 10 May 2009 &amp;nbsp The BIG IDEA (2009) Homelessness January 2009 Literacy and Education February 2009 Economic Empowerment March 2009 Ministering to Persons Who Have Disabilities and Special Needs April 2009 Affordable Housing May 2009 Health and Wellness June 2009 Prison Ministy July 2009 Innovative Worship August 2009 Crime and Violence Prevention September 2009 Pastoral Care and Counseling October 2009 Substance Abuse November 2009 HIV/AIDS December 2009 <!-- .yalc-cls { width:255px; height:308px; padding: 0px !important; margin-bottom:15px; } .yalc-cls ul { list-style: none; margin: 0 0 0 0 !important; padding: 0; } .yalc-cls ul li { list-style: none; margin:0px; padding:0px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 0 no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 87px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px 0 no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -87px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 51px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -87px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -138px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 52px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -138px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -190px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 53px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -190px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -243px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 65px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -243px no-repeat; } --> HOME RESOURCES THE ONLINE FORUM TEACHING VIDEOS THE SPOTLIGHT CORNER 2013 Units Kwanzaa - Thursday, December 26, 2013 Watch Night - Tuesday, December 31, 2013 Multimedia Videos Audios "
