" Lectionary Commentaries &amp;nbsp MISSIONARY SUNDAY (MISSION WORK AT HOME) LECTIONARY COMMENTARY Sunday, October 4, 2009 Eric A. Johnson, Guest Lectionary Commentator Pastor, Greater Galilee Church, Louisville, KY Lection ? James 1:26-27 (New Revised Standard Version) ) If anyone thinks he is religious and does not bridle his tongue, but  deceives his heart, this man?s religion is vain. ) Religion that is pure  and undefiled before God is this: to visit the orphans and widows in their  affliction, and to keep oneself unstained from the world. I. Description of the Liturgical Moment Any discussion of Missionary Sunday (Mission Work at Home) can be grounded and  framed by the metaphor of graduation. Graduation exercises imply that one has  completed a particular curriculum; and, as a result, in some sense, been  matured by the process of matriculation. Sojourner Truth said, ?Religion  without humanity is poor human stuff.? 1 Home missions give each of  us the opportunity to express our maturity and affirm, in a spiritual manner,  our own humanity. II. Biblical Interpretation for Preaching and Worship: James 1:26-27 Part One: Contemporary Contexts of the Interpreter As I pen this commentary, America is in the grips of one of the worst recessions  since the 1930s. The funds for unemployed persons are deteriorating, car  companies and financial institutions are models of instability and confusion,  state and city governments are facing millions of dollars in shortfall, people  are losing their homes and retirements, Wall Street is struggling, Main Street  is at the point of panic, and thousands of persons in America are in desperate need of compassion. There is a clich? that fits this text quite well: ?Charity begins at home.? If  we are to show compassion, we cannot overlook the pressing needs of home; and,  yet, also work in foreign lands. Part Two: Biblical Commentary James has many reasons for writing this volume. One of the reasons for his  undertaking was to clarify what it meant to be a Christian through ?faith  alone.? While faith alone is sufficient for salvation, it is not sufficient for  living out spiritual disciplines or holy habits. We do not labor to be saved;  rather, we labor because we are saved. One of the ways in which we can express  our Christian work is through compassion. Compassion can be said to be love in work clothes and is that essential that requires its fulfillment  in one not just pitying another, but getting involved with another. It is James  who, in chapter two, denotes that ?faith without works is dead.? Religion then,  of any kind, which is devoid of compassion, is nothing more than empty  non-involvement rhetoric. James is writing to the twelve tribes in the Dispersion. These persons were the  Jews who had been scattered in various parts of the world by their captors, the  Assyrians and the Babylonians. In this writing, one quickly notes that James is  pressing for a more practical understanding and undertaking of Christianity  which is grounded in the living out of one?s faith through obedience to the  Lord. The obedience for which James aims is the result of a marked maturity on the  part of Jewish believers. One of the struggles with our churches is that  persons are not challenged to become spiritually mature. I have often shared  with my congregation that, if the Lord tarries, we all will one day grow old,  but how many of us will grow up? Most of the problems in churches are caused by  spiritual immaturity. This immaturity is seen both in our actions and our  inactions. Being obedient to God is not so much up to God, rather it is also  comes down to us. We are often guilty of spiritualizing our failure to engage  in what should be basic behavior for disciples. Our inactions say a lot about  our immaturity, as well. Our lack of commitment and involvement in issues  outside of our church walls speaks volumes. Our lack of challenge to a prison  industrial complex  that is swelling with our children, our lack of  resistance to violence in our communities, and even our lack of compassion for  those who may have AIDS and/or some other grave medical concern is telling.  James would scream that, if we talk the talk, we must walk the walk. James helps us see in these focal verses how to make our practices pure before  God.  James says that our obedience can be reflected in several ways. We  have to choose not to be self-deceived by disciplining our speech. If we are  not just ?hearing? the word, but doing it ) we will refuse to deceive  ourselves and monitor carefully what we say.  Just as it was in James?  day, the tongue is still a big problem in today?s church culture.  There  is an emphasis in James on speech and the tongue (see, 1:19, 2:12; 3:1-3;  14-18, 4:11-12). We must recognize that as goes the tongue, goes the body. A  great truth is revealed here for believers to ponder. The tongue reveals what  is on the inside. So James warns that no matter how consistent our church  attendance, how excellent our singing, how beautiful our outfits, if we  habitually lose control of our tongues, our level of Christian maturity is  questionable at best. Another facet of the text has us see that religion that is worth something to  God looks not only at itself, but at those who need help. Verse 27 both  describes and defines this concept, when it exhorts us to remember those who  are in a helpless state. What is needed here is more than mere sympathy towards  humanity; there must be a reaching toward humanity. ?Orphans and widows? were a  class of persons who in Jewish culture were in the ?least of these? group. They  were the most helpless and, usually, under the most pressure as they sought to  attain the basic necessities of food and clothing. Nothing has changed as it  relates to widows and children. Today, so many widows and children are  suffering and too few in the church lift a finger to offer assistance. A few  place funds in offering plates for benevolence efforts or other church  ministries. Most take an out-of-sight out-of-mind approach, in spite of the  fact that these persons are in our own communities, not in some faraway place  such as Africa! As we ponder Missionary Sunday (Mission Work at Home), each of us should be  motivated to get involved in the endeavors that can alleviate the suffering of  those who cannot help themselves. Can your church do something to assist widows  who are lonely, poor, and need medical care? Can your ministry tackle poverty  in creative ways through teaching principles of economic empowerment? Can your  ministry start parenting classes for young men and women? Let us go forth and  offer God ministry that is pure because it seeks to help those most in need. Lastly, James tells us to remain ?unspotted,? unpolluted from the world. We are  told that we are to be in the world and not of the world. We must make contact  with the world, but we cannot allow ourselves to become contaminated. Pure  religion is just that?pure. We cannot love the pleasures, systems and mores of  this world more than we love God. Matthew 6:24 tells us that no one can serve  two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will be  devoted to the one and despise the other. How often it is that when we get  involved with the complexities of the world we get caught up in them to our own  detriment. We must take seriously the challenge to be found by Jesus without a  spot or blemish and at peace (2 Peter 3:14). Today, among other things, this  surely means not being devoured by our culture of consumerism, individualism  and secularism. Challenge The challenge of this text is to make sure that our religion is more than  concepts and pronouncements of piety. Pure religion includes earthly efforts  and human compassion.  God?s people have to stand up for those in our  society who cannot stand for themselves and in doing this we show forth the  purity of our religion. This purity of our religion involves also a commitment to speak as Christ spoke  and to serve boldly. The challenge here is to walk and talk as humble servants  who glorify God; not ourselves or even our churches. If we act and speak as  this type of beloved community, the Kingdom will come on earth as it is in  Heaven and God?s will shall be done. Descriptive Details In this passage, note with careful attention the foundation of obedience as the  beginning of pure religion. This obedience is predicated on one?s ability to  not only hear the Word, but also to do the Word. Note further the stress on  praxis in our religion. There is work for us to do; namely, to help those in  helpless conditions, to be cautious about what we say and to remain in a holy  posture before God. Accordingly, the descriptive details brought forth by this passage include, but  are not limited to: Sights : An unbridled tongue and a bridled tongue; a person with  a self-deceived heart; suffering widows; suffering orphans; and Sounds : Gossip; negative talk; the laughter of orphaned  children as they are visited and given nurture and love; and the appreciative  words of widows as they are visited, assisted and allowed to share of their  concerns and their memories. Notes 1. Newman, Richard. African American Quotations . New York, NY: Orxy  Press, 2000. p. 285. &amp;nbsp The BIG IDEA (2009) Homelessness January 2009 Literacy and Education February 2009 Economic Empowerment March 2009 Ministering to Persons Who Have Disabilities and Special Needs April 2009 Affordable Housing May 2009 Health and Wellness June 2009 Prison Ministy July 2009 Innovative Worship August 2009 Crime and Violence Prevention September 2009 Pastoral Care and Counseling October 2009 Substance Abuse November 2009 HIV/AIDS December 2009 <!-- .yalc-cls { width:255px; height:308px; padding: 0px !important; margin-bottom:15px; } .yalc-cls ul { list-style: none; margin: 0 0 0 0 !important; padding: 0; } .yalc-cls ul li { list-style: none; margin:0px; padding:0px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 0 no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 87px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px 0 no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -87px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 51px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -87px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -138px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 52px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -138px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -190px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 53px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -190px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -243px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 65px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -243px no-repeat; } --> HOME RESOURCES THE ONLINE FORUM TEACHING VIDEOS THE SPOTLIGHT CORNER 2013 Units Kwanzaa - Thursday, December 26, 2013 Watch Night - Tuesday, December 31, 2013 Multimedia Videos Audios "
