" Lectionary Commentaries &amp;nbsp <!-- .style2 { color: #FF0000; font-weight: bold; } --> SENIORS, ELDERS, AND GRANDPARENTS DAY LECTIONARY COMMENTARY Sunday, September 13, 2009 Makeba Lindsay D?Abreu, Guest Lectionary Commentator National Director, Domestic HIV Programs for The Balm in Gilead, Richmond, VA Lection - Zechariah 8:3-6 (New Revised Standard Version)  Thus says the Lord: I will return to Zion, and will dwell in the midst of  Jerusalem; Jerusalem shall be called the faithful city, and the mountain of the  Lord of hosts shall be called the holy mountain.  Thus says the Lord of  hosts: Old men and old women shall again sit in the streets of Jerusalem, each  with staff in hand because of their great age.  And the streets of the  city shall be full of boys and girls playing in its streets.  Thus says  the Lord of hosts: Even though it seems impossible to the remnant of this  people in these days, should it also seem impossible to me, says the Lord of  hosts? I. Description of the Liturgical Moment Grandparents Day was founded by Marian McQuade in West Virginia to  champion the cause of lonely elderly in nursing homes, and persuade  grandchildren to tap the wisdom and heritage of their grandparents. 1 The idea was spurred by the ?Past 80 Parties? Mrs. McQuade organized. As part  of the planning, she visited nursing homes and was moved by the residents?  loneliness. Inspired, she organized day visits called Grandparents Day to honor grandparents wherever they lived; and to give grandparents the  opportunity to show love for, identify strengths of, share with, and guide one  another. In 1978, President Jimmy Carter proclaimed the first Sunday after Labor Day as National  Grandparents Day . The proclamation declared grandparents as ?our  continuing tie to the near-past, to events and beliefs and experiences that so  strongly affect our lives and the world around us. Whether they are our own or  surrogate grandparents who fill some of the gaps in our mobile society, our  senior generation also provides our society a link to our national heritage and  traditions.? 2 Mrs. McQuade was the grandmother of forty-three grandchildren and fifteen  great-grandchildren. From 1970 until her death on September 26, 2008, she  tirelessly advocated for senior citizen rights and to make every day Grandparents  Day . Incorporating a celebration of Grandparents, Seniors and Elders into liturgical  life allows God?s people to celebrate the theology of legacy, the willing  bequest of a predecessor?s most prized spiritual, historical, emotional,  material, and physical divinely-bestowed possessions to a willing successor for  the purposes of increasing God?s impact in the life of the predecessor and  successor, and in the world. 3 II. Biblical Interpretation for Preaching and Worship:  Zechariah 8:3-6 Part One: The Contemporary Contexts of the Interpreter Grandparenthood is one on the greatest joys of life. Grandparents can freely  express unconditional love and care for their grandchildren without the  tensions, nervousness, and stresses of being a parent. For grandchildren,  grandparents are a symbol of freedom, unreserved love, legacy, and hope.  Likewise, those who are not biological grandparents, but who through their  love, patience, wisdom and concern have shepherded so many, have also created  amazing legacies Although my maternal grandparents died before I was born, two of my maternal  great-grandparents lived until my teen years. Their impact on me was larger  than life. They shared a rich legacy filled with spirituality, stories,  self-respect, weird foods, and fried hair. I loved them. Then there was the  cuddly bear, my paternal granddaddy. I have wonderful memories of him; memories  of love, hope, and security. Memories similar to those my son is creating with  his grandparents and great-grandparents. As an adult, I gained my husband?s  grandparents, who brought a new wonder into my life. I was unaware of National Grandparents Day until my son was born eight years  ago. The day allowed me to formally honor the rich ministry of grandparenthood,  celebrate the theology of legacy across five living generations, and to witness  the bond of the ?grandparents club.? It also allowed me to honor those seniors  and elders who were not related to me but have been a major presence in my  life. A healthy relationship among grandparents and grandchildren and among elders and  youth and young adults defy and breathe hope on the problems that plague our  society: the roaring rates of HIV/AIDS among youth and seniors, homelessness,  abuse among our most vulnerable populations, economic decline, and education  and health disparities. However, one cannot overlook the sadness among our elders because of elder  abuse, drug addiction, death, and estrangement. Seniors, Elders and  Grandparents Day affords the Church the opportunity to raise awareness and  impact the social issues that affect our sages. Part Two: Biblical Commentary The text is part of a compilation of sermons and visions under the name of  Zechariah, a postexilic priest and prophet 5 and contemporary of  Haggai and Ezra. He was most likely the son of Berechiah and grandson of Iddo,  a priest named among the returning exiles in Nehemiah 12:4. 6 Scholars have identified two distinctive parts of Zechariah, chapters 1-8 and  9-14 written in different time periods and by different authors, with most  agreeing to Zechariah as author of the first section. The first part of the  book is estimated to have been written during the reign of Darius, king of  Persia possibly from 520 to 518 BCE. King Darius, like the two Persian kings  before him, practiced religious tolerance and repatriated the exiles to Judah.  Zechariah?s audience is an impoverished and dispirited community. 7 There  has been much upheaval up to this point, empires have risen and fallen, and  oppressors have merely changed names. Efforts by the exiles to rebuild  Jerusalem have waxed and waned, mostly due to the exclusion of people of the  land in the community organizing and rebuilding efforts. Chapters 7-8 compose the final messages, framing a series of eight visions in  part one of the book. The people inquired of their obligation to fast four  times a year since the fall of Jerusalem. To which Zechariah responds, the true  obligation is authentic divine worship. He understands their underlying fear of  another misstep. However, the message is clear, like the meaning of Zechariah?s  name, ?YHWH remembers? and will keep the promises to the people of YHWH. He  reminds them that the historical events leading up to and the return from the  exile are part of YHWH?s sovereign purpose. YHWH will faithfully deliver the  LORD?s people from exile, and restore Jerusalem and the people?s relationship  with their God. In an exercise in visualization, Zechariah poetically lays out  the promise. In verse 3, the verb form of ?to return? promises the LORD?s expediency and  magnificence. According to the book of Ezekiel, YHWH had abandoned Jerusalem.  However, YHWH?s return to the site of the tabernacle with the LORD?s people is  a glorious return. 8 It is as if God promises them, ?I will quickly  reestablish my presence in my earthly home. 9 I will tabernacle in  the heart of Jerusalem. Jerusalem will be renamed by me, in a glorious renaming  ceremony, the faithful city. A city that is stable and dependable. And I the  LORD, the Commander-in-Chief, will have the exclusive rights of my mountain, of  my people. The city will experience my impact and it will be a sustainable city  that is able to be holy, set apart for my purposes.? The overall health and stability of any society is measured by many social  indicators. Today, we use statistics such as the infant mortality rate, urban  population size, food production per capita, labor force rates (employment,  income disparities, etc.), school enrollment, number of cases of particular  diseases, teen suicide or pregnancy rates, crime rates, poverty rates, health  care costs, and voter turnout numbers to provide information on social  conditions over time. In vv 4-5, the LORD keeps it real simple. No statistician  or sociologists are needed. The LORD has Zechariah take a snapshot of the age  groups. How are the elderly faring? Are the children developing across gender  and age groups? Under the LORD?S new national strategy, Jerusalem is restored. The presence of  young and old reflects a full repopulation of the city. In this city, seniors  and children, men and women, are equal citizens. The elderly advance in years.  They do not have to fear crime and elder abuse, and can again sit in public, at  the city gate in open spaces. They are not trapped in their homes or  institutions. The open areas near the gate reflect forward thinking city  planning. The municipalities have planned for youth and elderly to have  recreational areas. The city has a quality health care system, one without disparities. The adults  live quite long, and male and female children live beyond childbirth and  infancy. Teen suicide is low because the children advance to older adulthood.  There is food for the masses for no one is languishing in the streets or in  their homes. In my sanctified imagination, young adults to middle age adults  are not loitering the streets, because they are working, earning living wages  and equal pay for equal work. The economy is stable so the elderly are relieved  of labor, 10 usually necessary in an agrarian society. National  security is working effectively, and the country is at peace because there are  children and elderly in the streets not armed soldiers. In this portrait, there  is no generation gap. The very old and the young share the city without fear of  each other. This vision may seem far-fetched to the survivors who witnessed and experienced  the impact of the devastation, who know how governmental systems operate, felt  hunger, endured inadequate health care and education, and doggedly labored.  However, YHWH injects hope to the dejected. YHWH?s presence promises a  positive, definitive, and swift impact on the city. YHWH puts the rhetorical  questions to the remnant, literally the ?rest of the people,? to provoke a new  vision of Jerusalem in their eyes, and revive hope in the gaze of those who are  in despair. Prayer: YHWH dwells in the midst of our homes, cities, towns, and countries. For  we know that when you dwell in the midst, we will share our most prized  possessions with each other to increase your impact in the world. We see hope  in our cities. We celebrate the love and legacy of seniors, elders and  grandparents today. Amen. Celebration Imagine a world that is safe for all people; a world in which our most  vulnerable populations experience the fullness of security. Dream of a country  restored of its hope amongst its diverse citizens. Imagine a country stimulated  by healthy relationships among our most seasoned and earliest learners.  Visualize a city indwelt by the presence of YHWH. YHWH dwelling in a city has  the power to fill the streets with the laughter of the very young and very old.  YHWH tabernacling in any city will scale the generation gap in each family. Descriptive Details The descriptive details of this passage include: Sounds : The soft crescendo of the rumbling of thunder over the  mountain as YHWH returns to dwell in Jerusalem ; banter of old friends,  shuffling of feet and the soft thud of a walking stick ; children?s  laughter echoing along the walls; the constant thud of a bouncing ball, girls  and boys unreservedly laughing as they perform skits before the elders ; Sights: Billowing clouds almost as thick as a fog settling on  the city as YHWH dwells ; the hush of the crowd as they stand in  amazement as they see what YHWH sees ; and Smells: The odor of musk from a full day of play in the  sunshine . Notes 1. ?National Grandparents Day.? National Grandparents Day Council .  Online location: http://www.grandparents-day.com/ accessed 3 October 2008 2. President Jimmy Carter. ?National Grandparents Day Proclamation.? 3. Refer to Genesis 48 and Heb. 11:21; John 20:19-23, and 2 Kings 2:1-18 4. ?Zechariah.? Encyclopedia Judaica . 2nd Ed. Vol. 21: WEL-ZY. USA:  Thomas Dale and Jerusalem: Ketez Publishing House, LTD, 2007. p. 484. 5. ?The Book of Zechariah.? The Speaker?s Bible: the Minor Prophets . Ed.  Edward Hastings and James Hastings. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Book House, 1962.  p.179. 6. Carson, D. A ?Zechariah.? New Bible Commentary: 21st Century Edition .  Leicester, England: Inter-Varsity Press, 1994. p. 863. 7. Interpretersdictionary.org accessed 15 October 2008 8. Smith, Ralph, Ed. ?Zechariah.? Word Biblical Commentary . Vol. 32:  Micah ? Malachi. Waco, TX: Word Book, 1984. p. 232. 9. Refer to Psalm 132:13-14. 10. Myers, Carol L. and Eric M. Myers. ?Haggai, Zechariah 1-8: A New  Translation with Introduction and Commentary.? The Anchor Bible . Garden  City, NY: Doubleday, 1987. p. 415. III. Recommendations There are numerous intergenerational activities to engage the congregation  in anticipation for Seniors, Elders and Grandparents Day: Highlight and provide workshops on issues facing grandparents: rearing  grandchildren, drug addiction, HIV/AIDS, homelessness, understanding health  care benefits, elder abuse, estrangement, long distance grand parenting, etc.; Have children and youth send hand-written letters to their grandparents and  surrogate grandparents; Incorporate activities for Seniors, Elders and Grandparents Day into Christian  education ministries; Conduct ?Forget-Me-Not Visitations?  nursing homes), and develop an  ongoing visitation program; Have members of the youth and children ministries distribute flowers to elderly  members who are home-bound; Create and distribute a booklet of poetry that contains intergenerational  contributions; Have grandparents and surrogate grandparents create a scrapbook or storybook of  their childhood for their grandchildren; Identify milestones among members of your congregations: most number of  grandchildren, length of legacy (grand, great-grand, great-great, etc.) and  display the legacy on-screen during a service or on posters throughout the  church; Create and distribute grandparent pins or pins to all elders in your church; Create a video log with expressions of gratitude, poetry, from parents to their  grandparents and or their surrogate grandparents; Include skits about grandparents and surrogate grandparents in puppet, dance or  drama ministries; and Get digital picture frames for grandparents whose grandchildren live long  distances away so that they can digitally ?visit? their grandchildren. Resources for additional information Websites Grandparents-day.org The Foundation for Grandparenting. Online location: http://www.grandparenting.org/ Grandparents Magazine. Online location: http://www.grandparentsmagazine.net Organizations Your local Department of Aging AARP formerly known as the American Association of Retired Persons Books Ruiz, Dorothy S. Amazing Grace: African American Grandmothers As Caregivers and Conveyers of Traditional Values . Westport, CT: Praeger,  2004. Gellman, Marc, and Harry Bliss. And God Cried, Too: A Kid's Book of Healing and Hope . New York, NY: HarperTrophy, 2002. Uslander, Arlene, and Freddie Levin. That's What Grandparents Are For . Columbus, NC: Peel Productions, 2002. Mead, Lucy. Grandparents Are Special: A Tribute to Those Who Love, Nurture &amp; Inspire . New York, NY: Gramercy Books, 2000. Fays, Edward, and Jo Anne Metsch. The Grandparents' Treasure Chest: A Journal of Memories to Share with Your Grandchildren . New York, NY: Warner Books, 2002. Canfield, Jack, and Mark Victor Hansen. Chicken Soup for the Soul: Grand and  Great: Grandparents and Grandchildren Share Their Stories of Love and  Wisdom . Deerfield Beach, FL: Chicken Soup for the Soul Publishers,  2008. Stories about Elders and Grandparents Woodson, Jacqueline, and Floyd Cooper. Sweet, Sweet Memory . New York, NY: Jump at the Sun/Hyperion Books for Children, 2000. Dilz, Ric. My Grandma Could Do Anything! Boulder, CO: Rein Designs,  2004. Holman, Sandy Lynne, and Lela Kometiani. Grandpa, Is Everything Black Bad ? Davis, CA: Culture Coop, 1995. Hamm, Diane Johnston. Daughter of Suqua . Morton Grove, IL: A. Whitman,  1997. Pak, Soyung, and Susan Kathleen Hartung. Dear Juno . New York, NY: Viking, 1999. Christensen, Bonnie. In My Grandmother's House: Award-Winning Authors Tell Stories About Their Grandmothers . New York, NY: HarperCollins Children's Books, 2003. Williams, Vera B. ""More More More"" Said the Baby: 3 Love Stories . New York, NY: Greenwillow Books, 1990. A darling child of African heritage is adored as his white Grandma's ""Little Pumpkin."" Also features single-race families. Inclusive in tone and content for ages 2-up. Billingsley, Franny. Well Wished . New York, NY: Atheneum Books for Young Readers, 1997. Strete, Craig. The World in Grandfather's Hands . New York, NY: Clarion Books, 1995. &amp;nbsp The BIG IDEA (2009) Homelessness January 2009 Literacy and Education February 2009 Economic Empowerment March 2009 Ministering to Persons Who Have Disabilities and Special Needs April 2009 Affordable Housing May 2009 Health and Wellness June 2009 Prison Ministy July 2009 Innovative Worship August 2009 Crime and Violence Prevention September 2009 Pastoral Care and Counseling October 2009 Substance Abuse November 2009 HIV/AIDS December 2009 <!-- .yalc-cls { width:255px; height:308px; padding: 0px !important; margin-bottom:15px; } .yalc-cls ul { list-style: none; margin: 0 0 0 0 !important; padding: 0; } .yalc-cls ul li { list-style: none; margin:0px; padding:0px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 0 no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 87px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px 0 no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -87px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 51px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -87px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -138px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 52px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -138px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -190px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 53px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -190px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -243px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 65px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -243px no-repeat; } --> HOME RESOURCES THE ONLINE FORUM TEACHING VIDEOS THE SPOTLIGHT CORNER 2013 Units Kwanzaa - Thursday, December 26, 2013 Watch Night - Tuesday, December 31, 2013 Multimedia Videos Audios "
