" Compact Unit &amp;nbsp function MM_CheckFlashVersion(reqVerStr,msg){ with(navigator){ var isIE = (appVersion.indexOf(""MSIE"") != -1 && userAgent.indexOf(""Opera"") == -1); var isWin = (appVersion.toLowerCase().indexOf(""win"") != -1); if (!isIE || !isWin){  var flashVer = -1; if (plugins && plugins.length > 0){ var desc = plugins[""Shockwave Flash""] ? plugins[""Shockwave Flash""].description : """"; desc = plugins[""Shockwave Flash 2.0""] ? plugins[""Shockwave Flash 2.0""].description : desc; if (desc == """") flashVer = -1; else{ var descArr = desc.split("" ""); var tempArrMajor = descArr[2].split("".""); var verMajor = tempArrMajor[0]; var tempArrMinor = (descArr[3] != """") ? descArr[3].split(""r"") : descArr[4].split(""r""); var verMinor = (tempArrMinor[1] > 0) ? tempArrMinor[1] : 0; flashVer = parseFloatjor + ""."" + verMinor); } } // WebTV has Flash Player 4 or lower -- too low for video else if (userAgent.toLowerCase().indexOf(""webtv"") != -1) flashVer = 4.0;  var verArr = reqVerStr.split("",""); var reqVer = parseFloatr[0] + ""."" + verArr[2]);  if (flashVer < reqVer){ if (confirm(msg)) window.location = ""http://www.adobe.com/shockwave/download/download.cgi?P1_Prod_Version=ShockwaveFlash""; } } }  } AC_FL_RunContent( 'codebase','http://download.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=7,0,0,0','width','342','height','291','id','FLVPlayer','src','FLVPlayer_Progressive','flashvars','&MM_ComponentVersion=1&skinName=Halo_Skin_3&streamName=iStock_000010882137SmallWe&autoPlay=false&autoRewind=false','quality','high','scale','noscale','name','FLVPlayer','salign','lt','pluginspage','http://www.adobe.com/shockwave/download/download.cgi?P1_Prod_Version=ShockwaveFlash','movie','FLVPlayer_Progressive' ); //end AC code SECOND SUNDAY OF ADVENT Sunday, December 4, 2011 Guest Writer for This Unit: Tyrone Emmanuel McGowan Jr., an associate minister of the Providence Missionary Baptist Church (Chicago, IL), is a second-year Master of Divinity candidate at Yale Divinity School in New Haven, CT. The unit you are viewing, Second Sunday of Advent , is a compact unit. This means that it does not have a supporting cultural resource unit and worship unit. Instead, to enliven the imagination of preachers and teachers, we have provided scriptural text(s) that we suggest for this moment on the calendar along with a sermonic outline, suggested links, books, articles, songs, and videos. For additional information, see Second Sunday of Advent in the archives of the Lectionary for 2008?2010. 2011 is the first year that the African American Lectionary has posted compact units for moments on its liturgical calendar. I. Description of the Liturgical Moment Our English word for advent comes from the Latin term ?adventus? or ?coming.? Traditionally Advent is a period of four Sundays from the final Sunday in November to Christmas Eve. Advent is the first season of the Christian liturgical calendar. Advent represents a time of hope and expectancy as the global community awaits the birth of Jesus Christ into the world. In addition to the birth of Christ, we look forward to the continued presence and power of Christ entering our existential reality, renewing us and reviving us for the challenges that confront us on our journey. The season of Advent encourages us to continue to live faithful lives as we patiently await Christ to radically enter our particular situations. In contemporary culture where one?s disposition can change depending upon the latest trending topic on Twitter, many are no longer conditioned to wait for anything or anyone. We seem to live in a time without pauses. Advent comes to remind us that pauses are necessary and beneficial. This season of Advent also provides a creative space for us to reflect. This time of the year not only allows us the festive privilege of the lights, the gifts, the shopping, the trees, the dinners, and the music, but it is another opportunity to reflect all the more on the one who was sent to save us from our sins. We must never get lost in the commercialization of this season and forget the reason we truly celebrate the season?the Savior has come to redeem us. As many congregations celebrate the final Holy Communion of the year on this Sunday, we remember that he entered the world and forever changed it and us. II. Second Sunday of Advent: Sermonic Outline A. Sermon Focus Text(s): Psalm 72:1-7, 18-19 (New Revised Standard Version)  Give the king your justice, O God, and your righteousness to a king's son.  May he judge your people with righteousness, and your poor with justice.  May the mountains yield prosperity for the people, and the hills, in righteousness.  May he defend the cause of the poor of the people, give deliverance to the needy, and crush the oppressor.  May he live while the sun endures, and as long as the moon, throughout all generations.  May he be like rain that falls on the mown grass, like showers that water the earth.  In his days may righteousness flourish and peace abound, until the moon is no more. ) Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, who alone does wondrous things. ) Blessed be his glorious name forever; may his glory fill the whole earth. Amen and Amen. B. Possible Titles i. He's Worth the Wait ii. We Have Someone to Look Forward To iii. Worship While You Wait C. Point of Exegetical Inquiry Intended to be recited as a coronation ode for a newly crowned king, this royal psalm is positioned as the final psalm in the second section of the Psalter or ?Hezekiah?s Collection.? Providing the reader with an ample window to view Israelite and ancient Jewish spirituality, this psalm represents a word from an oppressed people. The psalmist, who in this particular passage is believed to be an elderly King David writing to the soon-to-be King Solomon, pens this psalm for a people who are waiting on a promised king to rule and reign over them with justice. This promised king was expected to continue in the Deuteronomic tradition that was ideal for a king. According to David?s farewell address a king should ?keep the charge of the Lord your God, walking in his ways and keeping his statutes, his commandments, his ordinances, and his testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moses? (1 Kings 2:3). While this passage represents canonized literature important to the sacred community of Israel, it importantly also yields a message of hope and great expectancy for us today. Although Solomon's name is invoked by this psalm, the kingdom that Christ came to fulfill is here prophesied under the shadow of Solomon's kingdom. Verses 5?6 offer an interesting point for exegetical emphasis. Here, the psalmist prays for the king's long life and reign and that his reign would come down like rain upon mown grass. While the reign of Solomon can be described as a golden age it would eventually come to an end, but Jesus Christ reigns forevermore. III. Introduction On this Sunday, as we continue in this season of Advent, this time of great expectation, we are reminded of the blessings and burdens that are associated with waiting. No matter who you are, or where you live, we all have to endure stages of delay and waiting. You are doing your best, playing by the rules, trying to live your life according to the will of God, but you can still find yourself in a divinely designed holding pattern that is beyond your control. You may find yourself on the runway of life waiting for the okay signal from the spiritual watchtower. Yes, waiting can seem to be an unfair and unjust process. Even after the successful passage of the recent Health Care Reform Bill, millions of Americans are still waiting on adequate health care insurance. With an African American unemployment rate that is nearly twice the national average, many individuals in our community continue to wait on employment. As we embark upon another U.S. presidential election cycle, the poor in this nation wait for a candidate who will see them and serve them. Even our children wait as shown in the 2010 documentary film ?Waiting for Superman??they are waiting as the educational future of some of our children is determined by lottery balls. As you go shopping for gifts and wait for the sales in the department stores, please remember that there are pressing issues people are waiting through this Christmas season. In our text today, we meet another group of people who are waiting. They are waiting for someone. They are a people whom God loves, but they are oppressed. The most vulnerable members of society, those without a voice are looking for someone to defend them. That leader was thought to be King Solomon who would succeed David as king of Israel. While it is written that Solomon excelled all the kings of the earth in riches and wisdom, his kingship would not last forever. However, I know another King whose kingdom will never fade away. Because of Him, this season we have someone and something to look forward to. IV. Moves/Points Move/Point One ? God's divinity will be revealed before humanity a. Through the prayers of the people ; b. Judging the people with righteousness ; c. Extending beyond the imaginations of the people . Move/Point Two ? Humanity will be restored to moral order a. Despite the threat of economic injustice ; b. Despite those in need of social justice ; c. Peace will abound . Move/Point Three ? Perpetual praise will be given a. For the wondrous work only God has done ); b. From generation to generation ); c. Because God's glory fills the earth ). V. Celebration The concluding doxology of the second book of the Psalter invites the people of God, who are oppressed, to praise God for all the wondrous works he has already done in their lives, and we should too. Then, praise God for what he is going to do. Great things, miraculous things, mind-blowing things are about to happen in this season. On this Second Sunday of Advent, everything may not be going the way you think it should be, but I dare you to praise God for what is on the way! VI. Illustration In a Hurry to Go Up My junior year at Morehouse College, I amazingly had an interview to become an intern for a member of the United States Senate in his Atlanta office. Because I got lost getting to the address, I was running a few minutes late for my scheduled interview. Once I entered the lobby of the building I saw a group of people getting on an elevator. Noticing that there was just enough room for me, I frantically asked those already on the elevator to hold the door. They were kind enough to hold the door for me and I was glad as I really needed to get to the tenth floor since I was already late. Suddenly, I felt the elevator going down instead of up. I desperately wanted to go to the top floor but now I was headed all the way to the basement. In my hurriedness I had not looked at the buttons to see the direction of the elevator. So many of us are in such a hurry to go up in life that we end up going down because we do not stop to discern the route God has determined. ?Tyrone McGowan VII. Sounds, Sights, and Colors in This Passage Sounds: The uplifted voices of David and the people of Israel praying for the new king; the sound of trumpets and other musical instruments playing for the king's coronation; the silent cries of the voiceless oppressed citizens; Sights: The majestic imagery of ancient Israel; the sprawling mountainsides, the rolling green hills and freshly mown grass with dew on top; the poor and disadvantaged citizens being marginalized by unjust policies outside of Jerusalem; and Colors: The bright light given from the sun and moon that endures throughout all generations. VIII. Litany and Songs for the Second Sunday of Advent A. Litany Advent While we were yet sinners, Jesus came at the right time, after forty-two generations. During this Advent season the whole church, the Body of Christ, looks forward to the second coming of the promised Messiah, Jesus our Lord. God sent the angel Gabriel to Nazareth to announce to the virgin Mary that she had found favor with God. Her cousin Elizabeth said, ?Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruit of your womb? (Luke 1:42). As the Word made flesh, Jesus came to an unprepared people in an unprepared place. We remember our Savior's humble and obscure entry into our world. O God, we remember your love for your creation and thank you for Jesus, your only begotten Son. God, help us to understand and appreciate the ways in which you use the forgotten, the marginalized, the outcast, the weak, the poor, the imprisoned, and the afflicted to proclaim the presence of the Kingdom. At the birth of our Savior, angels sang with jubilation and shepherds praised Jesus and glorified God. Lord Jesus, as we reflect upon the joyous miracle of your birth, deepen our understanding of the purpose of your coming. When you came as a tender baby to save a fallen world, Mary wrapped you in swaddling clothes. And when you died upon a cross at Calvary to redeem and restore a lost creation, Joseph of Arimathea wrapped you in burial clothes. And when you ascended to your Father in Heaven, God clothed you with all power in heaven and on earth! You told your disciples you would come again to receive us unto yourself. Thus every day we look forward to your second coming with great anticipation. We herald your coming, Wonderful Counselor, for you are the King of kings, Lord of lords, the Mighty God, the Prince of Peace. We love you. We adore you. You alone are worthy of all our praise! (See Isaiah 9:6.) B. Hymns Come, Thou Long Expected Jesus. By Charles Wesley. Tune, (HYFRYDOL), by Rowland H. Prichard Pass Me Not, O Gentle Savior. By Fanny J. Crosby. Tune by William H. Doane O Come, O Come Emmanuel. Text by John Mason Neale. Tune, (VENI EMMANUEL). C. Well-Known Songs Wait on the Lord. By Demetrius Griffin Jesus Is the Reason for the Season. By Kirk Franklin D. Traditional Songs All Hail King Jesus. Text and music by Dave Moody Alpha and Omega. By Erasmus Mutanbira E. Modern Songs (Written between 2000?2011) Hark. By Israel Houghton Your Grace Is Enough. By Darwin Hobbs We're Blessed in the City. By Fred Hammond F. Anthems Hallelujah! From the ?Mount of Olives.? By Ludwig V. Beethoven And the Glory. From ?Messiah.? By George. F. Handel G. Sermonic Selection Call Him Jesus. By John Ray Prepare the Way of the Lord. By Benjamin Harlan. For SATB and SAB Advent. By Craig Courtney. For TTBB; violin part in octavo H. Invitational Song I Found Jesus in Time. By Debra Snipes Our Father You Are Holy. By Ricky Dillard I. Benediction Song or Instrumental Go Ye Now in Peace. By Joyce Eiler The Lord Bless You. Based on Numbers 6:24-26. Tune, (BENEDICTION), by Peter Lutkin You can review past Lectionary worship units for The Second Sunday of Advent to find additional songs and suggestions for planning a worship service for this liturgical moment. IX. Videos, Audio, and/or Interactive Media An Advent meditation that encourages us to await the coming of Christ with expectation and joyful anticipation. Online location: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=POm7_WBMJTI&amp;feature=player_embedded O Come, O Come Emmanuel Video. Online location: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r7ktvmY6lTI&amp;feature=related ?The Advent Conspiracy,? A Different Way to View the Season. Online location: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZZ3p7zaXZvM&amp;feature=related X. Books to Assist in Preparing Sermons or Bible Studies Related to the Second Sunday of Advent Kirk-Duggan, Cheryl A. Mary Had a Baby: An Advent Study Based on African American Spirituals (Student and Leader guides). Nashville, TN. Abingdon Press, 2003. Hughes, Langston, and Ashley Bryan. Carol of The Brown King: Nativity Poems . New York, NY: Atheneum, 1998. Collins, John J. Introduction to the Hebrew Bible . Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2004. Wangerin, Walter, Jr. Preparing for Jesus: Meditations on the Coming of Christ, Advent, Christmas, and the Kingdom . Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1999. XI. Links to Helpful Websites and Ideas for the Second Sunday of Advent Children's word search puzzles on the Second Sunday of Advent. Online Location: http://www.efree.mb.ca/lectionarypuzzles/in-awag.htm#ad2 Second Sunday of Advent celebration ideas for children. Online location: http://worshipingwithchildren.blogspot.com/2010/09/year-second-sunday-in-advent-december-5.html ?Preaching During Advent,? an article by Sherman Haywood Cox II. Online location: http://www.soulpreaching.com/preaching-during-advent XII. Notes for Litany and Select Songs A. Litany Advent. Location: African American Heritage Hymnal . Chicago, IL: GIA Publications, 2001. #100 B. Hymns Come, Thou Long Expected Jesus. By Charles Wesley. Tune, (HYFRYDOL), by Rowland H. Prichard Location: African Methodist Episcopal Church Hymnal . Nashville, TN: The African Methodist Episcopal Church, 2000. #103 Pass Me Not, O Gentle Savior. By Fanny J. Crosby. Tune by William H. Doane Location: African American Heritage Hymnal. #435 O Come, O Come Emmanuel. Text by John Mason Neale. Tune, (VENI EMMANUEL). Location: African American Heritage Hymnal. #188 C. Well-Known Song(s) Wait on the Lord. By Demetrius Griffin Location: James Hall Presents: The Voices of Citadel: No Joy, No Strength . New York, NY: Musicblend (INDIE), 2006. Jesus Is the Reason for the Season. By Kirk Franklin Location: Franklin, Kirk &amp; The Family. Christmas . Inglewood, CA: Gospocentric, 2001. D. Traditional Songs All Hail King Jesus. Text and music by Dave Moody Location: Zion Still Sings for Every Generation . Nashville, TN: Abingdon Press, 2007. #53 Alpha and Omega. By Erasmus Mutanbira Location: Zion Still Sings. #221 E. Modern Song(s) (Written between 2000-2011) Hark. By Israel Houghton Location: Israel &amp; New Breed. A Timeless Christmas . Mobile, AL: Integrity/Columbia, 2009. Your Grace Is Enough. By Darwin Hobbs Location: Free . Indianapolis, IN: Tyscot Records, 2008. We're Blessed in the City. By Fred Hammond Location: Verity: The First Decade, Vol. 2 . New York, NY: Verity, 2004. F. Anthems Hallelujah! From the ?Mount of Olives.? By Ludwig V. Beethoven Location: G. Schirmer Publishing J. W. Pepper and Sons Incorporated 2480 Industrial Boulevard Paoli, PA 19301 Phone: 1-800-345-6296 Online location: www.jwpepper.com And the Glory. From ?Messiah.? By George F. Handel Location: J. W. Pepper &amp; Sons Incorporated Phone: 1-800-345-6296 Online location: www.jwpepper.com G. Sermonic Selection Call Him Jesus. By John Ray Location: J. W. Pepper &amp; Sons Incorporated Phone: 1-800-345-6296 Online location: www.jwpepper.com Prepare the Way of the Lord. By Benjamin Harlan. For SATB and SAB Location: J. W. Pepper &amp; Sons Incorporated Phone: 1-800-345-6296 Online location: www.jwpepper.com Advent. By Craig Courtney. For TTBB; violin part in octavo Location: Beckenhorst Press, Inc. 960 Old Henderson Road Columbus, OH 43220 Phone: 614-451-6461 Online location: www.beckenhorstpress.com H. Invitational Song(s) I Found Jesus in Time. By Debra Snipes Location: Snipes, Debra and The Angels. So Many Times the Lord Made a Way for Me . Butler, GA: J Platinum Records, 2000. Our Father You Are Holy. By Ricky Dillard Location: Dillard, Ricky &amp; New G. 7th Episode . Houston, TX: Alliance Music Group, 2007. Online location: www.jwpepper.com I. Benediction Song or Instrumental Go Ye Now in Peace. By Joyce Eiler Location: African American Heritage Hymnal. #637 The Lord Bless You. Based on Numbers 6:24-26. Tune, (BENEDICTION), by Peter Lutkin Location: African American Heritage Hymnal. #636 Church of God in Christ. Yes, Lord! Church of God in Christ Hymnal . Memphis, TN: Church of God in Christ Pub. Board in association with the Benson Co., 1982. #142 &amp;nbsp The BIG IDEA (2009) Homelessness January 2009 Literacy and Education February 2009 Economic Empowerment March 2009 Ministering to Persons Who Have Disabilities and Special Needs April 2009 Affordable Housing May 2009 Health and Wellness June 2009 Prison Ministy July 2009 Innovative Worship August 2009 Crime and Violence Prevention September 2009 Pastoral Care and Counseling October 2009 Substance Abuse November 2009 HIV/AIDS December 2009 <!-- .yalc-cls { width:255px; height:308px; padding: 0px !important; margin-bottom:15px; } .yalc-cls ul { list-style: none; margin: 0 0 0 0 !important; padding: 0; } .yalc-cls ul li { list-style: none; margin:0px; padding:0px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 0 no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 87px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px 0 no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -87px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 51px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -87px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -138px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 52px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -138px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -190px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 53px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -190px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -243px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 65px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -243px no-repeat; } --> HOME RESOURCES THE ONLINE FORUM TEACHING VIDEOS THE SPOTLIGHT CORNER 2013 Units Kwanzaa - Thursday, December 26, 2013 Watch Night - Tuesday, December 31, 2013 Multimedia Videos Audios "
