" Lectionary Commentaries &amp;nbsp LECTIONARY COMMENTARY Sunday, January 27, 2008 Brad R. Braxton, Lectionary Team Commentator Lection - Matthew 3:13-17 (New Revised Standard Version) ) Then Jesus came from Galilee to John at the Jordan, to be baptized by  him. ) John would have prevented him, saying, ?I need to be baptized by you,  and do you come to me?? ) But Jesus answered him, ?Let it be so now;  for it is proper for us in this way to fulfill all righteousness.? Then he  consented. ) And when Jesus had been baptized, just as he came up from  the water, suddenly the heavens were opened to him and he saw the Spirit of  God descending like a dove and alighting on him. ) And a voice from heaven  said, ?This is my Son, the Beloved, with whom I am well pleased.? I. Description of the Liturgical Moment Baptism comes from the Greek word ( baptizo ) meaning to intensively  immerse in water. The word also connotes ceremonial washing for purification.  For the Christian community, baptism symbolically establishes or affirms a  person?s relationship with God. While often associated with the ministry of  John the Baptist, baptism is?in the most radical sense?a willingness to join  Jesus in death (Mark 10:38 and Romans 6:3). John?s baptism anticipated the  Messiah to come. Today, baptism honors the Messiah who has come, acknowledges  the Messiah who is, and awaits the Messiah who is coming again. African American churches conduct baptism in various ways. Some baptize persons  after they publicly confess their faith in Jesus Christ. Others baptize infants  or children on the basis of family members? faith in Jesus Christ and the  family?s connection with that particular congregation. Also, the method of  administration varies from full immersion to pouring or sprinkling of water.  Seriousness and celebration surround African American services of baptism;  for the person being baptized both dies and rises to new life simultaneously. For more information, consult Lars Hartman, ?Baptism,? in The Anchor Bible Dictionary , volume I, ed. David Noel Freedman.  New York: Doubleday, 1992, pp 583-594. II. Biblical Interpretation for Preaching and Worship: Matthew 3:13-17 Part One: The Contemporary Contexts of the Interpreter Thirty years have passed since my father?and my pastor?immersed me in the  chilly waters of the baptismal pool at First Baptist Church in Salem, VA.  I still hear the voices surrounding that moment. The choir resolutely sang about  God who was ?gonna trouble the waters.? As the choir lowered their voices, my  father raised his: ?On the profession of your faith, and in the presence of God,  the angels, and this company, I now baptize you?? Those baptismal waters marked me as a person standing on God?s side. Standing with God can at times mean standing against forces  that deny God?s justice and peace. My baptism, while an intensely personal  moment, possesses profound political implications. It declares on whose side  I am standing. Not long ago, I took a stand in a public speech against certain practices of  the United States Government that were as much acts of terrorism &gt; as the  terrorism the United States is currently fighting around the world. The speech  became the subject of public debate in the editorials of the local newspaper.  Some people were enraged that I could equate the United States with other  terrorist groups. In one acidic editorial, a person questioned my patriotic loyalty and asked the  question, ?Braxton, are you with us?? When confronted with this kind of  question, my baptismal identity requires me to ask, ?Which ?us? are you  talking about?? There may be an ?us? that our baptismal identity won?t allow  us to join because of our allegiance with the ?us? struggling for justice,  peace, and non-violence. Part Two: Biblical Commentary In Matthew 3:13-17, Jesus? baptism declares his readiness for the political and  religious revolution represented by the kingdom of heaven. In the synoptic  Gospels, only Matthew presents this curious dialogue between Jesus and John  prior to the baptism. Jesus is eager to submit to John?s baptism.  In Matthew 3:14, however, John?s resistance meets Jesus? readiness.  Recognizing Jesus? superiority, John urges a role reversal, protesting that  Jesus should baptize him. After some persuading, John eventually concedes and  baptizes Jesus. Many New Testament scholars contend that Matthew uses this dialogue to address  a Messianic embarrassment troubling some followers of Jesus. Certain early  Christians may have inquired, ?Why would Jesus, a sinless Messiah, submit to  John?s baptism, which was for the repentance of sins?? According to Matthew, Jesus submits to John?s baptism not because of any need  to repent of sin but rather to ?fulfill all righteousness? ).  Interpreters debate extensively the meaning of ?to fulfill all righteousness,?  especially since the word righteousness carries numerous connotations. For many Christians, the word righteousness evokes thoughts of personal  piety and the state of a person?s ?soul? or conscience before God. Such  meanings are inherent in the term righteousness . Yet often the Christian  tradition has emphasized the personal aspects of righteousness to the  exclusion of the political aspects of righteousness. Therefore, we  frequently ignore the revolutionary characteristics of John and Jesus. Righteousness also signifies God?s saving action in the world. We might even  translate the Greek word for righteousness ( dikaiosune ) as justice .  Righteousness encapsulates God?s passionate commitment to set right the things  that are wrong in society 1 . In other words, righteousness is also  a matter of social justice . Thus, Jesus? submission to John?s baptism is no simple act of personal piety.  On the contrary, Jesus discerns that John?s baptism and fiery preaching  constitute a revolutionary declaration about a new world order where God will  set right all that ?the establishment? (in Jerusalem and Rome) has twisted.  Jesus wants to be a part of this revolution. By pleading with John to baptize  him in order to fulfill all (God?s) righteousness, Jesus in effect says,  ?Through this baptism, I ?take up arms? with you, John, and join this  revolution whereby God?s justice will be manifest in the world.? By  submitting to John?s baptism, Jesus declares, ?I am ready for the  revolution!? Other textual clues indicate the political and religious radicalism of John and  Jesus. John?s baptismal activity occurs in the wilderness (Matthew 3:1). In the  first century CE, the word wilderness increasingly obtained a subversive  significance. Historical accounts approximately during the time of Jesus  attest to social protest movements around Judea against the ruling  establishments where the agitators led their followers into the wilderness. Thus, John?s choice of the wilderness and Jesus? willingness to join him there  would have carried a subversive symbolism, especially given the popularity of  John?s movement. John?s revolution, which people joined through repentance and  baptism, declared that God?s true power would emerge on the margins of the  society (the wilderness) and not in the center of the establishment  (Jerusalem and Rome). Still another indicator of the revolutionary commitment of John and Jesus is the  centrality of repentance in their proclamation. Excessive, sentimental use has  blunted the sharp edge of the word repentance . Repentance involves more than  an admission of wrong. The Greek word for repentance ( metanoia ) connotes  a change of mindset . To repent is to adopt a new mindset that causes a  person to turn around. Repentance is a revolutionary act, creating a new way of  imagining the world. Both John and Jesus assert that only those with new  mindsets will be fit for the new kingdom. Furthermore, the means by which John and Jesus meet their deaths should  convince even the most hardened skeptics about the revolutionary nature  of their ministries. Neither dies of ?old age? or ?natural causes.? Both  are the victims of government-sponsored execution . Challenge By stepping into the Jordan River with John, Jesus signs his own death  certificate. The church would look so different if we truly lived out the  revolutionary implications of baptism. Unfortunately, throughout Christian  history, believers often have spent more time fighting over the mode of  baptism (e.g., immersion, sprinkling, in the name of the Trinity, or in Jesus?  name only) than fathoming the depths of its meaning. The next time I baptize  someone, I will be sure to ask that person, ?Are you really ready for this  revolution? It may just cost you your life!? Descriptive Details The descriptive details of this passage include: Sounds : The sounds of the Jordan River ); the dialogue between  John and Jesus 4-15); the voice from heaven ); Sights : The Jordan River ); John (whose clothing is described in  v. 4); the opening of the heavens ); the descending of the Spirit of  God ); Jesus 2 ; Smells : The scent of the Jordan River ); Tastes : John?s meals (locusts and wild honey) ; and Textures : John?s clothing ; the sensation of the waters of the  Jordan River upon the skin of John and Jesus ). Stories and Quotations The New Testament scholar Bart Ehrman provocatively addresses the political,  even revolutionary, nature of the ministries of John and Jesus. He writes: If, for example, Jesus had simply been a great moral teacher, a gentle rabbi who  did nothing more than urge his devoted followers to love God and one another? then he would scarcely have been seen as a threat to the social order and nailed  to a cross. Great moral teachers were not crucified?unless their teachings  were considered subversive. Nor were charismatic leaders with large  followings?unless their followers were thought to be dangerous? John the  Baptist was imprisoned and executed because of his preaching? Jesus was to  fare no better. 3 Notes 1. Long, Thomas G. Matthew . Westminster Bible companion. Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox Press, 1997. p. 33. 2. For a recent artistic reconstruction of Jesus? face, which  depicts his African-Asian features, consult Mike Fillon?s article ?Real  Face of Jesus,? in Popular Mechanic, December 2002. Online location: www.popularmechanics.com/science/research/1282186.html accessed 22 October 2007. 3. Ehrman, Bart D. The New Testament: A Historical Introduction to the Early Christian Writings. New York: Oxford University Press, 2000. p. 233. &amp;nbsp The BIG IDEA (2009) Homelessness January 2009 Literacy and Education February 2009 Economic Empowerment March 2009 Ministering to Persons Who Have Disabilities and Special Needs April 2009 Affordable Housing May 2009 Health and Wellness June 2009 Prison Ministy July 2009 Innovative Worship August 2009 Crime and Violence Prevention September 2009 Pastoral Care and Counseling October 2009 Substance Abuse November 2009 HIV/AIDS December 2009 <!-- .yalc-cls { width:255px; height:308px; padding: 0px !important; margin-bottom:15px; } .yalc-cls ul { list-style: none; margin: 0 0 0 0 !important; padding: 0; } .yalc-cls ul li { list-style: none; margin:0px; padding:0px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 0 no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 87px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px 0 no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -87px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 51px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -87px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -138px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 52px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -138px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -190px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 53px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -190px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -243px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 65px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -243px no-repeat; } --> HOME RESOURCES THE ONLINE FORUM TEACHING VIDEOS THE SPOTLIGHT CORNER 2013 Units Kwanzaa - Thursday, December 26, 2013 Watch Night - Tuesday, December 31, 2013 Multimedia Videos Audios "
