" Lectionary Commentaries &amp;nbsp LENT (Season of Lent: February 6?March 22, 2008) LECTIONARY COMMENTARY Sunday, February 10, 2008 John E. Guns, Guest Lectionary Commentator Pastor, St. Paul Missionary Baptist Church, Jacksonville, FL Lection ? Romans 12:1-2 (New Revised Standard Version)  I appeal to you therefore, brothers and sisters, by the mercies of God,  to present your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable to God,  which is your spiritual worship.  Do not be conformed to this world but  be transformed by the renewing of your mind, so that you may discern what is  the will of God-what is good and acceptable and perfect. I. Description of the Liturgical Moment As our culture and the church become more secular and driven by the seductive  spirit of distorted materialism, the need for a healthy observance of Lent  increases. Lent, which began in the fourth century, has endured several stages  of development. In its origination, Lent served as a forty-day period of study  and concentrated prayer in preparation for baptism, which would be held during  the Easter season. Throughout the course of time, Lent has evolved to serve as  a season of self-denial and intense consecration. While the former are worthy pursuits, the notion of redemptive service tied to  self-denial has not been sufficiently presented from the modern pulpit nor  embraced in Christian culture. I believe it is important that Lent becomes a  season, particularly in the African American church, of sacrifice and  self-denial tied to the purpose of redemptive societal engagement. II. Biblical Interpretation for Preaching and Worship: Romans 12:1-2 Part One: The Contemporary Contexts of the Interpreter One of the weightier challenges for the African American preacher is to  convince the average worshipper to embrace a life of meaningful sacrifice  coupled with authentic redemptive service to others. This mandate for sacrifice  has become challenging because much of the preaching today focuses on the  individual and the pursuit for more. Modesty and simplicity have been replaced  with extravagance. For many, the word sacrifice is an unwelcome intruder,  demanding more than we have a desire to give. Yet throughout our history,  sacrifice has been a staple of our struggles against oppression and the  dehumanizing treatment of our oppressors. The Lenten season within the  African American church context should not only be a time of self-denial but  also a season of sacrifice where one is inspired to embrace the spirit of  modesty and service. In my own context, self-denial, modesty, and service to  others are themes that I have preached and I have endeavored to model each.  I believe strongly that to turn around a generation that so readily embraces  unhealthy materialism, the church must preach and model an unmistakable image  of Christ as a savior who denied himself and sacrificed for us, lived modestly,  and served others. This is the profound lesson embedded in Romans 12:1-3. Part Two: Biblical Commentary Paul in Romans 12:1-3 provides a great challenge to those who have confessed  Jesus Christ as Lord. He calls upon those who have embraced the Gospel of  Jesus Christ, experienced justification (5:1-11) and now live under the  authority of the Holy Spirit (8:1-17) to offer themselves as sacrifices unto  God. This idea of offering or sacrifice is grounded in the system of offerings found  in the Pentateuch. There were three main types or groups of sacrifices in  ancient Israel?s worship: those that made atonement; those that were for  celebration (peace offerings, as well as other variations, such as Passover);  and those that were for dedication (meal offerings, as well offering the first  fruit, first born, paying vows, and making other types of dedicatory rituals).  Essentially, there was the forgiveness and acceptance by God through atoning  sacrifices, the celebration of being at peace with God in the fellowship or  peace offering, and the dedication to worship and serve God through the  dedication or meal offering. Paul is clearly aware of these sacrificial  customs discussed in the Pentateuch. In fact, throughout Romans (fifty-seven  times in total) he quotes from the Pentateuch and other Old Testament books as  he provides a linkage between the old and the new for his readers. Paul declares that as a result of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ those who  confess him are now called to submit themselves as instruments of God?s will  through consecration. This consecration involves the intentional yielding of  oneself to the desires of Jesus Christ. This offering or intentional yielding  of one?s self now takes on the character of the offerings/sacrifices in the  Old Testament. Because of Jesus Christ, the offering of one now is ?holy? and  ?acceptable? as was the requirement of the lamb used in the Old Testament  sacrifice system. What is important to note is that through the offering of one?s self to God,  authentic and God acceptable worship can occur. In this instance the word  worship, which is derived from the Greek word latreia, means the performance  of sacred services as required by the Levitical law. The nature of this  consecration then forms and shapes itself around the performance of acts that  speak of the mercy of God through Jesus Christ. This mercy, expressed through  the justifying work of Jesus Christ, now motivates the believer to yield  himself or herself in a substantive way to the will of God. The consecration  of the believer now satisfies the requirement of the law found in the Old  Testament, not as an extension of a legal system of religion, but rather in  and through the life changing sacrifice of Jesus Christ. His sacrifice  persuades those who call him Lord to live a life of ultimate commitment.  This ultimate commitment pleases God and is expressed through a life of  service, which then becomes a marvelous statement of worship. As persons who lead others in worship, it is important that worship is  holistically defined. Paul allows us to see worship as service. I suggest  that if we follow the model of our Christ, this can aid greatly in inspiring  congregations to embrace worship as acts of service for others done in the  name of Christ. Worship is now enfleshed and it moves beyond the sanctuary  into the streets. Worship is now the kindness I extend to those in need.  Worship is now the time I invest in assisting those who are attempting to rise  above the obvious barriers of our educational system. Worship is now the  resources I give to causes that improve and enhance the quality of life for  fellow travelers. Worship is now my life of service and sacrifice because I  have a holistic understanding of worship. What is the key to one?s willingness to make such a sacrifice? What aids  greatly in one?s ability to embrace sacrifice and service as a lifestyle? The  key is found in Romans 12:2. In v. 2, it is shown that the worshipper who  serves and sacrifices must have a transformed mind. The idea of transformation  is twofold. First, it is grounded in a full embrace of the process of inner  change, and second it rejects the world system, which contradicts the will of  God. This means that doing the will of God is inexplicably linked to one?s  willingness to endure the process of change, which results in the offering or  sacrifice of oneself. The Lenten Season is powerful because is provides the individual an opportunity  to begin transformation with the support of a communal setting, the church.  During this period and beyond, the idea of sacrifice and service are important  concepts that we can make plans to pursue. During this season of repentance,  self-denial, and prayer, we should strive to find meaningful ways to live out  our faith. The Lenten Season allows us to seek out ways to redemptively  involve ourselves in our community and the world through the local church.  Thus, in a world that can be ruggedly individualistic, we now find communal  participation through the Lenten Season. The transformation of our minds from a self-directed orientation to one that  seeks service and sacrifice will lead us to engage in acts of compassion and  mercy. The rejection of a societal pathos of selfishness and over indulgence  will lead to a new understanding of worship. In the end, the authentic spirit  of sacrifice birthed from a transformed mind leads to a fresh and exciting  life of service, which is true worship. Challenge This text calls us to yield ourselves completely to God through Jesus Christ,  living a life of meaningful service. As Jesus Christ offered himself so are  we to do the same. As he became our redeemer, so are we to become redemptive  tools in the hands of a merciful God. Descriptive Details The descriptive details in this passage include: Sounds : Our cries as we endure the process of being transformed by Christ;  words of appreciation from those whom we serve; and Sights : Cleaner communities; the smiling faces of children; the  appreciative faces of those who are lonely as they receive visits of comfort. &amp;nbsp The BIG IDEA (2009) Homelessness January 2009 Literacy and Education February 2009 Economic Empowerment March 2009 Ministering to Persons Who Have Disabilities and Special Needs April 2009 Affordable Housing May 2009 Health and Wellness June 2009 Prison Ministy July 2009 Innovative Worship August 2009 Crime and Violence Prevention September 2009 Pastoral Care and Counseling October 2009 Substance Abuse November 2009 HIV/AIDS December 2009 <!-- .yalc-cls { width:255px; height:308px; padding: 0px !important; margin-bottom:15px; } .yalc-cls ul { list-style: none; margin: 0 0 0 0 !important; padding: 0; } .yalc-cls ul li { list-style: none; margin:0px; padding:0px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 0 no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 87px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-1:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px 0 no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -87px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 51px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-2:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -87px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -138px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 52px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-3:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -138px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -190px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 53px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-4:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -190px no-repeat; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5 { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) 0 -243px no-repeat; display:block; width:255px; height: 65px; text-indent: -999999px; } .yalc-cls ul li a.yalc-link-5:hover { background:transparent url(blurbs/yalc-tabs.png) -255px -243px no-repeat; } --> HOME RESOURCES THE ONLINE FORUM TEACHING VIDEOS THE SPOTLIGHT CORNER 2013 Units Kwanzaa - Thursday, December 26, 2013 Watch Night - Tuesday, December 31, 2013 Multimedia Videos Audios "
