  September 28, l986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchMorningJohn Piper, PastorCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper    SPEAK TRUTH WITH YOUR NEIGHBOR  Ephesians 4:25 Speak Truth "Therefore, putting away falsehood, let every one speak the truth with hisneighbor, for we are members one of another." I would like to begin this morning by addressing the most notorious but notthe most important issue relating to falsehood; namely, the question: Isit ever right to tell a lie? I am going to address the issue, but I am notgoing to answer the question directly. What I am going to say is this: Itis possible to be a person who never intentionally lies and yet be a hardenedsinner, living in darkness and cut off from Christ in unbelief; and it ispossible to be a person who fears the Lord, walks by faith and yet feelconstrained in extreme, life-threatening situations to oppose evil by lyingintentionally. The reason I say that you can be virtually free from intentional lying andstill be unregenerate and bound to sin, is that there may be cultural orpersonal incentives that have nothing to do with God, and yet make you wantto have the reputation of dependability -- to be known as a person whoseword is as good as an oath. And the reason I say that you can be a godly person who trusts Christ andstill feel constrained to lie in extreme, life-threatening situations, isthat there are several stories in the Bible where this is exactly what happened. For example, in Exodus 1 the Egyptian Pharaoh decides to deplete the strengthof the nation of Israel by killing all the boys that are born. He says tothe Hebrew midwives in verse 16, "When you serve as a midwife to the Hebrewwomen, and see them upon the birthstool, if it is a son, you shall kill him;but if it is a daughter, she shall live." But, verse 17 says, "The midwives feared God, and did not do as the kingof Egypt commanded them, but let the male children live." When the king ofEgypt asked them (v. 18) why they did this, they answered (in v. 19), "Becausethe Hebrew women are not like the Egyptian women; for they are vigorous andare delivered before the midwife comes to them." Now, regardless of how vigorous the Hebrew women were in childbirth, thisstatement is in effect a lie. It is meant to lead Pharaoh to believe a falsehood,namely, that the midwives were doing their best to obey him but just couldn'tget there in time to make the death look like a stillbirth. But verse 17 says that the motive behind their disobedience to the king wasa genuine fear of God: "They feared God, and did not do as the king of Egyptcommanded them." And in verse 20 it says, "God dealt well with the midwives;and the people multiplied and grew very strong. And because the midwivesfeared God he gave them families." So they are not rebuked; they are blessed Another example is found in Joshua 2. Joshua sent two men to spy out Jericho,and the king of Jericho found out that they were there. They hid in the houseof Rahab the harlot. Verse 6 says that she took them to her roof and coveredthem with stalks of flax. When the king's messengers come to Rahab's houseand inquire about the men, she says (in vv. 4-5), "True, Men came to me,but I did not know where they came from; and when the gate was closed, atdark, the men went out; where the men went I do not know." The rest of the chapter tells how she believed in the God of Israel and pleadedfor the deliverance and of her family safety when Jericho would be attacked.Hebrews 11:31 says, "By faith Rahab the harlot did not perish with thosewho were disobedient, because she had given friendly welcome to the spies."So the Biblical interpretation of her action was that it was done from aheart of faith, even though she lied to the king's messengers. So I conclude from these two Biblical stories that it is possible to be aperson who fears the Lord (like the Hebrew midwives), and acts in faith (likeRahab) and yet feel constrained in extreme, life-threatening situations tooppose evil by lying. The reason that this is all I am willing to say instead of answering thequestion: Is it ever right to tell a lie? is that in neither of these cases(nor anywhere else in Scripture that I am aware of), does the Bible explicitlycommend or approve the lying itself. The midwives are commended for fearingthe Lord and not killing the babies. And Rahab gives evidence of her faithby giving a friendly welcome to the Israelite spies. But her lying is notexplicitly commended. I've struggled a long time with how to think and teach about these borderlinecases. And I have concluded that pastorally the wisest thing for me to dois to acknowledge that in the fear of God and in the walk of faith worthysaints have chosen to oppose the effects of evil by concealing the truthfrom wicked men. And having recognized that fact and that possibility, wedo well to shift our attention to the overwhelming Biblical emphasis on thecondemnation of falsehood and lying. We are going to focus on Ephesians 4:25 but first let me give you some ideafrom the rest of Scripture how serious this matter is in the eyes of God. Proverbs 6:16-17, "There are six things which the Lord hates, seven whichare an abomination to him: haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands that shedinnocent blood, a heart that devises wicked plans, feet that make haste torun to evil, a false witness who breathes out lies, and a man who sows discordamong brothers." Proverbs 12:22, "Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord." Proverbs 12:19, "Truthful lips endure for ever, but a lying tongue is butfor a moment." Proverbs 20:17, "Bread gained by deceit is sweet to a man, but afterwardhis mouth will be full of gravel." Proverbs 21:6, "The getting of treasures by a lying tongue is a fleetingvapor and a snare of death." Revelation 21:7-8, "He who conquers shall have this heritage, and I willbe his God and he shall be my son. But as for the cowardly, the faithless,the polluted, as for murderers, fornicators, sorcerers, idolaters, and allliars, their lot shall be in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone,which is the second death." (Cf. 21:27; 22:15) What I want you to see from these few texts is that we must not play fastand loose with this issue as though it were a matter of indifference to Godwhether we tell the truth or not. There is some kind of connection betweenthe practice of lying and the condition of the heart that makes Biblicalwriters certain that those who practice lying in their ordinary lives areoutside the scope of salvation. So we do well to ponder this matter together. You recall that Ephesians 4:25 is a specific, practical instance of verse22. Verse 22 says, "Put off your old nature which belongs to your formermanner of life and is corrupt through deceitful lusts (i.e., desires)." Thenverse 25 uses the same word for "put off" and says specifically, "Therefore,putting off falsehood, let every one speak the truth with his neighbor, forwe are members one of another." So it is clear that falsehood is a specific characteristic of the "old nature"referred to in verse 22. Put off the old nature, specifically, put off falsehood.Why is this helpful? It is helpful because it shows us where lying comesfrom. Verse 22 says that the old nature -- the pre-conversion nature -- is corruptedbecause of desires, and the thing that makes these desires bad is that theycome from deceit. There is nothing wrong with desire in and of itself. What'sbad is when desire goes after the wrong things. And the reason desire goesafter the wrong things is because our hearts are is deceived about what istruly desirable. But now we have seen that lying is one of the characteristics of this oldnature. In other words when Paul says that the old nature is corrupt he means(among other things) that the old nature is a liar. And this means then thatthe corruption of lying comes from the desires of deceit. Very simply thismeans that the reason we lie is because we have desires that we shouldn'thave, and the reason we have them is because we are deceived about what istruly desirable. To pick up the lesson from verses l8 and l9, our hardness of heart againstGod leads to darkness of understanding and darkness leads to ignorance ofwhat is truly valuable and desirable in life, and ignorance lays us opento all the deceits of Satan who Jesus says is the Father of lies (John 8:44). Let's be specific and make ourselves aware of some of the deceitful desiresthat tempt us to lie. I think all the desires that lead people to lie canbe summed up these two: fear and greed. Two kinds of fear and two kinds ofgreed. Let's think first about fear. In Matthew 21:23-27 the authority of Jesusis challenged by the chief priests and elders. "By what authority do youdo these things?" Before he answers them he gives them a test question tosee if they really love the truth or whether they are only trying to justifythemselves and trip him up. He asks, "The baptism of John, whence was it? From heaven or from men?" Nowwe can watch a lie in the making. We can see what desires go into the makingof a lie. It says (in v. 25) that the chief priests argued with one anotherand said, "If we say, 'From heaven'", he will say to us, 'Why then did you not believehim?' But if we say, 'From men,' we are afraid of the multitude; for allhold that John was a prophet.' So they answered Jesus, 'We do not know.'And he said to them, 'Neither will I tell you by what authority I do thesethings.'" The chief priests and the elders fail the test. They prove that their deepdesire is not for truth. What is it for? It is for personal esteem and physicalsafety! They are controlled by fear. Two kinds of fear. First, they fear getting egg on their faces and losing the esteem of thepeople. They fear being shown wrong. We see this in verse 25: they concludethat they can't answer Jesus' question by saying John's baptism is from heaven.Why? Not because it is untrue -- that is quite irrelevant to them. No. Itis simply because if they answer that way they will give Jesus a chance toshow them in an inconsistency -- "Why then did you not believe him?" So theyare driven toward a lie by their desire for the esteem of men and their fearof having to admit an inconsistency. The second kind of fear that controls them is fear of physical harm. Physicalsafety is more important than truth. We see this in verse 26: they can'tanswer that John's baptism is from men because the multitude believe Johnwas a prophet and so the people might get mad and stone the priests! So instead of giving the answer that they believe is true (namely, from men)they lie. They are evasive, diplomatic, or (as some say) political: theysay, "We don't know!" So we see the origin of a lie in two kinds of fear: fear of losing personalesteem and fear of getting physically hurt. But note well! These desiresfor safety and esteem are deceitful desires. Satan is deceiving the chiefpriests. It is a lie that popular esteem is to be desired more than speakingthe truth. It is a lie that physical safety is to be desired more than speakingthe truth. Ask the martyrs! Listen to Jesus! Don't run from persecution bylying or evading a testimony of truth. What does he say? Blessed are youwhen men persecute you for righteousness' sake! And so the lie of the chief priests is produced by the lies of Satan, thefather of lies. And that's how it is with virtually all lying. We are deceivedinto thinking that the mockery or abuse from some group is more to be fearedthan the disapproval of God, and so we lie. I said that lying is not just caused by two kinds of fear, but also by twokinds of greed -- greed for money and all it can buy, and greed for praiseand approval. Ananias and Sapphira are an example of the first kind of greed. The solda piece of property and kept back some of the proceeds for themselves andtook the rest of it to the apostles presenting it as the whole sum. Petersaid (in Acts 5:3), "Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to theHoly Spirit?" Satan is on hand again in his usual role. How did he get Ananiasto lie to Peter and to God? He deceived Ananias into thinking that it is more blessed to keep than togive. And that is a lie -- exactly the opposite of the word of Christ. Satanprobably suggested to Ananias all the possible expenses that might be comingup, and all the legitimate pleasures that he and his wife Sapphira have gonewithout all these years. So a deceitful desire was born from a lie and gavebirth to a lie. And Ananias dropped dead and so did his wife. And great fearcame upon the whole church. The lying tongue is an abomination to God. That is one kind of greed that produces lying -- the greed for money andwhat it can buy. The other kind of greed that produces lying is greed forpraise or power or position or approval. I will leave the examples here toyour own imagination. We must hasten on to the positive half of the commandin Ephesians 4:25. What we have seen in the connection between verses 22 and 25 is that theold nature is given to lying because it is enslaved to desires that are basedon deceit. The lies of Satan beget the lies of sinners. So Paul says, "Putoff that old nature -- put off lying -- and put on the new nature -- thenature created by God and marked by righteousness and holiness that comenot from Satanic deceit but from the truth" (v. 24). The lies of Satan that beget lies of sinners have to be replaced by the truthof Jesus (v. 21) that begets truthfulness of saints. This is what is meantin verse 23 by the renewing of the spirit of the mind. The mind has to befilled with Satan-fighting truth. And out of that truth will come righteousnessand holiness and part of this holiness is what verse 25 calls, "speakingtruth with your neighbor." O, how I wish we had time to go into all the truth of God's character andpromises that take away the impulse to lie. There are such incredibly greatpromises for God's people that if we really believed them the fear and greedthat tempt us to lie would melt like icicles under an April sun and we wouldbe full of freedom and light -- and, therefore, truth. Truth-telling is a"work of faith" (1 Thess. 1:3), because faith in the goodness and sovereignpower of God conquers the deceitful craving for esteem and safety and moneyand power that causes us to distort the truth in order to gain a worldlyadvantage. But instead of going into all those promises, let's close by focusing brieflyon the one truth Paul chooses to focus on at the end of verse 25. Paul says,"Let every one speak the truth with his neighbor -- (WHY?) -- FOR WE AREMEMBERS ONE OF ANOTHER." So out of all the relationships he could have focused on, he chooses to admonishus to tell the truth to our fellow Christians, because we are all membersof one body, and therefore members of each other (1:23; 2:16; 3:6; 4:16;5:28-30). I think he has in mind this kind of idea: if the body is eating with a fork,and the eye lies to the hand about where the mouth is, why, the hand maystab the eye. In other words, when you deceive a fellow believer it's likedeceiving yourself. When you mislead a believer it means that the truth ofGod concerning the body of Christ hasn't renewed the spirit of your mind. When the truth concerning the reality of the body of Christ and your partin it really hits home and you believe it, the spirit of your mind will betransformed about how you act toward other believers. When the truth of thebody of Christ renews the spirit of your mind, you will no more intentionallylie to a brother or sister in Christ than you will intentionally close yourown eyes while trying to adjust the blade on a live buzz saw. Let's end with this summary and application: With the possible exceptionof very extreme life-threatening situations, lying is part of the corruptold nature. It is caused by desires that come from the deceit of Satan aboutwhat is truly desirable. And therefore it should be stripped off with theold nature in ALL our relationships. But especially in the church! Let every vestige of the deceitful old nature be put away! In the church,let's not have any lying to each other, or hypocrisy, or duplicity, or deception,or varnishing the truth, or evasiveness or equivocation. Let's not be likethat at Bethlehem! But instead let's be candid with each other, and straightforward and plainand frank and open and real and unaffected and accurate and truthful andhonest. Let's walk in the light as He is in the light. In every board andcommittee meeting and every business meeting let's be open and above-boardand straight-out in our dealings, and especially in our leadership. I have tried my best in my six years here to set an example of honest andup-front and straight-forward and candid leadership in my involvement withthe staff and the Council of Deacons and in all our meetings and in the weeklynewsletter. To my knowledge I have never had an agenda that I have hiddenfrom the Council of Deacons, nor ever come to a congregational meeting ofthis church without the readiness and commitment to answer every questionasked with honesty and fullness to the best of my ability. And I believethat by and large this is the spirit of our church. And I pray that thiswill increase and grow. Be renewed in the spirit of your mind by trusting in the promises of Godand by remembering the body of Christ. And let us put away all falsehood,speak truth to our neighbor, for we are members one of another. This is ournew nature, the creation of God in true righteousness and holiness. Perhapsthe children of the world will see and come to glorify our Father in heaven.Amen.   Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
