 1 2004-4-11 Who is that Walking in the Garden? Easter Sunday  Mark Belletini   
Opening Words  We are here to celebrate life with joy and alleluias. How fly the years, another Easter is upon us! Once again, the flowers and glorious music. Once again, words of life and love made new. And once again,  we begin our time with words of hope:  May we live fully, love deeply, learn daily and speak truly that together we might leave the legacy of a better world.   
Sequence: Easter Exultet for 2004  In silence, the world was cradled until the stars sang their first alleluia.  In silence, the flowers rise up from the earth until the blossoms sing alleluia in our hearts.  In silence, the leaves uncurl into the air, until their bright green strikes us, ringing us like a bell, sounding an alleluia.  In silence, the child is carried in the womb, until the first cry breaks across the morning™s pink light, a first alleluia.  In silence, the word Love scrolls across the  
 2 ancient scriptures, until the city of justice is built on the earth with a shout of Alleluia.  And now let us keep silence for a time on this day, newly made, that The Great Alleluia might find  enough spaciousness in us to sound once again.  silence  Let us, on this day in particular remember the great lives which have interwoven with our own down the years, and brought us to a sense of life and love that is stronger than death. These lives we remember now privately, or name aloud in thanksgiving.  naming  And now let Alleluias echo across the room–   The Readings:  The First Reading comes from the Gospel of John, written around the year 100, and edited and changed around the year 110 by at least two different editors. We know little,if anything, about the life of the authors, although one of the editors may indeed have been the woman who was bishop in Ephesus.  In the vicinity where he was crucified, there was a garden. In that garden, there was a new rock-cut tomb never before used. There they laid him.   So on Sunday morning, Mary of Magdala comes to the tomb in the half-light. She notices that the stone has been rolled back from the mouth of the tomb–.  
 3 She stoops and looks down into the tomb, and then stands there, weeping. Then, when she turns around, she catches sight of Jesus, 
standing there, but she has no idea it™s him. So Jesus says to her, ?Lady, why are you crying so? Are you looking for someone?? Thinking him to be the gardener, she says to him, ?Look, mister, if you are the one who has taken him away, tell me, and I will bring him back myself.?  And then he said to her, ?Mary!? And she cried out, ?O my Teacher!?  And he said to her, ?Do not cling so to me, for I am still rising up–?  The Second Reading comes from Marina Schinz™s book,  Visions of Paradise 1985  To create a garden is to search for a better world. In our effort to improve on nature, we are guided by a vision of paradise. Whether the result is a horticultural masterpiece, or only a modest vegetable patch, it is based on the expectation of a glorious future. This hope for the future is at the heart of all gardening.   
Sermon  Many of you know by now how influential my late and beloved grandparents have been in my life. With their wonderful stories and their love, they imparted to my young life so many gifts, so many 
blessings.   But there was one gift they were apparently never able to give me, namely, gardening skills.  They had such skills in spades, of course. Every year, they turned every square inch of their respective back-yards into resplendent gardens. Figs, tomatoes, asparagus, spinach, chard–sheer abundance. One grandfather learned how to graft peach branches onto plum trees. One grandmother, long before people ever spoke of ?organic gardening,? 
 4 saved every single egg-shell and celery top and dug these back into her garden soil to enrich it. During the lean years of the Depression, these gardens gave them hope that they too might see a brighter future, well fed and healthy. And so it was.  But all my attempts at creating a garden ended in disaster. Either the snails ate everything overnight, or the mint plants descended like a Visigoth horde, destroying all things in their path. The basil choked, the tomatoes withered, and the onions wriggled with grubs. Finally I waved my white flag, let the fool mint plants take over, and was done with it.   Maybe when I retire I will magically recover the skills my grandparents tried to teach me in vain. After all, I have to admit I like very much what Mary Schniz™s reading says about gardening:    ?To create a garden is to search for a better world–   guided by a vision of paradise. This hope for the future is at the heart of all gardening.?  As they stooped over the dark earth, my grandparents had hope for a brighter future, cultivated by their own hands.   I have to imagine that other Mediterranean people, like the authors who crafted all the Easter stories, were not too different from my grandparents. Tough lives, difficult days, but with abundant gardens 
around them and a vision of hope for a better world.    After all, just look at how often the image of the garden appears in ancient Mediterranean literature! The Hanging Gardens of Babylon, the Garden of the Hesperides, the Garden of Eden, the Garden of Gethsemane, the 
Garden School of Pythagoras or The Friendship Garden of Epicurus, 
and the Love Garden in the Hebrew book called the Song of Songs:   Upon my couch at night I sought the one I love.  I sought but found him not. 
 5 I must seek the one I love. I asked the watch guards who patrol the town ?Have you seen the one I love?? And when I found him, he said, ‚I have come to my garden, O my own spouse.  I have plucked myrrh and spice.  Let us see if the vine has flowered,  if its blossoms have opened,   if the pomegranates are in bloom.  There I will give my love to you.   It™s clear to me that the folks who first crafted the Easter stories understood this rich garden imagery threading through their cultural heritage, and so began their story with these words:  ?Now in the place where he was crucified, there was a garden–  (John 19:41)  Now, as I say every year, I must say again. The gospel stories are wonderfully crafted literature. They are not historically true in all their details. All that modern historians claim for certain is that a Galilean teacher named Jesus was crucified by the Roman occupying force in Jerusalem some time during the ten-year stint of the Roman governor Pilatus. We can only vaguely conjecture what happened afterward. Some are not even convinced the teacher was buried at all. All that they can affirm is that Rome killed him, and that his body disappeared.  And so, even those Mediterraneans who lived closer in time to the actual event didn™t really know what happened for real. So, fifty years after the crucifixion, they created a great variety of literary speculations, not one of which matches any other. One writes of a moving breakfast at the beach, another imagines a long walk and conversation in the countryside. And the author we call John writes of a certain Mary wandering in the garden where Jesus was supposedly buried. Fashioned after the passage in the Song of Songs I read earlier, John™s garden makes a perfect setting for his interpretation of events. A woman named Mary 
 6 weeps at the tomb of Jesus. She weeps not just because he died, but because his dead body is missing, the final outrage in a whole week of outrage.   Suddenly, she turns and sees a gardener standing there. The text suggests it™s Jesus, but also makes clear that Mary has no idea who it is. He apparently does not look anything like Jesus. In fact, he is the gardener.  Totally enraged that her teacher™s body is missing, she snaps a demand at once, as she boldly accuses him of having stolen the body ?Listen, 
mister, tell me where you put it and I myself will go get it and bring it back where it belongs.?   But the gardener suddenly calls her by her name. She melts at once, decides that this stranger IS her teacher, somehow come back to life in some different form. She lunges and grabs hold of him. But he pushes her away:   ?Don™t grab hold of me–I am still rising up...?  The story is pretty strange, on first reading. But, since fundamentalism wasn™t even invented until the last century, I have to trust that the folks who wrote this story actually expected people to use their heads when reading it. Here™s what I say:    First, let me look at this woman Mary herself. Although her name 
figures in plenty of recent populist novels and books, like The DaVinci Code, and Holy Blood, Holy Grail, most everything those books say about her is just plain fantasia, unsupported by any real evidence. All that modern scholars can honestly say about Mary is this. She was a woman from Magdala, which was a very prosperous lakeside resort city, a town with the reputation of Beverly Hills. According to one gospel writer, she was thus apparently well-heeled enough to take care of Jesus needs during his teaching years. And there™s evidence she became a significant leader in early church communities.    
 7 And this is all we know about her. Anything else you may have heard, read or seen in a movie is simply foolishness.  So, in interpreting the story, I have to begin with what we know of this Mary. First, she is from Magdala. But this in itself tells us something; she grew up in a place of privilege. Oh, she knew that slavery existed–after all, the whole economy of the Empire was based upon slavery. But, as a prosperous and influential person, she knew she lived in an entirely different world than the slaves in her community. After all, slaves had neither legal rights nor any bright hope for a better life.     And I say that anyone hearing this story in the first century would have 
immediately understood the class significance of the two words ?Magdala? and ?gardener.? Anyone would have known that a person from Magdala knew a life of privilege. And anyone would also have known that the gardener in this story was a slave. All gardeners were slaves in those days. No one bent over their spade just out of hope for a better life for themselves, like my grand-parents.  Slaves had no vision of paradise tethered to their hoe and hammock.  So this Mary, who clearly respected her Teacher, is understandably shocked when she finds his body missing from the tomb. The awful death of her teacher was bad enough. Now there is not even a trace of 
him left. What a nightmare!   So when she catches sight of the gardener, she treats him like the slave he is, that is, as someone not considered worthy of much respect. She immediately accuses him of the theft. Then she snaps a demand that he 
had better confess his crime or else.   The gardener, however, surprises her. Instead of responding like a slave, he calls her by name. Mary! This is something no slave would do, but only an equal. And this is when Mary suddenly remembers all the teachings of her Teacher: ?All human beings are born with equal dignity. Male and female, slave or free, Greek or Jew– all human 
 8 categories of prejudice and caricature are null and void. People are inherently worthy–?     With a start she realizes that treating this slave with contempt betrays the teachings of her late and beloved Teacher.  .    So, realizing her mistake, she joyfully reaches for the gardener. He now embodies her teacher. She grabs him tight. But the author of the story has the gardener warn her away. ?Don™t cling so to me–?  Why? He wants to point out that by grabbing on to him, she is still missing the point. She still thinks the gardener needs to be treated with respect, because her teacher says so.  But the story insists that Jesus is ?still rising–? In other words, Easter won™t finally dawn until she decides to treat the gardener with respect, not because her teacher says to do so, but simply because he is a fellow human being.  The words put in the mouth of the gardener, ?Don™t cling so to me? is the author telling us, ?Don™t try and make the man Jesus himself what you hold on to. And don™t elevate the ordinary human being Jesus into some authority, or worse, God, and do things just because he says to do them. Instead, treat other human beings with care and compassion because they are who they are.    And so this garden story, set amid all the other wonderful garden stories of the Mediterranean world, offers us an invitation. It invites us to join in cultivating a garden, an Easter garden, where humane living, and not some ghostly doctrine of resuscitation, proclaims the meaning of Easter. Easter, this reading says, is not about the resurrection of a God, but the rising up of human beings everywhere into their own dignity and power, transcending all the human-made categories of gender roles, age, color, culture, orientation, ability, intelligence, work, or especially, in this story, class.   In the Easter garden, which this story invites us to help cultivate, no one can receive special deference because of their gender, position, history, heritage, degree or pedigree, story, clothing, or even robes.  In the Easter garden, everyone has a deep story. And that story is just as heart-
 9 breaking and human as the life-story of the person sitting right next to them.  Now of course I understand that sometimes there are people in our lives whom we experience as annoying. Or angry. Or broken. Or rude. Or even frightening. Of course. But because that is true, don™t imagine I am saying that cultivating the Easter garden of mutual care is something easy, or a pastime for the naïve and boundary-less. No. Cultivating such a garden is not easy, but the toughest thing imaginable. I have to believe this is true because of the garden metaphor itself. I watched my 
grandparents cultivate their own gardens. I could see the ache reflected in their eyes as their backs bent, their knees bruised, their muscles grew sore–being a gardener is no easy work, and all real gardening takes time and patience and intelligence. Cultivating an Easter garden, cultivating a new Eden, cultivating hope and paradise, can hardly be any less work. A lot more, actually.  John Dickinson™s painting up here at first looks like the empty tomb of 
the Easter Story. Beyond the open doorway is a garden, bright and sunny, filled with flowers. But in actuality, John wasn™t painting the Easter story. He was painting a cellar in an old family house, a cellar where gardening tools might be kept until needed in the spring. Then they would be hauled up the stairs to turn and furrow the soil in the 
garden outside.  And thus, for me, this delightful painting echoes the connection I have made between John™s Easter story, and my grandparents bent over the dark earth. It echoes the connection between the stories told about the 
teacher Jesus, and your own stories. And it opens on the garden where the slave and the privileged citizen discovered they were at root, brother and sister. In some ways, this story completes the Passover story. Not only do slaves need to be set free, but those who benefit from slavery also need to be set free. Free to cultivate a garden of hope together.  
 10 So my Easter faith, as a Unitarian Universalist, is that human worth is inherent, not earned. It™s found in gardeners, just as much as in those who own the gardens. It™s found in my grandparents even though they have died, just as much as it is found in me and you who are alive here and now. It™s found in everyone.  Easter for me is not about a God coming back to life. Easter for me is an 
invitation to every one of us to climb the steps out of the shadowy tomb, the dim cellar of cruel categories and self-deception, and up into the bright and free Easter garden of mutual meeting, the true garden of paradise.    And I say the Easter story I read this morning is not a story told to deny the reality of death, but rather, it™s a story told to affirm all the possibilities of deeper life and deeper loving for all the living and the dead. It™s a story of illumination, of brightness, of alleluias and buds opening into blossoms. And so I find it fitting to conclude with the following prayer written by Unitarian Universalist poet May Sarton, which we said together earlier:    Help us to be always the hopeful gardeners of the spirit, who know that without darkness, nothing comes to birth, as without light, nothing flowers.  Offertory  On this spring day, when flowers are blossoming and trees are budding, may we too blossom and bud in our generosity toward this congregation. Just as no garden blossoms without care and tender planting, so no congregation blossoms without financial care and tender giving. The morning offering for the health and welfare of this congregation will now be given and received. 
