 January 9, 2000 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor    DEVOTE YOURSELVES TO PRAYER (Colossians 4:2-4)   Devote yourselves to prayer, keeping alertin it with an attitude of thanksgiving; (3)praying at the same time for us as well,that God will open up to us a door for theword, so that we may speak forth the mysteryof Christ, for which I have also been imprisoned;(4) that I may make it clear in the way Iought to speak. One thing is crystal clear from this passage:it is God's will that we pray to him. Sometimeswe struggle to know the will of God for ourlives. But there are some things that youdo not have to struggle to know. One of themis that God's will is that you pray to him.The text says, Devote yourselves toprayer. God wills for you to pray tohim. Now before we think about anything else -the meaning of devote or theneed for alertness or time andplace and quantity and method of praying-before all that, just let it sink in thatGod wants us to pray to him. He commandsit. What is Prayer? But to ponder this we do have to ask whatpray means. Mainly it means askingGod for things. By things I don'tmean objects - stuff. I mean, generally,whatever your heart desires or needs. And,of course, what your heart needs most isGod - to know him and trust him and lovehim and obey him. I know that we should cometo God with more than asking. We should comeconfessing sins and giving thanks and praise.In a broad sense, prayer includes all that.But, speaking precisely, prayer is requesting,asking. That's why in Colossians 4:2 it says,Devote yourselves to prayer . . . with(or in) thanksgiving. Thanking Godshould always be part of what we do in prayer.But prayer, in the strict sense, means requesting.So I define it as asking God for things. Let's put beside this a great historic definitionof prayer. There is a story about D. L. Moodymaking a visit to Scotland in the 1800'sand opening one of his talks at a local gradeschool with the rhetorical question, Whatis prayer? To his amazement, hundreds ofchildren's hands went up. So he decided tocall on a lad near the front, who promptlystood up and said, Prayer is an offeringup of our desires unto God, in the name ofChrist, by the help of his Spirit, with confessionof our sins, and thankful acknowledgmentof his mercies. This is the answerto question #178 in the Westminster Catechism.To this Moody responded by saying, Bethankful, son, that you were born in Scotland.1 Be sure to notice the main thing: Prayeris an offering up of our desires unto God.That is the main meaning of prayer. Withconfession of sins and  with. . . thankful acknowledgment of his mercies- these go along with these expressed desires.But the essence of prayer is the expressionof our dependence on God through requests. God Loves to Be Asked Now think about this for a moment. God'swill is that we, his creatures, ask him forthings. And it is not just his will, it ishis delight. He loves to be asked for things.Proverbs 15:8 says, The prayer of theupright is His delight. He is so eagerto hear prayers and respond to them thathe says in Isaiah 65:24, It will alsocome to pass that before they call, I willanswer; and while they are still speaking,I will hear. In fact, he takes specialsteps to see to it that he is constantlybadgered. I say that reverently and, I think,truly on the basis of Isaiah 62:6-7 - Onyour walls, O Jerusalem, I have appointedwatchmen; all day and all night they willnever keep silent. You who remind the LORD,take no rest for yourselves; and give Himno rest until He establishes and makes Jerusalema praise in the earth. So God lovesbeing asked for things so much that he appointspeople to give him no rest butto remind the Lord and never[to] keep silent. Meditating on this is very encouraging toour faith and hope. This means that God,the Creator of the Universe, who holds ourlife in his hands and rules the world, isthe kind of God who loves to be asked forthings. I find it also tremendously strengtheningto my faith to meditate further on why thisis. Why does God not only will that we askhim for things, but delight in it and loveit like incense (Revelation 5:8) and takesteps to see that it happens? What's behindthis delight in our asking him for things?You might say, Well, it's because Godis love. It's his very nature to be a Giver.That is absolutely right. As Paul said inRomans 11:35-36, Who has given a giftto him that he should be repaid? For fromhim and through him and to him are all things.To him be glory for ever. God is always the Giver (see Acts 17:25).That is what he loves to be. And the lastphrase of Romans 11:36 says why, Tohim be glory for ever. It is more gloriousto be a Giver than a getter. Getters lookneedy. Givers look self-sufficient. So Godordains prayer because he wants us to seehim as gloriously self-sufficient and ourselvesas totally needy. So he says in Psalm 50:15,Call upon Me in the day of trouble;I shall rescue you, and you will honor Me.God answers our call for help so that weget the rescue and he gets the honor. Iwill rescue you and you will honor me.Similarly in John 14:13 Jesus says, Whateveryou ask in My name, that will I do, so thatthe Father may be glorified in the Son.Ask for things in my name! Why? So that theFather may be glorified. So he may look asglorious as he really is. Let these truths behind prayer strengthenyour resolve to pray this year. God willsthat you pray. He wills that you ask himfor things. And not just wills it, but reallydelights in it and really wants it and takessteps to see that it happens, because heenjoys it so much. Why should we be confidentof this? Because it comes from the very natureof who God is. He is love - he is a Giver.Why is he a Giver? Because he is utterlyself-s ufficient and delights to overflowand show us his glorious fullness and strengthand wisdom, and that he will give us whateverwe need to get us to everlasting joy in him.God loves to show the fullness of his gracein meeting the needs of humble, dependent- that is, praying - people, because it magnifieshis riches and makes our joy. This means that prayer is about as centralto the meaning of the created universe asyou can get. God created us, according toIsaiah 43:7, for his glory. Which we nowsee means that he created the universe sothat persons created in his image would lookto him to satisfy all their wants and needsso that they would get the joy and God wouldget the glory. When we express this lookingto God, we call it prayer. So prayer is not some small thing. It isnot some marginal thing. It is not some incidentalthing in the Christian life. Prayer is atthe heart of why God created the universe.You may have the modern, secular notion thatthe universe is really about great galacticevents and supernovas and remarkable expansesof time and space and energy. But in realitythe center of the created universe is mancreated in the image of God. And the meaningof man in the image of God is to displayGod's glory. And the way God delights todisplay his glory in man is by being dependedon through prayer. It just doesn't get much greater than this.Meditate on this. Muse on it. It is so richand will give you great incentives to prayin 2000. I heard one of you in prayer thisweek refer to inhaling the Word and exhalingprayer. That is very good. We live by theWord and prayer the same way we live by inhalingand exhaling air. This is our life. Devote Yourselves to Prayer Now back to Colossians 4:2, Devoteyourselves to prayer. This does notcome as a surprise now, does it? If prayeris so great and central to God's purposefor the universe and for your life, it isnot surprising that God would tell us, Devoteyourselves to prayer. And it is notsurprising that this word be devotedto or persevere in or continuein occurs six times in the New Testamentin relation to prayer. Acts 1:14, Theseall with one mind were continually devotingthemselves to prayer. Acts 2:42, [Theearly church] were continually devoting themselvesto . . . prayer. Acts 6:4, the apostlessaid they would devote themselves toprayer and to the ministry of the word.Romans 12:12, Rejoice in hope, perseverein tribulation, be devoted to prayer.Ephesians 6:18, Pray at all times inthe Spirit . . . with all perseverance. What does this mean? You pray often and youpray regularly. Prayer is not infrequentand prayer is not hit and miss. Being devotedto prayer means that you are not haphazardand you are not forgetful. It means you takesteps to see that it is part of your regularlife, the same way eating and sleeping are. I say, You take steps, becauseI think that is implied in the next wordsin Colossians 4:2, Devote yourselvesto prayer, keeping alert in it. Keepingalert means that you work against distractionsand hindrances. You do what you have to doto stay awake and to stay at the task. Forexample, Oswald J. Smith, the former pastorof Peoples Church in Toronto, used to getoff his knees when he got sleepy and pacehis room so that he would stay awake forprayer. Gordon Hamilton, a music partnerwith him in his travels, said that he wouldhear him pacing back and forth in prayer.He must have walked for miles.2 But if it means do what you have to do tostay awake and alert in praying, it alsoimplies: do what you have to do to see thatyou pray. So let's take the rest of our timewith some practical points about how to bedevoted to prayer. First let's put the same questions we didlast week: When, where and how. Taking Steps for Prayer: When and Where? When are you going to pray? You may say,I don't want a compartmentalized lifewith prayer in one devotional compartmentand the rest of my life in other compartments.I want an integrated life with prayer saturatingall I do. Well, amen to that. But it'sa false dichotomy, and it won't work to choosebetween a season of prayer in solitude andprayer soaking the rest of your life, asthough those were alternatives. If you wantto walk in prayer all day long, you willneed to linger in prayer in times of quietcommunion with God. Why? Because you can't get deep with Godon the run, fitting him into the cracks ofyour day. But you can enjoy continual fellowshipwith God on the run if you have gone deepwith God in the stillness of the season ofprayer. So yes, by all means make it youraim to have your whole day a walking conversationwith God - his memorized Word feeding youall day, and your desires being offered upto him hour by hour. Make that your aim.And the way to be devoted toprayer like that is to be devoted to regulardaily times of solitude in prayer. You willgo deep with him in the moments of quietfocus, and this depth will make God realand weighty in the rest of the day. So decide on a place and a time for thismeeting with God in prayer. Taking Steps: How Long? How long? If you are doing nothing, do something.Start where you are and take a step. Thenask God to grow you into a deep and wiseand fruitful person. We need Christian sages.And nobody becomes a sage on the run. Theremust be lingering in the presence of Godwith focused meditation on the Word and focusedprayer. It doesn't have to be one long time. It canbe several planned shorter times. For example,there is the great example of Daniel. Hewas a high ranking political official inBabylon. He had enemies and they passed alaw that no one could pray except to theking. Daniel 6:10 says, Now when Danielknew that the document was signed, he enteredhis house (now in his roof chamber he hadwindows open toward Jerusalem); and he continuedkneeling on his knees three times a day,praying and giving thanks before his God,as he had been doing previously. So not only do we see the courage and uttercommitment of Daniel to pray in an open windowwhen his life was threatened for it, butwe see that he was devoted toit three times a day. I have found it veryhelpful at times in my life to set asidea time in the morning, at lunch and beforeor after supper. You go away by yourselfand you read a small portion of Scriptureand you pray and ask for God's help in thatnext third of the day. Or you might do it differently. For example,Psalm 119:164 says, Seven times a dayI praise You, because of Your righteous ordinances.With alarm watches, you can set yourselfany kind of prayer schedule. But don't donothing. Devote yourself to prayer. Be alertin it, and do whatever you have to do tosee that you meet God in a focused way tohear from him in his Word and to offer upyour desires to him in prayer. Taking Steps: How? How? Dozens of things could be said. I willmention three. First, consider praying in concentric circlesfrom your own soul outward to the whole world.This is my regular practice. I pray for myown soul first. Not because I am more deservingthan others, but because if God doesn't awakenand strengthen and humble and fill my ownsoul, then I can't pray for anybody else's.So I plead with the Lord every morning formy own soul's perseverance and purificationand power. Then I go to the next concentric circle,my family, and I pray for each of them byname: Noel, Karsten/Shelly/Millie, Benjamin,Abraham, Barnabas, Talitha and some of myextended family. Then I go to the next concentric circle,the staff and elders of Bethlehem. I namethem all by name. Then I pray for you, Bethlehem Baptist Church.And then I go out from there to differentconcerns and groups at different times: ourmissionaries, our denomination and its schools,the Baptist General Conference, Evangelicalismin general and the church around the world,especially the suffering church. The widercircles include the city and the state andthe nation and the cultural and social issuesof the world. You can't pray for everything every time.So there need to be differences. And yourheart will dictate much of your burden. Somedays one family member or one staff memberor one crisis in the church or the worldwill consume most of your time. But if youhave a pattern - like the concentric circles- you won't spin your wheels wondering whereto start. That's the first thing I would say in answerto the how question. The other is to pray Scripture. The prayertime and the Bible meditation time don'thave to be separate times. It would be bestif they were not separate. If you ask, What do I pray for myself andmy family and my church and the missionariesand the city and the nations, the answeris pray Scripture. God's Word reveals Godand his will. What you want for yourselfand those you pray for is more of God andmore of his will. As you see him in his Word,pray that God would make this seen and knownand loved in the lives of the people youpray for. And as you see his will, pray thatGod would cause it to be done in the livesof those you pray for. Thy will bedone on earth as in heaven. Be intentional about this, but don't be tooself-conscious. Contrived prayers seem inauthentic.If we are so self-conscious that we try tocraft our prayers with interesting turnsof phrase, we will lose the power and realityof prayer. But do try to pray specific Biblicalvalues for people, not worn out cliches andtrite generalities that have no spiritualdepth. For example, if you want to pray for somebody,pray the beatitudes: Father, grant that Johnwould recognize his poverty of spirit. Lethim mourn for his sins and not be indifferentor unconcerned for his own soul. Work a meeknessinto his heart. Grant him to be hungry andthirsty for righteousness. Give him the heartof a peacemaker and a reconciler. Make himpure and keep him pure, O Lord. And if youwill for him to be persecuted, give him graceto count it all joy and to remember thathis reward is great in heaven. Praying like this will be mighty in the Spirit,because it is the Spirit's own Word and theSpirit's own will that you are praying. The third thing I would say about how topray is that praying in groups is importantto build into your life. Families, pray together.Small groups, pray together. Ministry groups,pray together. And consider being a partof the seven half-hour prayer gatheringsthat happen here at the church each week.Monday, 7:00 AM, Tuesday, 6:30 AM, Wednesday6:30 AM (women), 5:45 PM, Thursday, 6:30AM (refugee ministry focus), Friday, 6:30AM, Sunday 8:15 AM. So practically, if you followed through lastweek with your plan to find a place and timeand method of reading the Bible, then addthis: Be devoted to prayer, keepingalert in it, this will link you morefully with God and his purpose for the universe. Copyright 2000 John Piper   Piper's Notes  | Search Page  | Friends of JohnBunyan  |  Desiring GodMinistries    
