  October 12, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor   OBEY YOUR JOYFUL LEADERS Part Two (Hebrews 13:17)    Obey your leaders and submit to them, for they keep watch overyour souls as those who will give an account. Let them do this withjoy and not with grief, for this would be unprofitable for you.  I said last week that I see three points in verse 17: the aim ofleadership in the church, the means of leadership and the response toleadership.  The Aim of Leadership  The aim of leadership I saw was in two phrases: "that would beunprofitable for you" - which means that the aim of leadership is theprofit of the people - that they would be benefited. The other phrasewas, "keep watch over your souls" - which means that the benefit thatmatters most to leaders in the church should be the benefit of thesoul. And I argued that we exist to save the souls of the saints. Notjust to get people converted to Christ, but to help you persevere tothe end, because Hebrews 10:36 says, "You have need of endurance, sothat when you have done the will of God, you may receive what waspromised." Endurance is not icing on the cake of saving faith. It isthe proof that your faith is real. Therefore every message is asalvation message, every small group is a salvation small group, etc.Your perseverance is our main concern, because your soul hangs on it.That is the main aim of leadership - the profit of your soul, namely,its eternal salvation through persevering faith.  The Means of Leadership  The second point was the means of leadership in the church. Howare leaders to lead so that saints persevere in faith and are saved?We saw three things mentioned in the verse, and we got through one ofthem: watchfulness, joyfulness and seriousness.  1. Watchfulness considered in Part One, last week We saw"watchfulness" in the words: "they keep watch over your souls." Isaid that a literal translation was that leaders "keep watch onbehalf of your souls or for the sake of your souls." And to do thatfor your souls, they watch four things, not just one thing. Theywatch the word of God; they watch Christ; they watch their conduct;and they watch the people. In other words leaders are vigilant to beBiblical, Christ-centered, morally exemplary, and caring for thepeople. They are "watchful" - that's the first means of leadership.  And that is where we stopped last week.  2. Joyfulness of leaders Now the second means of leadership isthat leaders be joyful in their leading. First, watchfulness. Second,joyfulness. You see this at the end of Hebrews 13:17: "Let them [theleaders] do this with joy and not with grief, for this would beunprofitable for you." The profitableness of spiritual leadership forthe people comes through the leaders' joy.  The implications of this are profound. It means that a leader whois indifferent to his joy in God is also indifferent to the benefitof his people. Do you see that? If we do our work begrudgingly andwith complaining and groaning and sadness, "this will be unprofitablefor you." Our loving you depends on our delighting in the ministry.  That is not hard to see. If God is not the satisfying portion ofthose who give their whole lives to knowing his word and living it,why should anyone in the church believe this God is real? And if youdo not believe he is real, your faith will fall and not persevere. Sothe joy of leadership is not optional. It is essential. Which is whyPaul said in 2 Corinthians 1:24, "Not that we lord it over yourfaith, but we are workers with you for your joy." Joy is notsomething you can take for granted. It takes work to maintain joy inGod. It is very much against our fallen nature that finds joy in allbut God. We must be directed back to his all-satisfying greatnessover and over. That is what we leaders must do for each other, andwhat we must do for our people. And it is so important that even thepeople are commanded to help us do our work with joy: "Let them dothis with joy and not with grief, for this would be unprofitable foryou."  3. Seriousness of leaders Which leads to the third means ofleadership, seriousness. Watchfulness, joyfulness, seriousness.  I find this in the verse 17 in the phrase, "as those who will givean account." There it stands in the middle of the verse: "They keepwatch on behalf of your souls as those who will give an account."This means that when the elders of Bethlehem stand before thejudgment seat of Christ, he is going to say something like, "What didyou do to preserve the faith and obedience of the members ofBethlehem? What did you teach? How did you live? What steps did youtake in the case of the disobedient, the rebellious, the suffering,the grieving, the perplexed, the lonely, the aged, the teenagers, thechildren?" And we will have to give an account.  This is unbelievably serious business. So the joyfulness is not aflippant or trivial or shallow thing. It is immensely weighty. Notsad. Not burdensome (1 John 5:3). Not depressing. One of our answersat the judgment must be: I sought to maintain a happiness in you andto lead the people into a joy that could not be destroyed by canceror calamity, or criticism.  Watchfulness, joyfulness and seriousness - these are the means ofleadership in the church.  The Response to Leadership  Now we come to the third point in the verse, the response toleadership. First, we looked at the aim of leadership, then the meansof leadership, and finally the response to leadership.  The response God appoints is given in the beginning of Hebrews13:17: "Obey your leaders and submit to them." I said to a group ofpastors gathered on Wednesday that I was not especially eager topreach on this phrase. There are cultural reasons and Biblicalreasons that make it difficult. Culturally, the defining spirit inAmerica today is self-determination, not submission to the will ofanother. The ultimate value in America is the unencumbered self.Anything that enhances my individual liberty to do as I please isgood. And anything that encumbers me and limits my ability to do as Iplease is bad. Self is king. And autonomy is the highest law. Thatmakes this text culturally outrageous: "Obey your leaders and submitto them.  Another part of our culture that makes this text difficult is thatauthority and power have been so often abused that there arelegitimate misgivings about making obedience and submission the norm.There are books today on "spiritual abuse" and "churches that abuse."And what they have in mind in part is the abuse of power tomanipulate and coerce and use people to enhance the leader's statusand stroke the leader's ego and sometimes line the leader's pocket.So preaching on this text in this atmosphere is like standing up theSunday after 60 million people have watched police beat up RodneyKing and preaching on submission to your law enforcement officers.  Biblical facts about church leadership But there are moreimportant Biblical reasons for why this text is difficult to preachon - that is, why it is not easy to know exactly what this obedienceshould look like in actual practice. Let me mention four Biblicalfacts about church leadership that feed into how we hear the commandto obey church leaders.  1. The Bible teaches that elders sometimes go bad and teach wrongthings and do wrong things. For example, in Acts 20:30 Paul isspeaking to the elders of Ephesus and warns them, "From among yourown selves men will arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away thedisciples after them." The clear implication here is that some elderswill turn bad and will try to lead disciples away, and that theseshould not be obeyed. We have seen this too often in the news. And Iam in the midst of dealing with a church's leadership outside ourstate where a leader is resisting discipline and trying to lead agroup out of the church with him. It is tragic and Paul warns that itwill happen. This means the command to obey elders is not absolute.  2. This is confirmed in Galatians 1:8. Paul says that the gospelis so sacred that you should not obey anyone who comes with anothermessage, not even an angel: "But even if we, or an angel from heaven,should preach to you a gospel contrary to what we have preached toyou, he is to be accursed!" The truth of God is the litmus paper ofall true leadership. If I don't preach God's truth, don't believewhat I preach. That is what the apostle says in Galatians 1:8.Neither I nor the other elders at Bethlehem have final authority, thegospel does. Christ does.  3. In 1 Timothy 5:19-20, Paul instructs Timothy what to do if anelder is found to be in sin. He says, "Do not receive an accusationagainst an elder except on the basis of two or three witnesses. Thosewho continue in sin, rebuke in the presence of all, so that the restalso will be fearful of sinning." In other words, individual eldersare not perfect and a procedure must be in place for correcting anddisciplining them. We are not above error and mistake. There will betimes when we must repent and make public apology.  4. In 1 Peter 5:2-3, Peter tells us that elders should be goodexamples to the flock and not use their office for sordid gain, orfor the pleasures of power. "Shepherd the flock of God among you,exercising oversight . . . not for sordid gain, but with eagerness;nor yet as lording it over those allotted to your charge, but provingto be examples to the flock." This is a very important word to howthe relationship of leader-follower is to work in the church. Thereis real leadership, and real authority, but there should not be whatPeter calls "lording it over" the flock.  This is probably the closest phrase in the New Testament to themodern "spiritual abuse." I think "lording it over" (katakurieu)means using power without a servant heart, and trying to sway peoplewithout setting an example for them, and exerting influence for theenhancement of one's own status and ego - not for the glory of Christand the good of the people. That's what "lording it over" a peoplemeans. And that is not what elders are to do when they hear thecommand for the church to obey them. This command should make themtremble with the weight of spiritual responsibility, rather thangloat over the right to rule. Thinking in terms of rights of officialpower rather than responsibilities of spiritual leadership is oneroot of "lording it over" the flock.  Now none of this nullifies Hebrews 13:17: "Obey your leaders andsubmit to them." But it does shape it and give it a certain spiritand put limits on it and show both groups (leaders and people) abeautiful kind of dynamic that can exist when all is working as itshould.  Safeguards Around the Exercise of Leadership at Bethlehem  One of the things these texts do is cause us to put safeguardsaround the exercise of leadership at Bethlehem. Let me mention someof them. Some are explicitly Biblical; others are matters of wisdomthat have grown out of years of spiritual experience.  1. There is a plurality of leadership at Bethlehem, not just oneperson with authority. This is Biblical. All churches that we know ofin the New Testament were led by a plurality of elders, not just oneelder, or pastor (terms referring to the same person in the NewTestament). Hebrews 13:17 does not say, "Obey your leader", but "Obeyyour leaders." Bethlehem has 18 elders, and when they speak inconcert, the church should be very slow to reject their direction.  2. All the elders have equal authority. I get one vote just as theother 17 do.  3. The congregation approves the elders by secret ballot and cancall them to account. The council is not autonomous, but accountableto the congregation.  4. The council must consist of twice as many lay elders asvocational elders. This is not prescribed in the Bible. It is justanother check on the potential abuse of power by those of us who havea lot of influence by virtue of our teaching roles.  5. All the elders except the vocational elders may serve only twoconsecutive three-year terms before having to take a year off thecouncil. This allows for a lot of valuable longevity for giftedelders with sabbaticals every 7th year. But it also encourageshealthy growth as newer men are called to spiritual leadership.  6. We are constitutionally regulated, and the constitution isratified by the congregation. The elders operate with a lot ofleeway, but within the limits of a constitution that captures what webelieve is Biblical church order.  7. We submit as a congregation - leaders and people - to a churchcovenant. This is what we agree will govern our way of life together.The elders cannot decide to make something a matter of churchdiscipline that would contradict the covenant we took when we joinedthe church. If the covenant is changed, it is changed by the vote ofthe congregation.  All of these and others are way that we have tried to express ourBiblical conviction that the authority of church leaders is notabsolute or above limit or correction.  What's Left of Obedience and Submission? \ Now that leaves thequestion: Well, what's left for obedience and submission to mean?Have we been so fearful of authority that we have stripped verse 13of any significant meaning at all? I think that is a very legitimatequestion. So let me try to answer it. And I admit freely that we arevery much influenced by our culture here. If we lived in anauthoritarian culture, we would probably not be nearly so vigilantover the abuses of leadership.  What then does "Obey your leaders and submit to them" mean? Theword for "obey" (peith) is a very broad word and means "be persuadedby" (Hebrews 6:9), "trust" (Hebrews 2:13), "rely on" (Luke 11:22),and comes to mean "obey" because that is what you do when you trustsomebody. So you might say it is a "soft" word for obey. Itencourages a good relationship of trust, but still calls for thepeople to be swayed by leaders.  The word for "submit" (hupeik) occurs only here in the NewTestament. It's the more narrow word, and means "make room for byretiring from a seat," or "yield to" or "submit to."  So with all this background, what I would try to distill as themeaning would be something like this: Hebrews 13:17 means that achurch should have a bent toward trusting its leaders; you shouldhave a disposition to be supportive in your attitudes and actionstoward their goals and directions; you should want to imitate theirfaith; and you should have a happy inclination to comply with theirinstructions.  Now you can hear that these are all soft expressions: "a benttoward trusting," "a disposition to support," "a wanting to imitate,""an inclination to comply." What those phrases are meant to do iscapture both sides of the Biblical truth, namely, 1) that elders arefallible and should not lord it over the flock, and 2) the flockshould follow good leadership.  Where these two truths are working, it is a beautiful thing. Wehave tasted it and we should pray with all our hearts that Godpreserve it and deepen it among us for the good of the people and theglory of his name in this city and around the world.  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
