  I want to invite you to spend three Sundays studyingwith me the Second Letter of Paul to the Thessalonians.  I'vedivided the book into six parts -- three for Sunday morning andthree for Sunday evening.  So, for example, this morning our textis 1:1-10 and this evening we will unpack 1:11-12.  And so on,morning and evening, until we finish this little three-chapterbook.    There is something very satisfying about workingsystematically through a whole book of Scripture so that you havea grasp of the whole message and how the different parts fit togetherto make the main points.  A deep and joyful confidence comes intothe mind of a Christian whose knowledge of Scripture is not secondhand and piecemeal but textually based and orderly.  I hope that many of you will read the book throughagain and again; that you will keep a notebook for later use;that you will jot down questions as you read; that you will striveto apply the teaching to your life; and that you will pray earnestlywith me that   God may be pleased to use his word to manifest hisholiness, and convict us of the seriousness of our sin, and open our eyes to the glory of his grace in Christ,and lead us to deeper faith and greater love thanwe have ever had before.  With that as our prayer let's simply begin with 1:1-2and walk together through the first part of this book.  Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy, to the church of theThessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. . .  We know from the next to last verse of the book (3:17)that Paul himself is the author of this book.  He takes responsibilityfor its contents when he says, I, Paul, write this greetingwith my own hand.  This the mark in every letter of mine; it isthe way I write.  So it's Paul's letter.  But he aims forthe church to read it not merely as the ideas of one man, no matterhow much divine authority he had as an inspired apostle.   He wants the Christians to read the truths of thisletter as  shared truths, and he wants them to hear the concernsof the letter not merely as his own but also as the concerns andburdens of Silvanus (another spelling for Silas) and Timothy --the men who were with Paul when the church in Thessalonica wasstarted (Acts 17).  Since God had used all three of them to startthe church, it's fitting that God's ongoing ministry come to themin the name of these three men.  Then comes the description of the readers: Tothe church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the LordJesus Christ.  What does it mean that the church is inGod the Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ?   I think we can see the point if we just meditatefor a moment on the specific descriptions of God that Paul choosesto use: God the Father is one; and the Lord Jesus Christ is theother.  We as a church are in a Father and in a Lord.  What doesthat mean?  Well, what do those two words imply about God?    What does Father imply?  Primarily careand sustaining and protection and provision and discipline.  Soto be in the Father would mean mainly to be in his care and underhis protection.  The other designation is Lord: we are in the LordJesus Christ.  What does Lord imply?  Primarily authorityand leadership and ownership.  So to be in the Lord would meanmainly to be in his charge, under his authority and in his possession.  In other words, Paul greets the church in such away as to remind them that they are a family (in the care of aFather) and that they are servants (in in the charge of a Lord). These two descriptions of God as Father and Lord, and thus ofthe church as family and servants, corresponds to two of our deepestneeds.  Paul is not just throwing words away here.  He is alreadyencouraging and strengthening us as Christians if we will slowdown and listen.  The two needs that everyone of us has are the needfor rescue and help and the need for purpose and meaning.  Weneed a heavenly Father to pity us and rescue us from sin and misery. We need his help at every step of the way because we are so weakand vulnerable.  But we also need a heavenly Lord to guide usin life and tell us what is wise and give us a great and meaningfulcharge to fulfill.  We don't just want to be safe in the careof a Father.  We want a glorious cause to live for.  We want amerciful Father to be our Protector; and we want an omnipotentLord to be our Champion and our Commander and our Leader.  Paul says in verse 1, You are the church inGod the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ -- in the careof a Father; and in the charge of a Lord.  Take rest and helpfrom one and take courage and meaning from the other.  And all the more because of what verse 2 says.  Noticethe repetition of the very same designations, Father and Lord:   Grace to you and peace  from God the Father  and the Lord Jesus Christ.   The point here is that in God the Father and in theLord Jesus Christ what we find is grace.  The Father's care comesfrom grace.  The Lord's commands come from grace.  And grace isGod's powerful disposition to seek his pleasure in doing us good,even though we have no right to claim it.  And when you feel deep in your heart that God isyour caring Father, and that Jesus is your Champion and Lord,and that all their dealings with you are dealings of grace, thenthere comes into your soul a peace that passes understanding:Grace to you AND PEACE from God the Father and the LordJesus Christ.  And I doubt that this peace is merely individualpeace.  It is true for the church too.  In other words, the keyto peace in the church is  when the people ponder what it meansto have God as our Father, Jesus as our Lord and grace as thegoverning principle for both.  When a church takes its eyes andhearts off the sweet fatherhood of God and the sovereign lordshipof Jesus and the reign of grace its days of peace will be over. May the Lord guard us from that at Bethlehem.  To that end Ipledge myself to keep holding up these great Biblical realitiesfor your enjoyment.  And I hope in years to come I can say of Bethlehemwhat Paul says next about the church in Thessalonica, vv. 3-4:  We are bound to give thanks to God always for youbrethren, as is fitting, because your faith is growing abundantly,and the love of every one of you for one another is increasing. Therefore we ourselves boast of you in the churches of God foryour steadfastness and faith in all you persecutions and in theafflictions which you are enduring.  There are at least four truths here in these twoverses that Paul wants us to see.  First, faith and love are the essence and sum ofthe Christian life.  This is what Paul focuses on in verse 3 ascause for great rejoicing: Your faith is growing abundantlyand the love of every one of you for one another is increasing.   Faith is the vertical response to grace, namely,confidence in God's care.  And love is the horizontal responseto grace, namely, freedom for God's command.  Do you think it'scoincidental that these two human responses correspond to thetwo descriptions of God in verses 1 and 2?  The care of God theFather is to be trusted in faith; and the charge of Jesus theLord is to be obeyed in love.  As Father we trust him to meetall our needs, and as Lord we follow him in the paths of love.  Whether Paul consciously intends that correlationbetween Father and faith on the one hand and Lord and love onthe other hand, the truth remains: the essence and sum of theChristian life is faith toward God and love toward man.  The barometerof spiritual life and maturity at Bethlehem, according to thistext, is: do we have as strong confidence in God for our futureand do we have a visible, genuine love for each other?  The second truth that Paul wants us to see in verse3 is the beauty of growth.  He does not say that he thanks Godsimply because they have faith and love, but because their faithis growing abundantly and their love for each other is increasing. It's the beauty of growth and progress that fill him with joy.  In one sense this is a comfort to us, and in anothersense it is a rebuke.  It comforts us because we know we havenot arrived at where we should be in our faith and our love foreach other.  It is comforting to know that the Christian lifeis a process of growth, not an instantaneous perfection.  (Butthis rebukes us as well because there have been opportunitiesfor growth that we have not pursued.  There have been movementsof the Spirit that we resisted.)  But the third truth of these verses guards us fromthinking that we should take credit for our growth in faith orboast in any increases of love.  Whatever progress we have madehas been owing finally to the power of God's grace -- that's thethird truth.  We know this because Paul says in verse 3 that itis fitting to thank God for the growth of their faith and theincrease of their love.  And the only reason it is fitting forGod to get the thanks is because God did the decisive work.  This is why not growing in the Christian life isso dangerous.  If God is the one who gives growth and if God commandsthat we grow (2 Peter 3:18) then not to be growing in faith andlove means one of two things.  It means that God is not presentin our life and we have deceived ourselves in thinking that wehave been savingly converted and indwelt by the Holy Spirit. Or it means that we are grieving the Holy Spirit with a subtle,temporary rebellion so deep that almighty God suffers himselfto be resisted in his sanctifying work.  O how we should strive for growth in our faith, andfor increases in our love for one another.  None of us has arrived. And when you live in the river of this fallen world not to swimforward inevitably means drifting backward toward destruction. So let's be like the Thessalonians and pursue all the means ofgrace for the growth of our faith and the increase of our love!  The fourth truth in verses 3-4 is that faith andlove can flourish in the midst of persecution and afflictions. Verse 4 says that what Paul boasted of to the other churcheswas the Thessalonians' endurance and faith in the midst of persecutionsand afflictions.    Not only can faith and love flourish in the presenceof afflictions; Paul goes so far as to say that this is preciselyGod's design and plan.  And with that he raises an issue thatkeeps his attention through verse 10.  We will spend the restof our time on it.  After mentioning their endurance of persecution andaffliction, Paul says in verse 5 that this is evidence or proofof God's righteous judgment.  This is evidence of the righteousjudgment of God.  I take this to mean that the afflictionof the believers is part of God's judgment and that it is rightand just.  God is so much in control of things that even the hostileand sinful acts of unbelieving men are part of his holy and justjudgment.    This is one of those great passages of Scripturethat shows that when God governs the acts of sinful men he himselfdoes  not become sinful.  The persecution of Christians is sin;but in the wise and sovereign and holy hands of God it becomesthe expression and proof of his righteous judgment.  As an expressionof man's unbelief it is sin.  As an expression of God's judgmentit is righteous.  The rest of our text is Paul's demonstration of therighteousness of God's decision to use persecution as part ofhis judgment.  It has three parts, that is, he gives three reasonswhy it is right to ordain the suffering of his people throughpersecution and affliction.  First, it is right because its purpose is to fitunholy people for the holy kingdom of God.  Its design is notto punish believers but to purify them and refine their faiththe way gold is refined through fire (as Peter says in 1 Peter1:7).  That is the point of verse 5: This (that is, thispersecution and affliction) is evidence of the righteous judgmentof God, that you may be made worthy of the kingdom of God, forwhich you are suffering.    God's design in the suffering of his persecuted peopleis that they be found worthy of the kingdom at the last day. This doesn't mean that we become deserving of the kingdom.  Itmeans we become fit for it.  There is a holiness (though not aperfection) without which we will not see the Lord (Hebrews 12:14)and God works that holiness in us (Hebrews l3:2l) largely throughthe discipline of suffering (Hebrews 12:3-11).    So it is utterly crucial how we respond to sufferingin our lives.  It is God's school for heaven.  Paul said in 2Corinthians 4:17 that afflictions are producing our eternal weightof glory.  And in Romans 8:17 he said we will be fellowheirs with Christ if we suffer with him in order that we mightbe glorified with him.  And in all this we must not forget how the letterbegan: this just and holy God who hates sin and goes to painfullengths to burn it out of us is our Father, who loves us and knowsour frame and remembers that we are dust.  But Hebrews 12:5 says,The Lord disciplines him whom he loves, and chastises everyson whom he receives.  So Paul's first defense of the justice of God inordaining the suffering of his people through persecution is thathis design is holy and loving: he is fitting unfit people forthe holy joy of the kingdom of God.  Paul's second defense of God's justice in this matteris to show that the evil which seems to have the upper hand nowwill be brought to ruin.  The tables will be turned and persecutorswill be confounded.  This is the point of verse 6: . . .sinceindeed God deems it just to repay with affliction those who afflictyou.  There is a grave injustice happening when evil menpersecute Christians just like there was when evil men crucifiedJesus.  Yet God was in charge there and he is in charge here andhe will show that his own design in all this is just because whenall is said and done the afflicter will become the afflicted andjustice will be exacted from all who do not believe.  And finally Paul's third defense of God's justicein the design of persecution is that those who suffer will oneday be vindicated and given rest and joy at the coming of theLord from heaven.  The exams will be over and the vacation willbegin.  That is the point of verse 7.  It continues the sentenceof verse 6:  God deems it just not only to repay those who afflictyou but also .  . .to grant rest with us to you who areafflicted, when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven with hismighty angels in flaming fire.  So Paul's argument for the justice of God's judgmentin the persecution of his own people by unbelievers has threeparts.  I hope you don't take these as Biblical curiosities; Paulmeans for us to learn these things about God and suffering andthe second coming so that when we suffer for his sake our faithin his power and grace will grow stronger and our love for eachother will grow deeper.  Everything he is teaching us here isjust the kind of thing we need to know for our faith and loveto flourish in the midst of affliction.    I close by summing them up:      First, all affliction is designed to make us worthyof the kingdom of God -- our long-term holiness is vastly moreimportant to the Father who loves us than is our short-term comfort.   Second, no evil will triumph in the end: those whospurn the Gospel will in the end be brought to ruin, as verses8 and 9 describe in tragic and terrible terms: the Lord willinflict vengeance upon those who do not know God and upon thosewho do not obey the gospel of our Lord Jesus.  They shall sufferthe punishment of eternal destruction and exclusion form the presenceof the Lord and form the glory of his might.   And finally, the suffering of God's people will berewarded in the end with the stupendous privilege expressed inverse 10: the Lord will come on that day to be glorifiedin his saints, and to be marveled at in all who have believed,because our testimony to you was believed.    No more suffering.  The kingdom has come.  The churchhas been made worthy by her trials.  The enemies of truth areswept away in eternal destruction.  The saints are given everlastingrest.  And Jesus Christ is glorified on his throne for ever andever.   Charles Wesley's hymn, Lo! He Comes with CloudsDescending is a great statement of these truths.  As wesing it resolve in your heart that your faith will grow and thatyour love for each other will increase to the glory of God ourFather and the Lord Jesus Christ.    Lo, He comes with clouds descending, once for favoredsinners slain; All the many saints attending swell the triumph ofhis train: Alleluia!  Alleluia!  God appears on earth to reign.  Every eye shall now behold Him, robed in awesomemajesty; Those who once denied and killed Him, pierced andnailed Him to the tree, Deeply wailing, deeply wailing, shall the true Messiahsee.  Now redemption, long expected, see in solemn pompappear: All His saints, by man rejected, now shall meet Himin the air: Alleluia! Alleluia! See the day of God appear.  Yes, Amen! let all adore Thee, high on the eternalthrone; Savior, take the power and glory, claim the kingdomfor Your own: Alleluia! Alleluia! Christ shall reign and Christalone!  Amen.    
