  Malachi prophesied around 450 BC in Israel. He wasone of the last inspired prophets before the 400-year lull indivine revelation between the Old Testament and Jesus Christ.The Israelites had returned from the Babylonian exile. Jerusalemhad been rebuilt, and the temple restored.   But the people had not learned there lesson fromthe exile. They had grown skeptical of God's love (1:2), carelessin worship (1:7), indifferent to the truth (2:6-7), disobedientto the covenant (2:10), faithless in their marriages (2:15; 3:5),and stingy in their offerings (3:8).  To this carnal and rebellious people God sent hismessenger (Malachi means my messenger), and the firstmessage he put on his lips was, I have loved you, says theLord!   The first verse reads literally, The burden(not oracle) of the word of the Lord to Israel byMalachi. God had given Malachi a burden. The world of theLord is often called a burden in the Old Testament. Why do yousuppose that is?  I think there are at least two reasons.   One is that the word of God is never light and trifling.It is always weighty and serious and heavy. I don't mean dull,or boring or morose. I mean it is always substantial. There isno mirage in the word of God. It's always meaty -- even the milkis meaty. The word of God comes to a prophet as a burden becauseit is so thick and rich with truth.  The other reason that the word of God is called aburden is because even when it's good news it will be rejectedby many. You remember how Isaiah groaned under the weight of hispreaching ministry (in 6:11)? Why? Because even the glorious thingsthat he spoke made the heart of the people fat and their earsheavy and their eyes shut (6:10). And he cried out (in 53:1),Who has believed our report? And to whom has the arm ofthe Lord been revealed? So the word of the Lord is a burdenbecause it meets with opposition. Words designed for life becomethe aroma of death for those who are perishing.    My understanding of what it means to be a faithfulpastor is that I should take up the burden of each text that Ipreach on, and deliver it to you as my own burden with as muchof the spirit and truth of the text as God gives me. So I comethis morning with a burden -- a burden first because the wordof God in this text is weighty and because I know that not allwill believe what I say.   I picture the teaching of this text like a strangecloud coming toward us on the battlefield of life. We are surroundedby enemies and mortally wounded and cringing before the finalblow is struck. And we see this cloud approaching us in our miseryand hopelessness, and some groan that darkness should be addedto all the other dangers of life. But others remember the wordsof William Cowper's hymn,   Ye fearful saints fresh courage take, The clouds you so much dread, Are big with mercy, and will break, In blessing on your head.   And the cloud comes over the wounded soldiers ofthe Lord of hosts, it swallows them up, and lo and behold withinthe cloud there is light. And slowly the cloud moves with itsbroken and wounded soldiers through the battle lines of the enemy.And ten or thirty or eighty years later all the soldiers in thecloud arrive safe beyond the battle and beyond the reach of pain.Some of the enemy mock the cloud as it moves. They scoff and say,It is a dark cloud. Some of their bullets penetratethe cloud and wound the soldiers of the Lord. But not one is everlost from this cloud. And no matter how rough the terrain or terriblethe battle, the soldiers in this cloud survive the conflict andreach the place of peace.  In other words the teaching of this text appearsto some as dark and foreboding and unapproachable. But for othersit brings a sense of awe and safety. There is a sense of tremblingand speechlessness, for this is not like anything we have known.But inside the cloud the sense of peace and safety is as firmas the mighty Everest and as deep as the ocean space and stars.  May the Lord give us grace to see the glory of thisteaching and the privilege of entering in.  Verse 2: `I have loved you,' says the Lord.  Does that make you tremble? Isaiah says, Thisis the man to whom I will look, he that is humble and contritein spirit, and trembles at my word.  Have you learned the love of God in a way that makesyou tremble? Malachi's burden in this book is to show us a Godwhose goodness makes us tremble with reverent fear. For example,   1:6 If I am a father, where is my honor? Andif I am a master, where is my fear? says the Lord of hosts.  1:14b I am a great King, says the Lord of hosts,and my name is feared among the nations.  2:5 My covenant with him [Levi] was a covenant oflife and peace [in other words: just as in 1:2, I have lovedhim!], and I gave them to him that he might fear: and hefeared and stood in awe of my name.  3:5 I will draw near to you for judgment; I willbe a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers,against those who swear falsely, against those who oppress thehireling in his wages, the widow and the orphan, against thosewho thrust aside the sojourner, and do not fear me, says the Lordof hosts.   In other words, Malachi's burden in this book isto show us a God who makes us tremble with reverent fear. Thereforewhen he begins his prophecy to Israel in chapter one with thegood news, I have loved you, says the Lord, he unfoldsthe love of God for us in a way that makes us tremble before themajesty of God.  I have thought very often over the last seven yearsat Bethlehem about when it is appropriate to preach and teachconcerning the doctrine of God's free and sovereign electing love,and its counterpart in God's passing over others leaving themto sin and condemnation. My general approach has been one of cautious,gradual building, so that during my first five years or so I veryseldom made these doctrines the focus of explicit attention. Myassumption has been that these things are for the edificationof a mature congregation.  But as I meditated on today's text I was corrected,at least in part. Malachi is not speaking to a mature congregation,but to a worldly one. The people had become skeptical, careless,indifferent, disobedient, adulterous, and stingy. To this peopleMalachi preaches the truth of God's free and sovereign electinglove in terms more bold and more unmistakable than anywhere elsein the Old Testament.  And so I felt corrected, because these truths arenot only designed by God for the comfort and courage of the mature;they are also designed to shock the presumption and the flippancyof careless Christians -- Christians whose grasp of the love ofGod is so shallow that it never makes them tremble but insteadcan make them careless and casual and even presumptuous in hispresence.  So I have been very much emboldened to preach whatis here both because many of you are mature in your faith andthinking (1 Cor. 14:20), and because others may be in the samecondition the Israelites were in.  When God said in verse two, I have loved you,says the Lord, the Israelites respond skeptically, Howhast thou loved us?   Now test yourselves here. How would you answer thatquestion in your own life? How would you describe the God's loveto you. Is your life and family in such a shambles that you feelas skeptical about it as the Israelites did? Do you want to say,How hast thou loved me?  I don't doubt that there is a little of that in allof us. And so it will do us all good to listen to God's answerwhich is almost never heard today. How hast thou loved us? Answer:Is not Esau Jacob's brother? says the Lord. Yet I have lovedJacob, but I have hated Esau.  Now what sort of answer is this? The descendantsof Jacob have asked, How has thou loved us? How is it an answerto say, Jacob I loved, Esau I hated? Isn't that just a repetitionof what he already said in the first part of verse 2, Ihave loved you says the Lord?  No it's not, because of the little question, Wasnot Esau Jacob's brother? What does that mean? Why didGod ask that? He asked it because he knew that the answer to thatquestion contained the key to the essence of his love.   What is the answer? Was not Esau Jacob's brother?The answer us yes. In fact as every Israelite knew, Esau was notonly Jacob's brother, he was his twin brother, conceived in thewomb of Rebecca by their father Isaac. Jacob and Esau were notlike the sons of Abraham, Isaac and Ishmael. They had differentmothers and one of them wasn't even an Israelitess. But Jacoband Esau were twins. And not only were they twins, Esau was theelder, which means that by all customary rights and privilegeshe would be the main heir of the father's blessings.  Now what is the point of saying, Is not EsauJacob's brother?? The point is this: Based on what you andEsau were in yourselves I could just as easily have chosen Esauas you. Isn't he your brother? Weren't you twins? Isn't he infact your elder? But I chose you, and passed him by.  What then is God's answer to the question, Howhast thou loved us? His answer is, I have loved you withfree, sovereign, unconditional, electing love, that is how I haveloved you.   My love for you is electing love because I choseyou for myself above your brother Esau.   My love for you is unconditional love because I choseyou before you had done anything good or evil -- before you hadmet any conditions -- while you were still in your mother's womb(Gen. 25:24).   My love for you is sovereign love because I was underno constraint to love you; I was not forced or coerced; I wastotally in charge when I set my love upon you.   And my love for you is free because it's the overflowof my infinite grace that can never be bought.  Now I ask you, if you are a Christian here today,and if you say to God, How have you loved me? canyou answer the way God answered the Israelites? Do you look atyour sister or brother living in sin and tremble that you havebeen chosen? And that your election is not because of anythingin you? And that your faith and hope are owing wholly to God?Do you look at that childhood friend or college roommate who tooka turn away from God when you stayed on the path, and trembleat the awesome thought that God chose you?   But what about Esau?   Probably the most striking thing about this textis that in it God chooses to highlight his love for the descendantsof Jacob by contrasting it with his hatred for the descendantsof Esau, the nation of Edom.  If we ask, what does God mean by saying (in verse3) Esau I hated, the answer is spelled out for usin some detail in verses 3 and 4:  I have hated Esau; I have laid waste his hill countryand left his heritage to jackals of the desert. If Edom says,We are shattered but we will rebuild the ruins, the Lord of hostssays, They may build, but I will tear down, till they are calledthe wicked country, the people with whom the Lord is angry forever.   Notice four aspects to God's hate of Esau.   First, it means that God opposes their prosperityand brings their land under judgment. I have laid wastehis hill country and left his heritage to jackals of the desert.  Second, it means that God will continue to opposethem when they resist his judgment. His judgment will not sufferresistance. Verse 4: If Edom says, We are shattered butwe will rebuild the ruins, the Lord of hosts says, They may build,but I will tear down.   Third, God's hate for Esau means that they will byand large as a nation be given up to wickedness. Verse 4b: .. . till they are called the wicked country. . . This isthe most devastating of the judgments and the one that makes allthe others just. God is not bring judgments on an innocent people.He is just in all his dealings. When he passed over Esau and choseJacob there was no decree that an innocent Esau would be judged.Rather what God decreed was to pass Esau by, to withhold his electinglove and to give him up to wickedness.   Now there is great mystery here, and I do not claimto solve all the problems that our little minds can think up.There is much we are not yet ready to know. We see through a glassdarkly. But this much we are surely to believe: God did not choosethe descendants of Esau; rather he passed over them and withheldhis electing love; as a result Esau gave rein to wickedness anddeserved the indignation of God. Which leads to the fourth aspectof God's hate.  Fourth, at the end of verse 4 it means that the Lordis angry, or indignant with them for ever.   Why does God inspire Malachi to begin his messageto these worldly Israelites, and to us, with such a revelationas this? I have loved you, says the Lord. How have you lovedus? Is not Esau Jacob's brother? Yet I have loved you and hatedEsau? How have I loved you? I have loved you with free, sovereign,unconditional, electing love.  Why do I tell you this?     To humble you.  To take away your presumption.  To remove every ground of boasting in yourself.  To cut the nerve of pride that boasts over Esauas though your salvation were owing to anything in you.  To put to naught the cavalier sense of self-reliancethat lets you dally in my presence as though you were an equalpartner in this affair.   To make you tremble with tears of joy that youbelong to God.   As the psalmist says, There is forgivenesswith thee that thou mayest be feared! (Psalm 130:4)  But that is not all. God has another purpose in revealingthe greatness of his electing love for Jacob and his judgmentupon Esau. He tells us in verse 5:   Your own eyes shall see this (you shall see the terriblejudgments on Edom) and you shall say, `Great is the Lord beyondthe border of Israel!'  In other words, part of what it means to be lovedby God is to know that God reigns -- that he is great and mighty-- even beyond the people called by his name. He reigns in Edom.His purposes are not ultimately frustrated by the wickedness ofany people. Great is the Lord, beyond the border of Israel!Yes even in Edom -- in Albania.  So let us humble ourselves under the mighty handof God. Let us give him the glory -- all the glory -- for oursalvation. And let us never grow weary in savoring and strengtheningand spreading the vision of our God, for Great is the Lordbeyond the walls of this church!  
