  December 21, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church Fourth Sunday of Advent John Piper, Pastor    WE HAVE COME TO WORSHIP HIM (Matthew 2:1-12)  
  Now after Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days ofHerod the king, magi from the east arrived in Jerusalem, saying, 2"Where is He who has been born King of the Jews? For we saw His starin the east and have come to worship Him." 3 When Herod the kingheard this, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. 4 Gatheringtogether all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he inquiredof them where the Messiah was to be born. 5 They said to him, "InBethlehem of Judea; for this is what has been written by the prophet:6 'AND YOU, BETHLEHEM, LAND OF JUDAH, ARE BY NO MEANS LEAST AMONG THELEADERS OF JUDAH; FOR OUT OF YOU SHALL COME FORTH A RULER WHO WILLSHEPHERD MY PEOPLE ISRAEL."' 7 Then Herod secretly called the magiand determined from them the exact time the star appeared. 8 And hesent them to Bethlehem and said, "Go and search carefully for theChild; and when you have found Him, report to me, so that I too maycome and worship Him." 9 After hearing the king, they went their way;and the star, which they had seen in the east, went on before themuntil it came and stood over the place where the Child was. 10 Whenthey saw the star, they rejoiced exceedingly with great joy. 11 Aftercoming into the house they saw the Child with Mary His mother; andthey fell to the ground and worshiped Him. Then, opening theirtreasures, they presented to Him gifts of gold, frankincense, andmyrrh. 12 And having been warned by God in a dream not to return toHerod, the magi left for their own country by another way.  There are at least five truths that Matthew wants us to see inthis story about Christ and worship 1) Jesus is the Messiah, the Kingof the Jews, and should be honored as such. 2) Jesus is to beworshiped not just by Jews, but by all the nations of the world, asrepresented by the wise men from the east. 3) God wields the universeto make his Son known and worshiped. This is his great goal in allthings - that his Son be known and worshiped. 4) Jesus is troublingto people who do not want to worship him and brings out oppositionfor those who do. 5) Worshiping Jesus means joyfully ascribingauthority and dignity to Christ with sacrificial gifts.  1. Jesus is the Messiah, the King of the Jews, and Should beHonored as Such.  Verse 2 announces clearly whom this story is really about: "Whereis He who has been born King of the Jews?" It's about a newborn childdestined to be King of the Jews. Now, in itself that would not be avery great thing. Somewhere alive in America today there are probablythree or four children or young people under the age of 18 who aregoing to be President of the United States some day. But nobodyreally cares about this, or sets out to find them or honor them.  But verse 4 makes clear what the magi really mean by "King of theJews." It says, "Gathering together all the chief priests and scribesof the people, [Herod] inquired of them where the Messiah was to beborn." Herod had been called "king of the Jews" by the Senate in Romefor almost 40 years. But no one called him Messiah. Messiah means thelong-awaited God-anointed Ruler, who would overcome all other rule,and bring in the end of history, and establish the kingdom of God andnever die or lose his reign.  We don't know how the wise men got their information that therewas such a king coming. But it is clear that Herod got the message:these fellows are not searching for a mere, ordinary, human successorto me. They are searching for the final King, to end all kings. And,of course, unlike Anna and Simeon in Luke 2, that is the last thingHerod was looking for. He didn't even know the simple Scripturesabout where the Messiah was to be born.  So he asks the scribes, and the one text that they focus on isMicah 5:2,6 "And you, Bethlehem, land of Judah, are by no means leastamong the leaders of Judah; for out of you shall come forth a Rulerwho will shepherd my people Israel." Now that doesn't sound veryextraordinary either. The reason is that the only purpose for whichthe scribes quoted the text was to answer Herod's question: Where?And the answer is Bethlehem.  But what if Herod had asked them, "Who?" They might have read onin Micah 5: "(2) His goings forth are from long ago, from the days ofeternity. . . . (4) And He will arise and shepherd His flock in thestrength of the LORD, in the majesty of the name of the LORD His God.And they will remain, because at that time He will be great to theends of the earth." So this king is not just coming into being in thewomb of his mother Mary. "His goings forth are from long ago, fromthe days of eternity." Or, as John's Gospel says, "In the beginningwas the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God" (John1:1). And this king would not be limited in his realm to Israel. "Hewill be great to the ends of the earth."  That's the first truth and this is why worship is on their mind!And it leads us to the second truth in this text about the Messiah.  2. Jesus is to be Worshiped not just by Jews, but by all theNations of the World, as Represented by the Wise Men from the East.  Notice that Matthew does not tell us about the shepherds coming tovisit Jesus in the stable. His focus is immediately on foreignerscoming from the east to worship Jesus. Verse 1: "Now after Jesus wasborn in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king, magi fromthe east arrived in Jerusalem, saying, 'Where is He who has been bornKing of the Jews?'"  So Matthew's Gospel portrays Jesus at the beginning and ending ofhis Gospel as a universal Messiah for the nations, not just for Jews.Here the first worshipers are court magicians or astrologers or wisemen not from Israel but from the East - perhaps from Babylon. Theywere gentiles. Unclean. And at the end of Matthew the last words ofJesus are, "All authority has been given to Me in heaven and onearth. Go therefore and make disciples of all the nations."  This not only opened the door for us gentiles to rejoice in theMessiah, it added proof that he was the Messiah. Because one of therepeated prophecies was that the nations and kings would, in fact,come to him as the ruler of the world. For example, Isaiah 60:3,"Nations will come to your light, and kings to the brightness of yourrising." So Matthew adds proof to the messiahship of Jesus and showsthat he is messiah - a King, and Promise-Fulfiller - for all thenations, not just Israel. For us, not just Jews.  3. God Wields the Universe to Make his Son Known and Worshiped.This is His Great Goal in all Things - that His Son be Known andWorshiped.  Over and over the Bible baffles our curiosity about just howcertain things happened. How did this "star" get the magi from theeast to Jerusalem? It does not say that it led them or went beforethem. It only says they saw a star in the east (verse 2), and came toJerusalem. And how did that star go before them in the littlefive-mile walk from Jerusalem to Bethlehem as verse 9 says it did?And how did a star stand "over the place where the Child was"? Theanswer is: We do not know. There are numerous efforts to explain itin terms of conjunctions of planets or comets or supernovas ormiraculous lights. We just don't know. And I want to exhort you notto become preoccupied with developing theories that are onlytentative in the end and have very little spiritual significance.  I risk a generalization to warn you: people who are exercised andpreoccupied with such things as how the star worked and how the RedSea split and how the manna fell and how Jonah survived the fish andhow the moon turns to blood are generally people who have what I calla mentality for the marginal. You do not see in them a deepcherishing of the great central things of the gospel - the holinessof God, the ugliness of sin, the helplessness of man, the death ofChrist, justification by faith alone, the sanctifying work of theSpirit, the glory of Christ's return and the final judgment. Theyalways seem to be taking you down a sidetrack with a new article ornew tape or book. There is little centered rejoicing.  But what is plain concerning this matter of the star is that it isdoing something that it cannot do on its own: it is guiding magi tothe Son of God to worship him. There is only one Person in Biblicalthinking that can be behind that intentionality in the stars - Godhimself. So the lesson is plain: God is guiding foreigners to Christto worship him. And he is doing it by exerting global - probably evenuniversal - influence and power to get it done. Luke shows Godinfluencing the entire Roman Empire so that the census comes at theexact time to get a virgin to Bethlehem to fulfil prophecy with herdelivery. Matthew shows God influencing the stars in the sky to getforeign magi to Bethlehem so that they can worship him.  This is God's design. He did it then. He is still doing it now.His aim is that the nations - all the nations (Matthew 24:14) -worship his Son. This is God's will for everybody in your office atwork, and in your neighborhood and in your home. As John 4:23 says,"Such the Father seeks to worship him." At the beginning of Matthewwe still have a "come-see" pattern. But at the end the pattern is"go-tell". The magi came and saw. We are to go and tell. But what isnot different is that the purpose of God is the ingathering of thenations to worship his Son. The magnifying of Christ in the white-hotworship of all nations, the reason the world exists.  4. Jesus is Troubling to People Who do not Want to Worship Him andHe Brings out Opposition for those Who do.  This is probably not a main point in the mind of Matthew, but itis inescapable as the story goes on. In this story there are twokinds of people who do not want to worship Jesus, the Messiah. Thefirst kind is the people who simply do nothing about Jesus. He is anonentity in their lives. This group is represented by the chiefpriests and scribes. Verse 4: "Gathering together all the chiefpriests and scribes of the people, [Herod] inquired of them where theMessiah was to be born." Well, they told him, and that was that: backto business as usual. The sheer silence and inactivity of the leadersis overwhelming in view of the magnitude of what was happening. Andnotice, verse 3 says, "When Herod the king heard this, he wastroubled, and all Jerusalem with him." In other words, the rumor wasgoing around that someone thought the Messiah was born. Theinactivity on the part of chief priests is staggering - why not gowith the Magi? They are not interested. They do not want to worshipthe true God.  The second kind of people who do not want to worship Jesus is thekind who is deeply threatened by him. That is Herod in this story. Heis really afraid. So much so that he schemes and lies and thencommits mass murder just to get rid of Jesus.  So today these two kinds of opposition will come against Christand his worshipers. Indifference and hostility. Are you in one ofthose groups? Let this Christmas be the time when you reconsider theMessiah and ponder what it is to worship him.  So let me close with that, the fifth truth in this story. What isworship in this text?  5.Worshiping Jesus Means Joyfully Ascribing Authority and Dignityto Christ with Sacrificial Gifts.  There are four pieces to that definition of worship, and all fourare grounded in this text.  First, I see the magi ascribing authority to Christ by calling him"King of the Jews" in verse 2: "Where is He who has been born King ofthe Jews?"  Second, I see the magi ascribing dignity to him by falling downbefore him in verse 11: "After coming into the house they saw theChild with Mary His mother; and they fell to the ground and worshipedHim." Falling to the ground is what you do to say to someone else:you are high and I am low. You have great dignity and I am lowly bycomparison.  Third, I see the joy in these ascriptions of authority and dignityin verse 10: "When they saw the star, they rejoiced exceedingly withgreat joy." Now this is a quadruple way of saying they rejoiced. Itwould have been much to say they rejoiced. More to say they rejoicedwith joy. More to say they rejoiced with great joy. And even more tosay they rejoiced exceedingly with great joy. And what was all thisjoy about? - they were on their way to the Messiah. They were almostthere. I cannot avoid the impression then that true worship is notjust ascribing authority and dignity to Christ; it is doing thisjoyfully. It is doing it because you have come to see something aboutChrist that is so desirable that being near him to ascribe authorityand dignity to him personally is overwhelmingly compelling.  And the fourth part of the definition of worship here is that wedo our ascribing with sacrificial gifts. Worshiping Jesus meansjoyfully ascribing authority and dignity to Christ with sacrificialgifts.  Now we have learned in this series on worship that God is notserved by human hands as though he needed anything (Acts 17:25). Sothe gifts of the magi are not given by way of assistance orneed-meeting. It would dishonor a monarch if foreign visitors camewith royal care-packages. Nor are these gifts meant to be bribes.Deuteronomy 10:17 says that God takes no bribe. Well, what then dothey mean? How are they worship?  The gifts are intensifiers of desire for Christ himself in muchthe same way that fasting is. When you give a gift to Christ likethis, it's a way of saying, "The joy that I pursue (verse 10!) is notthe hope of getting rich with things from you. I have not come to youfor your things, but for yourself. And this desire I now intensifyand demonstrate by giving up things, in the hope of enjoying youmore, not things. By giving to you what you do not need, and what Imight enjoy, I am saying more earnestly and more authentically, 'Youare my treasure, not these things.'" I think that's what it means toworship God with gifts of gold and frankincense and myrrh.  And so may God take the truth of this text and waken in us adesire for Christ himself. May we say from the heart, "Lord Jesus youare the Messiah, the King of Israel. All nations will come and bowdown before you. God wields the world to see that you are worshiped.Therefore, whatever opposition I may find, I joyfully ascribeauthority and dignity to you, and bring my gifts to say that youalone can satisfy my heart, not these."  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
