  It does not say in verse 2 that he is like a forestfire, or like an incinerator's fire.  It says that he is likea refiner's fire.  A forest fire destroys indiscriminately.  Anincinerator consumes completely.  But verse 6 says, I theLORD do not change; therefore you, O sons of Jacob, are not consumed-- you are not destroyed.  He is a refiner's fire, and that makes all the difference. A refiner's fire does not destroy indiscriminately like a forestfire.  A refiner's fire does not consume completely like the fireof an incinerator.  A refiner's fire refines.  It purifies.  Itmelts down the bar of silver or gold, separates out the impuritiesthat ruin its value, burns them up, and leaves the silver andgold intact.  He is like a refiner's fire.  It does say FIRE.  And therefore purity and holinesswill always be a dreadful thing.  There will always be a properfear and trembling in the process of becoming pure. We learn if from the time we are little children: never playwith fire!  And it's a good lesson!  Therefore, Christianity isnever a play thing.  And the passion for purity is never flippant. He is like fire and fire is serious.  You don't fool around withit.  But it does say, he is like a REFINER'S fire.  Andtherefore this is not merely a word of warning, but a tremendousword of hope.  The furnace of affliction in the family of Godis always for refinement, never for destruction.    Now, to unfold this text, let me ask four questions,and point you to their answers in the Scripture in the time wehave.    Who is like a refiner's fire? Why must he be like a refiner's fire? How can we experience his fire as refining and not consuming? What is life like in the refiner's fire?    1.  Who is like a refiner's fire?   Verse 3 gives the answer.  As I read it look forthree individuals.  Behold, I send my messenger to prepare the way beforeme, and the Lord whom you seek will suddenly come to his temple;the messenger of the covenant in whom you delight, behold, heis coming, says the Lord of hosts.  The first individual mentioned is I --Behold, I send . . .  This I is identified at theend of the verse: Says the Lord of hosts.  The speakeris Jehovah, God the Father.  The second individual mentioned is Jehovah's messengerwho prepares the way.  Behold, I send my messenger to preparethe way before me.  Who is this?  Well the New Testamentquotes this very verse to identify John the Baptist, the one whocame to prepare the way for Christ (Matt. 11:10; Mark 1:2; Luke7:27).    But you don't have to read in from the New Testamentthat this is a kind of prophet whom God would raise up in thelast day.  It says in Malachi 4:5, Behold, I will send youElijah the prophet before the great and terrible day of the Lordcomes.  So the first messenger mentioned in 3:1 that God willsend to prepare his way is a kind of Elijah or one like Elijah. That is why Luke 1:17 says that John the baptist went beforeJesus in the Spirit and the power of Elijah.  The third individual mentioned in verse 1 TheLord who comes to his temple.  And the Lord whom youseek will suddenly come to his temple; the messenger of the covenantin whom you delight.  This is another messenger, different from the first. Who is this person?  Three things point ot the divine Son ofGod and Messiah.     He is called Lord -- a term that Malachiwould not apply to Elijah or John the Baptist.  This person issomeone greater.    The temple is said to belong to him: He will suddenlycome to HIS temple.  Of whom could you say that heis the owner of the temple of God?    This person seems to be almost identical withJehovah, not only because Jehovah's temple is his temple, butalso because he seems to take the place of the word mein the first half of the verse.  It says,  Behold, I sendmy messenger (Elijah = John the Baptist) to prepare the way beforeME . . .  But then he switches without any difficulty andinstead of saying, And I will suddenly come to my temple. . . he says, And the Lord whom you seek will suddenlycome to his temple.  It looks as though me --Jehovah -- is virtually interchangeable with this other personcalled the Lord, who owns the temple of God.   So I conclude that the messenger of the covenant,the Lord, the owner of the temple of God is none other than theSon of God, who is with God and is God, and who came into theworld and made himself known to us personally in Jesus Christ.  So when verse two goes on to say, But who canendure the day of his coming, and who can stand when he appears,for he is like a refiner's fire, I conclude that it is talkingabout the Son of God who came to us in Jesus Christ.    2. Why must he be like a refiner's fire?   The answer is implied in the word itself.  He mustbe a like a refiner's because we need to be refined.   We werecreated in the image of God with the potential to reverence Godand trust him and obey him and glorify him, but we were born ininiquity and in sin did our mothers conceive us.  We are shotthrough with the impurity of rebellion and unbelief, and we fallshort of God's glory again and again.    You can prove this to yourself in many ways.  Forexample you can notice how readily your heart inclines to thosethings that will show your strengths to other people, and howresistant your heart is to communion with God in solitude.  So we are impure by nature by nature and by practice.But God will have no alloys in heaven.  Blessed are thepure in heart, for they shall see God.  And yet he willhave someone in heaven.  He will have a redeemed people.  Hisbanquet hall will be full.  And therefore he must be a refiner'sfire.  If he were only a forest fire, heaven would be empty. If he were only an incinerating fire, heaven would be empty. And if he were no fire, heaven would be empty.    But how do we know heaven will not be empty?  Orto put it another way, how do we know that God will not simplyabandon impure people like us?  We don't deserve salvation?  Whyare we not simply consumed?  Why does Christ come as a refiner'sfire and not a forest fire?  Verse 6 gives the answer?  For I the Lord donot change; therefore, you, O sons of Jacob, are not consumed. But by itself that doesn't make sense.  What if God were changelesslybent of being a forest fire?  What if he were changeless in unrelentingwrath?  What sort of changelessness is it that guarantees thatwe are not consumed?   It is covenant-keeping changelessness.  Accordingto verse 1 the Lord comes as the messenger of the covenant. The reason Jesus is a refiner's fire and not a forest fire isbecause God made a covenant.  And Jesus is the emissary of thatcovenant.  He confirms it and seals it with his blood.  So hisblood is called in Hebrews 13:20, the blood of the everlastingcovenant.    The book of Malachi began with a statement of howthe covenant began.  I have loved you, says the Lord. But you say, How hast thou loved us?  Is notEsau Jacob's brother? says the LORD.  Yet I have lovedJacob! (1:2).  This is what never changes -- the free andsovereign choice of God to save sinners.  I have loved you,says the Lord. . . And I the Lord do not change.  Therefore youare not consumed.  Therefore, Jesus is a refiner's fireand not a forest fire.    3.  How can we experience his fire as refining andnot consuming?   Verse 5 makes it clear that when God comes not everyonewill be refined.  Some will be consumed.  Then I will draw near to you for judgment; I willbe a swift witness against the sorcerers, against the adulterers,against those who swear falsely, against those who oppress thehireling in his wages, the widow and the orphan, against thosewho thrust aside the sojourner, and do not fear me, says the LORDof hosts.  This is not the work of refinement, but the finaljudgment of condemnation.  It is ever clearer in 4:1,  For behold, the day comes burning like an oven, whenall the arrogant and all evildoers will be stubble; the day thatcomes shall burn them up, says the LORD of hosts, so that it willleave them neither root nor branch.  So when the Lord comes, some are refined and someare consumed.  How can we be sure to experience the fire of Godas refining and not consuming?  Notice very clearly what the answer cannot be!  Theanswer cannot be: get rid of your own sin.  If you got rid ofyour own sin you would need no refining?  Refining is for sinners! You can't answer the question, How do I qualify to get refined?by saying, Get rid of your sin!  That's what refining does --it starts to burn up your sin?  But how then does a sinner qualifyto have his sin burned up?  If it takes the merciful fire of Godto destroy the rebellion of sin what can a man do to have thatmercy.  And the answer of the whole Bible is: trust in thepurifying mercy God!  Or to put it the way Malachi puts it againand again: fear God -- which means mainly fear to dishonor himwith unbelief.  Fear the irreverence of distrust.  Fear the impulseto jump out of the refining fire of mercy into the forest fireof judgment because it looks cooler.  Trust the goodness of God. Believe that his ways are the ways to infinite joy.  Don't doubthis expertise as a Refiner.    He knows the time for joy, and, truly, Will send it when He sees it meet; When He has tried and purged thee duly, And finds thee free from all deceit. He comes to thee all unaware, And makes thee own his loving care.   The way to experience the fire of Christ as refiningand not consuming is to trust his promise to bring us throughthe fire to endless joy.  Salvation is by grace through faithin the purifying mercy of God.      4.  What is life like in the refiner's fire?   The most important thing to say is that it is a lifeof confidence in God.  And the foundation of our confidence isthis promise: The furnace of affliction in the family of God isalways for refinement, never for destruction.  I the Lorddo not change; therefore you are not consumed, O sons of Jacob! Which simply means that life in the refiner's fire is a lifeof trust in the unchanging, purifying love of God.  And perhaps the next most important thing to sayis that there is no painless path to heaven.  Why?  Because Jesussaid, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall seeGod.  And it is no more possible to become pure painlesslythan it is to be burned painlessly.  Purity comes throughthe refining fire.  And the fire has two forms: one is the fireof affliction and the other is the fire of intentional self-denial.  We see the first fire, for example, in  1 Peter 1:6-7   Now for a little while you may have to suffervarious trials, so that the genuineness of your faith, more preciousthan gold, which though perishable is tested by fire, may redoundto praise and glory and honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ.   James 1:2-4   Count it all joy, my brethren when you meetvarious trials, for you know that the testing of your faith producessteadfastness.  And let steadfastness have its full effect, thatyou may be perfect and complete, lacking in nothing.    Hebrews 12:5-10,14   My son, do not regard lightly the disciplineof the Lord . . . for the Lord disciplines him whom he loves,and chastises every son whom he receives . . . If you are leftwithout discipline, in which all have participated, then you areillegitimate children . . . he disciplines us for our good thatwe may share his holiness. . . Pursue holiness without which noone will see the Lord.   And the other form of purifying fire is the fireof intentional self-denial.  We see it for example in  Matthew 5:29-30   If your right eye causes you to sin pluck itout . . . and if your right hand causes you to sin, cut it offand throw it away.   1 Corinthians 9:27   I pommel my body and subdue it,    Romans 8:13   If by the Spirit you put to death the deedsof the body you will live.   What is life like in the refiner's fire?     More than anything else it is the unshakable trustthat all the paths of the Lord are steadfast love and faithfulness.  And on the path to purity and heaven the other truthis this: no pain no gain.    Both things are true: the Lord is like a refiner'sfire; and a refiner's fire is a fire.   
