  March 9, 1986 Bethlehem Baptist Church  Morning Pastor John Piper Copyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper   Blessed Are the Peacemakers  Matthew 5:9  "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called sons of God."   With each beatitude another nail is driven into a coffin. Inside the coffin  lies the corpse of a false understanding of salvation. The false understanding  said that a person can be saved without being changed. Or: that a person  can inherit eternal life even if his attitudes and actions are like the attitudes  and actions of unbelievers.     One after the other the beatitudes tell us that the blessings of eternity  will be given only to those who have become new creatures. Blessed are the  merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart, for  they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called  the sons of God.     If we don't obtain mercy, we receive judgment. If we don't see God, we are  not in heaven. If we aren't called the sons of God, we are outside the family.  In other words these are all descriptions of final salvation. And it is promised  only to the merciful, the pure in heart, and the peacemakers.     Therefore the beatitudes are like long spikes holding down the lid of the  coffin on the false teaching which says that if you just believe in Jesus  you will go to heaven whether or not you are merciful or pure in heart or  a peacemaker. In fact, from beginning to end the Sermon on the Mount cries  out, "Get yourself a new heart! Become a new person! The river of judgment  is at the door!" You recall the words of verse 20: "Unless your righteousness  exceeds that of the scribes and pharisees, you will never enter the kingdom  of heaven" (Matthew 5:20).     And at the very end of the sermon in 7:26f the Lord calls out over the crowds,  "Every one who hears these words of mine and does not do them will be like  a foolish man who built his house upon the sand; and the rain fell, and the  floods came, and the winds blew and beat against that house, and it fell;  and great was the fall of it". In other words, a life of disobedience to  the beatitudes and to the Sermon on the Mount will not stand in the judgment  no matter what we believe!     I have been convicted this past week that I have probably not treated this  dimension of the beatitudes with as much earnestness and seriousness as I  should, and that the care that I have for your eternal good has not shown  itself as genuinely as it must. My conscience was pricked in reading an old  book by Horatius Bonar to pastors in which he said,     Our words are feeble, even when sound and true; our looks are careless, even  when our words are weighty; and our tones betray the apathy which both words  and looks disguise. (Words to Winners of Souls, p. 55)     So I want to impress upon your consciences this morning with as much as  earnestness as I can that in the beatitudes Jesus is not making optional  suggestions, and this sermon is not a series of suggestions on how to make  the world better. On the contrary, Jesus is describing the pathway to heaven,  and this sermon is a message from God to urge you to get on that pathway  and stay on that pathway so that you can be called sons of God at the last  judgment.     That is what is at stake this morning. If you are on the narrow path which  leads to life my purpose is to help you stay on it. And if you are still  in the broad way that leads to destruction my purpose is to direct you to  the path of life.     When Jesus says, "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the  sons of God," he does not tell us how to become a son of God. He simply says  that sons of God are in fact peacemakers. People who are peacemakers will  be recognized as the sons of God at the judgment and they will be called  what they are and welcomed into the Father's house.     To see how to become sons of God we can look, for example, at John 1:12 and  Galatians 3:26. John 1:12 says, "To all who received him (Jesus), who believed  in his name, he gave power to become children of God." And Galatians 3:26  says, "For in Christ we are all sons of God through faith." In other words,  we become sons of God by trusting in Christ for our forgiveness and hope.     What Jesus is saying in Matthew 5:9 is that people who have become sons of  God have the character of their heavenly Father. And we know from Scripture  that their heavenly Father is a "God of peace" (Romans 16:20; 1 Thessalonians  5:23; Hebrews 13:20). We know that heaven is a world of peace (Luke 19:38).  And most important of all, we know that God is a peacemaker!     "God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not counting their  trespasses against them" (2 Corinthians 5:19). He made peace by the blood  of the cross (Colossians 1:20). In other words, even though by nature we  are rebels against God and have committed high treason and are worthy to  be eternally court marshalled and hanged by the neck until dead, nevertheless,  God has sacrificed his own Son and now declares amnesty free and clear to  any who will lay down their arms of independence and come home to faith.     God is a peaceloving God, and a peacemaking God. The whole history of redemption,  climaxing in the death and resurrection of Jesus, is God's strategy to bring  about a just and lasting peace between rebel man and himself, and then between  man and man. Therefore, God's children are that way, too. They have the character  of their Father. What he loves they love. What he pursues they pursue. You  can know his children by whether they are willing to make sacrifices for  peace the way God did.     By the sovereign work of God's grace rebel human beings are born again, and  brought from rebellion to faith, and made into children of God. We were given  a new nature, after the image of our heavenly Father (1 John 3:9). If he  is a peacemaker, then his children, who have his nature, will be peacemakers  too.     Or to put it another way, as Paul says in Galatians 4:6, "Since we are sons,  God has sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, 'Abba! Father!.'"  And therefore, as he says in Romans 8:14, "All who are led by the Spirit  of God are the sons of God." And being led by the Spirit always includes  bearing the fruit of the Spirit. And the fruit of the Spirit is peace!     So you see why it must be so, that the children of God must be peacemakers.  It is by the Spirit of God that we are made children of God, and the Spirit  of God is the Spirit of peace. If we are not peacemakers we don't have the  Spirit of Christ.     So we do not earn or merit the privilege to be called sons of God. Instead  we owe our new birth to the sovereign grace of God (John 1:13). We owe our  faith to the impulses of the new birth (1 John 5:1). We receive the Holy  Spirit by the exercise of this faith (Galatians 3:2). The fruit of this Spirit  is peace (Galatians 5:22). And those who bear the fruit of peace are the  sons of God.     Our whole salvation, from beginning to end, is all of grace -- therein lies  our hope and joy and freedom. But our final salvation is not unconditional,  we must be peacemakers -- therein lies our earnestness and the great seriousness  with which we must deal with these beatitudes, and seek the grace of God  in our lives.     Now let's look at what it means to be a peacemaker.     The promise of sonship in the second half of the Matthew 5:9 points us to  Matthew 5:43-45 for our main insight. Both of these texts describe how we  can show ourselves to be sons of God.     You have heard that it was said, "You shall love your neighbor and hate your  enemy." But I say to you, Love your enemies and pray for those who persecute  you, so that you may be sons of your Father who is in heaven; for he makes  his sun rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and  on the unjust.     Notice verse 45, "... so that you may be sons of your Father who is in heaven."  The thought is the same as in Matthew 5:9. There, we must be peacemakers  to be called sons of God. Here, we must love our enemies and pray for those  who persecute us if we would be sons of God.     So probably Jesus thinks of peacemaking as all the acts of love by which  we try to overcome the enmity between us and other people. And if we ask  for specifics he gives two examples.     The first thing he mentions is prayer (verse 44): Pray for those who persecute  you. Pray what? The next chapter tells us. In Matthew 6:9-10 Jesus says,  "Pray like this...". Pray that you and your enemy would hallow God's name.  Pray that God's kingdom be acknowledged in your life and his life. Pray that  you and he would do God's will the way the angels do it in heaven. In other  words, pray for conversion and sanctification. The basis of peace is purity.  Pray for yours and pray for his, that there might be peace.     Then in Matthew 5:47 Jesus gives the other specific example of peacemaking-love  in this text: "If you salute (or greet) only your brethren, what more are  you doing than others?" In other words, if there is a rupture in one of your  relationships, or if there is someone who opposes you, don't nurse that grudge.  Don't feed the animosity by ignoring and avoiding that person. That is the  natural thing to do--just cross the street so that you don't have to greet  them. But that is not the impulse of the Spirit of a peacemaking God, who  sacrificed his Son to reconcile us to himself and to each other.     Peacemaking tries to build bridges to people. It does not want the animosity  to remain. It wants reconciliation. It wants harmony. And so it tries to  show what may be the only courtesy the enemy will tolerate, namely, a greeting.  The peacemaker looks the enemy right in the eye and says, "Good morning,  John." And he says it with a longing for peace in his heart, not with a phony  gloss of politeness to cover his anger.     So we pray and we take whatever practical initiatives we can to make peace  beginning with something as simple as a greeting. But we do not always succeed.  And I want to make sure you don't equate peacemaking with peace-achieving.  A peacemaker longs for peace, and works for peace, and sacrifices for peace.  But the attainment of peace may not come.     Romans 12:18 is very important at this point. There Paul says, "If possible,  so far as it depends upon you, live peaceably with all." That is the goal  of a peacemaker: "If possible, so far as it depends on you..." Don't let  the rupture in the relationship be your fault.     Ah, but that raises a tough question: Is it your fault when the stand that  you take is causing the division? If you have alienated someone and brought  down their anger upon your head because you have done or said what is right,  have you ceased to be a peacemaker?     Not necessarily. Paul said, "If it is possible ... live at peace." He thus  admits that there will be times that standing for the truth will make it  impossible. For example, he says to the Corinthians (in 11:18-19), "I hear  that there are divisions among you; and I partly believe it, for there must  be factions among you in order that those who are genuine among you may be  recognized." Now he would not have said that if the genuine Christians should  have compromised the truth in order to prevent divisions at all cost. It  was precisely because some of the Christians were genuine -- genuine peacemakers  -- that some of the divisions existed. (Also see I Corinthians 7:15.)     Jesus said in Matthew 10:34,     Do not think that I have come to bring peace on earth; I have not come to  bring peace, but a sword. For I have come to set a man against his father,  and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her  mother-in-law; and a man's foes will be those of his own household.     In other words, you must love peace and work for peace. You must pray for  your enemies, and do good to them, and greet them, and long for the the barriers  between you to be overcome. But you must never abandon your allegiance to  me and my word, no matter how much animosity it brings down on your head.  You are not guilty; you are not in the wrong if your life of obedience and  your message of love and truth elicit hostility from some and affirmation  from others.     Perhaps it's just this warning that Jesus wants to sound when the very next  beatitude says, "Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness'  sake." In other words, righteousness must not be compromised in order to  make peace with your persecutors. When Jesus pronounces a blessing on you  for being persecuted for the sake of righteousness, he clearly subordinates  the goal of peace to the goal of righteousness.     In James 3:17 it says "The wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable."  First pure, then peaceable, not the other way around. And that is the order  we have in the beatitudes also (in verses 8 and 9): First, "Blessed are the  pure in heart," then, "Blessed are the peacemakers." Purity takes precedence  over peace. Purity is the basis of Biblical peace. Purity may not be compromised  in order to make peace.     Now I want to close by dealing with one more question that a message like  this would raise for some people today. Why, in view of the world situation,  does this message on peacemaking confine itself to the personal dimensions  of prayer and greetings and individual reconciliation? Aren't these personal  issues insignificant in comparison with the issues of nuclear war, military  budgets, arms talks in Geneva, apartheid in South Africa, civil wars in Central  America, religious oppression in Romania and Russia, and international terrorism?     Before we answer that question, let's ask another one. Was Jesus unaware  that the iron hand of the Roman empire rested on the tiny land of the Jews  without their consent? Was he aware that Archelaus slaughtered 3,000 Jews  at a Passover celebration? Was he aware that the Roman soldiers could conscript  any Jew they chose to carry their baggage? Was he aware that Pilate had his  soldiers bludgeon a crowd of Jews protesting his stealing from the temple  treasury? Was he aware that Pilate massacred Jews on the temple ground and  mixed their blood with their sacrifices they were offering?     When Jesus spoke of enemies, why did he confine himself to prayer and personal  greetings and blessings and individual deeds of generosity and kindness?  Why didn't he talk about the issues of national humiliation, and Roman oppression  and political corruption and the unbridled militarism of his day? Was he  utterly out of touch with the big issues of his day?     No. There is another explanation for why he preaches the way he does. In  Luke 13:1-5 some people confronted Jesus with one of Pilate's atrocities.  Here's the way he responded:     There were some present at that very time who told him of the Galileans whose  blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. And he answered them, "Do  you think that these Galileans were worse sinners than all the other Galileans,  because they suffered thus? I tell you, No; but unless you repent you will  all likewise perish."     He took a major social outrage of injustice and turned it into a demand for  personal, individual repentance. "Unless you repent you will all likewise  perish!" That's what he always did. Why did he do this? Because for Jesus  the eternal destiny of a human soul is a weightier matter, a bigger issue,  than the temporal destiny of a nation.     If you come to Jesus with a question about the justice of taxes to Tiberias  Caesar he will turn it into a personal command aimed right a your own heart:  "You give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's and to God the things that  are God's" (Matthew 22:15-21).     If your come to Jesus with a complaint about the injustice of your brother  who will not divide the inheritance with you, he will turn it into a warning  to your own conscience, "Man, who made me a judge or divider over you? ...  Take heed and beware of all covetousness; for a man's life does not consist  in the abundance of his possessions" (Luke 12:13-15).     Now let's go back to the question. Why does a message on peacemaking from  the Sermon on the Mount focus on the individual issues of prayer and greetings  and personal reconciliation? Aren't these personal issues insignificant in  comparison with the issues of nuclear war, military budgets, arms talks in  Geneva, apartheid in South Africa, civil wars in Central America, religious  oppression in Romania and Russia, and international terrorism?     The answer is no, because the point of these personal issues in the Sermon  on the Mount is to make crystal clear that every individual within the hearing  of my voice must become a new creature if you are to have eternal life. You  must have a new heart. Without a merciful, pure, peacemaking heart you cannot  be called a son of God at the judgment day. And that is the truly weighty  matter in the world today. Is the Son of Man confined in his views of the  world, is he he out of touch with the real issues of life because he regards  the eternal salvation of your soul as a weightier matter than the temporal  destiny of any nation on earth?     Blessed are you peacemakers who pray for your enemies and greet your opponents  with love and sacrifice like your heavenly Father for the reconciliation  of people to God and to each other, for you will be called sons of God and  inherit eternal life in kingdom of your Father.      Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
