  March 31, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church Palm Sunday John Piper, Pastor      IN THESE LAST DAYS, GOD HAS SPOKEN BY A SON   (Hebrews 1:1-4)   

  As I pondered and prayed over what to say on this Palm Sunday andEaster, I thought it would be good to concentrate our attention onsome clear, powerful revelation of Jesus, the Son of God. His comingas Messiah is the focus of Palm Sunday. His dying to deal with sin isthe focus of Maundy Thursday and Good Friday. And his resurrectionand reign are the focus of Easter Sunday. I love the way all of thiscomes together in Hebrews 1:1-4. So we will listen to this text forall three messages -- today, Thursday evening, and next Sundaymorning.  God, after He spoke long ago to the fathers in the prophets inmany portions and in many ways, 2 in these last days has spoken to usin His Son, whom He appointed heir of all things, through whom alsoHe made the world. 3 And He is the radiance of His glory and theexact representation of His nature, and upholds all things by theword of His power. When He had made purification of sins, He sat downat the right hand of the Majesty on high; 4 having become as muchbetter than the angels, as He has inherited a more excellent namethan they.  
    Do You Want to Hear God Speak?    Let's begin with a question? Do you want to hear God speak? Haveyou ever said in a moment of desperation, "O God, if you would onlyspeak! If I could only hear your voice. If you would only talk to meand not be so silent!" I have said those words. And I have found theLord patient with me and tender in his rebukes. One of the rebukes Ihave heard is found in Hebrews 1:1-2. What these two verses teachvery loudly and plainly is that God is  not  silent. God is notwithdrawn and uncommunicative.  They teach us that God has spoken in two phases:  before  thecoming of the Son of God into the world and  through  the Son ofGod's coming into the world. Read them again: "God, after He spokelong ago to the fathers in the prophets in many portions and in manyways, in these last days has spoken to us in  His  Son."Consider these two phases of God's communication for a moment.  Before the coming of the Son it says God spoke "in the prophets inmany portions (or many times or many places) and in many ways."Notice three crucial things.:    1) God spoke     He was not silent. God communicates. He means to connect with us.He is not an idea to be thought about. He is a person to be listenedto and understood and enjoyed and obeyed. He is a speaking Person.There is no more important fact than this: There is a God who speaksthat we might know him and love him and live in joyful obedience tohim. God spoke.    2) God spoke "in the prophets" or by theprophets     This means that God's typical way of communicating with his peopleas a whole was by inspiring human spokesmen as go-betweens. It wasnot God's way to write his word in the sky, or to shout it frommountains for all to hear, or to whisper it one by one in the heartof every Israelite. His usual way was to call a prophet and theninspire the prophet to speak and to write to the people what Godwanted said. But don't miss what this text says: When God spoke tothe fathers in the prophets,  God spoke      to theFathers! When the fathers heard and understood the prophets theyheard God speaking. God uses chosen, inspired human instruments tospeak to the fathers. But it is  God speaking  to the fatherswhen the prophets speak and write.    3) God spoke to the fathers by the prophets "inmany portions and in many ways"     This is where I get the assurance that God is not withdrawn anduncommunicative. This verse stresses the lavish variety of God'scommunication. In "many portions (or times or places) and many ways!"This is a great comfort and encouragement. Do you know why? Becausewe all know that some of those portions and ways are hard tounderstand. If God had only spoken in one portion or one way and wecouldn't get it, we would be very frustrated and at a greatdisadvantage. But God has not done it that way. He has spoken in manyplaces and times and portions and in many ways.  So if you have difficulty in grasping his word in Leviticus, youmay hear him clearly in Proverbs. If you don't see the point clearlyin Zechariah, you may still be deeply moved by the message of Jonah.If you don't catch on yet to the strange visions in Ezekiel, you maybe sustained by the sufferings of Job. The point is this: God meansto provide a lot of possibilities in the Old Testament where you canhear him. He has spoken and he is not silent. He is not withdrawn anduncommunicative. There are  many  places and  many  waysthat he has spoken by the prophets.  So I have been rebuked in my complaining about the silence of God.I am like a person complaining in "The Land of 10,000 Lakes" thatthere are no lakes in Minnesota because I don't see one from1801-11th Avenue.    God's Communication Now is Better and Greaterthan Before    But there's more. Hebrews says that God spoke in two phases: one before  the coming of the Son of God into the world, and one through  the Son's coming into the world. Verse 2a: "In theselast days [God] has spoken to us in  His  Son."  Now the point here is that if God seemed ready and eager tocommunicate himself in the Old Testament how much more is he ready tocommunicate in the sending of his Son! What the writer wants us tosee is that this latest communication from God is greater and betterthan all those portions and ways in days of old. So when I complainto God, "Lord, I want to hear you. Would you speak to me? I need tohear your voice . . ." is my complaint well placed? What would God'sresponse be in view of these words?  Let's look at three ways that the speaking of God in the Son inthese last days is better than God's speaking of old.    1) God has now spoken not just by prophets, butby his Son     Verses 1 and 2 say,  "God, after He spoke long ago to the fathers  in theprophets    in many portions and in many ways, 2 in theselast days has spoken to us  in His Son ."  Notice it does not say, "Formerly God spoke by prophets and inthese last days he has spoken by apostles." That's true. And you cansee their crucial role in Hebrews 2:3-4. But the point here is thatin these last days God has done something very different: tocommunicate, he sent his Son.  This is different. The Son of God is not just a prophet. Somethought he was just a prophet (John 9:17), but he was not a mereprophet. Here Islam makes a great mistake about Jesus. Jesus is notonly a prophet like Moses or Isaiah. And he is far above Mohammed inglory. He is the Son of God. And that means he is God. The son ofJohn Piper is human like John Piper. And the Son of God is divinelike God.  We will see this in detail next week when we focus on verse 3: "Heis the radiance of [God's] glory and the exact representation of[God's] nature." The point of those words is to warn us against themistake that Islam has made. Jesus is the unique image of God'sdivine glory and bears the very stamp of his divine nature. He is not  a mere prophet. The whole point here is to show that he issuperior to the prophets. He is the eternally begotten Son, withoutbeginning and without ending (Hebrews 7:3).  In other words, God has not just spoken by inspiring prophets andapostles. He has spoken by coming to us in the person of his Son. WhoJesus was, what he said and what he accomplished by dying and risingfrom the dead is God's Word to us. This is what God has said, andwhat we should hear -- what we need to listen to far more earnestlythan we do.  Every time I begin to complain that God is silent and that I needGod to speak to me -- at that moment I should stop and ask: Have Iheard this Word? Is this Word from God -- spoken in the Son of God --so short and simple that I have finished with it, and now I need more-- another word? Have I really heard the Word of God in person andthe teaching and the work Son? Is the aching of my soul and theconfusion of my mind really owing to the fact that I have exhaustedhearing this Word and need another word? And so I feel anothergracious rebuke to my unperceptive and presumptuous ears.  So the first way that the speaking of God is better in these lastdays than in the prophets of old is that he has now spoken in thecoming of his Son.    2) The second way that the speaking of God inthese last days is better than in the former days is that the Son inwhom he speaks has been appointed heir of all things    Verse 2: "In these last days [God] has spoken to us in His  Son,  whom He appointed heir of all things ." Now why doesthe author add this? Because he wants us to dwell on the fact thatthe one we listen to, Jesus, the Son of God, can make good in the endon all that he promises. Why? Because he is the heir of all things.In the end he will have at his disposal all things. He will have insubjection to him all that is. The writer wants us to think aboutthis. What does it mean to listen to a Spokesman for God who in theend will have under his complete control and ownership all things(all land, all water, all fire, all wind, all energy, all naturalresources, all nations, all military might, all buildings, allbacteria and viruses, all angels, all demons, all spiritual andmaterial beings except God the Father)? Well, it means that he canmake good on all his promises.  If he says, "Blessed are the meek for they shall inherit theearth" (Matthew 5:5) then he can make good on that promise, becausehe will own the earth and have it under his control. If he says,"Nothing in all creation will separate us from the love of God inChrist Jesus" (Romans 8:39), then he can make good on that promisebecause he will own all creation and have it under his control. If hesays, "There shall no longer be death or mourning or crying or painany more" (Revelation 21:1), he can make good on that promise becausehe will own life and death and rule unhindered over all that causespain and crying.  When you listen to the Son of God it is different from listeningto a prophet. God will make good on the word of the prophets. But theSon will make good on his own word.  I wonder if you have ever asked in verse 2 why the Son isdescribed first as the "heir of all things" and second as the one"through whom God made the world?" Why not say first that he isCreator of all things, and second that he is Heir of all things?Here's my suggestion: how the story ends is more important than howthe story begins, but you can't understand the true ending withoutunderstanding the beginning.  In other words, what is ultimately at stake in my life (and yourlife) is how the future goes, not how the past went. If I have aSavior who is heir of all things and makes everything serve myeverlasting joy, then the past is important only to the degree thatit helps me understand that and believe that and live in the truth ofthat. But it's the future where I will live -- or not.  But the fact is, we cannot understand Jesus' being appointed Heirof all things until we understand that all things were made throughhim. Until you know this, you might say, "Oh, Jesus was a man like usand was chosen to be exalted to some special role as heir -- afterall it says, he was "appointed" heir! So if he was "appointed" heirthen maybe he was not always heir and he was really adopted as a Sonof God rather than being the Son of God eternally. That would be ahuge mistake.  So the writer follows his first and primary statement that the Sonis "the heir of all things" with the statement that "through him Godmade the world." This means at least two things: 1) the Son existedbefore he came to earth in the person of Jesus of Nazareth; 2) theSon already owned the universe by virtue of creating it with theFather. In fact verse 3 says, "he upholds all things by the word ofhis power." (See also verses 10-12.)  So he created all and he upholds all. How then is he "appointed"heir of all? I think the answer is that, for now, much of hiscreation is in rebellion against him; and God has ordained that,because of the Son's faithful obedience and death and resurrection,these enemies will one day be subdued and all creation will bow downand acknowledge that they are ruled and owned by Jesus Christ.  Hebrews 10:12-13 says this:  Having offered one sacrifice for sins for all time, [Christ] satdown at the right hand of God, 13 waiting from that time onward untilhis enemies be made a footstool for his feet.  In other words Christ took his seat as the active ruling heir ofall things by virtue of his death and resurrection. He not only hasthe right be the heir of all things because he made all things, butalso because he defeated his enemies and purchased a lost people fromsin and death through his death.  So we have double reason to give heed to a Son of God who is heirof all things: he is heir in one sense because he made all things;and he is appointed heir in another sense because he died and roseagain to redeem for himself a people and to destroy sin and death andSatan and everything that could make his people miserable.  He can make good on his word because he is God, because he isCreator, and because he is the Triumphant Heir over all evil andmisery. This is a better word than anything the prophets ever spokein many ways in the Old Testament.  This leaves one last thing to say this morning about how superiorGod's speaking in the Son is over his speaking of old in theprophets.    3) This Word of God in his son is so decisiveand so full that there will be no third phase of God's speaking inhistory    That is what it means when it says in verse 2: " in these lastdays  [God] has spoken to us in His Son." The last days begin withthe coming of the Son into the world. We have been living in the lastdays since the days of Christ -- that is, the last days of history aswe know it before the final and full establishment of the kingdom ofGod.  The last days of a war are the days after the decisive battle hasbeen fought or the decisive bomb has been dropped. Everyone knows whowill win. It is only a matter of time. The resistance may go on forsome years, but the mortal blow has been struck to the enemy and thehigh ground has been captured. The days of fighting that remain arethe last days of the war.  So it is since the Son of God came into the world. In his deathand resurrection, the decisive battle with sin and death and hell hasbeen fought and won. It is only a matter of time. These are the lastdays bringing his decisive triumph to all the peoples of the earth.  But the point for the writer of Hebrews is this: The Word that Godspoke by his Son is the decisive Word. It will not be followed inthis age by any greater word or replacement word. This is  the word of God -- the person of Jesus, the teaching of Jesus and thework of Jesus.  When I complain that I don't hear the word of God when I feel adesire to hear the voice of God, and get frustrated that he does notspeak in ways that I may crave, what am I really saying? Am I reallysaying that I have exhausted this final decisive Word revealed to meso fully in the New Testament. Have I really exhausted this word? Hasit become so much a part of me that it has shaped my very being andgiven me life and guidance? Or have I treated it lightly -- skimmedit like a newspaper, dipped in like a taste tester -- and thendecided I wanted something different, something more? This is what Ifear I am guilty of more than I wish to admit. God is calling us tohear his final decisive Word -- to meditate on it and study it andmemorize it and linger over it and soak in it until it saturates usto the center of our being.  If you ask, What about the ministry of the Holy Spirit today, forthis I direct your attention to Hebrews 2:3-4 and to this week's STARarticle. In a word, it is the passion of the Holy Spirit to focus allour attention and all our affection on this final and decisive Wordspoken in the Son of God for these last days. That is his great work,and the aim of all is gifts.  Copyright 1996 John Piper  
  
