  I have been urging you for two weeks to considerthe spiritual value of Christian biography.  I have referred againand again to Hebrews 13:7, Remember your leaders, thosewho spoke to you the word of God; consider the outcome of theirlife, and imitate their faith.  Experience teaches us and the Bible teaches us thatthe lives of great men and women have great power to inspire usand shape us.  When Ruth Tucker put together her biographicalhistory of missions she wrote in the preface,  The Christian missionary movement through the centurieshas been perpetuated by missionary biography.  In fact, writesGeoffrey Moorhouse, it became the most fruitful. . .stimulusto the vocation during the nineteenth century.    I was struck again this week with the spiritual powerof a holy life -- especially the holiest of all lives, the lifeof Jesus.  I was reading the life story of Krister Sairsingh,a former Hindu from Trinidad who is now the Chaplain to internationalstudents at Harvard.  Let me read you some excerpts from his story.    After making great progress in the Hindu spiritualdisciplines something happened that unsettled him deeply.  During my final year of high school I had some bizarreand rather dreadful experiences in which it seemed that my  mantrashad failed me and the Hindu deities were of no avail.  For thefirst time I felt that the Hindu gods had disappointed me andthat the power of my special mantra was not adequate to my presentcrisis. . .  One of my classmates, an East Indian who identifiedhimself as a Christian, suggested that I consider Jesus afterI shared my problem with him. . .  At the urging of my classmate (now a medical doctor),I began to read the New Testament to learn more about Jesus. He totally captivated me.  Here was someone who struck me as differentfrom anyone who ever lived. . .  In reading the gospels I was drawn to this man whosaid he had the power to forgive sins, to break the bondage ofkarma.  Who really was this Jesus?  I really wanted to know.  I began a careful study of the gospels.  During those two monthsI would go into the cane fields and cry aloud to the unknown God,hoping that the truth would be revealed to me.  More than anythingelse I wanted the truth.  The weeks went by and still I could not get awayfrom the attractive power of Jesus.  As I read his sayings inthe gospels, I thought he was speaking directly to me.  It wasas if he were telling me that he could actually come to me, liftthe fear of death, break the bondage of karma, forgive my sinsand make me truly alive. . .   One night, after meditation on the account in John'sgospel of the death and resurrection of Jesus, I asked Jesus toforgive my sins, to set me free from the bondage of karma andto become the Lord of my life.  I had come to believe that hewas the only one who could do that. . . .  That night I pouredout my heart to him in tears.  I knew when I got up from my kneesthat something eventful, life-changing, had happened.  Jesus theLord had entered my life. (Veritas Reconsidered, pp. 19-20)    If Jesus can captivate a person by his spirit andwisdom and power and love, then it is not surprising that thosewho have walked closest to him and have a large portion of hisspirit will also captivate us.  That is the power and value ofChristian biography, and that is the value of studying a man likeBarnabas, a good man and full of the Holy Spirit and faith.  We have seen six qualities of his goodness and howeach one grew out of his great faith in the promises of God. And last week we looked at his unusual gift for encouraging youngerleaders.  We studied the marks of a Biblical leader-maker.  One of those marks we passed over very quickly becauseI said I would come back to it this week and make it the linkwith today's focus, namely, the weakness of this great man Barnabas. The point we skipped over was patience -- patience with otherpeople's failures.  We saw already (in Acts 9:26-30) that Barnabas alone,of all the disciples in Jerusalem, was willing to set aside Paul'shistory of persecution and give him a new chance to prove himselfas a Christian convert.  And in doing that God used Barnabas togive the church the greatest missionary and theologian it hasever had, namely, the apostle Paul..  Now there is one other time when the patience ofBarnabas moved him to stand up for a younger leader in the church. Let's turn to Acts 15:36.  Before we read this passage, let megive you a little background.  In Acts 12:25 we learn that Barnabas and Saul broughta young man named John Mark back to Antioch with them from Jerusalem. Mark's mother's name was Mary, and she had a house in Jerusalem-- the one where the disciples were praying when Peter escapedfrom prison (Acts 12:12).  So Mark had experience in the thickof things in Jerusalem in the years just after Jesus' death andresurrection.  We learn from Colossians 4:10 that Mark and Barnabasare cousins.    When the Holy Spirit appoints Barnabas and Saul tobe missionaries from Antioch in Acts 13:2, Barnabas and Saul decideto take John Mark along as an assistant (Acts 13:5).  But somethinghappened after the team left Cyprus and headed on into Pamphylia. It is very serious, but Luke only mentions it in one sentencein Acts 13:13, Now Paul and his company set sail from Paphos,and came to Perga in Pamphylia.  And John left them and returnedto Jerusalem.  Luke is very reserved here.  He passes no judgmenton John.  We wait to see what will come of this.  Two or three years later, after the first missionaryjourney is over, and after the Jerusalem council has settled theissue of Gentile circumcision, and after Paul and Barnabas areback in Antioch teaching and preaching, Paul is convinced thatthe time is right for a return to that first missionary fieldto strengthen the saints.  This is where Acts 15:36 picks up.. .  And after some days Paul said to Barnabas, Come,let us return, and visit the brethren in every city where we proclaimedthe word of the Lord, and see how they are.  And Barnabaswanted to take with them John called Mark.  But Paul thought bestnot to take with them one who had withdrawn from them in Pamphylia,and had not gone with them to the work.  And there arose a sharpcontention, so that they separated from each other; Barnabas tookMark with him and sailed away to Cyprus, but Paul chose Silasand departed, being commended by the brethren to the grace ofthe Lord.  This is the foremost instance of Barnabas patiencewith the failures of others.  He is the son of encouragement (Acts4:36).  He wants to give John Mark another chance and he wantsto do it now.    Paul disagrees.  The disagreement is so deep thatit cannot be resolved, and these veterans whose friendship goesback at least 15 years, and who owe each other so much, part company. Neither will yield.    Which one of them was right?  Well, Luke is remarkablyobjective here.  He does not seem to take sides.  Perhaps onelittle clue shows that the church inclined to the side of Paul,because in Acts 15:40 it says that Paul and Silas were commendedby the brethren to the grace of the Lord.  It doesn't say thisabout the departure of Barnabas and John Mark.    But Luke is not at pains to help us take sides here. He does not report this to make Paul out to be an ogre or tomake Barnabas out to be a patsy.  The impression you get is thattwo good men could not agree and a lamentable rupture in theirpartnership happened.  Before we come back and ferret out the lessons ofthis incident let's bring one more event into the picture.  Itis recorded by Paul in Galatians 2:11-14.  Sometime before this separation between Barnabasand Paul (in Acts 15:36ff) there had been another run-in of amuch more serious kind.  Peter had come down to Antioch from Jerusalemand was enjoying his Christian freedom by eating with the GentileChristians.  But then some of the more strict party in the Jerusalemchurch came who did not approve of this kind of freedom.  The response of Peter and the other Jews and evenBarnabas was utterly unacceptable to Paul. Let's read Galatians2:11-14.   But when Cephas came to Antioch I opposed him tohis face, because he stood condemned.  For before certain mencame from James, he ate with the Gentiles; but when they camehe drew back and separated himself, fearing the circumcision party. And with him the rest of the Jews acted insincerely, so thateven Barnabas was carried away by their insincerity  But whenI saw that they were not straightforward about the truth of thegospel, I said to Cephas before them all, If you, thougha Jew, live like a Gentile and not like a Jew, how can you compelthe Gentiles to live like Jews?   In other words, the behavior of Paul and Barnabasamounted to a new commandment to the Gentiles that they must virtuallybecome Jews.  Notice what was at stake here.  It was the truthof the gospel (v.14).  There are actions that so contradict thetruth of the gospel that they cannot be countenanced.  Paul knewthat when the truth goes, the gospel goes, and when the gospelgoes, the souls of men perish.  This was Paul's great strength. He never forgot that truth issues are ultimately people issues.  Peter and Barnabas were wrong.  Their actions wereout of step with the truth of the gospel.  Why had Barnabas beenswept away in this error?  Why did a few men coming from Jerusalemcause Peter and Barnabas to conform to their expectations ratherthan stand up for the principle of gospel liberty?    Here is the weakness of a great man.  Here the bubbleof idealism bursts on the needle of reality.  Our hero is fallibleand imperfect after all.  Now what can we learn from all this?  Let me mentionbriefly six lessons for our instruction and encouragement.  The first is a reaffirmation of our Sunday eveninglesson from two weeks ago based on Psalm 119:176:    1.  Great saints go astray.   At this point I don't want to pick on Barnabas. I have in mind both Barnabas and Paul.  Paul himself had givena warning loud and clear that he and Barnabas must not be idolized. In Acts 14:15 they were put in the category with the gods (whichwe might be tempted to do).  But Paul cries out (with a warningthat should be stamped over the biography of every man exceptJesus):  Men, why are you doing this?  We also are men, oflike nature with you. . .  More than once Paul confessed that he was a sinnerand that he had not yet arrived at perfection (Phil. 3:12; 1 Tim.1:15).  Great saints go astray, whether Barnabas, or Paul.  Andbiographies are the more valuable if they show us the weaknessesof our heroes as well as their strengths.  We can be thankfulthat the Bible is so honest in its portrayal even of the bestsaints.   2.  The ministry is made up of many judgment calls.   In fact, life is made up of many judgment calls. What I mean by a judgment call is a decision thathas to be made when no specific rule of Scripture refers explicitlyto your circumstances.  There is no passage in Scripture that says, Whena young missionary has forsaken the work on his first journey,you shall give him a second chance after 18 months of penitentand faithful service.  And no Biblical text says not to.  Instead we have principles that say, Encouragethe fainthearted, help the weak, be patient with them all.  And we have principles which say that leaders in the churchshould be above reproach, and well-tested.  One principle stressesthe glory of God's mercy.  Another principle stresses the gloryof God's calling.  One principle accents the bounty of God.  Theother principle accents the holiness of God.  Some of our decisions are governed by explicit Biblicalcommands -- thou shalt not commit adultery!  But most of our decisionsin life are an effort to apply Biblical principles to situationsthat the Bible does not deal with explicitly.  And the problemis that we often differ on how to do this.  Matthew Henry callsthese issues points of prudence.  Listen to his wiseand sober words:  Even those that are united to one and the same Jesus,and sanctified by one and the same Spirit, have different apprehensions,different opinions, different views, and different sentimentsin points of prudence.  It will be so while we are in this stateof darkness and imperfection; we shall never be all of a mindtill we come to heaven, where light and love are perfect. (Commentary,vol. 6, p. 200)  In Acts 15:38 the word Luke uses to describe Paul'sconviction that Mark should not go fits this idea.  It says, literally,But Paul did not count it fitting, or proper, to take alongone who had withdrawn. . .  It was an issue of spiritualprudence, an issue of propriety and fitness and strategic wisdom.   But what does wisdom dictate in a choice like this? Barnabas seemed to focus on the need and potential of Mark. Paul seemed to focus on the demands and potential of the largercause of the Gospel and the honor of the mission.  I don't think we should see this as all bad.  It'sthe rancor and bitterness and resentment that are bad.  But isit bad that one mission agency perceives wisdom in one strategyand another agency perceives wisdom in another strategy, so thattwo mission agencies are formed?  In fact there are agencies todaywith extremely high standards for their candidates more like Paul'sand their are agencies who will send almost anyone who wants togo.  Is that all bad?  The point here is simply this: most of our life andministry is made up of those kinds of decisions -- the applicationof Biblical principles to situations not explicitly dealt within the Bible.  And therefore complete agreement in these areaswill not happen in the body of Christ until we no longer see througha glass darkly.  And I suggest that we not too quickly assumethat our different strategies for Christ are a bad thing.   3. Sons of encouragement are vulnerableto minimizing the importance of truth for the sake of relationships.   In other words, their very strength -- the inclinationto stand up for people -- this very strength can lead to weakness. I think this is what happened in Galatians 2.  Why did Paul notget sucked into the hypocrisy while Barnabas did, when Barnabaswas the older, more experienced Christian?  I suspect it was becausePaul did not feel the same emotional empathy with the Jews whocame from Jerusalem that Barnabas did.  Paul didn't feel the sametug that Barnabas must have felt from the Jerusalem brothers.   Paul's orientation to the ministry was so gospel-centeredthat the emotions and opinions of other people did not have thesame importance to him that they did for Barnabas.  Listen tohow Paul talks in Galatians 1:8,    Even if we, or an angel from heaven, should preachto you a gospel contrary to that which we preached to you, lethim be accursed. . . (v.10)  Am I now seeking the favor of men,or of God?  Or am I trying to please men?  If I were still pleasingmen, I should not be a servant of Christ.   This kind of disposition probably did not make Paulthe same son of encouragement that Barnabas was. But it did keep the Gospel pure for another hundred generationsof Gentile believers.  And Barnabas, with all his warmth and patiencewith people, was sucked into an error that compromised the truthof the gospel.  Every strength is vulnerable to its correspondingweakness.  Which leads us to the fourth lesson.   4.  Diverse people in the body of Christ need eachother's different strengths.   Is it not a beautiful and encouraging thing thatat the beginning of Paul's Christian life when no one would takea risk on his behalf, Barnabas came forward and saved him forthe cause of Christ; but many years later, when Barnabas was fallingaway from the truth, Paul came forward and saved him for the cause? These men needed each other's different strengths.  Can either of these men boast over the other?  Ithink not.  God has chosen to build a community of diverse people. His aim is not that all the Barnabases become Pauls or that allthe Pauls become Barnabases.  His aim is that they help each otherfight the fight of faith and endure to the end and be saved. His aim is that when one is weak the other be strong; when thestrength of one makes him vulnerable to a corresponding weakness,the other be there with the balancing virtue.  And his aim isthat we not envy or resent each other, but rejoice in the wisdomof the Spirit who creates and us and molds us according to hischoosing.   5.  Past experiences and past usefulness are no guaranteeof future obedience.   In Acts 11:24 we saw that Barnabas was a good manand full of the Holy Spirit and faith.  And God used him mightilyin the church.   But it is just as certain that in Galatians 2he was NOT full of the Holy Spirit.   He gave way to the spiritof error and ceased, for a season, to walk in the way of faith.  Therefore, the lesson to be learned is that noneof us should rest on his laurels.  None of us should say, Well,I know I once had this marvelous experience with God, so I amsafe and secure from now on.  Rather we should say with Jesus,Let us watch and pray that we not fall into temptation. Let us put on the whole armor of God and do all to stand in theday of testing.  Let us hide the word of God in our heart thatwe might not sin against him.  Past experiences and past usefulness are no guaranteeof future obedience.  The Christian life is a race to be run andfinished, fight to be fought and won, and a faith to be kept tothe end.  There is no place for coasting or drifting.    In this Paul excelled: I do not run aimlessly,I do not box as one beating the air; but I pommel my body andsubdue it, lest after preaching to others I myself should be disqualified.. .  Forgetting those things which lie behind and straining forwardto what lies ahead, I press on toward the goal for the prize ofthe upward call of God in Christ Jesus. (1 Cor. 9:26-7;Phil. 3:13-4)  Persevering faith, not past faith, is the pathto glory.   6.  The cause of God will triumph through all theweaknesses and failures of his people.   There are at least three evidences of this from thelife of Barnabas and Paul.  First, in 1 Corinthians 9:6, sometime after separating from Paul and Barnabas, Paul refers to Barnabasas a fellow worker who shares his life and labor.  The breachhas been healed.  Second, in 2 Timothy 4:11 Paul says to Timothy, Lukealone is with me.  Get Mark and bring him with you; for he isvery useful in serving me.  Was it Paul's tough rebuke orBarnabas' tender patience that saved Mark for the cause of theGospel?  Or could it have been both?  In any case, the Lord brought victory out of contentionand Mark not only became useful to Paul but also served as Peter'sinterpreter and wrote our second Gospel -- the Gospel accordingto Mark.  The third piece of evidence, that God triumphs eventhrough the failures of his people is that when the contentionwas not solved, neither missionary quit the ministry.  Insteadthey chose new partners and went on with the ministry of the gospel,and out of one faltering missionary journey there emerged two.  And God has done this again and again in history. Out of the ashes of failure he fans a few embers into a new firethat burns for his glory.  The defeats of God's people are always temporary. And the celebrations of hell are very soon ruined by the sovereignwisdom and grace of God.  The ark of the covenant may be captured by the Philistinearmies.  But take heed lest you judge the victor too quickly:Dagon will fall on his face before the rays of dawn and tumorswill ruin the triumphs of the enemies of God (2 Sam. 5).  Thedefeats of God's people are always temporary.  The cause of Godwill triumph through all the weaknesses and failures of his people.  Let's close by summing up what we have seen.    Great saints go astray -- sons of thunder andsons of encouragement.   The ministry is made up of many judgment calls,and we will have to learn to disagree on some things without rancoror bitterness or resentment.   Every strength has its corresponding weaknessand we are all vulnerable.     Therefore we need each other's different strengthsand mustn't envy one another but rather give thanks for God'swisdom.   Past experiences and past usefulness are no guaranteeof future obedience.  Successful Christian living is made of vigilanceand constant prayer.   The cause of God will triumph through all theweaknesses and failures of his people. Our defeats are temporaryand the celebration of our enemies is brief.   
