 August 27, 1989    Bethlehem Baptist Church    John Piper, Pastor    
    THE PRAYER OF AN OLD SAINT    
    
    The generation gap is not all bad. Some gaps are good things. Like   in spark plugs &#151; the gap has to be just right to make the   spark that drives the piston that runs the engine. In fact the   Bible does not try to obliterate the generation gap; instead, it   teaches us how to understand the gap and how to cross it with   special kinds of respect.    
    At Bethlehem there are older saints and younger saints and some of   us in our forties and fifties who have a foot on both boats. What   I believe the Lord wants me to do in the next three weeks is apply   the Word of God to these groups and seek the wisdom and power of   God's Spirit to pull us together for the great work we have to do   as the people of God in this city and around the world.    
    Today the message is called, "The Prayer of an Old Saint." Next   week it will be called, "Do Not Say, `I am only a Youth'" from   Jeremiah chapter one. And in two weeks, as we enter the fall   schedule of three services and the new SPAN II design for   ministry, the title will be, "Old and Young Shall Dream Together"   from the text in Acts 2: "Your sons and your daughters shall   prophesy; your young men will see visions and your old men will   dream dreams." And in each of the evening services we will   continue what we began in the morning with further exposition and   stories and practical applications. Then on September 10 in the   evening we will meet outside in our new sanctuary and dream   together of what God aims to do through us as we build   together.    
    The more I have thought about this the more I am persuaded that   Christ is calling us to explode some stereotypes about the   generations. What is God's calling for an older saint? Is it the   same call that insurance companies and pension plans and   retirement communities offer? Is God's message and their message   the same? And how early in life does God look for visionary and   responsible ministry from our youth? Is it God's idea that we have   come to regard as normal and inevitable the excessive   style-consciousness, the disrespect, the self-centeredness, the   indifference that so often goes with adolescence? Have we just   gradually over the years in the American church conformed to the   lowest common denominator of what is possible for the old, and   what is expected from the young? Have we searched the Scriptures   to learn what God's will for older people is? Have we searched the   Scriptures to learn what God aims to make of a teenager or a   babyboomer? Or do we just absorb the media models?    
    Perhaps we can make some good progress together in the next   several weeks searching the Scriptures. I think you will find   exciting and encouraging what God can do and wants to do with old   and young in this congregation.    
    So let's think this morning about being at the upper end of the   age spectrum. The world is getting old. We will hear next week   some astonishing figures about the massive and exploding numbers   of young people in the world. But today we focus on the remarkable   facts of aging.    
    The more developed a country becomes, the longer its people live.   The country with the lowest average male life expectancy today is   Afghanistan at 37 years. The highest is Japan at 75 years. In   Guinea it is 39 years; Ethiopia 40; Cameroon 49; India 56; Poland   &amp; China 67; USA 72.    
    In the U.S., 210 Americans reach the age of 100 each week. 56,000   people in the U.S. past the age of 65 get married every year; and   10,000 get divorced. The world's over-60 population is expected to   almost triple in the next 40 years.    
    And the gap between the older and the younger is not all bad. The   Bible does not try to obliterate the gap. For example, Paul wrote   to the younger Timothy, "Do not rebuke an older man but exhort him   as you would a father; treat younger men like brothers, older   women like mothers, younger women like sisters, in all purity"   (1&yuml;Timothy&yuml;5:1-2).    
    If Paul had wanted to obliterate the generation gap, he would have   said to Timothy, "Don't make distinctions in the way you treat the   old and the young. Treat them all the same." But that is not what   he said. He said, Recognize the distinction between an old man and   a young man; acknowledge the gap, and treat the old man one way   &#151; like a father &#151; and the young man another way &#151;   like a brother.    
    If we were to do away with the generation gap, we would nullify   some very important Scriptures. Some Scriptures can only be   fulfilled by recognizing the generation gap and owning up to the   fact that it is good.    
    I want to illustrate this with a text from Leviticus 19. But   before I do let me set up an outline for the rest of the message.   I want to say three things about older people, and I choose words   that rhyme in the hope that you may remember them and think on   them and pray them into reality at Bethlehem.    
    1. Older people are to be PRIZED.    2. Older people are to be MOBILIZED.    3. Older people are to be EVANGELIZED (which we won't get to until   tonight).    
    1. Older people are to be PRIZED.    
    Here is where I want to quote Leviticus 19, specifically, verse   32.    "You shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of an   old man, and you shall fear your God: I am the Lord."    
    There are tokens of respect and demonstrations of honor that   belong to older people, simply because they are older. God has   granted them to live long, and you shall fear your God by honoring   the men and women who have born his image to old age.    
    This is why it is so important not to obliterate the generation   gap. This text commands the younger ones among us not to stride   presumptuously and carelessly into the presence of an older person   as though we were crossing no gap &#151; as though we and they   were simply peers with no special respect and honor to be shown to   them. "You shall rise up before the grey head; you shall show   honor to face of an old person."    
    How? Respectful postures. Respectful forms of address. Respectful   deference in sitting and standing. Respectful clothing. These are   not just arbitrary, old fashioned manners and customs. The text   says, "Honor the face of an old man, and fear your God." Customs   of respect and deference to older people are rooted in God and the   fear of God. And the loss of these manners of respect from   babyboomers and teenagers is directly related to their small view   of God and the contemporary foreignness of the idea of the fear of   God. If God has become a buddy, you can hardly expect people to   stand when an old man enters the room.    
    So we must learn to fear the Lord in humility and trust, and then   to let that trust and humility and fear show itself in respect and   honor for the people the Lord has made to bear his image a long   time on the earth. This is what I mean when I say, Older people   are to be PRIZED. Anything that signifies disregard, anything that   signifies that loss of strength means loss of honor, is wrong.    
    The way we treat our elders is a test of faith. It has to do with   reverence for God. Paul said this too in 1 Timothy 5:4,8: "If a   widow has children or grandchildren, let them first learn their   religious duty to their own family and make some return to their   parents; for this is acceptable in the sight of God . . . If any   one does not provide for his relatives, and especially for his own   family, he has disowned the faith and is worse than an   unbeliever."    
    In other words, we will prize older people the way we should when   we prize God the way we should. When you stand before an older   person, the issue is: will God be revered in this moment by the   way I treat this person? Now that has implications for the older   person too. It means that he or she exists for God. And that leads   us to the second point this morning.    
    2. Older people are to be MOBILIZED.    
    Turn with me to Psalm 71. While you are turning listen to these   facts: At the turn of the century, the average man in America   spent 3% of his lifetime in retirement; in this decade he is   spending 20% of his lifetime in retirement. Almost 2/3 of all   workers retire before 65. Over half the people over 85 report no   physical disabilities.    
    The Biblical implication from all this is not merely that there   are more and more older people to be prized, but more and more to   be mobilized.    
    Now this assumes two things. First, that there are mobilizers,   equippers, leaders who expect older people to be actively serving   Christ as long as they are alive, in whatever way their health   will allow. And, second, it assumes that there are older people   who expect to be actively serving Christ as long as they live, in   whatever way their health will allow.    
    I want to encourage both of those assumptions. And I think the   best way is to point your attention to verse 18 of Psalm 71. The   old saint prays like this:    
    So even to old age and gray hairs, O God, do not forsake me,till I   proclaim Thy mightto all the generations to come.    
    My father turned 70 last January. Last Friday he was supposed to   have his second hip surgery. I called Friday morning to check in   on him. My stepmother answered and said he couldn't have the   surgery because of a severely infected prostate. She said the hip   and the infection are excruciatingly painful. I said, "Where is   he?" She said, "O he's downstairs recording gospel messages for   radio in the Philippines. He says, it hurts more to lie down and   he may as well work." My father once told me a long time ago that   he never intended to stop preaching, and that his prayer was to   die in the pulpit.    
    I think that is the spirit of verse 18. Here is an old man with   grey hair pleading with God to sustain him in old age so that he   can press on with his ministry. That is what God wants at   Bethlehem: Older people who say: "Well, if my society says that my   profession is finished at age 65 but my God says that my ministry   is finished when I die, then between 65 and 95 I am on call full   time for God."    
    Look at verse 18 again with me: "So even to old age and gray   hairs, O God, do not forsake me, till I . . . " Now right at this   point I want you to fill in your ministry. Every Christian is   given gifts and called to ministry (Ephesians&yuml;4:11;   1&yuml;Peter&yuml;4:10f; 1&yuml;Corinthians&yuml;12:7) and there   are no age limitations. Your ministry will change with the   different chapters of your life. At the peak of his physical   powers my father preached well over 200 times a year. Now the pain   is too great to travel. So he tapes messages and writes Bible   study lessons and communicates with young Christians all over the   world from his study in Easley, South Carolina.    
    In Cameroon Noel and I met an American Wycliffe missionary named   Olive Shell. She was a linguistic specialist and happened to be 76   years old. She had been there 7 years after serving in Peru for 35   years. She was leaving and her plan was to take a refresher course   in Norman, Oklahoma and then go on to a new assignment. They   wanted to give her a plaque or something, but someone reminded   them that she only travels with as much luggage as she can carry   in two hands. So they decided not to weigh her down.    
    Not all older people are called to be missionaries or evangelists   like Olive Shell and my father. But we are all called to minister,   and the more time we have free, the more ministry we are called to   do. So how will you finish the verse: "Even to old age and gray   hairs, O God, do not forsake me, till&yuml;.&yuml;.&yuml;."    
    .&yuml;.&yuml;.&yuml;till every widow in the nursing home near my   home has a prayer partner;    .&yuml;.&yuml;.&yuml;till at least one older person is involved in   every Wednesday night kids choir and class and club;    .&yuml;.&yuml;.&yuml;till this old dilapidated sanctuary building   is painted and the windows are repaired so that we can grace the   neighborhood again for the five or seven years that it will be   standing;    .&yuml;.&yuml;.&yuml;till I have written every missionary that we   support every month for five years;    .&yuml;.&yuml;.&yuml;till I see Immanuel Baptist Church on its   feet and strong as a sister church to Bethlehem;    .&yuml;.&yuml;.&yuml;till there are strong Bible study groups at   the Elliot Twin Towers and Bethlehem partners for every resident   that wants one;    .&yuml;.&yuml;.&yuml;till abortion is stopped in our city;    .&yuml;.&yuml;.&yuml;till the new sanctuary is paid for and full   of praise;    .&yuml;.&yuml;.&yuml;till there is a great awakening in the land   and a great harvest of souls comes in to the glory of Christ.    
    If you are willing, God will show you how to finish the sentence   in verse 18 in a way that fits your strength and your gifts.    
    I have so much more to say. So we will pick it up here tonight.   There are more stories to tell, there is more to see in this   Psalm, and there is the tremendously important third point: Not   only are older people to be prized and mobilized, "Older people   are to be evangelized.    
    In closing I urge you to search your heart with these two   questions:    
    1) Is there some older person I have not PRIZED the way I should?   Have I risen up in respect before the grey head?    
    2) Have I slipped into an unchristian way of thinking about my   retirement, and neglected to dream God's dream for me these   crucial years? What ministry, what service is God calling me to   this fall?    
    
    O God, our help in ages past    Our hope for years to come,    Be Thou our guide while life shall last,    And our Eternal Home.       
        Copyright 1989, 1998 John Piper      Piper's   Notes            
