  December 2l, l986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchMorningJohn Piper, pastorCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper    PREPARING TO RECEIVE CHRIST  Looking for the Consolation of Israel (Luke 2:25-38) Now there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon, and this man wasrighteous and devout, looking for the consolation of Israel, and the HolySpirit was upon him. And it had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit thathe should not see death before he had seen the Lord's Christ. And inspiredby the Spirit he came into the temple; and when the parents brought in thechild Jesus, to do for him according to the custom of the law, he took himup in his arms and blessed God and said, Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word;for mine eyes have seen thy salvation which thou hast prepared in the presenceof all peoples, a light for revelation to the Gentiles, and for glory tothy people Israel. And his mother and father marveled at what was said about him; and Simeonblessed them and said to Mary his mother, Behold, this child is set for the fall and rising of many in Israel, andfor a sign that is spoken against (and a sword will pierce through your ownsoul also), that thoughts out of many hearts may be revealed. And there was a prophetess, Anna, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe ofAsher; she was of a great age, having lived with her husband seven yearsfrom her virginity, and as a widow until she was eighty-four. She did notdepart from the temple, worshiping with fasting and prayer night and day.And coming up at that very hour she gave thanks to God, and spoke of himto all who were looking for the redemption of Israel. Looking for the Consolation At the beginning of this text we meet an old man named Simeon and at theend of the text we meet an old woman named Anna. According to verse 26, it had been revealed to Simeon that he would not diebefore he had seen the Messiah, the Lord's Christ. And so when Jesus wasbrought to the Temple at eight days of age, Simeon was moved by the Spiritto come also. And he recognized the child and took him into his arms andblessed God. According to verse 38, at that very hour Anna came near also and recognizedthe child and began to thank God and speak about the babe. So here we have two old Jewish saints, representing as it were the very bestof the old covenant which is now giving way to the new with the coming ofthe Messiah. And the question I have asked is, Why these two? Of all theJews that might have been chosen to recognize the child-Messiah and takehim into their arms and and speak of his coming, why these? I think Luke wants us to ask that question because he he takes the time totell us some of the qualities of these two people. Simeon is righteous anddevout, with the Holy Spirit upon him (v. 25). Anna scarcely departs fromthe Temple worshiping God with fasting and prayer night and day (vs.37).They are both very God-centered people. But the thought that jumps off the page because of its similarity in verse25 and verse 38 is that both were looking and hoping for God to do somethingfor Israel. Verse 25: Simeon was righteous and devout, "looking for theconsolation of Israel." Verse 38: Anna spoke of the child "to all who werelooking for the redemption of Jerusalem." I assume that Anna herself was among those who were "looking for the redemptionof Jerusalem." And I assume that the reason she spoke to those in particularwho were looking for the redemption of Jerusalem was that they were opento her testimony about the Christ. So it seems to me that Luke wants to emphasizeby this repetition in verses 25 and 38 that what made Simeon and Anna especiallyfit to recognize and receive the Christ was their longing for God to breakinto history again to console and redeem his people by sending the Christ. The question we have been asking in these four advent messages is: How isthe heart prepared to receive Christ for who he really is? The answer I wantto focus on today, and which I infer from this and other texts, is this: God prepares a person to receive Christ by stirring up a longing for consolationand redemption that can come only from Christ. We can see in this text that this was true of his first coming -- Simeonand Anna were longing for the consolation and redemption of God's people,and they were granted the privilege of recognizing and receiving the Christinto their arms. And we can see the same truth in relation to Christ's SECOND coming to completethe redemption he began about 1986 years ago. For example in Hebrews 9:28it says, "So Christ, having been offered once to bear the sins of many, willappear a second time, not to deal with sin but to save those who are eagerlywaiting for him." Paul said something very similar in 2 Timothy 4:8, "Henceforth there is laidup for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge,will award to me on that Day, and not only to me but also to all who haveloved his appearing." And Peter turns it into a command: "Set your hope fully on the grace thatis coming to you at the revelation of Jesus Christ" (L peter 1:13). So I think we can say that not only in relation to the first coming of Christ,but also in relation to the second coming, it's true that God prepares usto receive Christ by stirring up a longing for consolation and redemptionthat can come only from Christ. Simeon and Anna saw Christ and welcomed himbecause they were longing for his coming and his redemption. They knew thatwas Israel's only hope. The same is true for professing Christians today:we will welcome Christ at his coming if we love his appearing and eagerlyawait the consummation of his redemption. But the main thing I want to emphasize this morning is that this is alsotrue for the coming of Christ to individual hearts in what we call conversion.Let me state the truth again and then apply it to the receiving of Christin conversion: God prepares a person to receive Christ by stirring up a longing for consolationand redemption that can come only from Christ. The story of Martin Luther's conversion illustrates the point. He had almostbeen struck with lightning and made a vow to God to become a monk. But asa monk he was utterly unable to find peace with God. He sought God in everyway the church of that day taught him -- in good works, in the merits ofthe saint, in the process of confession and absolution, in the ladder ofmysticism. On top of all this, Staupitz, his superior, appointed him to theuniversity to study and teach Bible. Listen to the way Luther later described his breakthrough. How was he preparedto see and receive Christ for who he really is? I greatly longed to understand Paul's Epistle to the Romans and nothing stoodin the way but that one expression, "the justice of God," because I tookit to mean that justice whereby God is just and deals justly in punishingthe unjust. My situation was that, although an impeccable monk, I stood beforeGod as a sinner troubled in conscience, and I had no confidence that my meritwould assuage him. Therefore I did not love a just and angry God, but ratherhated and murmured against him. Yet I clung to the dear Paul and had a greatyearning to know that he meant. Night and day I pondered until I saw the connection between the justice ofGod and the statement that "the just shall live by his faith." Then I graspedthat the justice of God is that righteousness by which through grace andsheer mercy God justifies us through faith. Thereupon I felt myself to bereborn and to have gone through open doors into paradise. In the monastery Luther had come to the end of himself. He had despairedof salvation. But by the grace of God he did not give up his longing andhis hope. He directed his attention to the one place he hoped to find help-- the Bible. He said, "I greatly longed to understand. . ." He said, "Ihad a great yearning" to know what it meant. And he said, "Night and dayI pondered." In other words, God prepared Luther to see the true meaningof Christ and accept it by stirring up a deep and powerful longing in hisheart for consolation and redemption that could only come from Christ. And this is what God does again and again. He may be doing it for you inthis advent season -- graciously and tenderly frustrating you with life thatis not centered on Christ, and filling you with longings and desires thatcan't find their satisfaction in what this would offers. Let me point youto the source and goal of those longings this morning and show you why itmakes sense to set your heart on Christ this Christmas. First, it makes sense because Christ is the consolation of Israel. The hopethat Simeon had for consolation comes from Isaiah 40:1-2, Comfort, comfort my people, says your God. Speak tenderly to Jerusalem andcry to her that her warfare is ended, and her iniquity is pardoned. The consolation Jesus brings in fulfillment of Simeon's hopes is the applicationof God's tenderness to a war-weary people. It is the application of God'spardon for a sin-sick and guilty people. When Jesus was born, the voice ofGod became flesh and dwelt among us. And what the voice said was, "Console,console my people." The consolation that God's anger is past. . . the consolation that our heavenlyFather has a tender affection for us in our weakness. . . the consolationthat our sins are pardoned and "cast into the depths of the the sea" (Micah7:19) -- this is the "consolation of Israel" that Simeon was looking for.And it is the consolation that you are looking for too, if you haven't foundit yet in Christ. Don't be kept away from this consolation this morning by saying, "I am nota part of Israel, so there is no reason to think that this consolation isfor me." This would be a terrible misunderstanding. Luke wrote this bookfor Theolphilus, a Roman official and a non-Jew. God made sure that we desperate gentiles would not rule ourselves out ofthis consolation. Look at how Simeon blesses God in verses 29-32, Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word;for mine eyes have seen thy salvation (i.e. consolation) which thou hastprepared in the presence of all peoples a light for revelation to the Gentiles,and for glory to thy people Israel. God's consolation shines the light of jesus Christ not only for the peopleIsrael but also for the Gentiles. The point is that the blessing of God'sconsolation is now available to all who will receive it. Jesus Christ is the consolation of the Father's open arms to Jew and Gentile. Jesus Christ is the consolation of the universal amnesty of God held outto the world of rebellious creatures. Jesus Christ is the consolation of God as we look back on all sin and hateand anger and guilt and shame and doubt and failure. Jesus is the fulfillment of Isaiah 49:13, Sing for joy, O heavens, and exult, O earth; break forth, O mountains, intosinging! For the Lord has consoled his people, and will have compassion onhis afflicted. So it makes sense to set your heart on Christ this morning because if thereis any deep longing in your heart for a consolation and comfort that thisworld cannot satisfy, it is because God is preparing you to recognize andreceive his gift: Jesus Christ, the consolation of Israel. Don't seek itany where but in him. Secondly, it makes sense to set your heart on Christ because he is the"redemption of Jerusalem". Anna spoke of him (v. 38) to all "who were lookingfor the redemption of Jerusalem." It is almost as though Luke meant for us to see in the hope of Simeon andAnna the fulfillment of Isaiah 52:9. Break forth together into singing, you waste places of Jerusalem; for theLord has consoled his people, he has redeemed Jerusalem. In the coming of Christ the prophecy was fulfilled. The Lord has "consoledhis people" -- that's what Simeon was looking for; and the Lord has "redeemedJerusalem" -- that's what Anna was looking for. Is there a difference? Consolation probably speaks to those longings for healing and restorationfrom all the past losses and miseries of life. In Isaiah the people hadexperienced judgment and exile with all its guilt and fear and lonelinessand death. Consolation is when God comes to heal and restore and revive allthat has been thrown away or lost. Redemption probably speaks to our need to be delivered from powers that stillhold us bondage. Redemption is a work of power to save from enemies thatstill threaten us. You can see this if you look at the one other place in this Gospel wherethe word redemption is used, namely Luke, 1:68. John the Baptist's father,Zechariah, prophesies with these words, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed (literally:made redemption for) his people, and has raised up a horn of salvation forus in the house of his servant David, as he spoke by the mouth of his holyprophets from of old, that we should be saved from our enemies, and fromall who hate us... Zechariah declares that Christ has come to redeem. Then he speaks of redemptionin terms of power. A "horn of salvation" (v. 69) means a powerful salvation,like the horn of a great bull. And verse 71 shows why such power will beneeded: he will save us from our enemies and from the hand of all who hateus. So the second reason that it makes sense to set your heart on Christ is thathe will fulfill your longings for victory over the forces of evil in yourlife. God owns and controls all things this morning. And there is nothing thathe could give you for Christmas this year that would suit your needs andyour longings better than the consolation of Israel and the redemption ofJerusalem, restoration for past losses and liberation from future enemies, forgiveness and freedom, pardon and power, healing the past and sealing the future. If there is a longing in your heart today for something that the world hasnot been able to satisfy, could it not be God's Christmas gift preparingyou to see Christ as consolation and redemption, and to receive him for whohe really is? How then do these four advent messages fit together? How is the heart preparedto receive Christ for who he really is? It is very simple. 1. The heart must become disenchanted with the praise of men. "For how canyou believe who receive glory from one another and do not seek the glorythat comes from God?" (John 5:44; 7:17-18). 2. The heart must become disenchanted with the sufficiency of money and thingsto satisfy the soul. "The Pharisees, who were lovers of money, heard allthis and scoffed at him" (Luke 16:14). 3. Then alongside this disenchantment with the praise of men and the powerof money, there must come into the heart a longing for consolation and aredemption beyond what the world can give. 4. And finally, there must be a revelation from God the Father, opening theeyes of the heart so that it cries out, like a man who stumbles onto anincredible treasure, "You are the Christ the Son of the living God, theconsolation of my past, the redemption of my future. Now I see you. Now Ireceive you -- for who you really are." May this be the testimony of many even before we gather to worship the Christon Wednesday night. Amen!   Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
