  November 30, 1986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchJohn Piper, PastorCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper    PREPARING TO RECEIVE CHRIST:  SOMETHING MORE THAN FLESH AND BLOOD (Matthew 16:13-20)  Something More Than Flesh and Blood One of the favorite Advent hymns that we sing during this time of year makesa connection between Christ's coming into history, and Christ's coming intoour hearts: Thou didst leave Thy throne and Thy kingly crown When Thou camest to earth for me, But in Bethlehem's home there was found no room For Thy holy nativity. O come to my heart, Lord Jesus: There is room in my heart for Thee! As I pondered what focus our Advent messages should have this year, the questionI asked was, How do you make room in your heart for Christ? How is the heartprepared to receive Christ? This is a very basic and important question. It is important for those of you who do not yet have Christ dwelling in yourheart. Romans 8:9 says, "Any one who does not have the Spirit of Christ doesnot belong to him." And not to belong to Christ is the greatest tragedy ofthis life and the next. It is important for those of us who do have Christ dwelling in your heartbut do not yet have a full and clear understanding of how he came to be there.When you read the letters of Paul, all written for professing Christians,it is amazing how he never tires of telling us how we got to be Christians. In Romans he says, "We know that our old self was crucified with him so that.. . we might no longer be enslaved to sin. In 1 Corinthians, "Consider your call, brothers; not many of you were wiseaccording to worldly standards. . . but God chose what is foolish in theworld." In 2 Corinthians he says, "You are a letter . . . written not with ink butwith the Spirit of the living God, not on tablets of stone but on tabletsof human hearts." In Galatians he says, "Did you receive the Spirit by works of the law, orby hearing with faith?" In Ephesians he says, "You who were dead in trespasses and sins he made alive" And so on! Paul never tires of telling us how we became Christians. He reminds us againand again who we are by telling us how we got to be this way. And so it mustbe very important that we be reminded again and again how we came to haveChrist dwelling in our hearts. From my own experience I can say that thereare at least four effects of being reminded (as I have been in preparingthis message) of how Christ came to dwell in my heart: it elevates Christ in my affections, it endears the Holy Spirit to me, it deepens my security in the love of God, it humbles me and makes me more eager and ready to entreat others to receive Christ into their hearts as well. So I want to ask the question in the next four weeks: How do we make roomin our hearts for Christ? How is the heart prepared to receive Christ? Eachof our four advent messages will give part of the answer. Today's answer to the question how the heart is prepared to receive Christcomes from Matthew 16:13-20. Now when Jesus came into the district of Caesarea Philippi, he asked hisdisciples, "Who do men say that the Son of man is?" And they said, "Somesay John the Baptist, others say Elijah, and others Jeremiah or one of theprophets." He said to them, "But who do you say that I am?" Simon Peter replied,"You are the Christ, the Son of the living God." And Jesus answered him,"Blessed are you, Simon Bar-Jona! For flesh and blood has not revealed thisto you, but my Father who is in heaven. And I tell you, you are Peter, andon this rock I will build my church, and the powers of death shall not prevailagainst it. I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whateveryou bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earthshall be loosed in heaven." Then he strictly charged the disciples to tellno one that he was the Christ. In this text Jesus asks the disciples, "Who do you say that I am?" So I amgoing to observe first of all that we prepare our hearts to receive Christby recognizing who he really is. It's very important that we know what itmeans to receive Christ for who he really is. Suppose your doorbell rings and you answer it and discover there a famousperson, say Billy Graham, and you swing the door wide and give him the bestseat and serve him on your best china and generally make a big fuss overhim -- and then discover that it isn't Billy Graham at all. And suppose heasks you why you are making such a big affair out of his presence, and youanswer, "O I thought you were Billy Graham." What have you done to your guest?You have belittled him. He thought your honor was for him, but it was reallyfor someone else because you didn't recognize who he really was. That's the way it is if we try to receive Christ into our hearts not knowingwho he really is. He is not honored by our ignorance. You can't honor someoneby bestowing favors on them when you mistake them for someone they reallyaren't. So in order to receive Christ in a way that honors him, in a way that saves,we must recognize who he really is. We must see his glory and agree in ourheart that he is indeed worthy of all our trust and obedience. In this text Jesus queries the disciples to see if they have arrived at thatkind of knowledge of who he really is. Verse 15: "Who do you say that I am?"Peter answers for the group in verse 16: "You are the Christ (the long awaitedMessiah) the Son of the living God." Jesus says Peter is blessed for giving that answer. So now the question becomes,How did Peter come to have this true insight into the identity of Jesus ChristHow did he know who he really was? That is our main question this morning.How is the heart prepared to recognize Jesus so that he can be received forwho he really is? Verse 17 gives the answer of Jesus: Jesus answered him, "Blessed are you Simon Bar-Jonah! For flesh and bloodhas not revealed this to you, but my Father who is in heaven." So the answer to our question is that to recognize Jesus for who he reallyyou need something more than flesh and blood. Or to put it more positively,to recognize and receive Christ for who he really is God the Father mustreveal it to you. To make this text and this message very personal this morning every one ofyou should now ask, "Has God done this for me?" "How did he do it?" "What was it like in my experience when God revealed to me that Jesus wasthe Messiah, the Son of the living God?" "What difference has it made in my life that God the Father has revealedto me the true glory of his Son, Jesus Christ?" My guess is that many of you, as you sit there, are saying, "I can't answerthose questions. I've never even thought of my conversion in those terms."Well, don't panic, because every person who has ever been converted to Christwas converted on the basis of a very limited understanding of what was happening. One person might say, "I believed on Jesus." Another might say, "I prayed to receive Christ." Another might say, "I confessed Jesus as Lord and believed in my heart thatGod raised him from the dead." Another might say, "I was born again." Another, "I was crucified with Christ and now walk by faith." Every person who has ever been converted to Christ was converted on the basisof a limited understanding of what was really happening. So don't be surprisedthat there may be Biblical descriptions of what happened to you that youmay not yet understand. It takes a life time to grasp the depth and wonderof the miracle of conversion to Christ. So I pray that what you will do with the rest of this message is first testyourself to see if this has really happened to you, and then, if it has,let your trust in God ripen into a deeper affection and zeal because of histremendous love to you described in this passage. Let's ask two questions to unfold the meaning of Matthew 16:17: 1. What is being denied when Jesus says, "Flesh and blood has not revealedthis to you"? 2. What is being affirmed when Jesus says, "My Father in heaven has revealedthis to you"? In other words, how does God reveal the true identity of hisSon to an individual person?  Let's take these two questions one at a time. 1. What is being denied in verse 17 when Jesus says, "Flesh and blood hasnot revealed this to you -- flesh and blood has not revealed to you thatI am the Messiah and the Son of God"? The phrase "flesh and blood is use four other times in the NT. 1 Corinthians 15:50 (speaking of the resurrection body), "I tell you this,brethren: flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, nor does theperishable inherit the imperishable." The meaning seems to be that ordinary human nature will not be raised. Therewill be a change. There will be a spiritual body, similar, yet different.Flesh and blood is man in his present limited, ordinary state. Galatians 1:15-17 (Paul speaking of his own conversion), "When he who hadset me apart before I was born, and had called me through his grace, waspleased to reveal his Son to me, in order that I might preach him among theGentiles, I did not confer with flesh and blood, nor did I go up to Jerusalem." This is an amazing parallels to Matthew 16:17. God "reveals" the Son to Pauland Paul does not confer with "flesh and blood," that is, he does not conferwith man. He goes away to Arabia. Ephesians 6:12, "We are not contending against flesh and blood, but againstthe powers, against the world rulers of this present darkness, against thespiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places." So flesh and blood is the merely human non-supernatural forces in the world.These are not our real enemies: the real ones are supernatural. Hebrews 2:14 (concerning Jesus' incarnation), "Since therefore the childrenshare in flesh and blood, he himself likewise partook of the same nature." In other words, Christ took on human nature and became man. So my conclusion from all these uses of the phrase "flesh and blood" is thatit is simply a way of referring to ordinary humanity, finite, limited, natural. So when Jesus denies that "flesh and blood" has revealed his true identityto Peter he is saying that mere human powers by themselves cannot recognizethe true glory of Christ. Neither your humanity nor anyone else's has openedthe eyes of your heart to recognize the truth and beauty of Christ. This was the teaching of Jesus that Paul unfolded 1 Corinthians 2:14, The natural man does not receive the gifts of the Spirit of God, for theyare folly to him, and he is not able to understand them because they arespiritually discerned. The "natural man" in 1 Corinthians 2:14 is basically the same as "flesh andblood" in Matthew 16:17. "Flesh and blood" cannot reveal the true spiritualreality of Christ and the "natural man" cannot know the gifts of the Spiritof God. Why not? Because (as Paul says) apart from the Spirit of God we inevitably assessheavenly things as "foolish." Apart from the work of God in our hearts wedon't like the humiliating implications of Christmas -- that we are under a curse and need a Savior, that we are dirty and need Purifier, that we are lost sheep and need a Shepherd, that we are sick and need a Physician, that we are rebels and need a Mediator and Reconciler. The inevitable reflex of our natural antipathy toward this truth is blindness.Why can't flesh and blood see the light of the glory of God in Jesus Christ?Jesus said in John 3:19, "Light has come into the world, and men loved darknessrather than light, because their deeds were evil." We inevitably love darkness;that's why we can't see the light. No one is blind against his will. Theblindness of fallen flesh and blood is simply this: fallen flesh and bloodhates the light. And so Peter did not own up to the truth of Jesus by means of his own powers.Flesh and blood could never reveal such a wonderful thing as the true Messiahshipand Sonship of Jesus. Something more than flesh and blood would be requiredin order to recognize Christ for what really is. If any of us in this room has recognized in Jesus the glory of the Son ofGod and acknowledged him as the fulfiller of all God's promises -- the Messiah,then something more has been at work on us than flesh and blood. That leadsus to the second question. 2. What does Jesus mean in Matthew 16:17 when he says, "My Father in heavenhas revealed this to you"? How does God reveal the true identity of his Sonto an individual person? What happened in Peter's heart and your heart that can be called a revelationof the Son of God? Did God speak to you in a dream and tell you to believethe Bible? Did thunder strike when you were reading a certain verse aboutthe deity of Christ? I would be very suspicious of such things because in themselves they do nothonor Christ -- if Christ knocks at your door and you don't recognize himand welcome him as Christ because of his own glory, but you only let himin because someone calls you on the phone and tells you that he is comingand that you better let him in, then you have not really recognized Christfor who he is. It's no honor to him to be admitted on the word of another. Is this the way God revealed the Son to Peter? Was Peter looking at the workof Jesus and the listening to the teaching of Jesus and seeing nothing buta prophet and a rabbi and a friend until God came to Peter in a dream ora vision and said that, contrary to all appearances and evidences, this Jesuswas the Christ, the Son of the living God? And was Peter's confession thenbased on this new information so that it meant something like this: "Jesus,personally I don't see the marks of divinity in you and I don't see the worksof a Messiah or any evidence that you are the Son of God, but on the basisof last night's dream I believe it anyway. You are the Messiah, the Son ofthe living God."? If that is what happened, then the confession of Peter is not much creditto Jesus, is it? If the recognition of Jesus' true dignity and glory as theSon of God is based on some separate information than what we see in him,then our confession doesn't glorify Jesus. I don't think this is what Jesus meant when he said that his Father had revealedJesus to Peter. What did he mean? We only have time to give one illustration from many possibilities (11:21;14:33; 15:13-14; 21:38; 23:16; etc.) of how Jesus expected people to recognizehim for who he really was. In Matthew 11:2-6 John the Baptist is strugglingwith doubt about Jesus in the prison. He sends his disciples to ask Jesus,"Are you he who is to come, or shall we look for another?" In other wordsare you really the Messiah? -- the very question that Jesus says you canonly answer willingly if God reveals it to you. But how does Jesus answer John's question? Does he say, "Pray, John, fora special revelation, and God will tell you if I am the Christ"? No. He says,"Go and tell John what you hear and see: the blind receive their sight andthe lame walk, lepers are cleansed and the deaf hear, and the dead are raisedup, and the poor have good news preached to them. And blessed is he who takesno offense at me." Now if you can only recognize Jesus as the Messiah and Son of God by meansof a divine revelation of God, why does Jesus answer John's desperate questionwith a human report of his power and his preaching? My answer is this: the absolutely indispensable work of God in revealingthe Son both then to John and Peter and now to me and you is NOT the addingto what we see and hear in Jesus himself, but the opening of the eyes ofour hearts to taste the true divine glory of what is really there in Jesus. When people have have doubts about the truth of Jesus don't send them awayto seek special messages from God. Point them to Christ. Tell them what youhave seen and heard in his life and teachings. Why? Because this is whereGod breaks in with his revealing power. He loves to glorify his SON! He lovesto open the eyes of the blind when they are looking at his SON! God does not reveal his Son to me by coming to me and saying, "Now, John,I know that you don't see anything magnificent in my Son. You don't see himas all glorious and divine and attractive above all worldly goods. You don'tsee him as you all-satisfying treasure, and you don't see his holiness andwisdom and power and love as beautiful beyond measure. But take my word forit, he is all that. Just believe it." NO!! Such faith is no honor to the Son of God. It cannot glorify the Son.Saving faith is based on a spiritual sight of Jesus as he is in himself,the all glorious Son of God. And this spiritual sight is given to us throughhis inspired word. And the eyes of our hearts are opened to recognize himand receive him not by the wisdom of flesh and blood but by the revealingwork of his heavenly Father. The apostle Paul said, It is the God who said, "Let light shine out of darkness," who has shonein our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in theface of Christ. How shall you prepare your heart this Christmas to receive Christ? Fix yourgaze on him in his word. Look to Christ! Consider Jesus. And pray, beyondyour own flesh and blood, that God would give you eyes to see and ears tohear that you might cry out with Peter, "You are the Christ the Son of theliving God!" Additional note: For further reflection on this great subject see Matt. ll:25-27; l3:l0; John6:44,45,65; 6:37; l7:6; Rom. 8:8; l Cor. l:2l-30; Acts l6:l4; Luke 24:45;l John 3:6; 3 John ll.   Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
