  We come to the end of the year, and the end of thebook of Malachi, and the end of the Old Testament.  There is somethinghere in these closing verses that we would expect, and somethingthat I think we would not expect.  We would expect that there would be a kind of bridgebetween the old and the new -- between what God has said and donein the past and what he will say and do in the future.  And wehave exactly that.    In verse 4 we have the command to look back andremember the law of Moses: Remember the law of my servantMoses, the statutes and ordinances that I commanded him at Horeb(=Sinai) for all Israel.  The backward glance will always be a crucial partof Biblical faith.  How would we know the path to God's futureblessing if he had not spoken in the past and told us the way? God has spoken.  And we must always look back to that sure, fixed,infallible word for guidance and hope.   But the bridge stretches not only back to theword of God at Mt. Horeb; it also stretches forward in these versesto the great Day of the Lord -- the day when God will bring historyto a decisive climax in victory over those who have remained inrebellion against him and with vindication for all his loyal subjects.  Verse 5: Behold, I send you Elijah the prophetbefore the great and terrible day of the Lord comes.  In other words, as the Old Testament closes God makesknown that he is not by any means finished with plan for the worldor for Israel.  There is a great day of victory coming and therewill be preparations for it so that the people of God will beready.   That is what I would expect at the end of the OldTestament -- a bridge between old and new -- a look back at thefaithful work of God in the past and a look forward to the finalvictory.  But what I would not expect as the final word inthe Old Testament is a pointed and specific focus on the relationshipsbetween fathers and children.  Of all the things that Malachicould have told us about the preaching of the future Elijahhe chooses to tell us in verse 6  that he will turn thehearts of fathers to their children and the hearts of childrento their fathers lest I come and smite the land with a curse.  So here at the end of 1987 I would like to let theend of the Old Testament direct our thoughts about God in thesethree ways.    First, from verse 4 we consider the backward lookto God's revealed word.    Second, from verse 5 we consider the forward lookto God's final victory and the Elijah who prepares the way.    Third from verse 6 we consider the effect of God'sword on the relationships between fathers and children.    1.   Take the phrase, Remember the Law!at the beginning of verse 4.  What does that mean?   Maybe thebest way to bring out the sense of this command is to look atsome analogies.  In Luke 17:32 Jesus appeals for a sense of urgencyin the last day and warns against trying to save your life bypiling up worldly securities.  To drive this home, he says, RememberLot's wife!  Why?  Because the memory will can save themfrom a similar fate.    There are many people who have been taken by thehand and brought out of the city of destruction, who then lookback with ungrateful longing for the ways of sin and in that momentare hardened like a pillar of salt.  But Jesus says, RememberLot's wife!  Let that memory live and have power in yourlife!  Memory is a means of salvation.  You may remember the story of the Texas Revolution. In December 1835 the Texas revolutionaries took the town of SanAntonio.  The fortress there was called the Alamo and was guardedby 150 men when Santa Anna, with Mexican forces came against thetown on February 26 the next year.  With 32 reinforcements theTexans held off the enemy until March 6 when the siege ended inbloody hand to hand combat and every Texan was dead includingJim Bowie and Davy Crocket.  The courage of the Texans inspired the rest of theresistance and six weeks later at San Jacinto the Texans defeatedthe Mexicans under the awe-inspiring cry, Remember the Alamo!  Why remember the Alamo?  Because the past exertspower in the present through the gift of memory.  Memory is power. The person who says that history is bunk, or that the past isgone and all that matters is the present, just doesn't know muchabout real life.  In real life memory has tremendous power toinspire and guide.  When God says, Remember the law!   Ithink it out to ring in our ears the same way Rember theAlamo! rang in the ears of the Texas Revolutionaries.  Itmeans, Don't forget what happened at Horeb!  How I broughtyou on eagle's wings out of Egypt!  How I came down with powerand glory on Mt. Horeb, and revealed my love and holiness, andmade a covenant with you of all the peoples on the earth, andtaught you the way of life and everlasting joy with good commandmentsand wise statutes and ordinances only for your good!  It means, You are in a war.  The powers ofdarkness will constantly try to put out the light of truth inyour life.  Worldliness fight for your mind everyday.  But I meanfor you to fight back!  Fight for the freedom of your mind!  Andthere is only one hope of success: REMEMBER THE LAW!  What if a soldier in the Texas militia got discouragedin military training, and acted cowardly in several skirmishes,and when his captain said, Don't you remember the Alamo!he said, I'm sorry, Captain, I just keep on forgetting-- what would the Captain say?  He might say, Well, if you are so hard thatthe death of 182 comrades takes no hold in your heart then youare fit to serve in the militia.  I'm sure that is whatGod is going to say to some professing Christians for whom thedeath of Jesus made so little difference in their lives.  Butnot before he has mercy.   The captain may first say something like this, Listen,soldier, if you don't remember the Alamo, when you go home tonightyou tell that story to your children!  And talk about it whenyou get up in the morning.  Speak of it when you sit in your houseand when you walk in the way, when you lie down and when you riseup.  Bind it as a sign on your hand, and hang it between youreyes if you must.  Write the words on your doorposts and on thegates of your house.  Do whatever you must do.  Do whatever youmust do!  There is no excuse.  The price was too great.  Rememberthe Alamo!  That is exactly what God says concerning the lawin Deuteronomy 6:4-9.  And so here at the end of 1987 may I urgeyou to take some time in the next four days to plan how you aregoing to keep the word of God in remembrance in 1988.  The pricewas great.  The steaks are high.  Much higher than the liberationof Texas.    2.   Now we turn to verse 5 and shift our focus fromthe past to the future, and from memory to hope.  Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet beforethe great and terrible day of the Lord comes.  There are at least two things about the future thatwe need to see from this verse.  One is that God will be victorious,and the other is that God merciful.  We see the prophecy of victory in the phrase, Dayof the Lord.  What does Day of the Lord mean?  In Luke 22:53 the chief priests and the captainsand the elders came out to the Garden of Gethsemane to arrestJesus in the darkness.  Jesus pricks their conscience with thewords, Have you come out as against a robber, with swordsand clubs?  When I was with you day after day in the temple, youdid not lay hands on me.  Then he says something full ofsovereign sovereignty and submission to God: But this isyour hour, and the power of darkness.  What does he mean, This is your hour? He means: For now you have the upper hand.  It is as though thealmighty simply lets his boxing gloves hang by his side for oneround.  He is battered to a pulp.  And the whole world thinksthe fight is over.  But Amos and Joel and Isaiah and Zepheniah and Malachiand Paul and John tell us that God will have his day in the end. The power of darkness has its hour.  But God will have his day. And it will be the last day.  And his cause will be totally victorious. Not only did he get up off the mat, but the whole arena is surroundedby ten million mighty angels.  And Christ will settle accountswith every one who cheered for his defeat.  So the prophecy of the Day of the Lord is a prophecyof God's victory and the victory of his cause and his people. It is a great folly to stay on the other side.  Especially in view of the other thing in this verse,namely, that God is merciful and gives many warnings and invitationsbefore the great and terrible day of the Lord comes.  Behold,I will send you Elijah the prophet before the great and terribleday of the Lord comes.  If we had time I would love to go into a detailedstudy with you about the expectation of Elijah.  From my mostrecent study of this I would say that just as the expectationof the Messiah's coming will be fulfilled in two stages -- thefirst and second coming of our Lord -- so the expectation of Elijahwill be fulfilled in two stages also.  John the Baptist came as the first fulfillment ofthis prophecy.  But there are good arguments that neither he norJesus nor the writers of the New Testament thought of John asthe final Elijah. (Luke 1:17 - he comes in the spirit andthe power of Elijah; Matthew 11:14 - If you are ableto receive it; John 1:21 - John says he is not Elijah; Matthew17:11 - Elijah comes and will restore all things;)  In stead Revelation 11:3-12 pictures two witnessesat the end of the age making one last extraordinary call to Israelto Israel to repent and prepare for the impending judgment.  Oneof these is almost certainly the final Elijah, because he hasthe power to shut up the sky, that no rain may falljust as the first Elijah did.  Apart from the details what is the main point ofthis prophecy?  The main point is that God precedes the wrathof judgment with the call of mercy.  He sends messengers to Sodomand Nineveh and Jerusalem and Minneapolis before he pours downfire and Brimstone.  And not just one, but a whole line of messengers.   It is no accident that you are here this morningand I am speaking this message.  I am not the Biblical Elijahbut I am a kind of Elijah -- a voice crying in the twentieth centurywilderness to you this morning: Prepare for the day of the Lord! Your presence here and my message from this text is God's invitationof mercy to you today.   You are God's creation.  You belong onhis side.   The bridge built with a cross.  The amnesty is signedwith the blood of his Son.  Come back home before the great andterrible day of the Lord.  In verse 4 we look back and remember the law of God. In verse 5 we look forward and see the victory of God and themercy of God.     3.   Now in verse 6 we see one of the effects of thatmercy -- and an unexpected one at that.  When Elijah preaches, and cries out for people toget ready to meet on the great and terrible day of the Lord whathappens?  Verse 6: And he will turn the hearts of fathersto their children and the hearts of children to their fathers,lest I come and smite the land with a curse.  His aim is to spare people from being cursed.  That'sthe mercy we saw in verse 5.  But to spare people from being cursedpeople must be changed.  Specifically, it it says their heartsmust be changed.  And even more specifically it says that thedisposition of the heart toward fathers and children must be changed.  Some take this verse to refer to the fathers AbrahamIsaac and Jacob, so that the meaning is simply this -- that thepeople will return to the faith of the fathers.  But the problemwith this is that it says that Elijah will also turn the fathershearts toward the children.  It would be unlikely that God wouldspeak of Elijah changing the hearts of Abraham Isaac and Jacob. So I take it in its simpler sense: ordinary living fathers andordinary living children will have their hearts changed towardeach other.  I want to close this year by pleading with you toturn your heart toward your father or your children, or that relativeor friend that you. . .  that you what?  What does it mean for a father to turn his hearttoward his child?  Well, what is the opposite of having a heartturned toward a child?  The opposite is to have the heart turnedaway.  Three examples:    Fathers, you can have your heart turned away fromyour children simply by ignoring them.  By being so swallowedup in your work that all they get the dregs of your life.     You can have your heart turned away from yourchildren by being abusive.  It may be that without even hearingyourself you communication with them is a litany of disapprovaland put-downs.  Why?  Because your heart is not toward them. You don't feel what they feel.  Your heart is frozen in a postureof habitual unkindness.   Or worse in our day is the increase (or increasinglyrevealed) sexual abuse of children.  And where then is the father'sheart?  It is curled around like a snake in love with its owntail and consuming itself on its own filthy passions.   Or you can have your heart turned away from yourchildren through an embittered spirit of disappointment: thatyou are forgotten by them, or that they have let you down in theway they live, or that they have taken you for granted and neversaid thanks for all you did.  Where is the heart then?  In thepoisoned puddle of self-pity that threatens to grow into an oceanof resentment.  What about the other way around?  What about childrenwith hearts that need to be turned toward their fathers and mothers?What kinds of hearts would this apply to today?  It would apply to rebellious and disobedient children.It could be a five year old or a fifteen year old.  Where isthe heart?  It sits in front of the mirror of the soul tryingto convince itself that the witch-face of cockiness and independenceis really the fairest face in the land.  And it would apply to children of any age thatneglect their parents and grandparents.  I have one grandmotherleft.  Both her children are dead, including my mother.  All shehas is four grandchildren of which I am one.  She is over ninety,lives in a nursing home outside Philadelphia and doesn't usuallyrecognize visitors let alone cards from me.  It is one of themost frustrating things in my life to live at this distance withno way to let her know my care.  And the implication of the textis woe to children who agonize with this issue.  Finally, the text would apply to the embittered victims of abuse.  Notice, it does not say that any father or childcan turn the heart of the other.  That is not your responsibility.But your own heart is.  So the word of God to fathers (and mothers!)today is this:    turn your hearts to your children:    don't give them the dregs of your life.  turn your hearts to your children:    don't be unkind    don't constantly criticize   don't even think the wicked thoughts that lead to sexual abuse  turn your hearts toward your children:   let the bitterness go, at least from your side forgive, and role the burden onto God.    And the word to children is this:    turn your hearts toward your father (and mother!):     don't rebel, obey!  turn your hearts toward your fathers and mothers and grandparents:    don't forget them or neglect them, care for them.  turn your hearts toward your father:    the road to restoration may be as long as life. It may involve extensive counseling with a wise Christian therapist. But in your heart the decisive step can be taken, must be taken: the feeling of having been victimized must cease to justify animosity.   Why?  It's the answer for why our hearts should turn inevery one of these cases: Jesus was the ultimate victim.  We werethe ultimate abusers -- our sin nailed him to the cross.  AndJesus has turned his heart toward you this morning.  That is themeaning of this message.  Whether you look back and remember thelaw of God; or look forward and see the victory of God, the pointcomes through: God has turned his heart toward you in Jesus Christ.Don't push it away.  It is a sweet and wonderful thing to holdno grudges. 
