 May 21, 1989    Bethlehem Baptist Church    John Piper, Pastor    
    
    MANHOOD AND WOMANHOOD    CONFLICT AND CONFUSION AFTER THE FALL    (Genesis 3:16 and 4:7)    
    To the woman he said, "I will greatly multiply your pain in   childbearing; in pain you shall bring forth children, yet your   desire shall be for your husband, and he shall rule over you....If   you do well, will you not be accepted? And if you do not do well,   sin is crouching at the door; its desire is for you, but you must   master it."    
    
    Last week we focused our attention on Genesis 1:27. This is the   utterly important foundation for understanding what it means to be   human, especially what it means to be human as male and female.   "So God created man in His own image, in the image of God He   created him; male and female He created them." Moses adds the   words "male and female" to make sure that no one makes the mistake   of thinking that the word MAN in this verse ("He created man in   His own image") refers only to the male human and not to the   female human.    
    Genesis 5:1-2 makes the same point: "This is the book of the   generations of Adam. When God created man (Adam), He made him in   the likeness of God. Male and female He created them, and He   blessed them and named them Man (Adam) when they were created." So   the clear teaching of Genesis is that human beings, both male and   female, are utterly unlike all other creatures because humans   alone are in the image and likeness of God &#151; both male and   female.    
    Then I said last week that if God created us in his image AS MALE   AND FEMALE, that implies equality of personhood, equality of   dignity, mutual respect, harmony, complementarity, and a unified   destiny.    
    Equality of personhood means that a man is not less a person than   a woman because he has hair on his chest like a gorilla, and woman   is not less a person because she has no hair on her chest like a   fish. They are equal in their personhood and their differences   don't change that basic truth.    
    Equality of dignity means that they are to be equally honored as   humans in the image of God. Peter says (in 1 Peter 2:17) "honor   all," that is, all humans. There is an honor to be paid to persons   simply because they are humans. There is even an honor that we owe   to the most despicable of criminals, like a Ted Bundy, just   because he is a human and not a dog. And that honor belongs to   male and female equally.    
    Mutual respect means that men and women should be equally zealous   to respect and honor each other. Respect should never flow just   one direction. Created in the image of God, male and female should   look at each other with a kind of awe that is tempered but not   destroyed by sin.    
    Harmony means that there should be peaceful cooperation between   men and women. We should find ways to oil the gears of our   relationships so that there is teamwork and rapport and mutual   helpfulness and joy.    
    Complementarity means that the music of our relationships should   not be merely the sound of singing in unison. It should be the   integrated sound of soprano and bass, alto and tenor. It means   that the differences of male and female will be respected and   affirmed and valued. It means that male and female will not try to   duplicate each other, but will highlight in each other the unique   qualities that make for mutual enrichment.    
    Finally, unified destiny means that male and female, when they   come to faith in Christ, are "fellow heirs of the grace of life"   (1 Peter 3:7). We are destined for an equal enjoyment of the   revelation of the glory of God in the age to come.    
    So in creating human beings as male and female in His image, God   had something wonderful in mind. He still has it in mind. And in   Jesus Christ He means to redeem this vision from the ravages of   sin.    
    We looked very briefly last week at what sin did to the   relationship between men and women. I want to clarify that further   this morning. Originally I had planned only to touch on this and   spend most of our time on the vision of manhood and womanhood   before the fall. But the message took a different turn and what   I'm doing now is setting the stage to unfold this pre-fall vision   of manhood and womanhood next week. I want you to sense very   keenly what the conflict is between men and women and how great   the confusion is today about what it means to be a man or a   woman.    
    Let's look at Genesis 3:16. Adam and Eve have both sinned against   God. They have distrusted his goodness and turned away from him to   depend on their own wisdom for how to be happy. So they rejected   His word and they ate the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of   good and evil. God calls them to account and now describes to them   what the curse will be on human life because of sin. In Genesis   3:16 God says to the woman, "I will greatly multiply your pain in   childbearing; in pain you shall bring forth children, and your   desire shall be for your husband, and he shall rule over you."    
    This is a description of the curse. It is a description of misery,   not a model for marriage. This is the way it's going to be in   history where sin has the upper hand. But what is really being   said here? What is the nature of this ruined relationship after   sin?    
    The key comes from recognizing the connection between the last   words of this verse (3:16b) and the last words of Genesis 4:7.   Here God is warning Cain about his resentment and anger against   Abel. God tells him that sin is about to get the upper hand in his   life. Notice at the end of the verse 7: "Sin is crouching at the   door; its desire is for you, but you must master it (literally:   you shall rule over it)."    
    The parallel here between 3:16 and 4:7 is amazingly close. The   words are virtually the same in Hebrew, but you can see this in   the English as well. In 3:16 God says to the woman, "Your desire   is for your husband, and he shall rule over you." In 4:7 God says   to Cain, "Sin's desire is for you, and you shall rule over   it."    
    Now the reason this is important to see is that it shows us more   clearly what is meant by "desire." When 4:7 says that sin is   crouching at the door of Cain's heart (like a lion, Genesis 49:9)   and that it's desire is for him, it means that sin wants to   overpower him. It wants to defeat him and subdue him and make him   the slave of sin.    
    Now when we go back to 3:16 we should probably see the same   meaning in the sinful desire of woman. When it says, "Your desire   shall be for your husband," it means that when sin has the upper   hand in woman she will desire to overpower or subdue or exploit   man. And when sin has the upper hand in man he will respond in   like manner and with his strength subdue her, or rule over   her.    
    So what is really described in the curse of 3:16 is the ugly   conflict between the male and female that has marked so much of   human history. Maleness as God created it has been depraved and   corrupted by sin. Femaleness as God created it has been depraved   and corrupted by sin. The essence of sin is self-reliance and   self-exaltation. First in rebellion against God, and then in   exploitation of each other.    
    So the essence of corrupted maleness is the self-aggrandizing   effort to subdue and control and exploit women for its own private   desires. And the essence of corrupted femaleness is the   self-aggrandizing effort to subdue and control and exploit men for   its own private desires. And the difference is found mainly in the   different weaknesses that we can exploit in one another.    
    As a rule men have more brute strength than women and so they can   rape and abuse and threaten and sit around and snap their finger.   It's fashionable to say those sorts of things today. But it's just   as true that women are sinners. We are in God's image male and   female; and we are depraved, male and female. Women may not have   as much brute strength as men but she knows ways to subdue him.   She can very often run circles around him with her words and where   her words fail she knows the weakness of his lust.    
    If you have any doubts about the power of sinful woman to control   sinful man just reflect for a moment on the number one marketing   force in the world &#151; the female body. She can sell anything   because she knows the universal weakness of man and how to control   him with it. The exploitation of women by sinful men is   conspicuous because it is often harsh and violent. But a moment's   reflection will show you that the exploitation of men by sinful   women is just as pervasive in our society. The difference is that   our sinful society sanctions the one perversity and not the other.   (There are societies that do just the opposite.)    
    This is not the way God meant it to be before sin, when man and   woman were dependent on him for how to live. This is the result of   rebellion against God. How then did God mean it to be? What was   the relationship between Adam and Eve supposed to look like before   sin entered the world?    
    We've seen part of the answer. They were created in the image of   God according to Genesis 1:27 and so the relationship they have   was supposed to be governed by equality of personhood, equality of   dignity, mutual respect, harmony, complementarity, and a unified   destiny. But that's only part of the answer. It's like saying to a   man and woman ballet dancer: Remember, you are both equally   accomplished dancers; you are equally regarded among your peers;   you must seek harmonious execution; you must complement each   other's moves; and don't forget you will share the applause   together.    
    That kind of counsel is very important and will deeply affect the   beauty of the performance. But if that's all they know about the   dance they're about to perform, they won't be able to do it. They   have to know the movements. They have to know their different   positions. They have to know who will fall and who will catch. Who   will run and who will stand. It is of the very essence of dance   and drama that the players know the distinct movements they must   make. If they don't know their different assignments on the stage   there will be no drama, no dance.    
    And so we have to ask this: in the drama of life between man and   woman before the fall did God mean for some responsibilities to   fall heavier on the one than the other? Both should show equal   respect we said; but are they supposed to show it in just the same   way? Both should seek peace and harmony by mutually serving each   other; but is the form of this service to look just the same for   the man and the woman?    
    I want to try to unfold a vision of Biblical complementarity and   harmony in the weeks to come. I'm convinced that the Bible does   teach that men have unique God-given responsibilities toward women   and women have unique God-given responsibilities toward men. These   responsibilities are not identical, and they are not dependent on   our gifts. They are based on our manhood and womanhood as God   designed us to be. And they are not limited to mere biological   functions in the process of reproduction.    
    These different responsibilities go right to the heart of the   meaning of manhood and womanhood as God created us to be. But they   are under tremendous attack today. They have been for some time.   And the result in our culture is mass confusion.    
    I would guess that probably two generations of men and women have   been raised in this country without a positive vision of what it   means to be male or female. We have been told many negative things   &#151; things we ought not to be, things we are to be liberated   from.    
    For example, manhood is not sexual exploitation. Manhood is not   cool, rational unemotionalism. Manhood is not the ruthless   task-oriented drive to conquer. Etc. So be liberated, men! On the   other hand womanhood is not boring domesticity. Womanhood is not   homebound motherhood. Womanhood is not mindless emotionalism.   Womanhood is not sexual compliance. Etc. So be liberated,   women!    
    But when all our talk is done about what manhood and womanhood is   NOT, what have we got? A big void of confusion about what they   are. Frustrating, guilt-producing, destructive confusion. And with   it a tidal wave of homosexuality, an epidemic of divorce, an   increase of violent crime, growing domestic abuse, and tens of   thousands of suicides every year, 75% of whom are men. (In 1981   there were 27,500 suicides in America of which 75% were men.)    
    It is simply an abdication of our moral and spiritual   responsibility to tell young people to avoid negative stereotypes   and then not give them a positive, practical, Biblical vision of   what it means to be a man and or a woman. And one of the reasons   we abdicate our responsibility is because it is the path of least   resistance. It's easy to tear down negative stereotypes; but it's   hard and risky work to rebuild the positive archetype.    
    No one will criticize you if you poke holes in ugly stereotypes of   manhood and womanhood. That's a very safe and customary pastime.   But a hundred people wait to be your judge if you try to develop a   positive vision for your daughters of what it means to be   feminine, or for your sons of what it means to be masculine. And   so by and large we don't do it. And we leave them confused &#151;   telling them what its not but not telling them what it is.    
    Over the nine years of my pastorate here I have counseled dozens   and dozens of couples seeking to be married. My experience has   been that it is rare indeed to find a young couple who have a   clear vision of what it means to be a Christian husband and a   Christian wife. By and large couples will readily admit that they   don't know whether being male or female implies any special   God-given responsibilities. Or, if they think there are some   special responsibilities, they generally don't know what they are.   And that confusion has ominous implications for the stability of   marriage and the way the children will be prepared for life as   male and female.    
    I mention this just to highlight the challenge before us as a   church. God has a vision for a redeemed manhood and womanhood. He   wants us to recover what we've lost because of sin. And so next   week I want to begin to reconstruct from God's Word as best I can   the shattered vision of manhood and womanhood that God ordained   before the fall and that he is calling us to recover through Jesus   Christ. I ask for your prayers and for your very serious   consideration of these things. What we are as male and female goes   to the heart of our personal identity. If we are confused here,   the repercussions will be very profound and pervasive.       Copyright 1989, 1998 John Piper      Piper's   Notes            
