  November 17, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor     Having Your Soul Anchored inHeaven  (Hebrews 6:19-20)     This hope we have as an anchor of the soul, a  hope both sure and steadfast and one which enters within the veil, 20where Jesus has entered as a forerunner for us, having become a highpriest forever according to the order of Melchizedek.   What we saw last week from verses 13-18 is that God has gone theextra mile in seeing to it that we have strong encouragement to holdfast to our hope in him. He wants us to have encouragement and theencouragement he wants us to have is the assurance that all hispromises will come true for us and that our future is firmly in hishand for our good.  So he not only makes promises to his children, but he takes andoath and swears that he will bless them, and only that he swears bythe highest and most precious reality in the universe, himself (v.13). So there are two things, not just one -- a promise and an oath-- that secure our hope. Let's pick it up at verse 18 and then moveinto today's text. It says that he took an oath "in order that by twounchangeable things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, we mayhave strong encouragement, we who have fled for refuge in laying holdof the hope set before us."  In other words he wants us to have strong encouragement to layhold on the hope he has sworn will be ours. The promise and the oathare meant to give us the deep confidence that we WILL inherit allthat he promises us in Jesus. So he wants us to experientially "layhold of" it. What does it mean to be told that God has secured afuture for us with promise and oath and that we are to "lay hold of"it? What does "lay hold of" mean in real life experience?  It means bank on that hope. Trust in it. Feel secure in it. Besatisfied with it. Long for it the way you long for the coming of thedawn after a long, dark, scary night. There are at least fivepractical things you can do to move your heart toward "laying hold ofyour hope."  1. Meditate from the Bible on how great your hope is in thepresence of God. 2. Meditate from the Bible on how sure your hope is in the presenceof God. 3. Pray earnestly that God would open your mind and heart to thisgreatness and this certainty and incline you to hope in him. 4. Consider how much Christ has suffered for your hope. 5. Consider Christians like yourselves who have laid hold on hope inChrist. For example, in 1934, when twenty-eight-year-old John Stam,missionary to China, was being led away to execution by thecommunists with his wife Betty, someone on the road asked, "Where areyou going?" John laid hold on the hope set before him and said, "Weare going to heaven." 6. Help each other do all these things in your small groups. Exhorteach other every day to lay hold on hope.  This is God's will for us -- to have strong encouragement to layhold on our hope.  Now this week the writer keeps on fighting for our encouragementand our laying hold on the good future God has promised and sworn.But he turns from the promise and the oath to give us another imagethat he hopes will stick in our minds and give us solid assuranceabout our future.  The image is the "anchor."  This hope we have as an anchor of the soul, a hope [literally:omit "a hope" and refer sure and steadfast to the anchor]   bothsure and steadfast and one which enters within the veil, 20 whereJesus has entered as a forerunner for us, having become a high priestforever according to the order of Melchizedek.  What is the anchor in this image? It says, "This hope we have asan anchor." But let's be precise. You can use the word "hope" in atleast three ways: 1) a subjective feeling or conviction in the soul("I hope to go to heaven."). 2) An future objective reality that youhope for ("Heaven is my hope."). 3) A person or event that makes yourconfidence sure ("Jesus' death is my only hope of escapingjudgment."). Which of these three is meant in verse 19 when it says,"This hope we have as an anchor"?  The answer is given in the preceding verse 18. It says, we are to"have strong encouragement, we who have fled for refuge in layinghold of the hope set before us." The hope is something "set beforeus." It is the future objective reality that we hope for. It isheaven and the blessing promised in verse 14 and the sum of all thegood that God has sworn to be for us in Jesus.  This is the anchor of verse 19 which continues verse 18: "Thishope we have as an anchor of the soul." In other words: What anchorsour soul is not our subjective confidence, but the sure objectivereality that God has promised. This is our anchor. And this is whatwe are to lay hold of.  So the writer's point is that what we are hoping for is absolutelysure. He uses three descriptions of the anchor to stress this. Inverse 19b he calls the anchor (the hope), "both (1) sure and (2)steadfast and (3) one which enters within the veil." The anchor issure, certain and safe. The anchor is steadfast, firm and reliable.The anchor is lodged within the veil. This is a reference to the veilthat hung across the inner sanctuary of the tabernacle and concealedthe arc of the covenant where God in his glory met with the highpriest once a year as he brought a blood sacrifice to atone for thesins of the people.  So what's the point of saying that our hope is an anchor lodged inthe heavenly holy of holies where God's glory dwells? Verse 20 fillsit out. This is where Jesus has gone as a forerunner for us (whichmeans we will enter with him someday). And he has gone as a highpriest. Not in the order of Aaron and Levi -- who (1) had to offersacrifices for  themselves  and for the people (5:3; 7:27), and(2) who died and had to be replaced year by year (7:23), and (3) whooffered the blood of bulls and goats which could never take away sins(10:4). But Jesus entered into the holy of holies once for all withhis own infinitely precious blood and his own indestructible life sothat his atoning work for us is perfect and lasts for ever. This iswhat verse 20 means when it says that Jesus "has become a high priestforever according to the order of Melchizedek."  So our anchor -- our promised future -- is  sure ; it is steadfast ; and it is the  finished and purchased work ofJesus  our High Priest.  So last week the writer helps us hold fast our hope by telling usthat it is based on two unchangeable things: God's promise and God'soath to bless us forever. This week he helps us hold fast our hope bytelling us that our promised future (our hope) is "an anchor of thesoul" that is sure and steadfast and as complete and binding as thework of Jesus in shedding his blood for our sins and taking ithimself into the presence of God to plead the case of those hepurchased.  Now here is the burning question for me. Is the anchor of my soulas firmly attached to my soul as it is to the altar of God? In otherwords is the picture here of an anchor with its hook and chain boundunbreakably to the altar of God in the holy of holies so that nothingcould loose it from that end, but with the rope just hanging out ofheaven in the air? Is the only point of this text to say "Take holdof the loose end of this rope and you will have safety and firmnessand assurance"?  Would that give you the sense of security and confidence and hopeand firmness that last week's text and this text seem to be about?What was the point of an anchor in those days? It was to keep youfrom being blown by the wind or swept by the tide into destruction --out to sea or on the rocks. But what if someone said: I have fittedyour boat with a good solid heavy anchor that will grip anysea-bottom. Only have not made it fast to the boat. Would that giveyou encouragement?  I don't think that is the image the author has in mind here. Whenhe says in verse 19 that we have an "anchor of the soul" I think hemeans that the anchor is firmly anchored in heaven,  and  theanchor is firmly attached to the Christian's soul.  Here are my four reasons for thinking this, which I pray will giveyou a deep sense of God's sovereign care for your perseverance andhope and encouragement. You are not left to yourself to hold on thestorms of life.  1. Recall Hebrews 6:9. The writer had just warned against driftingaway from God and committing apostasy and being judged. But then hesaid in verse 9, "But beloved, we are convinced of better thingsconcerning you, and things that accompany salvation." The betterthings are perseverance in faith and patient obedience -- in otherwords "holding fast to their hope." And he says that this"accompanies salvation." That is, it belongs to God's children aspart of their salvation. Persevering in hope and laying hold on ourinheritance and banking on it and being satisfied in it and living bythe power of it "belongs to" (literally: "is had by") salvation.That's part of our salvation. Salvation is not merely an anchoredrope dangling from heaven for us to hold on to with our own strength.Better things belong to salvation, including, the holding on. Thattoo is a work of our salvation. The anchor of our souls is bound tous as well as to heaven.  2. Recall Hebrews 3:14 where the writer says, "We have becomepartakers of Christ, if we hold fast the beginning of our assurancefirm until the end." Not: we WILL become partakers of Christ, if wehold fast." But: we HAVE become partakers of Christ if we hold fast.In other words, holding fast to the rope anchored in heaven is aneffect and proof of belonging to Christ, not a cause of it. We must  hold fast. But we  can  hold fast only because we are  held fast (see Philippians 3:12). We  have become partakers of Christ -- evidence? We hold fast to our hope. Christ'spower in us sees to it that it happens. The anchor of our souls isbound to us as well as to heaven.  3. Recall Hebrews 3:6. The writer compared Christ to the maker andmaster of a house, and compared Christians to the house itself. Thenhe said, "Christ was faithful as a Son over His house whose house weare, if we hold fast our confidence and the boast of our hope firmuntil the end." Note, it does not say that we WILL become his houseif we hold fast to our hope. No, it says that we ARE (now!) his houseif we (in the future) hold fast to our hope. So holding fast is notthe cause of our being Christ's house, but the proof of it. Belongingto his as his new creation, and being owned by him because of hispurchase and being indwelt by him as his home -- all this secures  our perseverance. It is not created by perseverance.The anchor of our souls is not a rope hanging in the air waiting forour weak hands to grasp and hold. That would be no security. Theanchor of our soul is as solidly bound to us as it is to heaven.  4. Consider Hebrews 13:20-21. What the writer shows there is thatwhen Jesus purchased our salvation by his "blood of the eternalcovenant" -- the new covenant (Luke 22:20; Jeremiah 31:33; 32:40;Ezekiel 11:19; 36:27; Deuteronomy 30:6) -- what he obtained for uswas not just heaven, but the faith and hope that it takes to get toheaven. The blood of the new covenant obtained the promises of thenew covenant, and they included the promises to "cause us to walk inhis statutes." Which means that holding fast to our anchored hope isnot our self-securing work, but God's blood-bought work in us tobring us to heaven.  Read it with me (Hebrews 13:20-21): "Now the God of peace, whobrought up from the dead the great Shepherd of the sheep through the blood of the eternal covenant , even   Jesus our Lord,21 equip you in every good thing to do His will,  working in usthat which is pleasing in His sight, through Jesus Christ , towhom  be  the glory forever and ever."  If I am going to hold fast to my well-anchored hope, then I willneed some sin-conquering help from God. And that is what verse 21says I get: "[God] is  working in us  that which is pleasing inhis sight " -- namely, our holding fast to the well anchored hope.And notice the next three words: "through Jesus Christ." That meansthat our High Priest, our never-dying, Melchizedek-like High Priestobtained by the blood of the eternal covenant not just firmattachment at one end of the anchor, but at both ends. It is firm inheaven, and it is firm in us. This is the salvation he obtained byhis blood: the hope of heaven, and the holding fast to get there. Weare not left to our own weak hands to hold on. The anchor of oursouls is bound to us as well as to heaven.  So what we have seen is that God is not inconsistent. He does notexert himself with promises, and oaths, and the blood of his Son, andthe eternal priesthood of Jesus simply to anchor down one end of oursecurity while leaving the other to dangle in the air. The salvationJesus obtained by his blood was everything it takes to save hispeople, not just part of it.  So we are prone to ask, Why does the writer encourage us to holdfast to our hope (verse 18)? If our holding fast was obtained andirrevocably secured by the blood of Jesus, then why does God tell usto hold fast?  The answer is this:   What Christ bought for us when he died was not thefreedom from having to hold fast but the enabling power to hold fast.  What he bought was not the nullification of our wills as thoughtwe didn't have to hold fast, but the empowering of our wills becausewe want to hold fast.  What he bought was not the canceling of the commandment to holdfast but the fulfillment of the commandment to hold fast.  What he bought was not the end of exhortation, but the triumph ofexhortation.   He died so that you would do exactly what Paul did in Philippians3:12, "I press on in order that I may lay hold of that for which alsoI was laid hold of by Christ Jesus." It is not foolishness, it is theGospel, to tell a sinner to do what Christ alone can enable him todo, namely, hope in God.  So I exhort you this morning with all my heart: reach out and takehold of that for which you have been taken hold of by Christ, andhold it fast with all his might.    Copyright 1997 JohnPiper    
