  September 21, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor    BE STRENGTHENED BY GRACE  Hebrews 13:7-16  
  Remember those who led you, who spoke the word of God to you; andconsidering the result of their conduct, imitate their faith. 8 JesusChrist is the same yesterday and today and forever. 9 Do not becarried away by varied and strange teachings; for it is good for theheart to be strengthened by grace, not by foods, through which thosewho were so occupied were not benefited. 10 We have an altar fromwhich those who serve the tabernacle have no right to eat. 11 For thebodies of those animals whose blood is brought into the holy place bythe high priest as an offering for sin, are burned outside the camp.12 Therefore Jesus also, that He might sanctify the people throughHis own blood, suffered outside the gate. 13 So, let us go out to Himoutside the camp, bearing His reproach. 14 For here we do not have alasting city, but we are seeking the city which is to come. 15Through Him then, let us continually offer up a sacrifice of praiseto God, that is, the fruit of lips that give thanks to His name. 16And do not neglect doing good and sharing, for with such sacrificesGod is pleased.  The Lord Is My Helper, I Will not Be Afraid  Last week we saw from the first paragraph of this chapter that weshould love each other and show hospitality and care for prisonersand keep our marriage vows and avoid the love of money - and do allof this not by our own strength or ingenuity but by the power of thepromise of God in verses 5-6: "I will never desert you, nor will Iever forsake you," so that we confidently say, "The lord is myhelper, I will not be afraid. What will man do to me?"  In other words, if you really believe this promise, if you believeit is true, and your heart is satisfied with the God who promises tobe there for you and help you, then you will not crave money, youwill keep your marriage vows, you care for prisoners, welcomestrangers and love each other. Faith in the promises of God is thepower to live a radical, normal Christian life.  It takes strength. It takes strength to love. It takes strength torisk yourself with strangers. It takes strength to take the sufferingof prisoners into your life, when you may have enough of your own. Ittakes strength to keep your marriage vows when the going gets roughand it is not the way you dreamed it would be. It takes strength toturn away from the promises of money. And that strength is whattoday's text is about. Where to get it and how to keep it. And theanswers are not new, just newly stated.  Is Your Heart Strong?  Look at verse 9: "Do not be carried away by varied and strangeteachings; for it is good for the heart to be strengthened by grace,not by foods, through which those who were so occupied were notbenefited."  I ask you: is your heart strong? I don't mean your physical heart.I think the writer means here the non-physical, non-material you. Thethinking, feeling, willing, hoping, fearing, trusting, longing,raging, grieving, rejoicing you. The inner you - what Paul meant whenhe prayed in Ephesians 3:16 that you would be strengthened in the"inner person." Are you strong? It has nothing to do with yourmuscles or your pulse or your measurements or your cholesterol oryour white blood count or your PSA or your electrocardiogram. Are youstrong - the inner you?  Do you want to be? Verse 9 says, "It is good for the heart to bestrengthened." This is good. Therefore it is something we shouldwant. It is something you should, right now as I am preaching, desireand seek. The strength of heart to be the kind of person described inverses 1-5. Not the power to put on a show. To clean the outside ofthe cup and leave the inside weak and dirty. But strength of heart.Strength that is real enough on the inside that it shapes the outsidenaturally. Do you want that? I do. Let's look to God now in his wordto work it in us.  Strengthened by Grace, not by Foods  Verse 9 tells us in a word where to turn for strength of heart andwhere not to turn. Turn to grace and do not turn to foods. "Do not becarried away by varied and strange teachings; for it is good for theheart to be strengthened by grace, not by foods, through which thosewho were so occupied were not benefited." Evidently in that churchthere were some strange teachings circulating about the power offoods. It's good that we don't know the details. It causes us toponder our own situation.  There are today many religious and secular food routines.Religious food routines like fasting and sacramentalism andvegetarianism and various kinds of abstinence. And there are thesecular routines of food supplements and vitamins and antioxidantsand organic diets, and fat-free, sugar-free, caffeine-free,chemical-free foods. And sometimes, not all the time, these thingsbecome obsessive. They take on a life-consuming importance. Slowlyand subtly the promises they make for our well-being become thepromises we hope in and the promises we live by.  But over against this misuse of foods, God says (in verse 9), "Itis good for the heart to be strengthened by grace, not by foods." Sobeware of "alien teachings" that elevate diet and nutrition and foodto a place where they are the real strength-givers and health-giversand hope-givers in your life. And instead learn to have your heartstrengthened by grace - day after day, morning noon and night.  How Do You Eat Grace?  How do you do that? If you don't eat food to strengthen yourheart, how do you eat grace? If you wake up in the morning and feelguilty and defiled because of something ugly you did yesterday, oryou feel like a failure because of how poorly something wentyesterday, what do you do? The "strange teaching" might say, "Eat agood breakfast. Get the right nutrition pumping through your blood.Do some exercise and get out into the sunlight." But God says, "Getyour heart strengthened by grace. On a morning like that, eat gracefor breakfast."  How? Well, consider verse 10. Picking up on this issue of beingstrengthened by grace and not foods, he says, "We have an altar fromwhich those who serve the tabernacle have no right to eat." He'sreferring to the priests in Jerusalem who have rejected Jesus astheir Messiah, but who go on "serving the tabernacle" which was meantto point to Jesus as the final sacrifice and the cross of Jesus asthe final altar of sacrifice (Hebrews 9:26; 10:12). So the altar hehas in mind is the cross where our final sacrifice was offered oncefor all for our sins. There is where our food is found. There is thetable where grace was prepared.  If you want to know where your breakfast of grace was prepared,the answer is (verse 10): We have an altar - the breakfast of gracewas prepared on the altar of the cross where Jesus died for our sins.If you want to be strong in your heart, when your heart is groaningwith a sense of sin and failure, before you go to the kitchen to eatfood, go to the altar to eat the blood-bought grace of forgivenessand hope.  Eating Forgiveness and Hope  Keep reading in verse 11. He explains that on the Day of Atonementin Leviticus 16, after the blood of the sacrificed bull and goat istaken into the holy of holies, and sprinkled there to cover the sinsof the people, the bodies of the bull and the goat are taken outsidethe camp and burned (Leviticus 16:27). "For the bodies of thoseanimals whose blood is brought into the holy place by the high priestas an offering for sin, are burned outside the camp." The point he ismaking is that these sacrifices are not eaten, as with some othersacrifices. The nourishment the people received on the Day ofAtonement was forgiveness and hope, not meat.  Yes, but all of that was meant to point to Jesus, the finalsacrifice for sin. There was a lesson in that. The writer draws outthe comparison in verse 12: "Therefore Jesus also, that He mightsanctify the people through His own blood, suffered outside thegate." In other words, Jesus has fulfilled the sacrifices of the Dayof Atonement; they are completed in him; they find their finalmeaning in him. And the meaning is: All there was to eat on the Dayof Atonement was forgiveness and hope. That's all there is to eatfrom the altar of Calvary where the body of Jesus was consumed withsuffering.  So the point is: When you feel like a failure, when you feeldiscouraged and hopeless and dirty, don't turn to food. It's an alienremedy, and verse 9 says, it has not benefited those who walk in it.It only makes things worse. Instead go to the altar of grace. We havean altar. And there is food. And the food is grace - the grace offorgiveness and the grace of hope. The only way to be strong is tocome back to this table again and again.  Feasting at the Altar of Grace  I speak from some years of personal experience in these things;there are many mornings when feasting at the altar of grace is onlyway I survive. Sometimes the breakfast of grace has to replace thebreakfast of foods. When you are a leader, the heart must be strong.People turn to you for help; they need answers to hard questions; andcomfort in the midst of grief; and guidance in perplexing decisions;and hope in the midst of discouragement; and an ear for theirdisappointments or even their anger; and a vision of God in the midstof darkness. The heart of a leader must be strong.  And so must yours. You are all ministers. And the glory ofChristianity is that we have an altar - we have an old rugged cross.And there the Savior, Jesus Christ, serves inexhaustible helpings ofgrace. Do you want your heart to be strong? Do you want to be astrong person who has the resources to love each other, and take instrangers, and care for prisoners, and stay married or single andchaste, and not love money? Then stay close to the altar and eat andeat and eat again - the grace of God.  The only strength that really matters in life is the strength ofheart that comes from feeding on grace and trusting in grace. All theway through life, it is not health and physical strength that Goddelights in. The Lord takes pleasure in those who hope in his grace(Psalm 147:11). And when we come to die, no food and no diet willmatter at all. One thing will matter: are we nourished at the altarof grace?  Another Help to Faith - Remembering Those Who Loved and Led Us  Now there is more help for us. Not only does this writer tell uswhere grace is prepared, namely at the altar of the cross, he alsotell us how to keep faith in grace stirred up. He says in verse 7:"Remember those who led you, who spoke the word of God to you; andconsidering the result of their conduct, imitate their faith. JesusChrist is the same yesterday and today and forever." This writerreally believed in the importance of heroes and models and biography(see chapter 11).  Not only should we remember that we have an altar where we canfind grace every day, but we should also remember people who trustedthat grace and loved and spoke to us the word of God. Remember them,verse 7 says. Know some history - perhaps just your parents lives, oryour grandparents, or a pastor or a missionary. Or, even better knowthese familiar ones, and then go to the wonderful biographies thattell the stories of those who were leaders in the church and whospoke the word of God.  Some of you may wonder why for eleven years at our pastors'conference I have given biographical lectures on people in churchhistory - Luther, Calvin, Edwards, Brainerd, Spurgeon, Machen,Lloyd-Jones, etc. It's not just because they're interesting. It'sbecause God said, "Remember those who led you and spoke the word ofGod to you."  Specifically God says (in verse 7), look at the result or outcomeof their conduct. What does that mean? It's not just: Look at theirconduct. It's: Look at the outcome, literally, the exit of their wayof life. I think it means: Look at the whole course of their life,especially the end of it. How did they run? Did they hold fast tillthe end? Did they finish well? Did they do what this whole letter ofHebrews is written to help us do - persevere to the end and be saved?  This is why dead heroes are more important than living heroes.Living heroes are important, but they might cease to be heroes beforethey die. They might let you down. Rather, he says, "remember" -that's a word that reaches into the past. Remember those whoseconduct you can survey from beginning to end, and consider all of it- especially how it ended.  Imitate Their Faith  Why? Why this focus on human leaders who knew and spoke the wordof God? Was it so that you could copy their conduct? That's not whatthe writer says. He says the reason is so that you will imitate theirfaith. Verse 7: "Remember those who led you, who spoke the word ofGod to you; and considering the result of their conduct, imitatetheir faith."  Not their conduct. If you try to imitate their conduct, you becomea religious fake, a spiritual counterfeit. This is a frighteningreality when you see it - people who have learned the forms ofgodliness and know nothing of the power that comes from genuinefaith. Instead he says: look at the whole course of their conduct andhow they finished their course, and get the same motor that made themwhat they were: their faith.  In what? The next verse says, "Jesus Christ is the same yesterdayand today and forever." Do you see the sequence of his thought? Inverse 7 he says "Remember leaders who in the past had faith, and nowin the present you imitate that very faith." Then in verse 8: "JesusChrist is the same yesterday and today and forever." Do you see thepoint?  Jesus is the Same Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow  They trusted Jesus in the past. Now you, today and tomorrow, go ontrusting Jesus. Why? Because Jesus is the same today when you trusthim and he will be the same tomorrow when you trust him.  But do you see what this implies about grace and how itstrengthens the heart? Something new is implied here that we didn'tsee in verses 9-10. If Jesus were only important for what he did onthe cross then it wouldn't matter if he were the same today andtomorrow. All that would matter is that the past work on the altar ofthe cross is still valid. Does the blood still buy my forgiveness?But if Jesus is important not only because he died once to forgive mysins, but also lives to be with me and help me in the next twominutes and this afternoon and tomorrow, then everything hangs onwhether the Jesus alive today is the same as he was when he died forme on the altar.  And that is exactly what we saw he promised to be last week: Iwill never leave you or forsake you (verse 5). The faith we are toimitate is faith in future grace, not just past grace. Faith that theliving Jesus who helped yesterday will help today and tomorrow.  Grace of Forgiveness and of Promised Help  When I wake up in the morning and feel guilty and defiled becauseof yesterday's ugliness, and hopeless because of yesterday's failure,my heart needs to be strengthened by two kinds of grace, not justone. I need the grace of forgiveness based on a great pastsubstitutionary sacrifice on the cross, that covers all my sins. O,how precious! And I need the grace of promised help from Jesus todayand tomorrow.  If I can have forgiveness, and if I can have the promise ofomnipotent help from Jesus who is the same yesterday today andforever, my heart will be strong, and I will be able to carry onanother day. Such is the glory of grace in the Christian life.  If you do not enjoy the forgiveness of your sins or have hope thatJesus will give you all the help you need today and tomorrow, then Iinvite you to turn from foods that cannot satisfy or help, and putyour trust in the grace of Jesus.  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
