  October 5, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor   OBEY YOUR JOYFUL LEADERS Part One (Hebrews 13:17-19)    Obey your leaders and submit to them, for they keep watch overyour souls as those who will give an account. Let them do this withjoy and not with grief, for this would be unprofitable for you. 18Pray for us, for we are sure that we have a good conscience, desiringto conduct ourselves honorably in all things. 19 And I urge you allthe more to do this, so that I may be restored to you the sooner.  Turning the People's Attention to their Leaders  The letter to the Hebrews is almost at an end. The writer is notsure he will ever see them again. He asks them in verses 18-19 topray for him and his team so that they might, if God wills, berestored to this church for ongoing fellowship. But that may nothappen. Where then will the people look for spiritual leadership? Theanswer is that they will look to their leaders in the church.  So it's not surprising that in this last chapter the writer refersto the leaders of the church three times (and not till now in theletter). Verse 7: "Remember those who led you, who spoke the word ofGod to you; and considering the result of their conduct, imitatetheir faith." Verse 24: "Greet all of your leaders and all thesaints. Those from Italy greet you." And our text, verse 17: "Obeyyour leaders and submit to them, for they keep watch over your soulsas those who will give an account. Let them do this with joy and notwith grief, for this would be unprofitable for you."  So we may take as a given that this church had leaders. And we mayalso assume that this writer of Scripture approved of that fact andwanted to strengthen the relationship between the people and theirleaders. He is almost finished with his influence through the letter,and so he begins to turn the people's attention in this last chapterto their leaders. When he is finished, the leaders will still bethere and will carry on the work of being teachers and examples tothe people.  Even Baptists and Americans Are Given Leaders by God  This is very important for us to see. We are Baptists byconviction and Americans (most of us) by the providence of God.Americans (as most humans) have a love affair with individualism anddo not like being told to submit to anyone. And Baptists believe inthe Biblical doctrine of the priesthood of all believers (1 Peter2:9; Revelation 5:9). So we Baptist Americans are prone to be verywary about leadership and the call for submission. Therefore it isimportant that we be checked by these passages. The New Testament isunmistakable in its teaching that the local church should haveleaders.  The way this teaching relates to all that has gone before in thisletter is simply this: When the book has been read in thecongregation, leaders live it and teach it and apply it to the livesof the people; and people watch them do this and imitate them andbecome responsive and compliant to their leadership. In other words,the Biblical truths - about Christ and his saving work and the powerof faith in future grace - that we have been savoring for the lasttwo years are meant to be embodied in the leaders of this church sothat you see them lived out, and hear them taught, and haveGod-centered models to imitate and God-centered teachings to follow.  Now let's develop this by opening verse 17 in more detail. I seethree points: the aim of leadership, the means of leadership, and theresponse to leadership.  1. What Is the Aim of Leadership According to Verse 17?  Obey your leaders and submit to them, for they keep watch overyour souls as those who will give an account. Let them do this withjoy and not with grief, for this would be unprofitable for you.  Two phrases in the verse point to the aim of leadership. One is,"that would be unprofitable for you." And the other is, "they keepwatch over your souls" (or literally: they keep watch on behalf ofyour souls). So I conclude that the aim of leadership in this verseis the "profit" or the "benefit" of the people. The leadership andthe response to the leadership should not be "unprofitable for you,"but rather "profitable for you." That's the aim - the benefit orprofit of the people.  And when it says that the leaders are watching, or staying on thealert, "on behalf of your souls," it means the same thing: it is forthe good of your souls that leaders are vigilant and awake andwatchful. So in both phrases - the one at the end, "that would not beprofitable for you," and the one in the earlier part of the verse,"they keep watch on behalf of your souls" - the point is the same:the aim of leadership is the profit or the good of the people,especially the good of their souls.  We may ask, What sort of profit or good does he have in mind? Theanswer is plain from the entire book, but let's take a specific verseto see it. Consider Hebrews 10:39, "We are not of those who shrinkback to destruction, but of those who have faith to the preserving ofthe soul." The aim of this book is to help people not shrink backfrom faith and have their soul destroyed, but rather to persevere infaith to the end and preserve their soul. The book of Hebrews isabout perseverance. Over and over, it calls us to be vigilantconcerning our souls and to endure to the end in faith and obedience(2:1; 3:6,12; 4:1,11,16; 6:1,11-12,18; 10:14,22-31,35-39;12:1-2,12-17,28; 13:13).  So the aim of spiritual leadership in the church is mainly thesalvation of the soul. And that salvation is not seen in the book ofHebrews as a one-time event of decision, but a life-long battleagainst temptation and unbelief. The job of the elders of this churchprimarily is to help you persevere in faith and be saved. In otherwords, since perseverance is at stake day after day, the aim ofleadership is not simply to get decisions for Jesus at the front endof Christian life, but to so teach and so live and so admonish thatprofessing Christians in the church "not shrink back to destruction,but . . . have faith to the preserving of the soul" (10:39).  This is one thing that makes the ministry so serious to me. Ibelieve what Jesus said in Mark 13:13, "The one who endures to theend will be saved." This is the message of Hebrews. And it means thatall messages and all meetings are salvation meetings. Not becausethey only aim at the first decision for Christ, but because our finalsalvation comes to us through persevering faith, not just a one-timedecision. Salvation of the soul is the ongoing work of God monthafter month to preserve us safe in Jesus by preserving our faith. Andthat happens through the teaching and modeling and admonishing andcorrecting by faithful leaders in the church.  Let me say it again from Hebrews 10:39, "We are not of those whoshrink back to destruction, but of those who have faith to thepreserving of the soul." That is the aim of leadership: thepreserving of the soul for eternity in the presence of God foreverlasting righteousness and joy.  2. How Shall the Souls of the People Be Preserved in Faith and notDestroyed?  Let's turn now to the second point, the means of leadership. I seethree answers in verse 17: their first is watchfulness, the second isjoyfulness, and the third is seriousness.  First, leaders preserve the souls of the people by watchfulness"Obey your leaders and submit to them, for they keep watch over yoursouls" (or: they keep watch on behalf of your souls). The spiritualleaders of a congregation are the watchers, the wakeful ones, theones who above all others are alert and vigilant in spiritualmatters. The word "over" (in "keep watch over your souls") does notmean that leaders just watch the souls of their people. The word(huper) means "on behalf of" or "for the sake of." So the watching is"on behalf of" your souls or "for the sake of" your souls.  And the question is: What do leaders watch so that the people'ssouls will be preserved and not destroyed? I would suggest fourthings from this book.  1. Spiritual leaders watch the word of God. They must ever bealert to the accurate meaning and the preciousness and thetruthfulness and the power of God's word. Verse 7: "Remember thosewho led you, who spoke the word of God to you." This is the mainfunction of leaders: they lead by the word of God, not their ownword. They are men under authority, not just with authority. This iswhy the people are called to obey them and submit to them.  The main issue in perseverance is whether we drift away from theword or keep hearing it, believing it, loving it and obeying it.Hebrews 2:1 said, "We must pay much closer attention to what we haveheard (the word of God), so that we do not drift away from it." Thejob of leaders is to help a congregation pay close attention to thatword and so not drift away from it and so persevere in faith in itand so be saved.  2. Spiritual leaders watch Christ. Christ is what the word isabout. Hebrews 1:2: "In these last days [God] has spoken to us in HisSon." The Son is the word we need to hear most of all. Hebrews 3:1:"Therefore, holy brethren, partakers of a heavenly calling, considerJesus." That's what leaders say over and over again: consider Jesus.To do that, leaders must watch Jesus, and be alert to Jesus, and knowJesus and love Jesus above everything. Hebrews 12:2, "Fix [your] eyeson Jesus, the author and perfecter of faith." If it is the aim ofleaders to preserve faith, and if Jesus is the author and perfecterof faith, then leaders must relentlessly say with their mouth andtheir lives: Fix your eyes on Jesus!  3. Spiritual leaders watch their own conduct. Hebrews 13:7:"Remember those who led you . . . considering the result of theirconduct, imitate their faith." The people are called to consider theleaders' conduct and imitate their faith. This means that leaders aremore accountable to God for their behavior than other Christians andmust watch it! All Christians should be godly and set good examples,but on top of that, God himself instructs the church to look at thelives of its leaders and follow. That is why there should be higherstandards for leadership in the church than for membership in thechurch. This is also why failures in leaders are worse than failuresin members. And why restoration to leadership should be much moredifficult than restoration to membership.  Paul says something similar in 1 Timothy 4:16, "Pay closeattention to yourself and to your teaching; persevere in thesethings, for as you do this you will ensure salvation both foryourself and for those who hear you." So again, the salvation of ourhearers depends in some measure on the faithfulness of leaders to bewatchful over themselves - their conduct as well as their doctrine.  4. Spiritual leaders watch the people. Hebrews 10:25 says, "Let usconsider one another for stirring up to love and good deeds" (literaltranslation). If the people are to watch each other for the sake ofstirring each other up to love, how much more the leaders. In fact,in view of this word in Hebrews 10:25, it is plain that the watchingover the flock is a shared effort among leaders and people. This isone of the reasons we believe so deeply in the small group ministryat our church. The elders cannot know all of you with the depth thatone needs to know you to give you the kind of personal care andexhortation you should have. That is why we give a lot of energy tocreating a system of cells where you can watch each other andstrengthen each other's faith, and stir each other up to love, andcall each other to account.  So watchfulness is the first means of leadership: watchfulness ofthe word, Christ, ourselves and the people.  Next, We Will Consider the Leaders' Joyfulness and Seriousness  Here is where we will have to stop this week. We will pick it uphere next week. Perhaps we have seen enough this morning at least toset you to praying for us as leaders. Our responsibility, as you cansee, is immense. We do not think of the work in terms of rights ofauthority as much as responsibility for spiritual leadership. Nextweek I will try to show you how you can help us and how you canrespond Biblically to this charge that we have.  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
