 April 4, 1999  Bethlehem Baptist Church Easter John Piper, Pastor CHRIST JESUS IS HE WHO DIED, YES, RATHER WHO WAS RAISED (Romans 8:34) And Can It Be? 
by Charles Wesley (last stanza) No condemnation now I dread; Jesus, and all in him, is mine! Alive in Him, my living Head, And clothed in righteousness divine, Bold I approach the eternal throne, And claim the crown, through Christ my own. Basic Christianity in a Nutshell Look with me at the words we just sang -the last verse of And Can it Be?.This is a one-verse short course in basicChristianity. Every line in this verse isa profound truth taken from the Bible aboutwhat it means to be a Christian. No condemnation now I dread Romans 8:1 -  Therefore there is nowno condemnation for those who are in ChristJesus. The sweetest of all words toa guilty sinner like me! No condemnationin Christ! Jesus, and all in him, is mine! Romans 8:32 -  He who did not spareHis own Son, but delivered Him over for usall, how will He not also with Him freelygive us all things? Not every convenienceor every comfort in this life, but everythingthat is good for us, as we trust him, andin the end, eternal life, every blessingpossible, and ever-increasing joy with God. Alive in Him [Christ] my living Head Colossians 3:3-4 - Your life is hiddenwith Christ in God. When Christ, who is ourlife, is revealed, then you also will berevealed with Him in glory. If youtrust Christ, he becomes your life, and yourlife becomes as indestructible and eternalas his. No matter what befalls you here. And clothed in righteousness divine 2 Corinthians 5:21 -  [God] made [Christ]who knew no sin to be sin on our behalf,so that we might become the righteousnessof God in Him. The foundation of ouracceptance with God is not our righteousness,but God's righteousness reckoned to us forChrist's sake, because he died for us. Thisis our hope and security. Therefore . . . Bold, I approach the eternal throne Hebrews 4:16 -  Let us draw near withboldness to the throne of grace, so thatwe may receive mercy and find grace to helpin time of need. What sinners can bebold with God? Only those who are clothedin righteousness divine. And that comes byfaith in Christ, not by our imperfect striving. And claim the crown, through Christ my own 2 Timothy 4:8 - There is laid up forme the crown of righteousness, which theLord, the righteous Judge, will award tome on that day; and not only to me, but alsoto all who have loved His appearing.A crown? Why a crown? Aren't crowns for kings?Yes, and for king's children - eventually.After a life of faith and servanthood andlove - perhaps in Moralica, Honduras, orTirana, Albania, or Tecate, California, orin your next-door neighbor's garage or hospitalroom - after a life of faith in Christ andlove for people, then the crown. Just Judge + Guilty Sinner = No Condemnation. All this - all this hope (Jesus, andall in him, is mine) -is based on thegreat declaration, There is no condemnationto those who are in Christ Jesus (Romans8:1). This is the very essence of Christianity:God is an unwaveringly just and holy Judge.Nobody gets by with anything in his courtroom.But we are all sinners and all guilty beforehim (Romans 3:23). Nevertheless, no chargecan be made to stick against us. What? Noone can condemn us? Every true Christiansings with joy, No condemnation nowI dread!? How can this be? Just Judge+ Guilty Sinner = No Condemnation. How doessuch an equation work? That is what Christianityis meant to answer. In Romans 8:33-34 Paul raises this question,Who will bring a charge against God'select? And then, he doesn't answer,Well, my enemies might, or my wifemight, or my conscience might, or worst ofall, God might. After all I am a sinner.Instead, he answers, God is the onewho justifies. In other words, othersmight bring charges, but the Supreme Courtof the universe, namely, God, has alreadyjustified. That is, he has acquittedand reckoned us righteous. Clothedin righteousness divine. So nobodycan make a charge stick. It doesn't matterwho indicts us or what their case is, ifGod has justified us, there is nowno condemnation. That's verse 33. Just Judge + Guilty Sinner + Death of Christ= No Condemnation. But how can this be? How does Justjudge + guilty sinner = no condemnation?A judge can't simply let criminals go freeand still honor the law and protect society.So the next verse asks the same questionagain, but this time answers it with a morefoundational answer. Romans 8:34, Whois the one who condemns? This is thesame as asking, Who will bring a chargeagainst God's elect? (verse 33). Therethe answer was: It doesn't matter who bringscharges against you if God is for you andhas declared you righteous. It is Godwho justifies. Here the answer is:It doesn't matter who condemns you, becauseChrist Jesus is He who died. There's the missing component in the equation,and the great center of Christianity, thedeath of Christ in the place of sinners.So now the equation goes like this: JustJudge + Guilty Sinner + Death of Christ =No Condemnation. The condemnation that belongedto us because of our sin was put on Jesus,and the righteousness that belonged to Jesusbecause of his perfect obedience was puton us. Bearing shame and scoffing rude, In my placecondemned he stood, Sealed my pardon withhis blood: Hallelujah! What a Savior! (Hallelujah!What a Savior, by Philip P. Bliss) Therefore: There is now no condemnationto those who are in Christ Jesus (Romans8:1). What About the Resurrection and Christ'sInterceding for Us? But what about the rest of verse 34? Do weneed to add it to the equation? ChristJesus is He who died; yes, rather who wasraised, who is at the right hand of God,who also intercedes for us. What aboutthe resurrection of Jesus and the reign ofJesus today at God's right hand where heintercedes for us? Well, yes these are essential. Without themthere would be condemnation to all of usguilty sinners. Paul said in 1 Corinthians15:17, If Christ has not been raised,your faith is worthless; you are still inyour sins. But the resurrection of Jesus and the intercessionof Jesus for us in heaven are essential forthis reason: they prove the validity andthe eternity of the condemnation-removingeffect of the death of Jesus. The resurrectiondoesn't add anything to the condemnation-absorbingeffect of Jesus' death. And the intercessionof Jesus for us in heaven doesn't add anythingto the condemnation-absorbing effect of Jesus'death. Instead, the resurrection of Jesus provesthat God is satisfied with the death of Jesusas removal of all our guilt and condemnation.Jesus did not have to stay dead to keep payingfor our sin. His suffering and death weresufficient. The resurrection is God's greatdeclaration: It really is finished. The debthas been paid. Justice has been done. Guiltis removed. Condemnation of sin has beenexecuted. And when Paul says in verse 34 that Christis at the right hand of God interceding forus, the point is not that anything is beingadded to the sufficiency of the death ofChrist, but that this death has eternal effectiveness.What is the plea that our interceding advocatemakes with God? His plea is his own blood,his own death. He has no other case to makefor us but his own death. That is the meaningof his daily intercession. The death of Christis as valid and as eternal as the life ofthe risen, interceding Christ. That's thepoint. So I think we can keep our equation simple:Just Judge + Guilty Sinner + Death of Christ= No Condemnation. But we need to keep inmind: because Christ rose from the dead,we know that his death was utterly sufficientand needs no repetition or addition to removeall our condemnation. And because Christintercedes for us, we know that his deathwill go on having its saving effect as longas there is Christ - who can never die! Just Judge + Guilty Sinner + Deathof Christ = No Condemnation. Underlined with the resurrection of Christ,and underlined with the intercession of Christat God's right hand. This is the heart and essence of Christianity. No condemnation now I dread, Jesus, and allin him, is mine. When condemnation is removed, what you havein its place is all that God is for you inJesus. Jesus, and all in him, is mine- all that God is and all that God promises- are yours when you are in him. How Does God's Work Become Mine Personally? Which raises the question now of how thiswork of God to remove condemnation becomesours personally. The Biblical answer is thatwe are justified by faith: Romans 5:1, Therefore,having been justified by faith, we have peacewith God through our Lord Jesus Christ.So we might say, add our faith into the equation:Just Judge + guilty sinner + deathof Christ + my faith = no condemnation.And I suppose that would be a perfectly legitimateway to say it. But I wonder if it might not be even betterto say: leave the equation as it is - expressingall that God is doing in the face of sinto remove condemnation. And then to ask,Do we love this great work of God? Do wecherish this work and this God who workslike this for us? Do we trust this God andthis great work? Do we receive all that Godis for us in Jesus when he takes away ourcondemnation? Maybe the way to draw this is to put a bigheart around the equation. Not just thatwe get into it, but that it gets into us.We take it in. We live on it. We love it.God does the work and we believe in the workand stand on the work. And receive all thatGod is for us in the work. Possessing All that God Is for You in JesusChrist When I was pondering how to bring this hometo you yesterday, I read a letter that waswritten to me dated March 24, 1999 from apastor in California whom I do not know.I think this brings the matter home to afitting conclusion: Just a word of thanksgiving to God. . . .I serve a wonderful congregation in a smalltown in central California. . . . On February14th of this year, Tony, a young man of 27years who had been visiting us, took hisown life. He left behind a family that lovedhim, which included 4 beautiful children,and one resounding question. Why? As I watched the medical examiners pull hisstiffened body out of a van, a sense of dreadovercame me. I asked myself, What couldhave possessed him to do such a thing?This question haunted my heart and mind throughoutthe following weeks. It was like a cold draftthat invaded the warmth of my family andministry. It ultimately caused me to takea leave of absence from our church to searchfor answers. It was during this time that I was led quiteprovidentially [to the truth of living byfaith in future grace, and] . . . God's graceand the power of His Spirit . . . [opened]a door in my heart through which I couldbehold the wondrous beauty of God in ChristJesus. This beauty has helped me better apprehendthe purpose for which I was created: To glorifyGod and enjoy Him forever! In the end I learned that it wasn't whatpossessed Tony that compelled him to takehis life, but rather what he didn't possess(apprehend): all that God is for us in JesusChrist. I have left all other questions,concerning this matter, along with Tony'slife, in God's sovereign Hand. Through it all, God's grace has sustainedme; and even more, has strengthened me thatI might joyfully lay hold of that forwhich Christ Jesus has also laid hold ofme. This joy has permeated my heartand mind and has overflowed onto my wife,daughter, church and community. This is what I pray for you all this morning.That you will possess all that Godis for you in Jesus Christ. That youwill lay hold on what Christ has doneto lay hold on you. And that you willoverflow with joy in knowing that there isnow no condemnation to those who are in ChristJesus, but rather, that Jesus and all inhim is yours. Copyright 1999 John Piper   Piper's Notes  | Search Page  | Friends of JohnBunyan  |  Desiring GodMinistries     
