     May 17, 1998   Bethlehem Baptist Church   John Piper, Pastor          The Called of Christ and the Loved  of God    Part One       (Romans 1:6-7)      
           Paul, a bond-servant of Christ    Jesus, called as an apostle, set apart for the gospel of God,       2 which He promised beforehand through His prophets in the holy    Scriptures, 3 concerning His Son, who was born of a descendant of David according to the    flesh, 4 who was declared the Son of God with power by the resurrection from the dead,    according to the Spirit of holiness, Jesus Christ our Lord, 5 through whom we have    received grace and apostleship to bring about the obedience of faith among all the    Gentiles for His name's sake,  6 among whom you also are the called of Jesus Christ; 7    to all who are beloved of God in Rome, called as saints: Grace to you and peace from God    our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.         
          What God Has Made of Paul       Paul began his great letter to  the Romans by identifying himself not in terms of what he had accomplished, but in terms  of God&#146;s work in his life. He said in verse 1 that he was a slave of Christ Jesus,  that is, Christ had bought him and now owns him and rules him (1 Corinthians 6:19-20). He  now exists, as he says in verse 5, for His name&#146;s sake. Then he said that  he is called as an apostle. So again it is what Christ did to him, not what he did, that  is first. He emphasizes this again in verse 5: we received grace and  apostleship. So the call of Paul to be an apostle was entirely gracious: it was free  and undeserved. Christ took the initiative on the Damascus Road and broke into Paul&#146;s  life and laid hold on him when he was on his way to imprison Christians. Then at the end  of verse 1, Paul says that he is set apart for the gospel of God. Again  someone else, not Paul, acts to give Paul his mission and his identity. God does, as we  saw, even before Paul is born (Galatians 1:15).    Paul&#146;s grasp of the freedom and the sovereignty of grace is  profoundly stamped by his own experience of it. He was, in his own estimation, the chief  of sinners (1 Timothy 1:15). And for some reason, not in himself, but only in the will of  God, God chooses freely to set his saving focus on Paul and make him a Christian and an  apostle and a servant of the gospel.    So, when he finally comes in verses 6-7 to describe his readers in Rome  (and by implication, all Christians!), it is not surprising that he speaks with the same  emphasis on what God has done, not what we have done. It&#146;s not that what we do is  unimportant: verse 5 says that the aim of Paul&#146;s apostleship among the gentiles is  the obedience of faith. So what  we  do is utterly crucial: his whole  ministry fails if it does not bring about the obedience of faith in our lives. (And not  just our lives, but the lives of all the gentiles &#150; or perhaps better, all the  nations, or peoples. O may God continue to give us a burden for the nations, the unreached  peoples of the earth! May he continue to raise up Paul-type missionaries among us!) But  when he describes what it means to have a Christian identity in verses 6-7, Paul does not  put the first emphasis on what  we  do. He puts it on what is done to us and for us,  just as he did in describing his own identity as a slave and apostle and servant of the  gospel.    
       Called and Loved &#150; the  Audacity of It       He uses two words that are  massively important in this book of Romans and in the whole of Paul&#146;s vision of God  and salvation &#150; so massive that I will deal with only one of them this morning. We  need to ponder these words as the key to our own identity and what it means to be a  Christian. The words are called and  beloved. Verse 6: . .  .among whom [that is, the nations] you also are the  called  of Jesus Christ; to all  who are  beloved  of God in Rome,  called  as saints: Grace to you and peace  from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.    Before I say another word about the meaning of these terms, I feel I  must address the audacity of it all. We need to feel this, so that when others express it,  we are not shaken. Here we are in a small room, compared to the whole city of Minneapolis.  And in a small city compared to the whole United States. And our entire country is a mere  4% of the world&#146;s population. And huge things are happening in the world: the fourth  largest country of the world &#150; Indonesia &#150; is near anarchy. India, the second  largest country is shaking her atomic weapons in the face of China, the largest county in  the world. Israel and the Palestinians are on the razor&#146;s edge of explosive strife.  Numerous African countries are smoldering powder kegs of unrest. And over against all this  huge global reality, I stand here this morning, infinitesimally small by comparison, and  say that the God who created the universe and holds all these countries and armies and  weapons and systems in being is at work in the world, mainly calling individual persons to  himself to be part of his people through the gospel of Jesus Christ.    And you are among that number. And what God has done in loving you and  calling you to Christ may have more eternal significance than who is the political leader  of Indonesia or whether India has atomic weapons. Now this seems utterly audacious. But if  it seems audacious to us, imagine how it must have seemed to the early Christians. Here is  the mammoth Roman Empire, plus the unknown hoards of barbarians beyond in  every direction. And Paul is virtually unknown in this great empire. And the One he  preaches has never been heard of before, Jesus. And he tells this little band of believers  in the huge city of Rome that God has loved them and called them and made them, in  particular, the focus of his saving work. They are the called of Christ and the beloved of  God. In other words, in all this mammoth empire and world, God is dealing with them in a  special way. The audacity of claiming this!    
       The Magnificence of the Lord of  the Universe       Which is, perhaps, why Paul  inserted in verses 2-4 something about this gospel and something about this Christ. He is  the fulfillment of the ancient promises to Israel that a ruler would come. And he was  raised from the dead and ordained Son of God in power. So today, whether it looks like it  or not, all authority in heaven and on earth belongs to Christ. And unless we know that  and believe that with all our hearts, we will be overwhelmed by the apparent bigness of  all that happens in the world. In the absence of that truth, Christianity looks hopelessly  insignificant and Christians look foolish. So set your mind on the magnificence of Christ  as the Lord of the universe, and on the power and wisdom of God the Father who created all  this and plans all this and is managing all this, precisely for the building of his church  &#150; his people &#150; by bringing about the obedience of faith for the sake of his name  among all the nations.    Now back to these two key words: Paul describes the Roman Christians  &#150; and you and me &#150; by focusing not mainly on what we do, but mainly on what he  does: he says we are  called  and we are  loved . That is what makes us  Christians. That is what we should know about ourselves mainly. Other things are important  to know. But nothing is more important that this.    First, in verse 6 he says we are the called of Christ  Jesus. And then, in verse 7 he says we are called as saints. So, at  least twice in these two verses, he emphasizes that who we are as Christians is based on  the work of another, the One who calls us.     
       God&#146;s Call Is not a  Democratic Idea       This will not move us and fill  us with the gratitude and wonder and worship that it should as long as we think the way  typical American lovers of democracy think. Americans believe in government of the people,  by the people and for the people. That&#146;s probably not a bad idea for humans governing  humans. But when it gets transferred to the way God governs the world, it is a very bad  idea. It creates the impression that human rights and privileges are at the center of the  universe, and that the only thing that should distinguish one person from another is his  own effort or intelligence or courage. Otherwise we must all be treated equally and God  must do for everyone what he does for anyone.     But what if the human heart is corrupt and hard and rebellious and  blind and virtually dead to spiritual reality (Ephesians 4:18)? In that case, the only  thing that self-reliance can produce is more death. And the only thing that can save us  from our own corruption is a divine, supernatural, powerful, awakening call from God. If  we say (in democratic fashion) that God must call everyone the same way he calls anyone,  we do not yet understand how deeply sinful and rebellious and undeserving we are. If God  calls anyone, it is grace, free and totally undeserved. And he is not obliged to call  everyone if he calls anyone, because he does not call any on the basis of human merit or  human distinctives. Democracy proceeds on the basis of universal human rights; but  rebellious, sinful humans have absolutely no rights in relation to God. All divine  condemnation is just; all divine salvation is gracious. As Romans 9:15 says, God has  mercy on whom he will have mercy. And the fact that anyone is called from darkness  to light is a wonder of grace.    Now I am assuming several things here that I need to demonstrate from  the Scriptures, namely, 1) that God is the one who calls; and 2) that his saving call is a  special act of grace in the lives of some sinners and not all; and 3) that this call is  effective &#150; it creates what it commands.    
       God is the One Who Calls       When Paul says in verse 6,  You are the called of Jesus Christ, he probably doesn&#146;t mean called  by Christ Jesus. He probably means, called by God into the fellowship of  Christ Jesus. I say this because this is what he teaches elsewhere in Romans and his  other letters. For example, in 1 Corinthians 1:9 Paul says, God, who has called you  into fellowship with his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, is faithful. So God calls, and  the aim of the call is to put us into fellowship with his Son, Jesus Christ. So in Romans  1:6, the phrase the called of Jesus Christ most likely means: those who  are called by God to belong to Jesus Christ and enjoy fellowship with him.    
       His Call Is an Act of Grace  Toward Some Sinners       Another thing that needs to be  shown is that this call of God into the fellowship of Jesus is given to some, not all, and  that no injustice is done here because none has a right to the call. Look with me at  Romans 8:28-30, And we know that God causes all things to work together for good to  those who love God, to those   who are called according to His purpose  .  Here we see clearly that not all are called. All things do not work together for good for  everyone, but only for those who are called. Then in verse 30 he says it again:  These whom He predestined, He also called; and those whom He called, He also  justified. So again it is not everyone. The call of God, as Paul uses  the term, is special and particular. Well, what is it then? Are we not to preach the  gospel to everyone?    Indeed we are. Jesus scattered the seed of the Word indiscriminately on  every kind of soil (Mark 4:14). And Paul did exactly the same: he would come to a city and  he would preach the gospel to the whole synagogue or the whole town square. He would  call everyone to repent, without exception (Acts 17:30).     But that universal call of the gospel (see Matthew 22:14), which is the  same as evangelism and missions, is  not  the call that Paul is talking about in  Romans 1:6-7 and Romans 8:28,30 (or Romans 9:24). Well, what is this call &#150; this call  into the fellowship of Jesus? What is the call that enables Paul to say, Those whom  he   called   he also justified? God does not justify everyone. But he  does justify all the called. What then is this call?    
       His Call Creates What it Commands       This brings us to the third  thing that I was assuming and need to demonstrate, namely, that the saving call of God  into the fellowship of his Son is effective, or effectual &#150; it accomplishes what it  calls for; it creates what it commands. The gospel is an offer to everyone that whoever  sees the glory of Christ, and is drawn to him, and receives him in his beauty as his or  her own precious portion in life, and trusts in this glorious Christ will be saved.  Everyone who hears the gospel and believes, on the basis of this faith alone, will be  justified and accepted by God.    But when that gospel is preached, what is the final answer to why some  believe and some do not? Why did you believe? Listen to Paul in 1 Corinthians 1:23-24:  We preach Christ crucified [that is, we preach to everyone the glory of a loving,  self-sacrificing Savior] to Jews a stumbling block and to Gentiles foolishness, but  to  those who are the called,  both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom  of God. Paul preaches indiscriminately to all &#150; God means for every ethnic  group to be reached with the gospel &#150; all the nations, as Romans 1:5  says. As he preaches to all and offers salvation to all, most of the Jews regard a  crucified Messiah as a stumbling block and reject him. And most of the gentiles regard a  crucified Lord as foolishness, and they reject him. But in those two groups, among those  who hear &#150; out from them &#150; some are called (a different call from  the universal call to all). And the effect of their call is that this Christ no longer  looks like a stumbling block, and no longer looks like foolishness, but rather he looks  like the power and the wisdom of God. 1 Corinthians 1:24, But to those who are  called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ [is] the power of God and the wisdom of God.    Why? Because the effectual call awakens the dead, gives sight to the  spiritually blind, opens the ears of the spiritually deaf, humbles the proud, softens the  hard, and brings forth faith. This is why Paul says in Romans 8:30, Those whom he  calls, he justifies &#150; even though justification is by faith (Romans 5:1). The  call of God takes away every proud obstacle to faith and makes Christ irresistibly  attractive, so that willingly, freely we believe.    
       Wake up, O Sleeper, Rise  from the Dead       Let&#146;s close by looking at  this miraculous process in action in 2 Corinthians 4:4-6. There Paul says, The god  of this age has blinded the minds of unbelievers, so that they cannot see the light of the  gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God. Human rebellion and unbelief  are intensified by the devil who hates truth and life. But if you can&#146;t see the  glory of Christ in the gospel because of rebellion, you won&#146;t believe the  gospel. It will seem like a stumbling block or foolishness.    So what must happen? Preaching Christ and loving people must go on  (verse 5): For we do not preach ourselves, but Jesus Christ as Lord, and ourselves  as your servants for Jesus' sake. That&#146;s the universal gospel call (not the  effectual divine call). But what will make the decisive difference in who is saved? It  will be the divine supernatural call of God, just the same as in the beginning of the  world when his call to the light created the light. Verse 6: For God, who said,  &#145;Let light shine out of darkness,&#146; [in the same way] made his light shine in our  hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of  Christ.    In other words, until God effectually calls us the way he called light  into being at the creation, we will not see the light of the knowledge of the glory  of God in the gospel. And if we don&#146;t see it, we will not love the light and  come to the light (John 3:19-20). But if we do see it, we will come. Christ will no longer  be a stumbling block or foolishness. He will be to us the power of God and the  wisdom of God. And we will come to him and cleave to him and love him and trust him.    That is what Paul means in Romans 1:6 when he says, You Romans  are the called of Jesus Christ. God has said in your hearts, Let there be  light, and you have seen his glory and come to him and called on him, and he has  saved you, and forgiven you and accepted you and poured out his love in your hearts. That  is what has happened to you, Christian. Learn who you are. Learn how to thank your God,  and live in the humble wonder of grace.    And say with me to every unbeliever, on behalf of Christ, and in the  power of his Spirit: Wake up, O sleeper, rise from the dead, and Christ will shine  on you (Ephesians 5:14).       Copyright 1998 John Piper    Piper's Notes       
