  August 11, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor      "Do Not Harden Your Heart in the Day ofTrial"   Hebrews 3:7-19   
  Therefore, just as the Holy Spirit says, "Today if you hear hisvoice, 8 do not harden your hearts as when they provoked me, as inthe day of trial in the wilderness, 9 where your fathers tried me bytesting me, and saw my works for forty years. 10 "Therefore I wasangry with this generation, and said, 'they always go astray in theirheart; and they did not know my ways'; 11 as I swore in my wrath,'They shall not enter my rest.'" 12 Take care, brethren, lest thereshould be in any one of you an evil, unbelieving heart, in fallingaway from the living God. 13 But encourage one another day after day,as long as it is still   called "Today," lest any one of you behardened by the deceitfulness of sin. 14 For we have become partakersof Christ, if we hold fast the beginning of our assurance firm untilthe end; 15 while it is said, "Today if you hear his voice, do notharden your hearts, as when they provoked me." 16 For who provokedHim when they had heard? Indeed, did not all those who came out ofEgypt led by Moses? 17 And with whom was He angry for forty years?Was it not with those who sinned, whose bodies fell in thewilderness? 18 And to whom did He swear that they should not enterHis rest, but to those who were disobedient? 19 And  so  we seethat they were not able to enter because of unbelief.  
    Jesus is Greater than Moses    Last week we saw that Jesus Christ is greater than Moses in atleast two ways.  First, Hebrews 3:3 says that he is greater than Moses the same waya builder of a house is greater than the house he built. In otherwords Jesus is greater than Moses because he made Moses. And verse 4makes the implication explicit: God is the maker of all things.Therefore Jesus Christ is God. Which is what the writer had said inHebrews 1:8, "But of the Son  He says , "Thy throne, O God, isforever and ever."  Second, Hebrews 3:5-6 say that Jesus is greater than Moses the waya son over a house is greater than a servant in the house. The Son isheir of the house. He owns it, rules it and provides for it.  In other words what we have in Hebrews 3:3-6 is a restatement ofHebrews 1:2, "In these last days God has spoken to us in His Son, (1)whom He appointed  heir  of all things, and (2) through whomalso  He made  the world." The same two glories of Christ we sawin Hebrews 3. Christ is the  Creator  of all and the  Heir of all. That is, he made all things including the people of whichMoses is a part, and he is the heir of all things, including thehouse in which Moses is a servant.    
      We are the House of God,    IF     Then at the end of last week's text (Hebrews 6b) the writer drawsus into the picture. He says to his readers that they (we) are thevery house of God -- the house his Son made and inherits -- " if we hold fast our confidence and the boast of our hope firm untilthe end" -- "Whose house we are, if we hold fast our confidence andthe boast of our hope firm until the end."  Now this  "if"   is a tremendously serious thing. We are hishousehold -- we are God's people, we are God's possession andinheritance, that is we are saved --  if  . This  "if"  isso serious and so important that the rest of chapter three is asupport and explanation of it. In fact much of the rest of this bookis meant to make this  "if"  plain.  And here at the end of the twentieth century in America it is evenmore important that we hear it and understand it, because we areconfronted by voices in books and radio and sermons and songs thatuse the term "unconditional" carelessly -- as in the terms,"unconditional love" and "unconditional acceptance," for instance.And very often when it is used there is no effort to make soundBiblical distinctions between what is unconditional -- like God'selecting love -- and what is not unconditional -- like God'sjustifying and glorifying love. One of my main motives for writing Future Grace  was to help clarify this important Biblicalteaching. But now we have it right here before us in Hebrews 3:6. Weare God's house, " if      we hold fast our confidenceand the boast of our hope firm until the end."  So let's get into this big  "if"  and then let the rest ofthe chapter explain this and show us why it is important.  
    A Condition for    Being,    not    Becoming     Notice first that this condition --  "'if'  we hold fast tohope" -- is a condition for  being  something  now . Verse6 does not say: you  will become  God's house if you hold fastto your hope. It says, "We  are  God's house" if we hold fast toconfidence and hope. It's like saying, "You are a Southerner if youpronounce Ronald Reagan's wife's name 'Naintsy' instead of 'Nancy."Talking like this does not  make  you a Southerner; it showsthat you  are  one.  So I think Hebrews 3:6 teaches that " if  we hold fast ourconfidence and the boast of our hope firm to the end, we show that we are  God's house." This is what  defines  the household ofGod: God's people hope in God. God's people are confident in God.They hold fast to God as their boast. That's the human trait andevidence of belonging God's household. If you want to be assured thatyou are of God's household test to see if you hope in God and haveconfidence in God and look to God for the security and happiness ofyour future and the satisfaction of your heart.  Here is another support for this: in verse 1 the readers arecalled "partakers of a heavenly calling." It says, "Therefore, holybrethren, partakers of a heavenly calling . . ." So the writer isassuming that his readers  are  already partakers of God'sheavenly call. They are heaven-bound. They are not just hearers  of the call; they are partakers of -- sharers in --the call. So when he puts a big  "if"   on this in verse 6 -- if  you hold fast to your confidence in God -- he means: you are   partakers of the call, you  are  the household ofGod, and the evidence of this is your persevering confidence and hopein God to the end.  Now jump ahead to verse 14 to confirm that this is the way thewriter is thinking. In verse 14 we have an  "if"  statement verymuch like the one in verse 6: "We have become partakers of Christ, ifwe hold fast the beginning of our assurance firm until the end."Being "partakers of Christ" in verse 14 is virtually the same asbeing "partakers of the heavenly calling" in verse 1. And both arethe same as "being God's house" in verse 6.  But notice the wording carefully here in verse 14, because it is astrong confirmation that we are on the right track. It says, "We have become  partakers of Christ, if we hold our assurance tothe end." The condition is future: " If      we holdfast assurance to the end." But the effect of the condition relatesto the past: "We  have become  partakers of Christ." So it'sclear that the point here is not: hold fast to your assurance inorder to become in the future a partaker of Christ. The point is:hold fast to your assurance in order to show (prove, evidence,demonstrate) that you  are  a partaker of Christ.    
      Salvation Can't be Lost    Now this is utterly crucial because it shows that this writer doesnot believe that you can truly partake of Christ, share in hisheavenly calling and be a part of his house and then lose thatsalvation. This is tremendously important because, Lord willing, weare going to see other parts of this book that could easily be takento mean that we can lose our salvation.  But ask yourself this question: If verse 14 says, "We have becomepartakers of Christ (in the past),  if  we (in the future) holdfast our assurance," then what conclusion should we draw if we do nothold fast our assurance (in the past)? I believe the answer is: Thenwe  have not become  partakers of Christ. It would be wrong tosay, "If we do not hold fast our assurance, then even though we wereonce partakers of Christ, nevertheless now we lose our part inChrist." That is the opposite of what this verse says. It says, We have become  partakers of Christ, if we hold fast our assuranceto the end; and if we do  not  hold fast to our assurance to theend, then we  have not become  a partaker of Christ. Not holdingfast to our assurance does not make us lose our salvation; it showsthat we were not truly saved.    
      Maintaining Assurance    Everything in chapter three (and I would argue that everything inthis book) is written to encourage and empower you to be earnest andvigilant and focused in the fight to maintain strong assurance inChrist. Let me show you this so that you get a feel for how importantthis is to the writer to the Hebrews. Over and over again the writerurges us to persevere in our hope and not to throw away ourconfidence, because this is the living evidence that we tryly havebecome partakers of Christ. For example:  Hebrews 2:1 -- For this reason we must pay much closer attentionto what we have heard, lest we drift away from it.  Hebrews 3:6 -- We are his house , if we hold fast our confidenceand the boast of our hope firm until the end.  Hebrews 3:14 -- For we have become partakers of Christ, if we holdfast the beginning of our assurance firm until the end . . .  Hebrews 6:11-12 -- And we desire that each one of you show thesame diligence so as to realize the full assurance of hope until theend, that you may not be sluggish, but imitators of those who throughfaith and patience inherit the promises.  Hebrews 10:23 -- Let us hold fast the confession of our hopewithout wavering, for He who promised is faithful . .   Hebrews 10:35 -- Therefore, do not throw away your confidence,which has a great reward.  Hebrews 12:1 -- Therefore, since we have so great a cloud ofwitnesses surrounding us, let us also lay aside every encumbrance,and the sin which so easily entangles us, and let us run withendurance the race that is set before us.  
    The Strength to Persevere is God's    And as we come to the end of the book he delights to bless us andremind us that the strength to persevere to the end is not our own,but God's. This is the point of Hebrews 13:21.  [Now the God of peace] . . . equip you in every good thing to doHis will,  working in us that which is pleasing in His sight ,through Jesus Christ, to whom  be  the glory forever and ever.Amen.  The surety of believers lies not in the absence of conditions inthe promises of power.  But the way we experience the power of God through Christ to workthis persevering grace in us is through the warnings and promises ofthe word of God. That's why the book was written. God doesn't work inus the endurance apart from the word. He works by the word. Our greatsalvation and our great Savior (which is what this book is about) arethe inspiration the Spirit uses to hold us fast. So we must considerJesus (3:1) and not neglect our great salvation (2:3). That's whatthis book is written to help us do.  So let's look just briefly at how the writer helps us in Hebrews3:7-19, and then we will come back to this text again next Sunday.    
      Example and Warning to Persevere    His main approach in these verses is with a very serious warningof the way God worked in the past, namely, in the way he dealt withIsrael after they came out of Egypt and then in spite of all thatpower and mercy on their behalf, they tested God with grumbling andunbelief. The result was that he gave them up to die in thewilderness and swore that they would not enter the God's rest in thepromised land.  The point is that the people of Israel are a example or a pictureor a lesson-book for these readers. They had been treated with greatmercy as God brought them out of Egypt by signs and wonders. Andthese people had seen signs and wonders (Hebrews 2:4). They hadtasted the powers of the age to come (6:5). The Holy Spirit had beenat work in their midst and they had participated in his power (6:4).All this is like what the Israelites experienced as they came out ofEgypt. And for a short while they were very happy and seeminglyconfident in God.  But it didn't last. And that is why this example is so importantto the writer of Hebrews. He wants the professing Christians to last,to persevere. Because that's the only way they will prove they aretruly God's house and truly share in Christ's salvation. So he sayslook at Israel and  don't  be like them. Pick it up at verse 8:  Do not harden your hearts as when they provoked me [or perhapsbetter, "as in the embitterment"], as in the day of trial in thewilderness, 9 where your fathers tried me by testing me, and saw myworks for forty years. 10 Therefore I was angry with this generation,and said, "They always go astray in their heart; and they did notknow my ways;" 11 as I swore in my wrath, "They shall not enter myrest."  In other words they had seen God's gracious works; they had seensigns and wonders and miracles of mercy, they had tasted the heavenlygift, but instead of being softened to trust God in the day of trialwhen things were difficult, they became hard and unbelieving and didnot trust God's goodness, but murmured. The result was that God wasangry and cut them off from the promised land.  Now the point is that this is what will happen to us,  if  --the big  "if"  of verse 6 and 14 -- If  we harden ourhearts in the day of trial and murmur against him and throw away ourconfidence and hope in God. The story of Israel is an example for theprofessing church. Do not treat the grace of God with contempt --presuming to receive it as an escape from the Egypt of misery, butnot being satisfied with it as guidance and provision in thewilderness of this life. O how many professing Christians want themercy of forgiveness so that they won't go to hell, but have hardhearts toward the Lord when it comes to daily fellowship with him!  
    Belief for Living, not Just forEscape    Note well, the issue of perseverance is not first an issue ofbehavior. Don't be asking first: What actions does God want me to do ? The issue in this text is one of the heart. It is a matterof believing or trusting or hoping in God. Look at verse 10:"Therefore I was angry with this generation, and said, "They alwaysgo astray  in their heart .'" Why didn't the people get to enterthe promised land? You could say, they sinned and they rebelled andthey murmured. Yes. But look at how this writer ends the chapter.Verse 19: "And  so  we see that they were not able to enter because of unbelief. " Persistent sin in the face of God'smercy is a sign of unbelief.  Yes, the people were embittered because of God's testing them (v.8); yes, they sinned (v. 17); but beneath all that was the rootproblem: they didn't believe God, that is, they didn't trust hisgoodness -- to lead and protect and provide and satisfy. Even thoughthey saw the waters of the Red Sea divide and they walked over on dryground, the moment they got thirsty, their hearts were hard againstGod and they did not trust him to take care of them. They cried outagainst him and said that life in Egypt was better.  That is what this book is written to prevent. O how manyprofessing Christians make a start with God. They hear that theirsins can be forgiven and that they can escape hell and go to heaven.And they say: what have I got to lose, I'll believe. But then in aweek or a month or a year or ten years, the test comes -- a season ofno water in the wilderness. A weariness with manna, and subtly agrowing craving for the fleeting pleasures of Egypt, as Numbers11:5-6 says, "We remember the fish which we used to eat free inEgypt, the cucumbers and the melons and the leeks and the onions andthe garlic, but now our appetite is gone. There is nothing at all tolook at except this manna."  This is a terrifying condition to be in -- to find yourself nolonger interested in Christ and his word and prayer and worship andmissions and living for the glory of God. And to find all fleetingpleasures of this world more attractive than the things of theSpirit.  If that is your situation this morning, then I plead with you tolisten to the Holy Spirit speaking in this text. Give heed to theword of God (2:1). Do not harden your heart (3:8). Wake up to thedeceitfulness of sin (3:13). Consider Jesus, the apostle and highpriest of our great confession (3:1). And hold fast to yourconfidence and the boast of your hope in God (3:6).  And if you have never even made a start with God, then put yourhope in him. Turn from sin and from self-reliance and put yourconfidence in a great Savior. These things are written (and thissermon is preached) that you might believe and endure, and have life.  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
