  May 11, 1986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchJohn Piper, PastorCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper    HOLY WOMEN WHO HOPED IN GOD  (1 Peter 3:1-6) Likewise you wives, be submissive to your husbands,so that some,though theydo not obey the word, may be won without a word by the behavior of theirwives, when they see your reverent and chaste behavior. Let not yours bethe outward adorning with braiding of hair, decoration of gold, and wearingof fine clothing, but let it be the hidden person of the heart with theimperishable jewel of a gentle and quiet spirit, which in God's sight isvery precious. So once the holy women who hoped in God used to adorn themselvesand were submissive to their husbands, as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling himlord. And you are now her children if you do right and let nothing terrifyyou. I would like to sum up last week's message and make the transition to today'smessage by telling you a story from John Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress. The Pilgrim's Progress is a story about how a man called Christian makeshis way "through many dangers, toils and snares" along the King's Highwayto the Celestial City. It is an allegory of the Christian life, and it istremendously helpful. At one point along his way Christian, and his faithful companion Hopeful,stray out of the King's Highway into By-Path Meadow. In this place they losetheir way. And presently they meet a giant called Giant Despair. He overcomesthem and drives them to his home called Doubting Castle, and throws themin a dark, stinking dungeon. The next day, Giant Despair comes to them and in rage falls upon them andbeats them half to death, leaving them to groan and cry in their distress.The next day Giant Despair comes and tells Christian and Hopeful that theonly way to escape their miseries would be to "forthwith make an end ofthemselves, either with Knife, Halter, or Poison." When the Giant leaves the dungeon, Christian and Hopeful discuss thispossibility, and Christian is of the mind that they should do it, he wasso distressed. But Hopeful recalls the command of the Lord of the Countryto which they are going, and how he had forbidden them to take anyone's life. Then he says (for as his name is, so is his heart), Who knows but that God that made the world may cause that Giant Despair maydie? or that at some time or other he may forget to lock us in? or but hemay in short time have another of his Fits before us, and may lose the useof his limbs?...My brother, let's be patient, and endure a while; the timemay come that may give us a happy release; but let us not be our own murderers." Later when Giant Despair comes back and finds that Christian and Hopefulhave not taken their lives the way he suggested, he falls into a rage andtakes them out to show them the bones of the pilgrims he had killed, andthen drives them back again to their dungeon, beating them all the way. That night the giant's wife says that the reason they are holding on to lifemay be that "they live in hope that some will come to relieve them, or thatthey have pick-locks about them." So Giant Despair says he will search themin the morning. That night was Saturday and at midnight Christian and Hopeful began to prayand continued in prayer till almost break of day. Then a wonderful thinghappened. In John Bunyan's own words, Now a little before it was day, good Christian, as one half amazed, brakeout in this passionate speech: What a fool, quoth he, am I, thus to lie ina stinking Dungeon, when I may as well walk at liberty. I have a Key in mybosom called Promise, that will, I am persuaded, open any Lock in DoubtingCastle. Then said Hopeful, That's good news; good Brother, pluck it out ofthy bosom and try. Then Christian pulled it out of his bosom, and began to try at the Dungeondoor, whose bolt (as he turned the Key) gave back, and the door flew openwith ease, and Christian and Hopeful both came out. Then he went to the outwarddoor that leads into the Castle-yard, and with this Key opened that dooralso. After, he went to the iron Gate, for that must be opened too, but thatLock went damnable hard, yet the Key did open it. Then they thrust open theGate to make their escape with speed, but that Gate as it opened made sucha creaking that it waked Giant Despair, who hastily rising to pursue hisPrisoners, felt his limbs to fail, for his Fits took him again, so that hecould by no means go after them. Then they went on, and came to the King'sHighway again, and so were safe because they were out of his Jurisdiction. There is only one escape from Giant Despair and Doubting Castle, namely,the endurance of hope and the Key called Promise -- that was last week'smessage. Now we make our transition to this week's message. After Christian attainsto the Celestial City, his wife, Christiana, set's out on her way to heaven.At first she and her four sons had refused to leave the City of Destruction.But then at last they too were converted and set out as Pilgrims. There is a terrific story of how her four sons and Mr. Great-Heart and Mr.Honest destroy Doubting Castle and slay the Giant Despair. But we must passover that and come quickly to the end of Christiana's Pilgrimage. She has fought valiantly and has completed her course. As she and her companycamp by the last river she receives a letter from the Celestial City. Itread, "Hail, good Woman, I bring thee Tidings that the Master calleth for thee,and expecteth that thou shouldest stand in his presence, in Clothes ofImmortality, within this ten days." With her heart full of hope in God, she gathers her sons, Matthew, Samuel,James and Joseph, and tells them good-by. She gives her few goods to thepoor. She calls Mr. Valient-for-Truth and commends to him the care of hersons. And then, with great tenderness and strength, she summons Mr. Despondencyand his daughter Much-Afraid and encourages them with these words: You ought with thankfulness for ever to remember your Deliverance from thehands of Giant Despair.... The effect of that Mercy is, that you are broughtwith safety hither. Be ye watchful and cast away Fear, be sober and hopeto the end. And that brings us to our topic and our text for today, HOLY WOMEN WHO HOPEDIN GOD, 1 Peter 3:1-6. In 1 Peter 2:13ff. Peter admonishes us all to be subject, or submissive,for the Lord's sake to every human institution, whether it be to the emperoras supreme, or to governors as set by him. In other words, keep the speedlimits, pay your taxes, and be respectful toward policemen and senators. Then, following this theme, in 2:18ff. he addresses the servants in the churchand admonishes them to be submissive to their masters with all respect, bothto the kind and to the overbearing. Then in 3:1-6 he instructs the wives to be submissive to their husbands,and in verse 7 he instructs husbands to live considerately with their wives. Finally in this sequence of thoughts he tells the whole church (in 3:8ff.)to have unity and sympathy and love and tenderheartedness and humility towardone another, and not to return evil for evil. Since today is Mother's Day we will focus our attention on the women in 3:1-6.And since we are in the middle of a series of messages on hope, we will wewill go right to the root of things and begin by asking, What is the rootcause of a woman's greatness in the eyes of God -- the only eyes that matter! The answer is given in verse 5: "So once the holy women who hoped in Godused to adorn themselves and were submissive to their husbands." Let's focuson three things in this verse. First, these holy women hoped in God. Second, because they hoped in God, they adorned themselves in a certain way,namely, with a gentle and quiet spirit (we will see this in verses 3-4). Third, by hoping in God and adorning themselves with this spirit of tranquility,they were submissive to their husbands. Because of these three things, Peter calls them "holy women." Their spiritand their demeanor are distinct from the world and are precious in the sightof God (verse 4). And not only are they precious in God's sight, but theyare also powerful in the sight of unbelieving husbands. Peter's desire isthat women in his own day would follow the example of the holy women of old,and that they would win their husbands to Christ by their reverent and chastebehavior. Let's take these three things in verse 5 one at a time and look at them briefly. 1. First, the holy women are called women who hoped in God. They had learnedto preach to themselves the way the psalmist did in Psalm 42:5, Why are you downcast, O my soul, And why are you disquieted within me? Hope in God! For I shall again praise him, My help and my God. In Hebrews 11, you recall, faith is defined in verse one as the assuranceof things hoped for. Then in verse 11 Sarah, one of the holy women of old,is given as an example: By faith Sarah herself received power to conceive, even when she was pastthe age, since she considered him faithful who had promised. In other words, Sarah hoped in God. She looked away from herself and herbarrenness and her age and banked on God for the fulfillment of his promisethat she would have a child and be the mother of many nations. This didn't come easy for Sarah. In fact, when she heard God make the promiseto Abraham, she laughed to herself and did NOT believe (Genesis 18:12). Butthen God rebuked her for the laughter of unbelief, and said, "Is anythingtoo hard for the Lord?" (Genesis 18:14-15). And the next thing we hear from Sarah is a word of exultation to God whenIsaac is born. She says, God has made laughter for me; every one who hears will laugh over me... Whowould have said to Abraham that Sarah would suckle children? Yet I have bornehim a son in his old age. She gives God the glory for the child, and so we may assume, with the writerto the Hebrews, that God's rebuke, and the reminder that nothing is too hardfor the Lord, restored Sarah's faith and caused her to hope in God. So women who hope in God are women who look away from the troubles and miseriesand obstacles of life that seem to make the future bleak, and they focustheir attention on the sovereign power and love of God who rules in heavenand does on earth whatever he pleases. 1 Peter 3:6b shows us what that hope looks like in the stresses and threatsof real life. And you are now her children if you do right and let nothing terrify you. The presence of hope drives out fear. The daughters of Sarah do not fearanything but displeasing God. Or to be more accurate, the daughters of Sarahfight the anxiety that rises in their hearts. They wage war on fear, andthey defeat it with the promises of God. They know that following Christ will mean suffering. But they believe thepromises -- like 1 Peter 3:14. But even if you do suffer for righteousness' sake, you will be blessed. Haveno fear of them, nor be troubled, but in you hearts reverence Christ as Lord. Holy women who hope in God take this promise of blessing through suffering,and they fight fear with the faithfulness of God -- "Sarah considered himfaithful who had promised!" (Hebrews 11:11). And then they do what Petersays in 4:19, Therefore let those who suffer according to God's will do right and entrusttheir souls to a faithful Creator. They affirm the sovereign rule of God over their suffering and that theydo not suffer apart from his will, and they rest their souls in the firmand omnipotent hands of a faithful Creator. They cast out fear and they hopein God. And so they prove to be the daughters of Sarah and heirs accordingto the promise. 2. The second thing that is said of the holy women in 1 Peter 3:5 is thatthey adorn themselves a certain way. The verse begins, "So (or, thus) theholy women who hoped in God used to adorn themselves..." This adornment refersto the adornment in verses 3 and 4. Let not yours be the outward adorning with braiding of hair, decoration ofgold, and wearing of robes, but let it be the hidden person of the heartwith the imperishable jewel of a gentle and quiet spirit, which in God'ssight is very precious. Why does Peter even bring up the issue of clothes and hair style and jewelry?I think the context of verses 1 and 2 is the key. He has in view mainly womenwho are married to unbelieving husbands. They want to win their husbandsto Christ. That is what Peter wants too. He says, Likewise you wives, be submissive to your husbands, so that some, thoughthey do not obey the word, may be won without a word by the behavior of theirwives, when they see your reverent and chaste behavior. Peter wants the Christian women to win their husbands by a life of reverenceand purity expressed in a submissive attitude that honors him as the headof the home. And he warns them not to preach at him -- "that they may bewon without a word." Then comes verse 3 with its warning against making your adornment externalinstead of internal. So what I think Peter is doing is giving married womenanother warning about how not to win their husbands, namely, don't thinkthat you can win him with trendy hairstyles, or a better tan, or delicatejewelry, or clinging robes. You might in this way attract him to the bedroom,but probably not to God. If you want to win him to God, your adornment is going to have to be a newwoman within. The world can teach you how to win a man to yourself. But onlythe Scripture can teach you how to win him to God. And we have seen two steps. First, hope in God and fear no man. Don't putyour hope in your husband; put your hope in God. (And to the single womenI would say, don't put your hope in getting a husband, put your hope in God.The only man worth getting is a man who wants to be second in your life notfirst.) Then the second step is that when you have put your hope in God, his sovereigntytakes away the pride in your heart, and his love takes away the fear in yourheart, and what's left in your heart is gentleness and quietness, as Petersays in verse 4. (Or: meekness and tranquility.) And that is the adornmentyou should pursue. The woman who adorns herself within with such a spirit,will know how to adorn herself without for the sake of the kingdom and forthe salvation of her husband. There are countless women to serve as examples for us, both in the Scripturesand since those days. Esther was the second daughter of Jonathan Edwards-- he had eight! She married Aaron Burr, who became President of PrincetonCollege. She had learned her father's piety and put her hope in God, notman. Her journals were just published in 1984 and you can read there about herfight of faith. For example, in 1754 she gave birth to a little girl namedSarah and discovered that she had what they called a "crooked neck." Estherhumbled herself before God and wrote, "Perhaps God foresaw that we shouldbe to proud of her, and so has sent this calamity to mortify us and her." Three years later on September 24, 1757 Esther's husband died in the pursuitof his duties at the College. She does not gloss over her pain. She callsit a "deep wound." And says that "God only can know and to him alone wouldI carry my complaint." But then within two weeks she writes to her mother, God has seemed sensibly near, in such a supporting and comfortable mannerthat I think I have never experienced the like... Request earnestly of theLord that I may never...faint under this his severe stroke... O I am afraidI shall conduct myself so as to bring dishonour on...the religion which Iprofess. What is the one thing that a woman who hopes in God fears? She fears bringingdishonor on God. She fears that she may fail to glorify God under the rodof his hard providence. And how does she quiet her heart in the midst ofthat fear? She preaches herself a sermon about the character of God. EstherBurr wrote, At night when retired felt calmed with the thought that God would be Glorified...The ever blessed God will lose none of his glory, let men or Devils do theirworst. 3. That leaves one last step for us to take. Holy women hope in God. Thishope yields a meek and tranquil spirit. And, finally, that spirit expressesitself in submissiveness. Verse 1 says, "Likewise you wives be submissiveto your husbands." And verse 5 says, "So once the holy women who hoped inGod used to adorn themselves and were submissive to their husbands." So thereare three steps on the way to pleasing God and winning an unbelieving husband. The first is to hope in God and fear no man. The second is to adorn yourself with the inner beauty of meekness andtranquility, which flow naturally from hoping in God and being rid of fear. And now the third, which flows freely from a meek and tranquil spirit, isto be submissive to your husband. Let me try to illustrate what I think submission is by referring to my ownmother and father (and if we had time I believe I could show from Scripturethat this illustration is a Biblical model not a merely cultural one). I grew up in a home where my father was away for about two-thirds of eachyear. He is an evangelist. He held about 25 crusades each year ranging inlength from one to three weeks. He would leave on Saturday, be gone for oneto three weeks and come home on Monday afternoon. I went to the Greenvilleairport hundreds of times. And some of the sweetest memories of my childhoodare the smile of my father's face as he came out of the plane and down thesteps and almost ran across the runway to hug me. This means that my sister and I were reared and trained mostly by my mother.She taught me almost everything practical that I know. She taught me howto cut the grass and keep a check book and ride a bike and drive a car andmake notes for a speech and set the table and make pancakes. She paid thebills, handled repairs, cleaned house, cooked meals, helped me with my homework,took us to church, led us in devotions. She was superintendent of theIntermediate department at church, head of the community garden club, andtireless doer of good for others. She was incredibly strong in her loneliness. The early sixties were the daysin Greenville, S. C., when civil rights were in the air. The church tooka vote one Wednesday night on a resolution not to allow black people to worshipin the church. When the vote was taken she stood entirely alone in opposition.And when my sister was married in the church in 1963 and one of the usherstried to seat some black friends of our family all alone in the balcony,my mother indignantly marched out of the sanctuary and sat them herself onthe main floor with everyone else. I have never known anyone quite like Ruth Piper. She seemed to me omni-competentand overflowing with love and energy. But here is my point. When my father came home, my mother had the extraordinaryability and Biblical wisdom and humility to honor him as the head of thehome. She was in the best sense of the word, submissive to him. It was anamazing thing to watch week after week as my father came and went. He went,and my mother ruled the whole house with a firm and competent and lovinghand. And he came, and my mother deferred to his leadership. Now it was he that prayed at the meals. Now it was he that led in devotions.Now it was he that drove us to worship and watched over us in the pew, andanswered our questions. My fear of disobedience shifted from my mother'swrath to my father's, for there, too, he took the lead. But I never heard my father attack my mother or put her down in any way.They sang together and laughed together and put their heads together to bringeach other up to date on the state of the family. It was a gift of God thatI could never begin to pay for or earn. And here is what I learned -- a Biblical truth before I knew it was in theBible. There is no correlation between submission and incompetence. Thereis such a thing as masculine leadership that does not demean a wife. Thereis such thing as submission that is not weak or mindless or manipulative. It never entered my mind until I began to hear feminist rhetoric in the latesixties that this beautiful design in my home was somehow owing to anyone'sinferiority. It wasn't. It was owing to this: my mother and my father puttheir hope in God and believed that obedience to his word would create thebest of all possible families -- and it did. So I exhort you with all myheart this morning, consider these things with great seriousness and do notlet the world squeeze you into its mold.   Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
