  August 24, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor    THE PAINFUL DISCIPLINE OF OUR HEAVENLY FATHER  Hebrews 12:3-11   For consider Him who has endured such hostility by sinners againstHimself, so that you may not grow weary and lose heart. 4 You havenot yet resisted to the point of shedding blood in your strivingagainst sin; 5 and you have forgotten the exhortation which isaddressed to you as sons, "MY SON, DO NOT REGARD LIGHTLY THEDISCIPLINE OF THE LORD, NOR FAINT WHEN YOU ARE REPROVED BY HIM; 6 FORTHOSE WHOM THE LORD LOVES HE DISCIPLINES, AND HE SCOURGES EVERY SONWHOM HE RECEIVES." 7 It is for discipline that you endure; God dealswith you as with sons; for what son is there whom his father does notdiscipline? 8 But if you are without discipline, of which all havebecome partakers, then you are illegitimate children and not sons. 9Furthermore, we had earthly fathers to discipline us, and werespected them; shall we not much rather be subject to the Father ofspirits, and live? 10 For they disciplined us for a short time asseemed best to them, but He disciplines us for our good, that we mayshare His holiness. 11 All discipline for the moment seems not to bejoyful, but sorrowful; yet to those who have been trained by it,afterwards it yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness.  Resting and Wrestling  There is a restful side to the Christian life and a wrestling sideto the Christian life. "Come to me all you who labor and are heavyladen and I will give you rest," Jesus said in Matthew 11:28. "Beanxious for nothing . . . let your requests be made known to God . .. and the peace of God will guard your hearts and minds in ChristJesus" (Philippians 4:6-7). There is rest and peace in the Christiansoul.  But there is also wrestling and struggle. Jesus said in Luke13:24, "Strive to enter by the narrow door; for many, I tell you,will seek to enter and will not be able." And the word "strive" isagonizo - to wrestle and struggle. At the end of his life, Paul saidin 2 Timothy 4:7, "I have fought the good fight, I have finished thecourse, I have kept the faith." Keeping the faith is a fight to befought and a race to be run.  These two sides are not related in such a way that you rest oneday and wrestle the next. They are interwoven in two ways. 1) First,the main aim of our wrestling is to rest - in God and not in money orposition or looks or achievement; the aim of our wrestling is to restin the promises of God and not the promises of sin. 2) Second, allour wrestling and fighting and running are done with a deeprestfulness of spirit that Christ himself has already won thedecisive victory for us and is sovereignly working in us and willbring us to glory.  The Mystery of God's Providence in the Pain of our Lives  The book of Hebrews is a very mature and sober book when it comesto the pain and stress of Christian living and the endurance that ittakes to run the race and fight the fight and finish well. It's not abook that people (especially teenagers and strong young adults)gravitate toward - unless they have suffered and struggle for someexplanation of how that relates to God. In other words, the more easyand pain-free your life has been, the less you will cherish the kindof spirituality taught in this book. And the more you have suffered,the more you will cling to the precious teachings of this book - ifyou are willing to believe them.  That is a big if. I was talking with one of our members at thebaptism service Wednesday evening, and he was telling me about recentconversations he had had with people who simply do not believe whatthis chapter teaches. It's not a little feel-good chapter about howto make the best of your troubles - or even about how God makes thebest of your troubles. It is a massive statement about the gracioussovereignty of God over the evil that befalls his people. And the bigIF is: will you believe this? Will you accept the mystery of God'sprovidence in the pain of your life, and be trained by it (as verse11 says) for the sake of good and peace and holiness andrighteousness and life? Or will you kick against this chapter anddemand in the season of suffering that God give a greater account ofhimself than he does in this chapter?  I think it will be helpful to approach verses 3-11 like this:first we will notice the pain and sorrow in this chapter? Second, wewill ask what kind it is and where it comes from? Third, we will askif it has a purpose or design and what is it?  First, then, let's notice the thread of suffering that runsthrough this section. Keep in mind what we saw two weeks ago and lastweek. Two weeks ago in Hebrews 11:35b-38 we read about Old Testamentbelievers who were tortured, mocked, whipped, imprisoned, sawn intwo, destitute, homeless. Then last week in Hebrews 12:1 we heard thecall for all of us to lay aside sins and weights and run the marathonof radical love and holiness, while these saints witness to us alongthe route that it really can be done "by faith." And then in versetwo the writer tells us to look to Jesus who, like these OldTestament saints, endured a horrible death and was shamed, but sethis eyes on the joy set before him.  Glimpses of the Suffering of the Readers of Hebrews  And now he brings this legacy of suffering up to date and appliesit to the believers of his day. In verse 3 he says, "Consider Him whohas endured such hostility by sinners against Himself, so that youmay not grow weary and lose heart." The first glimpse of suffering wesee in this church here is that something is threatening to make them"grow wearing and lose heart." It is normal for Christians to haveexperiences of stress and suffering that threaten their faith andpress too hard, or last too long and feel almost intolerable. Losingheart is a great spiritual danger. And these Christians were in thatdanger, as are many of you.  Another glimpse of their suffering is the reference to thehostility against Jesus (v. 3): "Consider Him who has endured suchhostility by sinners against Himself." Why consider this? Because thesame kind of thing is happening to you and you need to get strengthfrom Jesus.  Another glimpse is in verse 4: "You have not yet resisted to thepoint of shedding blood in your striving against sin." The point hereis that things are bad, but not as bad as they could be. There ishostility and trouble and stress and suffering, but evidently nomartyrs yet. We know from Hebrews 10:34 that some had been imprisonedand some had been plundered. But it is not yet martyrdom, though thatcould come. The stress level here is huge. How do you sleep at nightwhen being a Christian may result in mob violence?  Another glimpse of their suffering is in verse 11: "All disciplinefor the moment seems not to be joyful, but sorrowful." In otherwords, the present experience of these Christians was sorrowful. Joyhad been covered with a dark cloud of pain. The word "seems"(discipline "seems" not to be joyful) hints that there is a kind ofresidual joy of hope that hangs on beneath the cloud, but the tearsand the sighs and the groans are so many that it looks like sorrowhas the upper hand - at least for a season. As it does when a childcries after a spanking.  So I think it is fair to say that the believers in this passageare under tremendous stress; they are enduring some form ofhostility; they are wrestling with great sorrow and are in danger ofgrowing weary of the battle and losing heart. This whole book iswritten to keep that from happening.  The Suffering Is Coming from the Hostility of Sinners  Now the second thing to ask is what kind of suffering this is andwhere did it come from. The first answer is that the suffering iscoming from hostile adversaries. This was true in chapter 10:32-34;and it was true of the Old Testament saints in 11:35-38; and you cansee that it is true here in the connection between verses 3 and 4."Consider Him who has endured such hostility by sinners againstHimself, so that you may not grow weary and lose heart. You have notyet resisted to the point of shedding blood in your striving againstsin." The link with Jesus and the hostility shown against him showsthat this is what the Christians are dealing with. He enduredhostility from sinners . . . you too have resisted, but have not yethad to shed your blood. So the suffering in view is mainlypersecution in various forms, short of martyrdom.  But where did it come from? Who is doing this? Who's in charge ofthis? The first answer to that is seen in verse 3: "Consider Him whohas endured such hostility by sinners." This is what Jesus endured,and this is what you are enduring. The suffering comes from thehostility of sinners. The suffering is coming from the hostile willof sinful adversaries. That is the first answer.  It is not the main one, and it is not the decisive one. This wholepassage is built on another answer to the question: Where does thissuffering come from? And who's doing this? And who's in charge? Themain answer of the passage is that God is in charge here, and that heis in ultimate control of these afflictions and that they are in factthe loving discipline of a perfect heavenly father. That's the burdenof this passage.  The Suffering is God's Discipline  Verse 5-7 says that one of the reasons you are growing weary andlosing heart is that "you have forgotten the exhortation which isaddressed to you as sons, 'MY SON, DO NOT REGARD LIGHTLY THEDISCIPLINE OF THE LORD, NOR FAINT WHEN YOU ARE REPROVED BY HIM; FORTHOSE WHOM THE LORD LOVES HE DISCIPLINES, AND HE SCOURGES EVERY SONWHOM HE RECEIVES.' It is for discipline that you endure" (seeProverbs 3:11-12). In other words, what adversaries do to you out ofsinful hostility, God is doing out of fatherly discipline.  This is extremely important for knowing your God and for living byfaith through the suffering that is coming sooner or later into yourlife. Notice very carefully: this text does not say that God looks onwhile hostile sinners hurt his people, or while Satan ravages theelect, and only then steps in to turn all this evil for good. That isnot what the text says. It has a totally different conception of whatis happening to us.  It says that God is disciplining us; he is teaching us andcorrecting us and transforming us. In other words, God has a purposeand a design in what is happening to us. God is the ultimate doerhere. Verse 6b goes so far as to say, "[God] scourges every son whomhe receives." Who is scourging? Who is whipping? (See 11:36). God is.God is not a passive observer in our lives while sinners and Satanbeat us up. He rules over sinners and Satan, and they unwittingly,and with no less fault or guilt, fulfil his wise and loving purposesof discipline in our lives.  This is what I said earlier some Christians simply will notbelieve. They say that God is not in charge of the evil that happensto us. That he has given the world over to Satan and the free will ofman. But it will not work in this passage. The hostility of sinnersis real and it is wrong and responsible and guilty. But it is also -and this is a great hope for us - it is also the loving, painfuldiscipline of our Father in heaven. God is not coming to his childrenlate after the attack, and saying, "I can make this turn for good."That is not discipline. That is repair. It's the difference betweenthe surgeon who plans the incision for our good, and the emergencyroom doctor who sews us up after a freak accident. This text says,God is the doctor planning our surgery, not the doctor repairing ourlacerations.  Are Natural Calamities also God's Discipline?  Someone might ask, does this principle of discipline apply tothings like natural calamities and sicknesses that are not caused bythe hostility of sinners? Should we see these things as part of God'soverarching discipline of his children for their good?  I would answer with a question: Which is harder to attribute toGod's design: the hostility of sinners against God's people or thedestruction of a hurricane? I believe the hostility of sinners ismore difficult to attribute to God's design. The reason is that inboth cases - hostility and hurricanes - you have to deal with thepain caused by the event. But in the case of hostility you have theadded difficulty that people's wills are involved, whereas in thecase of a hurricane you don't have that difficulty. No human agent iscausing the hurricane, but a human is willing the hostility. So if wesay that God is governing the hostility of sinners against thesaints, we imply that he governs not just natural effects but humanwills, and what harm they bring to the saints.  And that is what this passage teaches. What hostile sinners meanfor harm, God means for good. What they will as hurtful, God wills ashelpful. What they plan as destruction, God plans as salvation. Whatthey design as a deterrent to faith, God designs as discipline forfaith.  The upshot then is this: if it is more difficult for God to governthe hostility of sinners against his people, and yet this passageteaches that he does just that, then why would we even think ofdenying the less difficult act of God's rule over natural things likehurricanes and sickness? Especially when God himself says in Exodus4:11 "Who has made man's mouth? Or who makes him dumb or deaf, orseeing or blind? Is it not I, the LORD?"  So I see in this passage the precious teaching that God reignsover the hazards of our circumstances and over the health of ourbodies and over the hostility of our adversaries and he designs allof life ultimately as a loving father's discipline.  God's Design is Love  Which leaves one last question: what is the design of God in thissovereign governing of our adversaries and circumstances? The text iswonderfully clear on this. Verse 6: "Those whom the Lord loves hedisciplines." The design of God is love. Our pain is not the effectof God's hate, but of God's love. Will you believe this? That is thequestion.  Or verse 7: "It is for discipline that you endure; God deals withyou as with sons." In other words, in your pain, you are not beingtreated as a slave or as an enemy. You are being treated as a lovedchild of God. The issue is: will you believe this? Will you let theWord of God settle the issue for you, so that when the sufferingcomes, you don't turn on God and put him in the dock and prosecutehim with accusations? He probably will not tell you why it is yourturn, or why it is happening now, or why there is this much pain, orwhy it lasts this long. But he has told you what you need to know: itis the love of an all-wise Father to a child. Will you trust him?  Our Good, Our Holiness, Our Peace, Our Righteousness  But he is even willing to tell us more. Verses 10b-11, "Hedisciplines us for our good, that we may share His holiness. Alldiscipline for the moment seems not to be joyful, but sorrowful; yetto those who have been trained by it, afterwards it yields thepeaceful fruit of righteousness." Four words: our good, our holiness,our peace, and our righteousness. This is the design of our lovingFather that comes to us painfully and mysteriously through thehostility of sinful adversaries and the natural hazards of a fallenworld.  Verse 9b poses our concluding question: Will we "be subject to theFather of spirits, and live?" Or will be rebel against the father ofspirits, and die? Will we trust him? If we submit to this sovereign,loving, fatherly care, we will not "grow weary and lose heart," butwe will keep the faith, fight the good fight, and finish our course,and die well, and glorify our Father in heaven.  END  A few confirming texts: Genesis 50:2 Amos 3:6 1 Peter 3:17; 4:19 Acts 4:27-28    
