  June 22, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor    Installation of Chuck Steddom as Minister of Worship and Music   THE FAITH OF NOAH, ABRAHAM AND SARAH  Hebrews 11:7-12  
  By faith Noah, being warned by God about things not yet seen, inreverence prepared an ark for the salvation of his household, bywhich he condemned the world, and became an heir of the righteousnesswhich is according to faith. 8 By faith Abraham, when he was called,obeyed by going out to a place which he was to receive for aninheritance; and he went out, not knowing where he was going. 9 Byfaith he lived as an alien in the land of promise, as in a foreignland, dwelling in tents with Isaac and Jacob, fellow heirs of thesame promise; 10 for he was looking for the city which hasfoundations, whose architect and builder is God. 11 By faith evenSarah herself received ability to conceive, even beyond the propertime of life, since she considered Him faithful who had promised; 12therefore, also, there was born of one man, and him as good as deadat that, as many descendants as the stars of heaven in number, andinnumerable as the sand which is by the seashore.  Examples of Faith  Here are four examples of how faith lives. First, Noah trusts Godand builds an ark for the salvation of his household. Second, Abrahamtrusts God and leaves his homeland for an unknown place of promise.Third, Abraham trusts God and lives in tents instead of building acity with permanent foundations. Fourth, Sarah trusts God andconceives when she is barren and past the age of childbearing.  These are not Add-ons to Saving Faith  Now make sure that you don't slip into a mentality here that iscommon among modern Christians - namely, the mentality that assumes(without even thinking about it) that the faith spoken of here hasnothing to do with personal salvation - that it is a kind of add-onto basic Christianity - that we were saved by an act of faith that issomehow different from what's being talked of here. In other words,many Christians think that saving faith is only a single act ("askingJesus into your heart") and that all else that happens in theChristian life is something added on to that and to our benefit forthe sake of our maturity, but not relevant for salvation.  I say don't fall into that mentality. Saving faith is not a meresingle act of receiving Jesus. Saving faith receives Jesus in orderto go on trusting him. Saving faith is a life of faith. That faith iswhat this chapter is trying to teach us. You can see that mostclearly if you look at the verse that leads into the chapter, Hebrews10:39, "But we are not of those who shrink back to destruction, butof those who have faith to the preserving of the soul." Do you seewhat is at stake: shrinking back to destruction; or pressing on infaith to preserve the soul. In other words, the evidence of authenticsaving faith is its pressing on. Faith that saves from destruction isfaith that lives day by day. That is what Chapter 11 is meant toillustrate. What does saving faith look like?  So the next verse, 11:1, defines the faith that presses on topreserve the soul as "The assurance of things hoped for and theconviction of things not seen." Faith that saves from destruction andpreserves the soul is future oriented. It doesn't just look back towhat God did in the past, but mainly looks forward to what Godpromises to do in the future. It gains a lot of its confidence fromGod's past faithfulness, but what it believes is mainly promises.That is not add-on, second-stage, super-Christian faith. That isbasic, ever-growing, ordinary Christian faith.  So let's take our four examples of living by faith - the life thatleads away from destruction and into salvation (10:39) - and look atfour things that are always true of this life of faith.  Today is the installation of Chuck Steddom as our Pastor forWorship and Music. So what I have done is look at Chuck and Carol'scoming through the lens of this text. Let's see if we can do thesetwo things: listen to what the text teaches us about the life offaith, that we are all called to live, and apply what it teaches tothe coming of Chuck and Carol to minister among us.  Four Truths about the Life of Faith  I said there are at least four things that are always true aboutthe life of faith. Let's take them one at a time as they show up inthese Biblical examples.  First, there is always a promised work of God.  God speaks and promises that in the future he will do something.This is the object of our faith. We trust God, that what he says willin fact happen. He will do it. He is good enough, and smart enough,and strong enough to do what he says he will do.  Verse 7 says Noah was "warned by God about things not yet seen,"namely, the flood that was coming. Verse 8 says that Abraham was"called" by God to leave his homeland. Verse 9b says that Abraham andIsaac and Jacob were fellow-heirs of a "promise" - so God had made apromise about the land that they would inherit it some day, but notyet. Finally, verse 11b says that Sarah regarded him faithful "whohad promised." God had promised. So in every case the life of faithis sustained by the word of God. God has spoken. Faith comes byhearing and hearing by the word of God. This is the starting point:God.  In Chuck and Carol's case, God has spoken many promises to them inhis word. He has said, "I will supply all your needs according to myriches in glory in Christ Jesus" (Philippians 4:19). "I will pursueyou with goodness and mercy" (Psalm 23:6). "I will never leave you orforsake you so that you can say, 'The Lord is my helper, I will notfear, what can man do to me" (Hebrews 13:5-6). "If you abide in me,you will bear much fruit at Bethlehem" (John 15:5). "Wait on me andyou will renew your strength; you will mount up with wings likeeagles, you will run and not grow weary, you will walk and not faint"(Isaiah 40:31). "I will give you words that you need to speak" (Luke12:12). "I will give you wisdom for every new challenge" ( James1:5). "I will be with you and strengthen you and help you" (Isaiah41:10). "I will instruct you and teach you in the way which youshould go; I will counsel you with My eye upon you" (Psalm 32:8).  God has acted to bring Chuck and Carol to us and he has spoken togive a massive foundation to their life of faith among us.  The second thing in the life of faith is the inner response offaith.  There is an outer response, which we will see in a moment. But theinner response comes first and is the essence of faith. The outerresponse is the fruit of the inner response. Without the inner lifeof faith, the outer acts are mere performance, which Jesus callshypocrisy and white-washed tombs (Matthew 23:27).  Verse 7 says that Noah was "reverent" - "in reverence [he]prepared an ark." This is the inner life of faith bowing humbly andtrembling with joy before the awesome word of God. Verse 8b describesAbraham's faith as "not knowing where he is going" when he set out.In other words, part of the inner response of faith is sometimesperplexity and uncertainty about the details of God's call on ourlives. Verse 10a says that the reason Abraham lived in tents insteadof building a city was that "he was looking for the city . . . whosearchitect and builder is God." Faith focuses not on present rewardand prosperity, but on God and what he has promised to do. That isits basic reality: it fixes its gaze not on the negativecircumstances or the human risks, but on the reality that God willbuild according to his promises. Then finally, verse 11b says thatSarah "considered him faithful who had promised." Again God is thefocus. The inner life of faith is a riveting focus on God asfaithful.  Here is what the life of faith means for Chuck and Carol as theycome. It means a kind of trembling reverence with Noah over thegreatness of God and the ministry of corporate worship in this place.This is not an ordinary thing. This ministry touches on eternity andon the throne of God every day. Anything that has to do with God sodirectly and so sacredly calls for the profoundest reverence.  And they come, like Abraham, with all kinds of unknowns. Only Godknows the future of this church and this city and this mission. Theycome to a place and a ministry where almost all the people areunknowns and the expectations are varied and the possibilities areendless and the pitfalls are many and the "god of this world" isdeceitful. So they come like Abraham, knowing God's call, but not thedetails. And so it will be with every major act of obedience youperform.  But they look not to themselves in this uncertainty but to thefaithfulness of God and to the kind of thing God can build, and notman. The battle belongs to the Lord. And faith does not focus on allthe unknowns and brood over how uncertain things are. Faith lifts upits eyes to the city whose builder and maker is God. It sings thephrase, "ponder anew what the Almighty can do, if with his love hebefriend thee." It joins Sarah and considers him faithful who haspromised.  Third, the life of faith involves an external response, not justan internal one.  Noah built an ark - imagine the ridicule. Abraham left a securefamily and home in Ur of the Chaldees. He chose to live in tents toshow he was looking for God's act and God's timing in his life. AndSarah, I presume, got the diapers and the crib ready. It doesn't say.  Saving faith changes the way you live. Your life takes on adimension that can only be explained by "the assurance of thingshoped for." Only God makes sense out of an ark in the desert, andemigration to who-knows-where, and living in tents rather thanbuilding a city and preparing for a child you are too old to bear.That's the way the life of faith is: it doesn't make sense withoutGod. But with God, it is utterly reasonable.  So it is with Chuck and Carol. They have left the secure and verysuccessful ministry at Prairie Bible College. They have emigratedfrom a foreign country (Canada). They have chosen to live in the citywith its unique challenges and opportunities. And while not preparingdiapers and crib (as far as I know) for any new Steddoms, they dreamof spiritual offspring that only God can produce. O, that God maygrant the miracle of new birth the way he granted the miraculousbirth of Isaac!  Fourth, the life of faith enjoys some measure of God's reward now,but not most of it.  Noah was saved with his family, but he is only an "heir" of therighteousness that accords with faith (verse 7). In other words hewas still awaiting the full blessing of righteousness when he died.Abraham found the promised land, and prospered immensely, but hestill lived in tents and only saw in the future the "city whosearchitect and builder is God" (verse 10). Sarah had her miracle baby.But the countless seed mentioned in verse 12 were far in the futurefor her. Faith tastes the blessing of God's goodness now in this age,but not most of it. There is so much yet to come.  That is the point of Hebrews 11:39-40, "All these, having gainedapproval through their faith, did not receive what was promised,because God had provided something better for us, so that apart fromus they should not be made perfect." And even we await the fullingathering of all God's people from all the peoples of the world, sothat the full inheritance of God's kingdom will come to all of ustogether.  And so it will be with Chuck and Carol and their children. Theywill be blessed in this place. You will be a blessing to them, asthey will to you. They will have joy. They will see fruitfulministry. They will taste the salvation of our God. And see the gloryof the Lord. But it will all be, as Paul says, "through a glass,darkly." It will all be partial. Every joy will have its limits.Every fruit its bruise. Every relationship its disappointment. Everyservice its critic. And every birth and wedding its nearby funeral.  Hebrews 13:14 takes up the very thought of Abraham's faith: "Herewe have no lasting city." Everything breaks. Everything ages, spoils,rusts. Only God remains unchanged and glorious.  So, Chuck, that is what we are about here. Connecting with God.Knowing God. Desiring God. Prizing God. And savoring the supremacy ofGod in all things for the joy of all peoples. We are glad you havecome to join us in this great mission.  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
