  According to Zephaniah 1:1 The word of theLord came to Zephaniah the son of Cushi. . . in the days of Josiahthe son of Amon, king of Judah.  Josiah had begun to reignin Judah about 80 years after the northern kingdom of Israel hadbeen swept away by the Assyrian invaders.  During those 80 years the southern kingdom of Judahhad not learned the lesson of the northern kingdom, and sank deeperand deeper into sin and rebellion against the law of God.   In the 18th year of Josiah's reign Hilkiah the priestfound in the Temple a copy of the book of the law that had beenignored for decades.  When he read it to the king, Josiah wasbroken.  He humbled himself before the Lord and rent his clothesand wept (2 Kings 22:19).  Over the next thirteen years Josiah led an amazingreformation in Judah based on the law of God.  He renewed thecovenant between God and his people (2 Kings 23:3).  He took allthe vessels of Baal and Asherah out of the Temple and burned themin the fields of Kidron (23:4).  He deposed the idolatrous priests(23:5).  He broke down the houses of the male cult prostitutes(23:7).  He removed the horses that the kings of Judah had dedicatedto the sun (23:11).  And he reinstituted the Passover that hadbeen ignored since the days of the judges (23:22).  These were the days of Zephaniah according to 1:1. So when we read this little book we can picture it as part ofthe call for reformation that Josiah was pursuing.  No doubt theprophet and the king teamed up to try to draw the people backto God.  How did Zephaniah preach?  What kind of preaching doesGod inspire when his people are in need of revival and reformation?  All of chapter one is a warning to Jerusalem anda prediction of the coming day of the Lord in wrath.  Verses 2-4,   I will utterly sweep away everything from theface of the earth, says the Lord.  I will sweep awayman and beast; I will sweep away the birds of the air and thefish of the sea.  I will overthrow the wicked; I will cut offmankind from the face of the earth, says the Lord.  Iwill stretch out my hand against Judah, and against all the inhabitantsof Jerusalem; and I will cut off from this place the remnant ofBaal and the name of the idolatrous priests.   Why was God's wrath so kindled?    Verse 8: the officials and king's sons were arrayedin foreign attire, wanting to be like the other nations who knewnot God.    Verse 9: servants were filling their masters' houseswith violence and fraud.    Verse 12: Men were thickening upon their lees --they were like the sediment at the bottom of stale wine, sayingin their hearts, The Lord will not do good, nor will hedo ill.  God has ceased to be a practical reality in theirlives.  Then in chapter two the first warning is followedby an earnest call for repentance.  There may yet be hope, atleast for those who repent. Verses 1-3:  Come together and hold assembly, O shameless nation,before you are driven away like the drifting chaff, before therecomes upon you the fierce anger of the Lord, before their comesupon you the day of the wrath of the Lord.  Seek the Lord, allyou humble of the land, who do his commands; seek righteousness,seek humility; perhaps you may be hidden on the day of the wrathof the Lord.  Even if the humble in the land can't avert the finalwrath of God, they may at least perhaps be hidden themselves whenthe terrible day of the Lord comes.  Then in 2:4-15 Zephaniah cries out the woes and warningsnot just over Judah and Jerusalem, but also over the surroundingnations of the world.    On the west are the cities of Philistia, Gaza, Ashkelon,Ashdod, Ekron, and the tribe of the Cherethites (vv. 4-7).  On the east are the lands of Moab and Amon (vv. 8-11). On the south are the Ethiopians (v. 12).  And on the north is the terrible Assyria (v. 13-15).   Judgment is coming on the whole surrounding world. And verse 10 probably sums up best the reason: This shallbe their lot in return for their pride, because they scoffed andboasted against the people of the Lord of hosts.  The rootcause of worldwide judgment is human pride.  But lest the people in Jerusalem gloat over the judgmentof the nations Zephaniah comes back to them and in 3:1-8 givesone last indictment of Jerusalem.  Verses 1-2:  Woe to her that is rebellious and defiled, the oppressingcity!  She listens to no voice, she accepts no correction.  Shedoes not trust in the Lord, she does not draw near to her God.  Then, at the end of his indictment, as so often inthe prophets, comes an amazing shift.  Along side the destructionof his wrath God puts the re-creating power of his love.  It seemsthat inspite of the world-wide outpouring of his wrath God isgoing to do two great acts of mercy described in 3:9-20.    1.  He is going to cause a global awakening so thatpeople from all the nations turn to him.  Verse 9:   Yea, at that time I will change the speech of thepeoples to a pure speech, that all of them may call on the nameof the Lord and serve him with one accord.  In other words God will not be content merely todestroy the nations of the world.  He aims to be Lord over thenations.  How can this be?  Look how verse 8 ends and how verse9 begins:  For my decision is to gather nations, to assemblekingdoms, to pour out upon them my indignation, all the heat ofmy anger; in the fire of my jealous wrath all the earth shallbe consumed.  9) For then I will give the peoples purified lipsthat all of them may call on the name of the Lord, to serve himshoulder to shoulder.  How will God pour his indignation on the nationsand consume the earth with his jealous wrath, and at that verytime purify nations so that they call on his name and serve. This is a picture of worldwide judgement and worldwide turningto God.  Zephaniah doesn't work out the details for us.  Perhapshe pictures the judgment of God as an extended series of catastrophesover a period of time that come to climax in the final destructionof all unbelievers.  And perhaps during this extended time ofjudgments God also works among the nations of the earth to purifya people for himself through the preaching of the gospel so thathe will indeed have a people for himself from all the tribes andtongues and nations (Revelation 5:9).  No matter how God intends to do these two thingswe must affirm what the prophet affirms: God will not be denieda people to call on his name and to serve him from all the nationsof the world.  And so he himself is going to change them and andgive them a heart and lips to call on his name.  That is the firstact of mercy described in 3:9-20, a global awakening with peoplefrom all the nations calling on the Lord and serving him.  2.  The other act of mercy in these verses is therevival and purification of his people Israel.  He is going toremove the proud and leave only a people who are humble and lowly,who trust in the name of the Lord.  Verses 11-12:  On that day you shall not be put to shame becauseof the deeds by which you have rebelled against me; for then Iwill remove from your midst your proudly exultant ones, and youshall no longer be haughty in my holy mountain.  For I will leavein the midst of you a people humble and lowly. They shall takerefuge in the name of the Lord.  In other words, not only is God going to create apeople for himself from all the nations of the world, but he isalso going to purge and purify his people Israel (cf. John ll:52). He will eliminate the proud and he will keep for himself a humbleand lowly people.  So the judgments and the wrath announced in chaptersone and two are not the last word in Zephaniah's prophecy.  Thelast word is the promise of a worldwide turning to God and a revivalof true faith among his people Israel.  Now before we look at the spectacular promise ofverse 17 let's look for a moment at Ephesians 3:4-6.  The reasonfor this is that in the Old Testament the question about how theconverts from the nations and the converts in Israel relate toeach other is not clearly answered.  How do you and I stand asGentile converts to the God of Israel?  We are sort of johnny-come-lately'sin this affair.  Do we share in the full blessings of Israel?  Paul calls this a mystery, which means that it wasnot clearly revealed at the first.  What is the answer given inEphesians 3:4-6?  When you read this you can perceive my insight intothe mystery of Christ, which was not made known to the sons ofmen in other generations as it has now been revealed to his holyapostles and prophets by the Spirit; that is, how the Gentilesare fellow heirs, members of the same body, and partakers of thepromise in Christ Jesus through the gospel.  The answer is that through the Gospel we Gentileshave come to believe on Jesus.  And through Jesus we have becomefull-fledged members of God's people: fellow heirs along withbelieving Jews of the promises of God.  So now we go back to Zephaniah.  And when we read3:17 we know that it refers not only to all believing Jews butalso to all of Gentiles who have become heirs of the promise throughfaith in Christ, the seed of Abraham.    The Lord, your God, is in your midst, a warrior who gives victory; he will rejoice over you with gladness,  he will renew you in his love (literally: be silentin his love) he will exult over you with loud singing.   From this amazing verse I get the title of this morning'smessage: God has Pleasure in the Good of his People. God does not do you good out of some constraint or coercion. He is free!  And in his freedom he overflows in joy to do yougood.  He exults over you with loud singing.  Can you imagine what it would be like if you couldhear God singing?  Remember that it was merely a spoken word thatbrought the universe into existence.  What would happen if Godlifted up his voice and not only spoke but sang!  Perhaps a newheaven and a new earth would be created.  God says something almostjust to that effect in Isaiah 65:17-18,   Behold, I create a new heavens and a new earth. . . I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy.  
