  May 18, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor    WHAT IS BAPTISM AND DOES IT SAVE?  1 Peter 3:18-22  
  For Christ also died for sins once for all, the just for theunjust, in order that He might bring us to God, having been put todeath in the flesh, but made alive in the spirit; 19 in which also Hewent and made proclamation to the spirits now in prison, 20 who oncewere disobedient, when the patience of God kept waiting in the daysof Noah, during the construction of the ark, in which a few, that is,eight persons, were brought safely through the water. 21 Andcorresponding to that, baptism now saves you - not the removal ofdirt from the flesh, but an appeal to God for a good conscience -through the resurrection of Jesus Christ, 22 who is at the right handof God, having gone into heaven, after angels and authorities andpowers had been subjected to Him.  Controversy is Essential and Deadly  Let me begin today with a brief introductory word aboutcontroversy. The main thing I want to say is that doctrinalcontroversy is essential and deadly. And the attitude towardcontroversy in various groups of Christians depends largely on whichof these two they feel most strongly. Is it essential or is itdeadly? My plea is that at Bethlehem we believe and feel both ofthese. Controversy is essential where precious truth is rejected ordistorted. And controversy is deadly where disputation about truthdominates exultation in truth.  The reason controversy is essential in the face of rejection anddistortion is that God has ordained that the truth be maintained inthe world partly by human defense. For example, Paul says inPhilippians 1:7 that he is in prison for the "defense andconfirmation of the gospel." And Jude 3 says that we should "contendearnestly for the faith which was once for all delivered to thesaints." And Acts 17:2-3 says that Paul's custom in the synagogue wasto "reason" from the Scriptures and "explain and give evidence" thatJesus was the Christ. So the preservation and transmission ofprecious truth from person to person and generation and generationmay require controversy where truth is rejected or distorted.  But controversy is also deadly because it feels threatening and soit tends to stir up defensiveness and anger. It's deadly also becauseit focuses on the reasons for truth rather than the reality behindtruth, and so tends to replace exultation in the truth withdisputation about the truth. This is deadly because thinking rightlyabout truth is not an end in itself; it's a means toward the goal oflove and worship. Paul said in 1 Timothy 1:5 that "the goal of ourinstruction is love." And he prayed in Philippians 1:9-11 that our"love . . . abound in knowledge . . . unto the glory and praise ofGod." Controversy tends to threaten both love and praise. It's hardto revel in a love poem while arguing with someone about whether ornot your sweetheart wrote it.  John Owen on Controversy  So controversy is essential in this fallen world, and controversyis deadly in a fallen world. We must do it and we must tremble to doit. A wise counselor for us in this is John Owen, the Puritan pastorfrom 340 years ago. He was involved in many controversies in his day- theological and denominational and political. But he never ceasedto be a deep lover of God and a faithful pastor of a flock. Hecounsels us like this concerning doctrinal controversy:  When the heart is cast indeed into the mould of the doctrine thatthe mind embraceth - when the evidence and necessity of the truthabides in us - when not the sense of the words only is in our heads,but the sense of the thing abides in our hearts - when we havecommunion with God in the doctrine we contend for - then shall we begarrisoned by the grace of God against all the assaults of men.*  I think that was the key to Owen's life and ministry: he didn'tjust contend for doctrine; he loved and fellowshipped with the Godbehind the doctrine. The key phrase is this one: "When we havecommunion with God in the doctrine we contend for - then shall we begarrisoned by the grace of God against all the assaults of men." Inother words, we must not let disputation replace contemplation andexultation.  I am keenly aware that this series of messages on baptism is morecontroversial than usual. I am also eager that this pulpit avoid twogreat errors: losing truth in the quest for exultation; and losingworship in the noise of disputation. So let us all pray that in ourlives and in our church we walk the tightrope balanced by thenecessity of controversy on the one side and the dangers of it on theother.  The Bible itself is a great help in this because it teaches aboutbaptism, for example, in contexts that are so rich with good newsthat it makes it relatively easy to exult as we deal with thispractice of baptism. In fact, baptism itself is meant, like theLord's Supper, to point to realities that are so great and sowonderful that. over all the controversy, we must hear the music ofGod's glorious goodness and grace.  Exulting in Christ's Substitution for us  So it is here in 1 Peter 3:18-22. Sandwiching the teaching onbaptism in verses 19-21 there are the same great truths about Christand his death and resurrection that we saw last week in Colossians 2.Let's get these before us for the sake of exultation before we lookbetween for the necessary disputation.  Verse 18: "Christ also died [literally: suffered] for sins oncefor all, the just for the unjust, in order that He might bring us toGod, having been put to death in the flesh, but made alive in thespirit." Now here is something worth exulting over. Put it in fiveparts.  1. We are cut off from God.  First, the greatest problem in the world, the greatest problem inyour life and mine, is that we are cut off from God. We have no rightto approach him. We are alienated from him. You see this behind thewords of Peter when he says that the aim of Christ's suffering was"that he might bring us to God." Now if Christ had to die that wemight be brought to God, it is clear that we are alienated from Godwithout Christ. This is the big issue. Not floods, and not cancer,and not crime, and not war, and not our job or marriage or kids. Thebig issue is that we are cut off from God, our Maker. And if thatproblem does not get solved, then the anger of God will rest on usand our eternity will be miserable.  2. It is sin that alienates us from God.  Second, we see what the problem is that alienates us from God,namely, sin. Peter says, "Christ suffered for our sins . . . that hemight bring us to God." It's our sins that cut us off from God. Thisis true legally and it's true emotionally - as we all know. Legally,God is a just judge and does not simply pronounce the innocent guiltyand the guilty innocent. He is holy and does not relax in the livingroom with rebels. Every sin is serious and pushes him farther away.And emotionally, we know that as our consciences are defiled by sinswe feel so dirty in the presence of God that we can't lift our faces.  3. God substituted his Son for us.  Third, God has taken the initiative to overcome this alienationfrom him by offering Christ to suffer in our place. You see thisgreat reality of substitution in the words, "Christ also suffered forsins once for all, the just for the unjust." Here is the great groundof our hope, that we really can and will come home to God. O let usexult in this above all the works of God - that he has substitutedhis just Son in our place. This is the great gospel. This is whatholds us late at night and early in the morning when sin and Satanassail us with their accusations and say, you can't pray to God, muchless go to heaven. Look at you! You're a sinner! To this we say,"Yes, but my hope does not lie in not being a sinner. It lies in asubstitution of the Just for the unjust."  4. The substitution was once for all.  And to add to the glory of it, in the fourth place, Peter, justlike the book of Hebrews (7:27; 9:12; 10:10), says that thissubstitution of the Just for the unjust was "once for all" - once forall time. It need not be and cannot be repeated, because it wasperfect and complete the first and only time it was done. The debtfor all my sins - past, present and future - was paid in a singlesacrifice for all time. O the glory of an objective, finished,once-for-all gospel performed by God in his Son outside of me apartfrom my psychological fickleness.  5. God was satisfied with Christ's substitution.  And fifth, after he had offered himself once for all the Just forthe unjust, God gave him life. "Having been put to death in theflesh, but made alive in the spirit." This means, at least, that Godwas satisfied with Christ's substitution. Which means that if youwill cherish it as the foundation of your life, God will be satisfiedwith you, in Christ. God gave Christ life in at least two senses: oneis that God gave him life in the spirit during the three days whilehis body was in the grave. We know this because Jesus said to therepentant thief on the cross, "Today you will be with me in paradise"(Luke 23:43). Today, not in three days, but today. The other way thatGod gave Christ life is that he raised his body from the dead, andtransformed it into a "spiritual body" - a new kind of body withoutthe limitation of the old "flesh" - a body suited for the spiritualrealm that "flesh and blood" cannot inherit (1 Corinthians 15:50). SoGod gave a mighty YES to Christ's substitution by raising him fromthe dead.  That's the top of the sandwich around the teaching of baptism:"Christ has suffered for sins once for all the Just for the unjustthat he might bring us to God." Welcome home, are the sweetest wordsin the world, when God speaks them to our soul.  Exulting in the Subjection of Christ's (and our) Enemies  The bottom part of the sandwich is verse 22: "Christ is at theright hand of God, having gone into heaven, after angels andauthorities and powers had been subjected to Him." Here we see theother effect of the death and resurrection of Christ. First was asubstitution for our sins, now we see a subjection of his enemies.First substitution, then subjection. (Kids, ask mom and dad at lunchtoday, "What were the two words that started with "s" to describe thework of Christ?)  Now don't miss this: we saw the very same thing last week inColossians 2:15. When Christ died and rose again, all the evilangels, and authorities and powers were subjected to him in a newway. From the beginning of creation he was sovereign over them.That's not new. But now he has nullified the one thing that theycould use to destroy us, our sin. It's as if the demonic world hadmany weapons to harm us, but only one great tank of poison that coulddestroy the children of God. And when Christ went to the cross, hedrank the entire tank.  O there is much to contend for here, but for now, this morning,let us simply exult in this. Let us commune with our God in this. Letus revel in this reality. That the substitutionary death and bodilyresurrection of Jesus Christ subjected angels and authorities andpowers to him, meaning that in him the elect of God cannot bedestroyed by these enemies. Our great enemies are subjected to thewill of the one who died to save us, and he will save us. He will notlet his work of substitution or subjection be done in vain.  Does Baptism Save?  Now sandwiched between these two great truths about Christ(substitution for sinners and subjection of enemies) are the wordsabout baptism. I preached on this text September 25, 1994. So I sendyou to the file cabinet if you want more, but I only have time hereto go straight to the point at issue, namely, the meaning of baptism.In verse 19, Peter reminds the readers that, in the spirit, Jesus hadgone to preach to the people in Noah's day, whose spirits are now inprison awaiting judgment. (I don't take the position that verse 19refers to Jesus' preaching in hell between Good Friday and Easter.)But there was tremendous evil and hardness in Noah's day and onlyeight people enter the ark for salvation from the judgment throughwater.  Now Peter sees a comparison between the waters of the flood andthe waters of baptism. Verse 21 is the key verse: "And correspondingto that [the water of the flood], baptism now saves you - not theremoval of dirt from the flesh, but an appeal to God for a goodconscience - through the resurrection of Jesus Christ." Now there aresome denominations that love this verse because it seems at first tosupport the view called "baptismal regeneration." That is, baptismdoes something to the candidate: it saves by bringing about newbirth. So, for example, one of the baptismal liturgies for infantssays, "Seeing now, dearly beloved brethren, that this child isregenerate, and grafted into the body of Christ's Church, let us givethanks."  Now the problem with this is that Peter seems very aware that hiswords are open to dangerous misuse. This is why, as soon as they areout of his mouth, as it were, he qualifies them lest we take them thewrong way. In verse 21 he does say, "Baptism now saves you" - thatsounds like the water has a saving effect in and of itself apart fromfaith. He knows that is what it sounds like and so he addsimmediately, "Not the removal of dirt from the flesh, but an appealto God for a good conscience - through the resurrection of JesusChrist." (Or your version might have: "the pledge of a goodconscience toward God").  But the point seems to be this: When I speak of baptism saving,Peter says, I don't mean that the water, immersing the body andcleansing the flesh, is of any saving effect; what I mean is that,insofar as baptism is "an appeal to God for a good conscience," (oris "a pledge of a good conscience toward God"), it saves. Paul saidin Romans 10:13, "Everyone who calls on the name of the Lord -everyone who appeals to the Lord - will be saved." Paul does not meanthat faith alone fails to save. He means that faith calls on God.That's what faith does. Now Peter is saying, "Baptism is theGod-ordained, symbolic expression of that call to God. It is anappeal to God - either in the form of repentance or in the form ofcommitment.  What is Baptism?  Now this is fundamentally important in our understanding of whatbaptism is in the New Testament. James Dunn is right I think when hesays that "1 Peter 3:21 is the nearest approach to a definition ofbaptism that the New Testament affords" (Baptism in the Holy Spirit,p. 219). What is baptism? Baptism is a symbolic expression of theheart's "appeal to God." Baptism is a calling on God. It is a way ofsaying to God with our whole body, "I trust you to take me intoChrist like Noah was taken into the ark, and to make Jesus thesubstitute for my sins and to bring me through these waters of deathand judgment into new and everlasting life through the resurrectionof Jesus my Lord."  This is what God is calling you to do. You do not save yourself.God saves you through the work of Christ. But you receive thatsalvation through calling on the name of the Lord, by trusting him.And it is God's will all over the world and in every culture - nomatter how simple or how sophisticated - that this appeal to God beexpressed in baptism. "Lord, I am entering the ark of Christ! Save meas I pass through the waters of death!" Amen.  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
