  May 11, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor     BURIED AND RAISED IN BAPTISM THROUGH FAITH   Colossians 2:8-15   See to it that no one takes you captive through philosophy andempty deception, according to the tradition of men, according to theelementary principles of the world, rather than according to Christ.9 For in Him all the fullness of Deity dwells in bodily form, 10 andin Him you have been made complete, and He is the head over all ruleand authority; 11 and in Him you were also circumcised with acircumcision made without hands, in the removal of the body of theflesh by the circumcision of Christ; 12 having been buried with Himin baptism, in which you were also raised up with Him through faithin the working of God, who raised Him from the dead. 13 And when youwere dead in your transgressions and the uncircumcision of yourflesh, He made you alive together with Him, having forgiven us allour transgressions, 14 having canceled out the certificate of debtconsisting of decrees against us and which was hostile to us; and Hehas taken it out of the way, having nailed it to the cross. 15 WhenHe had disarmed the rulers and authorities, He made a public displayof them, having triumphed over them through Him.  Does Christian Baptism Parallel Old Testament Circumcision?  This is the second in a four-part series on Christian baptism. Letme tell you a bit about how I am choosing the texts to preach from. Idiscovered in my seminary and graduate school days that my old waysof defending believer's baptism were not compelling. I used to spendtime pointing out that all the baptisms described in the NewTestament are baptisms of believers and that all the commands to bebaptized are given to believers. I used to point out that infantbaptism is simply not mentioned in the Bible and that it isquestionable to build a crucial church practice on a theologicalinference, without explicit Biblical teaching when all the examplesgo in the opposite direction.  But I discovered that those who baptize infants ("paedobaptists")were not swayed by these observations, because they pointed out that,of course, we only see believer's baptism in the New Testament sincewe are dealing in all these settings with first generationevangelism, not with second generation child-rearing. Everybodyagrees that the only adults that should be baptized are believingadults. The issue is, what happens when these baptized Christianadults have children?  So they pointed out that all my statistics are irrelevant and thequestion boils down to one of theological inference. Specifically,does Christian baptism parallel Old Testament circumcision as thesign of those who join the covenant people of God, and if so, shouldnot the children of Christians receive baptism the way the sons ofIsrael received circumcision?  For example, the Heidelberg Catechism was written in 1562 as anexpression of the Reformed faith. It is said by some to have theintimacy of Martin Luther and the charity of Philip Melanchthon andthe fire of John Calvin : three great Reformers in the 16th century.At the end of the section on baptism, question #74 asks, "Are infantsalso to be baptized?" The answer goes like this:  Yes; for since they, as well as their parents, belong to thecovenant and people of God, and both redemption from sin and the HolyGhost, who works faith, are through the blood of Christ promised tothem no less than to their parents, they are also by Baptism, as asign of the covenant, to be ingrafted into the Christian Church, anddistinguished from the children of unbelievers, as was done in theOld testament by Circumcision, in place of which in the New TestamentBaptism is appointed.  Now this has been the standard understanding of baptism amongPresbyterians and Congregationalists and Methodists and many othersfor hundreds of years. Lutherans and Catholics defend the practice ofinfant baptism differently, putting more emphasis than these otherchurches have on the actual regenerating effect of the act.  Are New Truths Revealed in the New Covenant?  So one of the most crucial questions you must face as you ponderthe New Testament command to be baptized is whether you think thisparallel with circumcision settles the matter. That is, is it thewill of God revealed in the New Testament that Baptism andcircumcision correspond so closely that what circumcision signified,baptism signifies? Or are there new truths about the creation andnature of the people of God in the New Covenant that point toward adiscontinuity as well as continuity between circumcision and baptism?  Well, in my struggles with this issue over the years, especiallythe years in graduate school when I was studying mainly withpaedobaptists, three or four texts, more than any others, kept mefrom embracing the argument from circumcision. One is Colossians2:11-12. Another is 1 Peter 3:21. Another is Romans 9:8. And anotheris Galatians 3:26-27. I will take the Colossians text today and buildon the others in the weeks to come.  But first let's make sure we don't miss the forest for the trees.This text (Colossians 2:10-15) is a virtual rain forest of stronggospel timber. Get a bird's eye view of it with me. It's all aboutwhat God has done for us (in history, objectively through Christ),and what he has done in us so that we will indeed inherit what hepurchased  What God Has Done For Us  Take first the objective, historical, external work of God inverses 14-15. In essence, what these two verses tell us is that ourtwo greatest enemies were defeated in the death of Christ. Nothingmore powerful than the death of Christ has ever happened.  The first enemy defeated was the "certificate of debt" that wasfiled against us in the courtroom of heaven. In other words, becauseof our sin and rebellion, the laws of God had become a deadly witnessagainst us and we were in such deep debt to God that there was no wayout. Verse 14 says that Christ canceled that whole debt by paying itall on the cross. "[He] canceled out the certificate of debtconsisting of decrees against us and which was hostile to us; and Hehas taken it out of the way, having nailed it to the cross." So thegreat enemy of our sin and guilt and debt, Christ defeated. Thathappened in history, objectively, outside us.  The second enemy defeated was the host of evil spiritual beings :the devil and his forces. Verse 15: "When He had disarmed the rulersand authorities, He made a public display of them, having triumphedover them through Him." It's true that we must still "wrestle withprincipalities and powers" (Ephesians 6:12), but if we wrestle in thepower of Christ and his shed blood, they are as good as defeated,because the blow he struck was lethal. Revelation 12:11 says thatbelievers "overcame [the devil] because of the blood of the Lamb andbecause of the word of their testimony, and they did not love theirlife even to death." We must fight. But the battle belongs to theLord and the decisive blow has been struck at Calvary. Satan cannotdestroy us.  What God Has Done in Us  Now besides these two great objective, external, historicaltriumphs over our worst enemies (the debt of sin before God and thedevil's hosts on earth), this forest also describes what God does inus : not just for us and outside of us but in us so that we benefitfrom what was done outside of us.  He uses two pictures: one is circumcision and the other isresurrection. Verse 13 focuses mainly on our resurrection:  When you were dead in your transgressions and the uncircumcisionof your flesh, He made you alive together with Him, having forgivenus all our transgressions.  So you see what he does in us: we were spiritually dead, and hemade us alive. This is the miracle of the new birth. You were savedbecause God spoke a life-giving, resurrecting word into your heart (2Corinthians 4:6).  The other picture of what God does in us is the picture ofcircumcision. Verse 11:  In Him you were also circumcised with a circumcision made withouthands, in the removal of the body of the flesh by the circumcision ofChrist.  Now this is harder to understand because the ideas are moreforeign to us. Paul compares the saving work of God in us with thepractice of circumcision. He says it's like that, only this is acircumcision made "without hands" : it's a spiritual thing he istalking about, not a physical one. And he says that what is being cutaway is not the male foreskin, but the "body of the flesh." In Paul'slanguage that's probably a reference to sin-dominated, ego-dominateduse of the body. What is cut away in this spiritual circumcision"without hands" is the old unbelieving, blind, rebellious self andits use of the body for sin. And that way, Paul is saying, God makesa person his very own.  So we have seen two pictures of what God does for us, objectively,historically, outside ourselves to save us: he defeats the enemy ofsin and the enemy of Satan. And we have seen two pictures of what Goddoes in us to make us part of that salvation: he raises us from thedead spiritually and he circumcises our hearts and strips away theold rebellious self and makes us new.  Baptism and Circumcision  Now, in that forest of glorious good news, here's the questionabout the tree of baptism: is water baptism the Christian counterpartto Old Testament circumcision? Is the continuity such that, just ascircumcision was given to the children of God's covenant people then,baptism should now be given to the children of God's covenant people?  The key verses are verses 11-12. Notice the linking of the twoideas of circumcision and baptism:  . . .in Him [Christ] you were also circumcised with a circumcisionmade without hands, in the removal of the body of the flesh by thecircumcision of Christ; having been buried with Him in baptism, inwhich you were also raised up with Him through faith in the workingof God, who raised Him from the dead.  It's clear there's a link here between baptism and circumcision.But it isn't, I think, what many infant baptizers think it is. Noticewhat sort of circumcision is spoken of in verse 11: it is precisely acircumcision "without hands." That means Paul is talking about aspiritual counterpart of the Old Testament physical ritual. Thenbaptism is linked in verse 12 to that spiritual counterpart to theOld Testament circumcision. This is extremely important. Try to getit.  What is the New Testament counterpart or parallel to the OldTestament rite of circumcision? Answer: it is not the New Testamentrite of baptism; it is the New Testament spiritual event of thecircumcision of Christ cutting away "the [old sinful] body of theflesh." then, baptism is brought in as the external expression ofthat spiritual reality. That is precisely what the link betweenverses 11 and 12 says. Christ does a circumcision without hands :that is the New Testament, spiritual fulfillment of Old Testamentcircumcision. Then verse 12 draws the parallel between that spiritualfulfillment and the external rite of baptism.  Notice what verse 11 stresses about the new work of Christ incircumcising: it is a circumcision "without hands." But water baptismis emphatically a ritual done "with hands." If we simply say thatthis New Testament ordinance of baptism done with hands correspondsto the Old Testament ritual of circumcision done with hands, then wemiss the most important truth: something new is happening in thecreation of people of God called the church of Christ. They are beingcreated by a "circumcision without hands" by God. They are beingraised from the dead by God. And baptism is a sign of that, not arepetition of the Old Testament sign. There is a new sign of thecovenant because the covenant people are being constituted in a newway : by spiritual birth, not physical birth.  "Through Faith"  And one of the clearest evidences for this is the little phrase"through faith" in verse 12. Watch this carefully. This is what heldme back from paedobaptism through years of struggle, until I saw moreand more reasons not to join up. Verse 12 links the New Testamentspiritual circumcision "without hands" in verse 11 with baptism, andthen links baptism with faith:  Having been buried with Him in baptism, in which you were alsoraised up with Him through faith in the working of God, who raisedHim from the dead.  If baptism were merely a parallel of the Old Testament rite ofcircumcision it would not have to happen "through faith" sinceinfants did not take on circumcision "through faith." The reason theNew Testament ordinance of baptism must be "through faith" is that itrepresents not the Old Testament external ritual, but the NewTestament, internal, spiritual experience of circumcision "withouthands."  Those two words : "through faith" : in verse 12 are the decisive,defining explanation of how we were buried with Christ in baptism andhow we were raised with him in baptism: it was "through faith." Andthis is not something infants experience. Faith is a consciousexperience of the heart yielding to the work of God. Infants are notcapable of this, and therefore infants are not fit subjects ofbaptism, which is "through faith."  So I urge those of you who have not yet come to faith in Christ toconsider the rainforest of good news in these verses: that Christdied and rose again to cancel our debt with God and to triumph overSatan; and that he raises spiritually dead people from the grave andcircumcises sinful hearts : he does all this through faith. He bringsus to trust him, by showing us how true and beautiful he is. Look tohim and believe.  And then he bids us to express that faith in baptism. If you wantto prepare for this step of obedience, you can come up after theservice, or you can check it off on the worship folder leaf, or youcan come to the baptismal preparation class starting next Sunday fortwo weeks.  May the Lord draw many of you to the enjoyment of this fullobedience "through faith."  Copyright 1997 John Piper   Distributed electronically  by the Friends of John Piper.  
  
  
