  Those of us in leadership at Bethlehem believe thatthe more sharply you can bring the goals of the church into focus,the more intentionally and strategically you will be able to helpachieve those goals.   Or to put it another way, if you can'tstate clearly and concisely why we exist as a church, then itwill be harder for you to serve the purpose or mission of thechurch.    And we believe with all our hearts that just as everyeye and ear and tooth and tongue and finger and toe should servethe purpose and calling of the human body, so every individualmember of Bethlehem Baptist Church should serve the purpose forwhich we exist as a church.  Four years ago the Council of Deacons and staff ofthe church crafted a philosophy of ministry and statement of prioritiesto answer the question: Why do we exist?  What is our mission?  The answer was given that the church has three priorities, onerelating to God, one relating to believers, and one relating tounbelievers.    Our reason for being as a church is to see that everymember is growing to maturity in the personal and corporate worshipof God;    that every member is growing to maturity in the abilityto love fellow believers and strengthen their faith;    and that every member is growing to maturity in thecourage and effectiveness of reaching unbelievers with the gospelof Jesus Christ.   We exist to worship God, nurture each other, andevangelize the world, all to the glory of God.  I preached onthese three priorities two years ago because we were so convincedthat the clearly you know why we are hear the more intelligentlyand freely and strategically you can make your essential contributionto the cause.  But now time has passed.  And by a powerful law offallen  human nature the mission begins to dim and the goals becomeblurred and the momentum of strategic thinking lapses into thementality of maintenance.  I don't think that has happened atBethlehem.  But it will happen if we don't refresh our sense ofmission and renew our reason for being again and again.  So our aim for the next three Sundays is to remindourselves why we exist, and to let Scripture unfold for us themeaning of our three priorities.  And my hope is to describe themission of Bethlehem in such a way that every member will be ableto articulate it for yourself and for others in a few simple sentencesand have a Biblical basis for what you say.  The mission hasn't changed over the past four yearsbut we have hit upon some new vocabulary for saying the same thingin a different way.  And I think this has an advantage not onlyin keeping our sense of mission fresh, but also in keeping Godcentral -- which is all-important to us.  The way we state the mission of the church thesedays is that Bethlehem is a vision of God, and the reason we existto savor that vision, instill that vision and spread that vision. These are the old three priorities and they make up our reasonfor being.      We savor the vision of God in worship.     We instill the vision of God through the fellowshipof nurture and teaching.     And we spread the vision of God through evangelismand missions.     The great advantage of describing our mission likethis is that at every point God is the explicit center.  He isnot only central in the vertical act of worship.  He is also centralin horizontal acts of nurture and evangelism.  We aim never tolose sight that from him and to him and through him are all things(Rom. 11:36). . . that in him we live and move and have our being(Acts 17:28). . . that everything we do, whether we eat or drinkor worship or work or witness, should be done for his glory.  So for three weeks we want to talk about these threepriorities of the church -- savoring the vision of God in worhip,instilling the vision of God in nurture and education, and spreadingthe vision of God in evangelism and missions.  Instead of taking separate Sundays to develop thevision itself I have decided simply to let the texts themselvesbring out some of its features each week.  In a sense every messagemorning and evening is aimed at refining the vision.  So todaywe turn to Psalm 63 and attempt to let at least the first eightverses of this psalm unfold for us the priority of. . . savoring the vision of God.  The psalm begins with a heading that says, APsalm of David, when he was in the Wilderness of Judah. In verse 9 he speaks of those who seek to destroy my life. So he is probably a fugitive of some kind.  Some one is chasinghim in the wilderness.  We are inclined to think of the days when King Saulchased David in the wilderness and tried to kill him.  But verse11 points to a later time.  It pictures David as the king already:But the king shall rejoice in God; all who swear by himshall glory; for the mouths of liars will be stopped.  Butwhen Saul was chasing David he wasn't king yet.    But there was a time when David was king and a fugitivefrom his own land and forced to flee to the desert, namely, thetime when his son Absolom rebelled and tried to overthrow hisfathers throne.  According to 2 Samuel 15:23 David fled the city,crossed the brook Kidron and went into the wilderness.  This isprobably the experience behind the Psalm.    He is in the wilderness, and he begins his psalm,O God, thou art my God.  These words are importantfor several reasons.  First, they make plain the tremendouslyimportant fact that the seeking and thirsting for God which wewill see in just a moment is not the seeking of a man who wasunacquainted with God.  It is not the seeking of a man who hadno relationship with God.  On the contrary, O God, thou art my God,is the deepest affirmation that between David and God there isa covenant, a relationship based on God's oath.  God had saidto Abram in Genesis 17:7, I will establish my covenant betweenme and you and your descendants after you throughout their generationsfor an everlasting covenant, to be God to you and to your descendantsafter you. . . and I will be their God.  When David says, O God, thou art my God,he reasserts the rock under the quicksand of his own emotions. When he cries, O God, thou art my God! he doesn'tmean that he is always lifted above the pangs of soul-thirst. When he says, O God, thou art my God, he means atleast these two things: 1) when he thirsts he will seek to slakehis thirst on God alone and not on anything else: O God,thou art my God.  And he means 2) that when he seeks hisGod, God will be there and meet his need.  O God, thou artmy God!  Are you like David this morning?  When you are driveninto the wilderness by tragic and painful circumstances and youbegin to suck for air in the quicksand of your own emotions, canyou cry out among the jackals and the snakes, O God, thouart my God!?   The covenant stands!  There is a rock beneathand it will rise in time.  Do you have a covenant relationship with God thismorning?  If you say, What is that?  What is it like?  letme read you the words of a man who made a covenant with God whenhe was 19 years old.  Jonathan Edwards wrote about this some yearslater like this,    On January 12, 1723, I made a solemn dedication ofmyself to God, and wrote it down; giving up myself, and all thatI had to God; to be for the future, in no respect, my own; toact as one that had no right to himself, in any respect.  Andsolemnly vowed to take God for my whole portion and felicity;looking on nothing else, as any part of my happiness, nor actingas if it were; and his law for the constant rule of my obedience:engaging to fight against the world, the flesh and the devil,to the end of my life. (Personal Narrative)    Have you made a decisive covenant-commitment to God?  Have you ever met Jesus Christ standing in your way, havingtracked you down on the path of insurrection, and in his handsa declaration of amnesty from God, signed with his own blood,the blood of the covenant?   And have you ever looked into hiseyes and heard him say, the King will cancel your debt and forgiveyour insurrection and welcome you into his kingdom if you willkneel and swear faith and loyalty to me for ever?  Have you knelt like Jonathan Edwards and made thiscovenant oath: O God, henceforth, in faith and loyalty, thou artmy God?  I urge you to do it even as you listen this morning.. . and all of you, to reaffirm your covenant vows.  The reason I dwell so long on this first phrase thismorning is that the rest of the psalm is built on this foundation. Without this rock beneath there is no true worship of God.    But once this foundation is established, what appearsin the psalm is that God is savored in at least two ways, andtherefore worship takes at least two forms.  Verses 1-4 describethe savoring of God through thirsting.  And verses 5-9 describethe savoring of God through feasting.  In other words in verses1-4 the vision of God is not clear and present and satisfyingand so David faints for it.  But in verses 5-9 the vision of Godis present and rich and David is eats his fill with satisfaction.  I want you to see this clearly this morning, becauseit is so important for understanding the movements of your ownredeemed soul.  God is worshipped and honored and savored bothby fainting for him and by feasting on him.  Will you please rememberthat!  It is not a clever semonic alliteration.  It is straightout of the text!  In the RSV verse 1 says, O God, thou art myGod, I seek thee, my soul thirst for thee; my flesh faints forthee, as in a dry and weary land where no water is.  Andthen the Lord of the Covenant comes.  The rock rises to meet David'sfeet.  The banquet of his glory is spread before the eyes of faith,and David says, My soul is feasted s with marrow and fat.   God is worshipped, honored and savored both whenwe faint for him and when we feast on him.   Fainting is the formof worship when God is distant, and feasting is the form of worshipwhen he is near.  The heart that savors God above all things willexperience yearning and longing and thirsting and panting andfainting when the vision of God is distant and dim.  And thatsame heart will experience feasting and satisfaction when thevision draws near and becomes clear.  This is a great help to us  when we wake up in thewilderness.  And some of us wake up there every day.    Let me make just two other observations from thistext for the sake of our worship life at Bethlehem, and for thepriority of savoring the vision of God.  1.  The first is that even though worship does involveexpressions of thankfulness to God for his gifts, this is notthe essence of true worship.  In fact there is a gratitude toGod for his gifts that has no true worship in it at all.  In otherwords there are people who love their health and family and joband hobbies, and thank God for them often, but don't love God. They don't savor God.  And when God is not savored for the sweetnessand excellence of who he is, he is not worshipped.  David makes this plain by the way he expresses hislongings in verses 1 and 3.  In verse 1 he says, O God,thou art my God, I seek thee, my soul thirsts for thee; my fleshfaints for thee. . .  This is not primarily a thirst forany of God's gifts.  It is a thirst for God.  David has a heartfor God.  He has a taste for fellowship with God.  He makes this even more explicit in verse 3: Becausethy steadfast love is better than life, my lips will praise thee. This means that David wanted God more than he wanted life.  Andif you want God more than you want life, then you want God morethan you want all the joys of this life -- family, health, food,friendship, sexual relations, job-satisfaction, productivity,books, skateboards, computers, music, homes, sunsets, fall colors. When David says that the love of God is better than life andtherefore better than all the beauty that life means, he is notdenying that all these good things come from the love of God. He is warning us rather that if our hearts settle (even gratefully!)on the beauty of the gift and do not yearn for the infinitelygreater beauty of the Giver, then we are idolaters and not worshippersof God.  I wonder whether this is why we cannot do withoutthe wilderness experiences life.  If all of life were a paradise,as so many people think it should be and as so many try to makeit, then would we not much more often become addicted to savoringthe gifts of God rather than God. Surely that is why Jesus saidit is hard for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God.  And surelythat is why he takes his loved ones again again through the desertfires.  He would disenchant us with the world and give us a tastefor eternity.    And don't think it came easy for David to give upthe the gifts of God.  Not many days hence the rebellion in Jerusalemwill be quelled, and Absolom dead with the darts of Joab, andDavid in his chamber crying, O my son Absalom, my son, myson Absalom! Would I had died instead of you, O Absalom, my son,my son. (2 Samuel 18:33)  The wilderness is the way of God to wean us fromthe most precious things in the world.  And those who savor thevision of God know that his love is better than all that thislife can give.  2.  The last thing I want us to see from this psalmis the importance of corporate worship in the life of the soul. Do you see from verse 2 what the function of temple worship wasfor David while he was in the wilderness?  He says, So I have looked upon thee in thesanctuary, beholding thy power and glory.  What does thismean?  It means that when he was out in the wilderness, cut offfrom the worshipping community at the Temple it was the memoryof experiences there that brought God home to him with clarityand power and finally gave him a feast in the wilderness.  Neither in the Old Testament nor in the New Testamentwas the worship of God bound to a building.  But both in the OldTestament and in the New Testament God has blessed the regulargathering of his people with the vision of his power and his glory. This is the vision that feeds our souls on Sunday morning, andthen later on, in the wilderness, functions to remind us thatGod is great indeed and make us thirst and faint for his powerand glory.  I wish there were time to unfold all the implicationsthat this has for our worship together.  But let this closingword suffice.  When you understand the essence of worship to bethe genuine savoring of God, whether through fainting or feasting,thirsting or bursting, you can't treat it lightly any more.  Itbecomes the very center-piece of life.  It becomes radically God-centered. It becomes intense and earnest.  It becomes for most people theonly hour in the week when they become silent with reverence andawe before the power and glory of God.  And therefore we do everything we can to help worshipperslike David go hard after God.    We urge you to seek God during the prelude, and notto talk to each other.    We close the doors for extended times of worshipso that those who are here can give their undistracted attentionto God and not man.    We have moments for praise and meditation and offeringwith no verbal direction so that you can deal with God in thestillness of your own heart.    We let much of the service flow without comment orannouncement so as to draw as little attention as possible awayfrom your communion with God.  Most of us did not grow up in a tradition that tookGod-centered worship seriously.  Most people come to church witha passive entertainment mentality, and therefore except in themost riveting of moments the mind tends to float aimlessly fromone human thing to another.  And the thought of exerting effortto direct the mind's attention and the heart's affection towardsGod is foreign.  And therefore what David described in verse 2must be learned.  So I have looked upon thee in the sanctuary,beholding thy power and glory.    May the Lord give us a passion to worship at Bethlehemand so to fulfill the first and most basic step of our mission,to savor the vision of God. 
