  August 31, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor    "FAIL NOT TO OBTAIN THE GRACE OF GOD"  Hebrews 12:12-17  
  Therefore, strengthen the hands that are weak and the knees thatare feeble, 13 and make straight paths for your feet, so that thelimb which is lame may not be put out of joint, but rather be healed.14 Pursue peace with all men, and the sanctification without which noone will see the Lord. 15 See to it that no one comes short of thegrace of God; that no root of bitterness springing up causes trouble,and by it many be defiled; 16 that there be no immoral or godlessperson like Esau, who sold his own birthright for a single meal. 17For you know that even afterwards, when he desired to inherit theblessing, he was rejected, for he found no place for repentance,though he sought for it with tears.  Last Week's Verses: 3-11  Notice the word "therefore" at the beginning of this passage inverse 12. This means that what we saw last week in verses 3-11 ispart of the basis for the exhortations in verses 12-17. The mainpoint of last week's text was:  &#183; the pain and trouble you are experiencing is not a sign ofthe hatred of God, but the love of God. Verse 6: "Those whom the Lordloves he disciplines." &#183; Your persecution is not a sign of God'streating you as enemies, but as sons. Verse 7: "It is for disciplinethat you endure; God deals with you as with sons." &#183; Yoursuffering is not meaningless, but designed for your good and yourholiness. Verse 10: "He disciplines us for our good, that we mayshare His holiness."  Therefore . . .  Since the fatherly love of God designs your pain for your good andyour holiness . . .  &#183; therefore (verse 12) "strengthen your weak hands and feebleknees . . ." &#183; therefore (verse 13) "make straight paths foryour feet" and don't meander around in the Christian life; run thestraight race . . . &#183; therefore (verse 14) "Pursue peace andsanctification;" that is, pursue the holiness that God is pursuing inyou by his discipline! . . . &#183; therefore (verse 15) "don't fallshort of the grace of God; don't let a root of bitterness spring upand defile . . ." God is working grace for you through discipline;don't miss it. &#183; therefore (verse 16) don't be like Esau whosold his birthright for a single meal and after that could notrepent. Don't trade the pain of God's discipline for the delights ofthe world.  All of these commands for us to do something are rooted insomething God is already doing for us and in us. So just like chapter11 taught us, we are to do these things "by faith" - that is, withthe assurance that God is for us and is working for those who trusthim. We are not being commanded here in this text to do things thatwill get God to adopt us as his children. We are being commanded toact like people who are utterly persuaded that we are already adoptedthrough faith, and that our omnipotent Father loves us, and that themost painful adversities of our lives are expressions of his lovingdiscipline and not his hateful vengeance.  That's what the "therefore" means at the beginning of verse 12:God is ruling over the lives of his people. The persecution andsickness and adversity we endure are part of God's sovereign designfor our good and our holiness. Therefore, be strengthened by thistruth, and join God in pursuing the holiness he designs, drink inthis grace; don't throw away your birthright as a child of God bysaying, "To hell with these sufferings; if that's the way God is, I'mgoing back to Egypt" (see 11:25-26).  Is God's Discipline Punishment?  Now maybe it will help this stick if I try to answer one of thequestions that people asked me from last week's message. The mostcommon one was, "Does the discipline of God in verses 3-11 meanpunishment? Are we being punished when we are persecuted or when weare sick or troubled?"  Answer: this book teaches that Christ died to bear our sins.Hebrews 9:28: "Christ was offered once to bear the sins of many."Christ bore the punishment for our sins. As Isaiah 53:5 says, "He waswounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities."Therefore it would be wrong to think of the pain that happens to usnow as God's punishing our sins a second time: as though they getpunished once in Christ's suffering and once in our suffering. Thatview of our suffering would dishonor the suffering of Christ.  Instead we ought to think that the suffering of Christ for us haschanged our suffering into something utterly different from ordinarypunishment. Just as the death of Christ for us has changed our deathinto something utterly different - "O death where is your victory? Odeath, where is your sting?" (I Corinthians 15:55) The death ofChrist for us has taken the sting out of our death; and the sufferingof Christ for us has taken the punishment out of suffering. What thenis left of discipline if the punishment has been taken out of it? Theanswer is that purifying is left, and training and deepening andsobering and refining.  This is why we ended the service last week with the verse from"How Firm a Foundation:"  When through fiery trials thy pathway shall lie, My grace,all-sufficient, shall be thy supply; The flame shall not hurt thee, Ionly design Thy dross to consume and thy gold to refine.  God's Goal for us is Deeper Faith and Holiness  In other words, God's design in discipline is not to hurtultimately, though it does hurt temporarily (Hebrews 12:11). His aimis not punitive; it is not vengeance; it is not retributive justice;it is purification and refining. How should we then feel when we arepersecuted or betrayed or inflicted with disease? We should feel thatGod loves us and that he knows the best therapy for purifying andrefining and deepening and strengthening our faith and holiness.There are, no doubt, particular habits of sin that need to be rootedout of our lives. But the pain may be more generally designed just totake us into deeper faith and a deeper holiness.  I say this partly because of Hebrews 5:8 where the writer says ofJesus, who was sinless (Hebrews 4:15), "Although He was a Son, Helearned obedience from the things which He suffered." The design ofGod in the suffering of his Son was not only that he might bear ourpunishment, but that he himself might learn depths and dimensions offaithfulness and obedience that could not be learned any other way.If it was true for the Son of God, how much more true for us.  Take an illustration from the life of Paul: In 2 Corinthians1:8-9, he described a painful experience he had in Asia: "We do notwant you to be unaware, brethren, of our affliction which came to usin Asia, that we were burdened excessively, beyond our strength, sothat we despaired even of life; indeed, we had the sentence of deathwithin ourselves in order that we should not trust in ourselves, butin God who raises the dead." Now this illustration shows the designof God in Paul's affliction.  What is it? This has happened he says, "In order that (notice thepurpose or the design) we should not trust in ourselves, but in Godwho raises the dead." Here the "discipline" of God is not connectedwith any sin Paul committed. It is connected with a deepening offaith. We are all prone to trust in human resources for our sense ofsecurity and happiness. So God sometimes strips us (or someone nearus) of all those resources, as Paul says, "beyond our strength, sothat we despaired even of life itself." The aim is not punishment,but utter, radical resting in God alone for our hope even in the faceof death. The last aim of God's discipline in the moment of death issimple, humble, childlike trust in "the God who raises the dead."  So the answer to last week's question is: No, God's discipline isnot the same as punishment.* The whole point is, again, that God isthe Father of his people; he loves us unimaginably; he is not lookingon passively while we get lacerated, and then fixing our wounds inthe emergency room of life; he is the infinitely wise surgeondesigning how he will operate on us to deepen our faith and make usholy.  Understanding God's Discipline Helps Us Run our Race  Now why are we told all this? It is more than some people want toknow about God. It is troubling to some and causes problems in theirminds. The answer is that God means for us to be helped by it in ourrunning the rough race of radical Christian living. Notice that lastweek's text (12:3-11) is sandwiched between exhortations to run welland run straight and not to be worn out or hindered. It's meant tohelp us run.  Recall Hebrews 12:1b, "Let us also lay aside every encumbrance,and the sin which so easily entangles us, and let us run withendurance the race that is set before us." So the Christian life is arace to be run, and there are sins to forsake and encumbrances toshed. The danger this church is facing is mentioned in verse 3:"Consider Him who has endured such hostility by sinners againstHimself, so that you may not grow weary and lose heart." They weregrowing weary and losing heart. Why? Because life is hard. There ispersecution and there is adversity of every kind and there issickness.  That's why verses 3-11 exist. God wants us to understand onecrucial reason life is hard. Why adversity? Why imprisonment (11:34)?Why atrocities against the people of God? Why sickness? Why doesn'tGod just fix it? Without verses 3-11 this writer thinks weariness anddiscouragement will get the upper hand. Notice the connection betweenverse 3 and verse 12 (to see the sandwich). In verse 3, theexhortation is that we not "grow weary and lose heart." In verse 12,the exhortation is that we "strengthen the hands that are weak andthe knees that are feeble." It's the same concern before and afterthe teaching on God's discipline.  And notice the connection between verse 1 and verse 13. Verse onecalls us to "run with endurance the race that is set before us," andverse 13 says, "Make straight paths for your feet." In other wordsthe aim of all this teaching about God's discipline in our sufferingis so that we will not give up the race - that we not fall exhaustedin discouragement or take a detour into some easier path.  The assumption is that knowing what God is up to in our suffering- that it is in fact the loving, sovereign God who is at work for usin it all - is the key to pressing on in the race of holy Christianliving.  How Does God's Discipline Help Us Press On?  He gives a couple of examples of how the two are connected - howGod's design in our suffering and our pursuing the race areconnected. Take the one in verse 14: "Pursue peace with all men, andthe sanctification [= holiness] without which no one will see theLord." Notice the words, "peace" and "sanctification" (or"holiness"). Running the race means pursuing peace and pursuingholiness. That is the straight path that leads to life - to seeingthe Lord.  But how does the discipline of God in our lives through sufferinghelp us press on with that? Look at verse 10b: [God] disciplines usfor our good, that we may share His holiness." Holiness is what Godis pursuing in us through our suffering. And holiness is what we areto pursue in our race. And the connection is "therefore" (verse 12).He pursues our holiness; therefore we pursue holiness. We are notdoing this on our own. God is at work in us (Hebrews 13:21) and weare to join his sovereign design. We are to be mightily encouraged todo this (see Philippians 2:12-13).  And notice verse 11, "All discipline for the moment seems not tobe joyful, but sorrowful; yet to those who have been trained by it,afterwards it yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness." See theword "peaceful" or "peaceable." This parallels the exhortation inverse 14, "Pursue peace with all men." And what's the connection?"Therefore!" In all your adversity God is at work designing apeaceable fruit of righteousness. Therefore, pursue peace. Not theother way around. God is at work, so you take heart and work. God ispursuing your peacefulness and your peaceableness. So you strengthenyour hands and pursue peace.  Trusting that God is Already at Work in Us  This is close to the essence of the Christian life. The commandsof God are not given to us so that we might get God to act for us.They are given to us so that we might trust that - even in ourhardest times - God is already at work for us to accomplish the verythings he commands us to do. I am designing to bring about yourholiness in all your pain . . . therefore pursue holiness. I amdesigning to bring about your peace in all your pain, says the Lord .. . therefore pursue peace.  Or as verse 15 says: I am pouring grace into your life through myfatherly discipline . . . therefore don't fail to receive it. Don'tmiss it.  Which is followed by the warning of Esau: He missed it. Verse 16b:"[Esau] sold his own birthright for a single meal." That is, helooked down the straight path that leads to life and he saw adversityand hunger, and instead of believing that God was in it and workingfor his good - as a loving, disciplining Father - he sold it for asingle meal and left the race. And the terrifying thing is, he couldnot return. Verse 17, "You know that even afterwards, when he desiredto inherit the blessing, he was rejected, for he found no place forrepentance, though he sought for it with tears."  He tried to repent and could not. He had gone too far (see 1 John5:16). God will forgive all genuine repentance no matter what you'vedone. But there is a hardening against God that goes over the lineand can no longer repent. And this is meant as a very sober warning.  Lay Aside Every Encumbrance to Running the Race  So here is the sum of the matter: Hebrews 12:1 says, Run the raceof the Christian life no matter how hard the course. To that end, layaside every encumbrance and every sin. Pursue peace. Pursue holiness.Don't let your suffering discourage you and make you fall or temptyou to leave the race track. Don't forget that in all your sufferingyour Father is in charge and loves you and designs for you and in youthe very things he is calling you to pursue. Don't be like Esau whowould not lay aside even a single meal, but traded away his soul.  So here is how we want to close this service and these last threesermons on the adversities of our lives. There are "sins,""encumbrances" and "single meals" that we need to be renounce. Iinvite you to take a moment and seek God's insight into what they arein your life. Write them on the leaflet of the worship folder, commityourself to this renunciation, pray for God's grace in a time ofneed, and symbolically drop them in the receptacle on your way out.  May God give us the deep, unshakable faith in his lovingsovereignty so that we run and not grow weary.  
  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
