  May 26, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor   
       For whom did Jesus taste death?   Hebrews 2:9    But we do see Him who has been made for a little whilelower than the angels,  namely,  Jesus, because of the suffering of death crowned with glory and honor, thatby the grace of God He might taste death for everyone.     
      For Those He Came to Save    Yesterday I marched for Jesus along with thousands of others inthe Twin Cities and with millions of others around the world. As Iturned from Nicollet Mall onto Sixth Street we were singing thesecond stanza of "Crown Him With Many Crowns." I am probably the onlyone who was thinking at that moment of this morning's message. Thetitle of the message this morning is, "For Whom Did Jesus TasteDeath?" The second verse of "Crown Him with Many Crowns" goes likethis:  Crown Him the Lord of life,  Who triumphed o'er the grave.  Who rose victorious in the strife  For those He came to save.  His glories now we sing,  Who died and rose on high.  Who died eternal life to bring,  And lives that death may die.  He triumphed over the grave and rose victorious in the strife for those he came to save . "For those he came to save." Thesewords seem to signal that the writer of this hymn believes thatChrist had a design to really save a particular group of people byhis death. He triumphed over the grave for those he came to save. Itsounds like there are some he came to save, and that for these thegrave is defeated and eternal life is given.    
      For Everybody?    So my question this morning is this: "For whom did Jesus tastedeath?" Ask 100 evangelical Christians in America that question and95 will probably say, "Everybody." And there is something healthyabout that answer -- and something unhealthy. What's healthy about itis that it is not cliquish or elitist or sectarian. It has an eye onthe world. It wants others to enjoy the forgiveness of sins thatbelievers enjoy. It is not narrow and confined in its affections.  It tries to express the Biblical truth that God so loved the worldthat he gave his only Son that whoever believes might not perish buthave eternal life (John 3:16). It is healthy and right to believethat everyone who has faith -- no matter what race or education orintelligence or social class or former religion -- everyone who putsfaith in Jesus Christ is justified and accepted with God on the basisof Jesus' shed blood. It's healthy and right to believe that no onecan say, "I really want to be saved by believing Jesus, but I can'tbe because he did not die for me." No one can say that. There is noone who truly believes for whom Jesus did not taste death.  There are lot's of reasons why this answer (that Jesus tasteddeath for everyone) is a sign of spiritual health. One of the mostobvious reasons is right here in our text, Hebrews 2:9:  But we do see Him who has been made for a little while lower thanthe angels, namely,   Jesus, because of the suffering of deathcrowned with glory and honor, that by the grace of God He might taste death for everyone .  The answer that 95% of evangelicals would give is a healthy signof desire to say what the Bible says.  But to say what the Bible says and to mean what the Bible meansare not necessarily the same thing. Which is why I said that there issomething unhealthy about answering the question "For whom did Jesustaste death?" by simply saying "everybody." What's unhealthy about itis not, first, that it's wrong. It might not be wrong. It depends onwhat you mean by saying that. What's unhealthy is that it stops shortof asking what Jesus really accomplished when he died. It assumesthat we all know what he accomplished and that this he accomplishedfor everybody in the same way. That is not healthy, because it is nottrue. My guess is that most of those 95% who say Jesus died foreverybody would have a hard time explaining just what it is that thedeath of Jesus really, actually accomplished for everybody --especially what it accomplished for those who refuse to believe andgo to hell.    
      Then Why Is Not Everyone Saved?    In other words, it's unhealthy to say that Jesus tasted death foreveryone and not to know what Jesus really accomplished by dying.Suppose you say to me, "I believe that Jesus died for everyone," andI respond, "Then why is not everyone saved?" Your answer probablywould be, "Because you have to receive the gift of salvation; youhave to believe in Christ in order for his death to count for you." Iagree, but then I say, "So you believe that Christ died for peoplewho reject him and go to hell in the same way that he died for thosewho accept him and go to heaven?" You say, "Yes, the difference isthe faith of those who go to heaven. Faith connects you with thebenefits of the death of Jesus."  There are several problems here. I will only mention one. And Idwell on this because, if this is what you believe, then you aremissing out on the depths of covenant love that God has for you inChrist by understanding it to be the same as the love he has forthose who reject him. And you are, in one serious way, "neglectingyour great salvation," which, we saw in Hebrews 2:3, we must not do.There is a greatness about being loved with Calvary love that youwill never know if you believe that those in hell were loved anddied-for the same way you were.  It would be as though a wife insisted that her husband loved andsacrificed for her no differently than he loves and sacrifices forall the women in the world. But in fact Paul, the apostle, says inEphesians 5:25-27:  Christ loved the church and gave Himself up for her; that He mightsanctify her, having cleansed her by the washing of water with theword, that He might present to Himself the church in all her glory,having no spot or wrinkle or any such thing; but that she should beholy and blameless.  That's what we mean when we say he died for the church, his bride.In other words there is a precious and unfathomable covenant lovebetween Christ and his bride, that moved him to die for her. Thedeath of Jesus is for the bride of Christ in a different way than itis for those who perish.  Here's the problem with saying Christ died for all the same way hedied for his bride. If Christ died for the sins of those who arefinally lost, the same way he died for the sins of those who arefinally saved, then what are the lost being punished for? Were theirsins covered and canceled by the blood of Jesus or not? We Christianssay, "Christ died for our sins" (1 Corinthians 15:3). And we meanthat his death paid the debt those sins created. His death removedthe wrath of God from me. His death lifted the curse of the law fromme. His death purchased heaven for me. It really accomplished thosethings!  But what would it mean to say of an unbeliever in hell that Christdied for his sins? Would we mean that the debt for his sins was paid?If so, why is he paying again in hell? Would we mean that the wrathof God was removed? If so, why is the wrath of God being poured outon him in punishment for sins? Would we mean that the curse of thelaw was lifted? If so, why is he bearing his curse in the lake offire?  One possible answer is this: one might say that the only reasonpeople go to hell is because of the sin of rejecting Jesus, notbecause of all the other sins of their life. But that is not true.The Bible teaches that the wrath of God is coming on the world, notjust because of its rejection of Jesus, but because of its many sinsthat are not forgiven. For example, in Colossians 3:5-6, Paul refersto "immorality, impurity, passion, evil desire, and greed," and thensays, "On account of these things the wrath of God will come." Sopeople who reject Jesus really will be punished for their specificsins, not just for rejecting Jesus.    
      In What Sense Did Jesus Taste Death for aPerson in Hell?    So, we go back to the problem: in what sense did Christ tastedeath for their sins? If they are still guilty for their sins andstill suffer punishment for their sins, what happened on the crossfor their sins? Perhaps someone would use an analogy. You might say,Christ purchased their ticket to heaven, and offered it to themfreely, but they refused to take it, and that is why they went tohell. And you would be partly right: Christ does offer hisforgiveness freely to all, and any who receives it as the treasure itis will be saved by the death of Jesus. But the problem with theanalogy is that the purchase of the ticket to heaven is, in reality,the canceling of sins. But what we have seen is that those who refusethe ticket are punished for their sins, not just for refusing theticket. And so what meaning does it have to say that their sins werecanceled? Their sins are going to bring them to destruction and keepthem from heaven; so their sins were not really canceled in thecross, and therefore the ticket was not purchased.  The ticket for heaven which Jesus obtained for me by his blood isthe wiping out of all my sins, covering them, bearing them in his ownbody, so that they can never bring me to ruin -- can never be broughtup against me again -- never. That's what happened when he died forme. Hebrews 10:14 says, "By one offering He has perfected for alltime those who are sanctified." Perfected before God for all time, bythe offering his life! That's what it means that he died for me.Hebrews 9:28 says, "Christ also, [was] offered once to bear the sinsof many." He bore my sins. He really bore them (See Isaiah 53:4-6).He really suffered for them. They cannot and they will not fall on myhead in judgment.  If you say to me then, that at the cross Christ only accomplishedfor me what he accomplished for those who will suffer hell for theirsins, then you strip the death of Jesus of its actual effectiveaccomplishment on my behalf, and leave me with what? -- An atonementthat has lost its precious assuring power that my sins were reallycovered and the curse was really lifted and the wrath of God wasreally removed. That's a high price to pay in order to say thatChrist tasted death for everyone in the same way.  I don't think that the Bible commands us or, in fact, lets us saythat Christ died for everybody in the same way. And the context ofHebrews 2:9 is a good place to show that the death of Christ had aspecial design or aim for God's chosen people that it did not havefor others.    
      What Does "Everyone" mean?    At the end of verse 9 the writer says, "By the grace of God[Christ] tasted death  for everyone ." The question here iswhether "everyone" refers to every human without distinction, orwhether it refers to everyone within a certain group. As when I sayat staff lunch, "Is everyone present?" I don't mean everyone in theworld. I mean everyone in the group I have in mind. What is the groupthat the writer has in mind: all of humanity without any distinction,or some other group?  Let's let him answer as we trace his thought in the next verses.Verse 10 is the support for verse 9: Christ tasted death  foreveryone  "for it was fitting for him, for whom are all things,and through whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, toperfect the author of their salvation through sufferings." In otherwords, immediately after saying that by the grace of God Christtasted death for everyone, the writer explains that God's design inthis suffering of Christ was to "bring many sons to glory." So verses9 and 10 go together like this: Christ tasted death for everyone,because it seemed fitting to God that the way to lead his children toglory was through the suffering and death of Christ.  This means that the "everyone" of verse 9 probably refers to everyone of the sons  being led to glory in verse 10. In otherwords the design of God -- the aim and purpose of God -- in sendingChrist to die was particularly to lead his children from sin anddeath and hell to glory. He had a special eye to his own electchildren. It's exactly what the Gospel of John says in 11:52 -- thatJesus would die to "gather together into one the  children ofGod  who are scattered abroad." These "children of God" thatChrist died to gather are the "sons" that God is leading to glorythrough the death of Christ in Hebrews 2:10  You can see this in the next verses too. Verses 11 and 12:  For both He who sanctifies [i.e. Christ] and those who aresanctified [the sons he is leading to glory] are all from one Father;for which reason He is not ashamed to call them brethren, saying [inPsalm 22:22], "I WILL PROCLAIM THY NAME TO MY BRETHREN, IN THE MIDSTOF THE CONGREGATION I WILL SING THY PRAISE."  In other words the sons that God is leading to glory through thedeath of Christ are now called Christ's  brothers . It was for everyone  of   these   that Christ tasted death.  Verse 13 goes on now to call them, not only brothers, but inanother sense children of Christ:  And again, "I WILL PUT MY TRUST IN HIM" [Christ's own confessionof faith in his Father along with his brothers]. And again, "BEHOLD,I AND THE CHILDREN WHOM GOD HAS GIVEN ME."  Notice, the sons that are being led to glory through the death ofChrist are now called children that  God has given to Christ .They don't just become children by choosing Christ. God sets hisfavor on them and brings them to Christ -- gives them to Christ. Andfor every one of these he tastes death and leads them to glory. Thisis exactly the way Jesus spoke of his own disciples in the prayer ofJohn 17:6: "I manifested Thy name to the men whom  Thou gavest Meout of the world ; Thine they were, and Thou gavest them to Me."So the picture we have is a chosen people that the Father freely andgraciously gives to the Son as his children.  Then notice how verses 14-15 connect the aim of Christ'sincarnation and death with this chosen group of children:  Since then the children share in flesh and blood [in other words,since those whom the Father gave to the Son have a human nature], HeHimself likewise also partook of the same [human nature], thatthrough death He might render powerless him who had the power ofdeath, that is, the devil; and might deliver those who through fearof death were subject to slavery all their lives [namely, everyone ofthose children and brothers that God had given him to lead to gloryby his death].  So here the reason given for the incarnation and the death ofJesus (in verse 14) is that the "children" share in flesh and blood.That's the reason Christ took on flesh and blood. And the "children,"according to verse 13 are not humans in general, but children God hasgiven to Jesus. And so the whole design and aim of the incarnationand death of Jesus was to lead the sons, the brothers, the children,whom God gave to Jesus, to glory.    
      Your Belief Was Purchased by the Death ofChrist    Now I will stop here in our text, even though we could keep righton going through the rest of this chapter showing that the aim of Godin the sending and death of Jesus was to accomplish somethingdefinite for his brothers, his children, those whom God has given himout of the world. But I will stop and make a closing application.  I am not the least bit interested in withholding the infinitevalue of the death of Jesus from anyone. Let it be known and heardvery clearly: God so loved the world that he gave his only begottenSon so that  whoever believes on him  -- I say it again: whoever believes in him  -- should not perish but have eternallife. Christ died so that whoever (in this room this morning)believes might not perish but live.  And when you believe as you ought to believe, you will discoverthat your belief -- like all other spiritual blessings -- waspurchased by the death of Christ. The sin of unbelief was covered bythe blood in your case, and therefore the power of God's mercy wasreleased through the cross to subdue your rebellion and bring you tothe Son. You did not make the cross effective in your life by faith.The cross became effective in your life by purchasing your faith.  So glory in this, Christian. Glory that your sins really werecovered when Jesus tasted death for you. Glory that your guilt reallywas removed when Jesus tasted death for you. Glory that the curse ofthe law really was lifted and that the wrath of God really wasremoved, and that the precious faith that unites you to all thistreasure in Christ was a gift purchased by the blood of Christ.  Christ tasted death for everyone who has faith. Because the faithof everyone who believes was purchased by the death of Christ.  For further reflection see:  1 Timothy 4:10  Ephesians 5:25-27  Titus 2:14  John 10:15; 11:52; 17:6,9,19  Acts 20:28  Revelation 1:5; 3:9; 5:9  Romans 8:28-32  1 John 2:2 (compare John 11:52)  2 Peter 2:1  
  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
