  August 10, 1997  Bethlehem Baptist Church  John Piper, Pastor  
  FAITH TO BE STRONG AND FAITH TO BE WEAK  Hebrews 11:29-38  
  As we read today's text the main thing to see and think about isthe startling shift that happens in the middle of verse 35. I'llpoint it out when we get there.  By faith they passed through the Red Sea as though they werepassing through dry land; and the Egyptians, when they attempted it,were drowned. 30 By faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after theyhad been encircled for seven days. 31 By faith Rahab the harlot didnot perish along with those who were disobedient, after she hadwelcomed the spies in peace. 32 And what more shall I say? For timewill fail me if I tell of Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, of Davidand Samuel and the prophets, 33 who by faith conquered kingdoms,performed acts of righteousness, obtained promises, shut the mouthsof lions, 34 quenched the power of fire, escaped the edge of thesword, from weakness were made strong, became mighty in war, putforeign armies to flight. 35 Women received back their dead byresurrection; [note shift] and others were tortured, not acceptingtheir release, in order that they might obtain a better resurrection;36 and others experienced mockings and scourgings, yes, also chainsand imprisonment. 37 They were stoned, they were sawn in two, theywere tempted, they were put to death with the sword; they went aboutin sheepskins, in goatskins, being destitute, afflicted, ill-treated38 (men of whom the world was not worthy), wandering in deserts andmountains and caves and holes in the ground.  Blowing Away the Fog About What Faith Is  Christians and non-Christians can have defective views of what theChristian life really is. Preaching the word of God aims to bring ourviews of God and his ways more and more into line with the truth. Wedo this for unbelievers so that you can embrace Christianity on thebasis of a true picture of it, rather than a distorted one; and we doit for believers so that you can live your lives on the basis of trueviews of God and his ways, rather than distorted and deluding anddiscouraging views.  This passage is tremendously important for blowing the fog ofconfusion away from what faith is and what kind of life itguarantees. There are many who teach today that the life of faithwill bring health, wealth and prosperity, and where those things arelacking it's because faith is lacking. That never seemed to squarewith what I saw in the teachings of Jesus or his apostles, and I canrecall the first time this chapter walloped me with its incredibleimpact on this question. I hope it has the same effect for good onyou this morning.  I will try to make five brief points on the basis of these verses.  1. Through our faith God can and does work miracles and acts ofprovidence to bring practical earthly help and deliverance to hispeople.  That is the point of verses 29-35a. What I mean by "miracles" isworks of God that involve some extraordinary interruption in thenatural cause-effect way that nature works. The writer refers, forexample, to the dividing of the Red Sea (verse 29) and the fallingdown of the walls of Jericho (verse 30) and the shutting of themouths of lions when Daniel was in the lions' den (verse 33), and thequenching of fire by Shadrach and Meshach and Abednego, when theywalked through Nebuchadnezzar's furnace (verse 34), and theresurrection of the son of the widow of Zarephath (verse 35a). Allthese are what we usually call miracles. God breaks into the normalway things work and in an extraordinary way makes them workdifferently. And in every case here the people of God were helped orrescued from danger or death.  That's one way God works through our faith - namely, by miracles.But I also mentioned "acts of providence." Through our faith Godhelps us by acts of providence. What I mean by "acts of providence"is works of God that control situations but in a less extraordinaryway. Looking on, you would not necessarily say that a miraclehappened, but by the eye of faith you see the "invisible hand of God"- as R. C. Sproul calls it.  For example, the writer refers to Rahab not perishing because shehad heard of the power of the God of Israel (Joshua 2:9-11) and caredfor the Jewish spies (verse 31); and to David conquering kingdoms andestablishing righteousness (verse 33); and to Elijah escaping thesword of Jezebel (verse 34); and to Gideon being strengthened inweakness (verse 34); and to others putting foreign armies to flight(verse 34); etc. In all these cases God is the one who is workingbehind the scenes, but no miracles are obvious. This is what we maycall the more ordinary working of God's providence.  And the point of the writer here in verses 29-35a is that allthese wonderful acts of God - both extraordinary miracles and moreordinary acts of providence - come about "by faith." You see that:  (verse 29) By faith they passed through the red sea . . . (verse30) by faith the walls of Jericho feel down . . . (verse 31) by faithRahab . . . did not perish . . . (verse 33) by faith [they] conqueredkingdoms . . .  The point is that God works through faith to do miracles and actsof providence to bring practical, earthly help and deliverance to hispeople. That's the first point. Here's the second point.  2. God does not always work miracles and acts of providence forour deliverance from suffering; sometimes by faith God sustains hispeople through sufferings.  That's the point of verses 35b-38. Or another way to put it wouldbe to say that having true faith in God is no guarantee of comfortand security in this life. Now it is absolutely crucial for you tosee that the miseries God's people sustained in verses 35-38 come byfaith, not because of unbelief. See this in two ways. First, in verse33, notice that the list begins with ". . . who by faith conqueredkingdoms . . . etc.," and without a break continues into all themiseries of verses 35-38. It is by faith that "others were tortured .. . and others experienced mockings and scourgings, etc." All thismisery is received and endured by faith.  The other way to see this is in verse 39 which looks back on allthe sufferings of verses 35-38 and says, "And all these [that is, allsuffering people], having gained approval through their faith, didnot receive [yet in this life] what was promised." In other words thesuffering and misery and destitution and torture of God's people inverses 35-38 are not owing to God's disapproval. Rather God'sapproval is resting on them because of their faith. The miseries andsufferings were endured, not diminished, by faith.  Let's be specific, so we get the full impact of what this issaying. Verse 35b: "Others were tortured." God does not always turnthe hearts of torturers away from their torture of his people, thoughhe could. Someone might say, "Well, the torturers have free will andGod cannot intervene. He has limited himself." That is simply notwhat the Bible teaches. The Bible frequently portrays God restrainingand channeling the evil of men's hearts. For example, in Genesis 20:6King Abimelech almost committed adultery with Abraham's wife, butdidn't. Why? God says to Abimelech, "I also kept you from sinningagainst Me; therefore I did not let you touch her." God restrainedthe evil intent of Abimelech's will. If God can do that to Abimelech,he can do it to the police chief who is about to torture a Christianin the back room of a Mozambique jail. But he doesn't always do it.That is what verse 35b says. And when he doesn't, it does not meanthat the suffering Christian does not have faith. Nor that Goddoesn't love him, as we will see in chapter 12.  Another example: God does not always lessen the agony of hischildren, but permits them to experience not just suffering, buthorrific suffering. Verse 37: "They were stoned, they were sawn intwo." Now this is almost too horrible to think about. It is the waytradition says that Isaiah died. Imagine how forsaken you might feelif death lies in front of you, and a person devises a way for yourdeath to be as horrible as possible. That has happened and it hashappened to people of whom the world was not worthy (as verse 38says). God could stop that - without nullifying any humanresponsibility. That is the point of verse 29-35a - God can and doesdo miracles and acts of providence to relieve his people and deliverthem, but not always.  This is perhaps clearest by contrasting a phrase in verse 34 andone in verse 37. In verse 34 the second clause says, "escaped theedge of the sword." So some by faith "escaped the edge of the sword."Then in verse 37 the fourth clause says, "They were put to death withthe sword." So in one instance by faith they escaped the edge of thesword, and in another instance by faith they died by the sword. Acts12:1-2 says, "About that time Herod the king laid hands on some whobelonged to the church, in order to mistreat them. And he had Jamesthe brother of John put to death with a sword." But the next versestell the story of how he arrested Peter for the same purpose, but Godintervened and miraculously delivered Peter. One died by faith. Theother escaped by faith.  So the second point is: God does not always work miracles and actsof providence to deliver his people by faith, but sometimes by faithGod sustains his people through horrendous sufferings. From the firsttwo points the third follows.  3. Having faith is not the ultimate determining factor in whetheryou suffer or escape, God is - God's sovereign will and wisdom andlove.  To me this is immensely comforting. It is a great relief to knowthat there is a higher explanation for my pain or my pleasure thanwhether I have enough faith. Would it not be horrible to have tobelieve that on top of all your suffering you had to add this: itmust be because I lack faith.  We will not do assume that in this church. We will not look intothe face of the dying and say, or imply: "If you had faith, you wouldlive." We will say, rather, "Trust in God, because whether you liveby faith or die by faith God will take care of those who trust inhim. To live is Christ, and to die is gain."  And ultimately, it is God, and not we, who decides when and how wedie. He has his purposes. They are hidden from us. And faith means,we believe they are good.  Which leads to point four.  4. The common feature of the faith that escapes suffering and thefaith that endures suffering is this: both of them involve believingthat God himself is better than what life can give to you now, andbetter than what death can take from you later.  When you can have it all, faith says that God is better; and whenyou lose it all, faith says God is better. The clearest illustrationof this in today's text is verse 35: "[by faith] women received backtheir dead by resurrection; and others were tortured, not acceptingtheir release, in order that they might obtain a betterresurrection." What does faith believe in the moment of torture? Thatif God loved me, he would get me out of this? No. Faith believes thatthere is a resurrection for believers which is better than themiracle of escape. It's better than the kind of resurrectionexperience by the widow's son, who returned to life only to die againlater.  In other words, faith is utterly in love with all that God will befor us beyond the grave. Faith loves God more than life. Faith lovesGod more than family. Faith loves God more than job or retirementplans or ministry or writing books or building the dream house ormaking the first million. Faith says, "Whether God handles metenderly or gives me over to torture, I love him. He is my reward(11:6), the builder of the city I long for (11:10), the treasurebeyond the riches of Egypt (11:26), and the possession that surpassesall others and abides for ever (10:34)."  The great challenge of the book of Hebrews, and the mission of ourchurch, is to cultivate and to spread a death-defying passion forGod. The preaching, the Sunday School, the small group ministry, therelationships of love, the soccer camps, the prayer gatherings, andthe untold ministries inside and outside aim at this: to cultivateand to spread such a deep and satisfying relationship with God thatwe rest in him whether living or dying, whether comfortable ormiserable. Our aim is to cultivate and spread the unshakableconfidence that God is better than what life can give us and whatdeath can take from us.  This leads to one final point.  5. Those who love God more than life and suffer willingly awaitingsomething better than what this earth can offer, are God's greatgifts to the world.  Look with me at verse 37b and 38, ". . . they went about insheepskins, in goatskins, being destitute [no promise of preppyblouses or cool slacks], afflicted, ill-treated (men [people] of whomthe world was not worthy), wandering in deserts and mountains andcaves and holes in the ground." What does it mean that the world wasnot worthy of these obscure, destitute, unsightly, seemingly-cursedpeople? What does that mean - the world was not worthy of them? Itmeans they were a gift to the world and the world does not deserveit.  Many things in this life are utterly opposite from the way theyseem. And here is one of them. When the precious children of God arepermitted to suffer and be rejected and mistreated and go destitute,afflicted and ill-treated, God is giving a gift to the world. He isgracing the world. He is shedding his love abroad in the world.Because in those who suffer and die in the unshakable assurance ofhope in God, the world is given a message and a picture: "The Lordhimself is better than life. Turn, O turn and believe."  Who would have thought it - that the suffering are a gift to theworld?  O the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God! Howunsearchable are his judgments and how inscrutable his ways! For whohas known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counselor? Or whohas given a gift to him that he might be repaid? For from him andthrough him and to him are all things. To him be glory for ever.Amen. (Romans 11:33-36)  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
