  October 6, 1996  Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor      Let Us Press On To Maturity   (Hebrews 6:1-3)   
  Therefore leaving the elementary teaching about the Christ, let uspress on to maturity, not laying again a foundation of repentancefrom dead works and of faith toward God, 2 of instruction aboutwashings, and laying on of hands, and the resurrection of the dead,and eternal judgment. 3 And this we shall do, if God permits.  Two weeks ago I asked you if you wanted to be oak tree Christiansor cattail Christians. Last week we saw (in 5:13) that there are babyChristians and mature Christians. What's plain from the book ofHebrews is that this writer wants us to press on to be oak treeChristians, mature Christians -- not cattail baby Christians. Hebrews6:1 says, "Let us press on to maturity." He even puts  himself in the number: "Let  us  press on . . ." Not just, " You press on . . ." but, "You and me -- let  us  press on tomaturity." This is  his  life goal and this is his goal for them . He is writing and working for this goal.   And so it comes like a bucket of ice water in our faces when weread in verse 3, "This we shall do, if God permits." What?!  If God permits! What is this  if ? Does it mean God possibly maynot permit our pressing on to maturity? "Let us press on to maturity. . . And this we will do,  if  God permits." Last week we sawthat they were dull in their hearing. So maybe this bombshell willwake them up. "I call you to grow and press on to maturity. And youwill --  if  God permits."  I hope they woke up at these words -- and trembled. I hope thatthese words grab you as well. I want us to get inside these wordsthis morning. There is a vision of God here -- a great, sovereign,all-governing God whom we need very much to see and believe and restin.   First let's clarify what it is that he may permit or may notpermit. Take the word "This" in verse 3: " This  we shall do, ifGod permits." What is he referring to? He just said three things inverse 1. 1) Leave the elementary teaching about the Christ. 2) Presson to maturity. 3) Don't lay foundations again.  Now there's a question we have to ask here. Something doesn't seemto fit. Look back at Hebrews 5:12, "Though by this time you ought tobe teachers,  you have need again for someone to teach you theelementary principles of the oracles of God ." The question is:how does this fit together with Hebrews 6:1 where it says, "Leave theelementary teachings and don't lay a foundation again." One seems tosay you need to be taught the basics again (5:12), and the otherseems to say you should not lay that foundation again (6:1). Well,does he or doesn't he want them to lay a foundation of basics again?  I think the answer is something like this: 5:12 says they needteaching about the basics; 6:1 says they should not lay thefoundation of the basics again. So evidently there is a differencebetween the teaching that they need in 5:12 and the laying again of afoundation in 6:1. One they need and one they don't. What's thedifference?  I think the teaching they need about the basics (5:12) is how touse these basics for Christ's sake to press on to maturity. Butlaying a foundation again, I think, implies that they are losingsight of the basics about Christ and are beginning to occupythemselves with Old Testament and Jewish truths that were used as thefoundation for presenting and understanding Christ. And the writerdoesn't want them to go that far back.  Let me explain. In this writer's mind laying, a foundation for theunderstanding of Christ is different from teaching about how to livein Christ  on the basis  of that foundation. The foundation hehas in mind is described in 6:1d-2. The striking thing about thislist is that it is not distinctively Christian. It is made up offoundational Old Testament and Jewish truths and practices that thereaders probably built on when they were converted. The list hasthree pairs: pair one: "repentance from dead works and of faithtoward God" (v. 1d); pair two: "instruction about washings, andlaying on of hands;" pair three: "the resurrection of the dead, andeternal judgment" (v. 2).   All these are common Old Testament beliefs or current practicesamong the Jews. When these readers were evangelized and converted,these things, it seems, had been made foundational as a way ofhelping them understand the work of Christ. Christ is the goal andfulfillment of all these things. So when verse 1 says they shouldleave the "elementary teachings about Christ (or literally: "the wordof the beginning of Christ"), what I think it means is that theyshould not occupy themselves so much with the pre-Christianfoundational preparations for Christ that they neglect the glory ofthe gospel and how to use it to grow into maturity and holiness.  That's what they should  not  do. But what then does 5:12mean when it says that they do need "someone to teach [them] theelementary principles of the oracles of God"? How is that differentfrom laying this foundation again -- which they should  not  do?I think the answer is that the teaching they  do  need in 5:12is how to use the basics about Christ to press on to maturity.   In other words, it's what we saw last week from 5:14 -- they needto learn how to take the milk --the basic truths of the gospel -- andpractice how to grow with them. The need is not to rebuildfoundational facts, but to stand on them and live by them. They needto learn how you take basic gospel truth about Christ and use it tobecome discerning people about good and evil, so that they attain theholiness without which they will not see the Lord (12:14).  Their problem is not lack of foundational knowledge, but lack offruitfulness in life. Look at 6:7-8. Here is a description of theproblem in a word picture:  For ground [that refers to the readers] that drinks the rain whichoften falls upon it [that refers to the truth they have been hearing]and brings forth vegetation useful to those for whose sake it is alsotilled, receives a blessing from God; 8 but if it yields thorns andthistles, it is worthless and close to being cursed, and it ends upbeing burned.  Here's the issue: has the rain (that is, the milk of the word)produced thorns and thistles, or has it produced useful vegetation?In other words have the readers learned how to use the word of Christ(the milk) to become discerning between good and evil, or have theybeen preoccupied with verbal foundation repair and missed thepractical point that Christianity is about the moral and spiritualtransformation of life?   The writer is hopeful. Verse 9: "Beloved, we are convinced ofbetter things concerning you." They've been dull of hearing andcareless in part. But it's not too late. There's hope. But he is notcavalier or absolutely sure what the outcome will be for them. Hewants them to be diligent to have the full assurance of hope (6:11)and the faith and patience and holiness that inherits the promises(6:12; 12:14). But he does not say it's automatic. He urges them on.   Verse 1: "Let us press on to maturity!" And he adds the greatqualifier in verse 3: "This we will do, if God permits."  Now let's focus on the implications of those few powerful words:"This we will do, if God permits." We will press on to maturity if  God permits.  Here are five implications of these words. And this is what itmeans for God to be God and that we are not God.   
    1. God governs the progress of sanctification (ormaturity).   In other words, he has final say in whether we overcome our bentto sinning and make progress toward maturity. We will press on tomaturity  if  God permits it. That is, we will make progress inour sanctification and holiness  if  God permits it. He decidesultimately if and how fast we advance in holiness.  For example, look at Hebrews 13:20-21,   Now may the God of peace, who brought up from the dead the greatShepherd of the sheep through the blood of the eternal covenant, even  Jesus our Lord, equip you in every good thing to do Hiswill,  working in us that which is pleasing in His sight ,through Jesus Christ, to whom be   the glory forever and ever.Amen.  Either God works in us what is pleasing in his sight or hedoesn't. That is, either he permits our progress toward maturity orit doesn't happen. He governs the progress of sanctification.  Another example is from Hebrews 12:16-17 where the writer tellsabout Esau who squandered his birthright and his blessing and thentried to repent and couldn't.  [Let] there be no immoral or godless person like Esau, who soldhis own birthright for a single meal. 17 For you know that evenafterwards, when he desired to inherit the blessing, he was rejected,for he found no place for repentance, though he sought for it[repentance] with tears.   Esau was rejected. He had so profaned the grace of God that he wasno longer able to repent even though he wept and looked like he wassincere. God had forsaken him utterly and there was no more patience.This is the precious and terrible warning behind the words, "We willpress on to maturity,  if  God permits." Beware of being likeEsau, he says. God governs the progress of sanctification, and he isnot obliged to grant repentance to anyone. Which leads to the secondimplication of the words ". . . if God permits."  
  2.  Permitting us to advance to maturity is all grace, and notpermitting it is righteous judgment.   We are by nature rebellious against God and guilty for it. Goddoes not owe any of us the grace to conquer our rebellion. If Godleaves us in our rebellion, he is righteous and just to do so. Heowes us nothing. We are rebels by nature, and deserve onlypunishment, not rescue. If you are saved this morning, it is all ofgrace. And if you persevere and make progress toward maturity, it isall of grace. "This we will do, if God permits." And if he choosesnot to permit it, he is not hindering our good will, he is leaving usin our bad will. If we have a good will toward God, this is the workof grace and we will make progress. And we should tremble withgratitude.   
    3. God sometimes wills that something come to pass which heforbids us to bring to pass.   That is, he sometimes decrees what he forbids. In this case, forexample, he may not permit someone to press on to maturity.Nevertheless he commands us to press on to maturity. So he isdecreeing immaturity while commanding maturity.   The clearest illustration of this in Biblical history is God'splan for the death of Jesus. God forbids murder: "Thou shalt notmurder" (Exodus 20:13). And he decrees that his Son be murdered. Acts4:27-28:  Truly in this city there were gathered together against Thy holyservant Jesus, whom Thou didst anoint, both Herod and Pontius Pilate,along with the Gentiles and the peoples of Israel,  to do whateverThy hand and Thy purpose predestined to occur.   What Herod and Pilate and the Roman soldiers and the crowdsshouting "Crucify him," did was all  predestined  to occur byGod, and it was all  sin . Thus God sometimes forbids what hedecrees: he forbids murder, and he decrees the murder of his son forthe salvation of his people.   This does not mean that God is a sinner, because there is adifference between sinning and choosing for wise and holy purposesthat sin be. The cross of Christ is the clearest place for seeingthis mystery. There are infinitely wise and holy reasons for willingthat his Son be sinfully killed. And in the same way there are wiseand holy reasons for why he might not permit someone to press on tomaturity.   
    4. Nevertheless it is our duty and our delight to press on tomaturity.   This whole book is written as incentive and help to press on tothe holiness without which we will not see the Lord. God'ssovereignty in sanctification does not remove our obligation. Itenables it. "Work out your salvation with fear and trembling.  For it is God who is at work in you to will and to do his goodpleasure" (Philippians 2:12-13). God's sovereign work in us is ouronly hope that we will press on to maturity.    
    5. Finally, God's absolute sovereignty is a sweet place torest.   This writer is bending every effort to help these people perseverein faith (6:12) and hold fast to their confession (4:14), and fightthe evil heart of unbelief (3:12) and pursue the holiness withoutwhich they will not see the Lord (12:14). He warns and argues andpleads. And he is hopeful that God is at work in them, as he saysdown in verse 9. But that is not finally where he rests.  His final place of rest is the sovereignty of God. And I commendthis resting place to you. He is doing all that he can do. And he iscalling them to vigilant action. But in the end he looks up and says,"Thy will be done concerning their perseverance and maturity." Herests in God's sovereignty: "This we will do,  if  God permits."  He is like Joab going into battle with his brother Abishai. Hemakes every preparation and plan and then says to Abishai,   Be strong, and let us show ourselves courageous for the sake ofour people and for the cities of our God; and  may the LORD do whatis good in His sight . (2 Samuel 10:12)  We have done all that we can do in preparation. We will fight withall our might. But in the end, not we, but the Lord, will advance thevictory or not. So there is where we rest: "May the Lord do what isgood in his sight."  That is where God calls you to rest this morning. Life is complexand full of uncertainties. We work hard. We make preparations. Weplan. We preach. We persuade. We write. We try every way that we knowto do all the good we can do for a perishing, God-profaning world.And when all is said and done, we say, "This will bear fruit, if theLord permits." "May the Lord do what seems good to him."  Come to him this morning and put your faith his sovereign goodnessand wisdom and power. It is the sweetest, safest resting place in theuniverse.  Copyright 1996 John Piper  
  
