 December 13, 1998 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor  THE FINAL DIVIDE: ETERNAL LIFE OR ETERNAL WRATH (3) (Romans 2:6-10) [God] will render to each person according to his deeds: 7 to thosewho by perseverance in doing good seek for glory and honor andimmortality, [he will render] eternal life; 8 but to those who areselfishly ambitious and do not obey the truth, but obeyunrighteousness, [he will render] wrath and indignation. 9 There willbe tribulation and distress for every soul of man who does evil, ofthe Jew first and also of the Greek, 10 but glory and honor and peaceto everyone who does good, to the Jew first and also to the Greek. Seeking Glory and Honor and Immortality I could not bring myself to leave this passage behind with so littlesaid about one of the central assertions, namely that eternal life isgiven to those who seek glory and honor and immortality.Notice verses 6-7: [God] will render to each person accordingto his deeds: to those who by perseverance in doing good seek forglory and honor and immortality, [he will render] eternal life.Shorten that down to this: To those who seek for glory andhonor and immortality, God will render eternal life. Now let's clarify from last week so as to get the misunderstandingsout of the way. 1. Yes, the point is made here that glory and honor and immortalityare sought in a certain way, namely by perseverance in doinggood. Or literally, in accord with the endurance of goodwork. So you can't just go about seeking glory and honor andimmortality any way you wish. How you do it matters. The judgmentwill be according to deeds, as verse 6 says. So we mustseek the glory of eternal life according to the endurance ingood work. That's the first clarification. 2. The second one is that this judgment according to deeds is notjudgment on the basis of the merit of good deeds. That is, the deedsdo not earn eternal life. Rather, the basis of our eternal life andof our right standing with God is the death of Christ, atoning forall our sin, and the righteousness of Christ, fulfilling all ourfailed obedience. Romans 2:24-25 says, [We are] justified as agift by His grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus,whom God put forward as a propitiation by his blood. So thedeath of Christ, absorbing the wrath of God against our sins, is thefoundation of our justification, our right standing with God. But Paul also puts it positively. Not only does Christ take on oursin and absorb the punishment of it, but we take on his righteousnessand receive the reward of it. 2 Corinthians 5:21 says, [God]made Him who knew no sin to be sin on our behalf, so that we mightbecome the righteousness of God in Him. And in Philippians 3:9Paul says I aim to be found in Him, not having a righteousnessof my own derived from the Law, but that which is through faith inChrist, the righteousness which comes from God on the basis offaith. According to Our Deeds The point here is this: eternal life is not earned by the merit ofour good deeds. It is obtained for us by the death of Christ andbased on the righteousness that we have by faith in him. When verse 6says, there will be a judgment according to deeds andverse 7 says that eternal life is given to those who persevere ingood deeds, the meaning is that the faith that justifies alwayssanctifies. A changed life - not a perfect life - always comes as thefruit of being united to Christ. So a transformed life is a necessarycondition of eternal life, but does not earn or merit eternal life. Or, as Jesus said, in Matthew 7:16-17, You will know them bytheir fruits. Grapes are not gathered from thorn bushes nor figs fromthistles, are they? So every good tree bears good fruit, but the badtree bears bad fruit. The appearance of fruit does not make atree a fruit tree. But it shows that it is a fruit tree. So atransformed life does not make a person a Christian. But atransformed life shows that a person is a Christian. In summary then: in the last day there will be a judgment. It willsettle finally and publicly who enters eternal life and who doesn't.The verdict, not guilty, at this judgment will be basedon the work of Christ on the cross. The guilt of all true believerswas carried by Jesus: the Lord has laid on him the iniquity ofus all (Isaiah 53:6). But that verdict will accord withour deeds - our daily lives will give evidence that we trustedChrist more than money and that we loved him more than the praise ofmen. Do Seek Glory and Honor and Immortality Now, when all that clarifying is done, we should go back and notmiss the force of these words in verse seven: God will give eternallife to those who seek for glory and honor andimmortality. Yes, seek it by perseverance in good deeds. Andyes, these good deeds are the fruit of being justified by faith inChrist. Yes and Amen and Praise the Lord to that. But don't miss whatit is saying: there is a seeking of glory and honor and immortality. I stress it for three reasons: 1) A lot of people think this is a low and sub-Christian motive.Christians don't seek glory and honor and immortality. That would beselfish. This was what C.S. Lewis reacted against so vigorously inThe Weight of Glory. The New Testament has lots to say about self-denial, but not aboutself-denial as an end in itself. We are told to deny ourselves and totake up our crosses in order that we may follow Christ; and nearlyevery description of what we shall ultimately find if we do socontains an appeal to desire. If there lurks in most modern minds the notion that to desire ourown good and earnestly to hope for the enjoyment of it is a badthing, I submit that this notion has crept in from Kant and theStoics and is no part of the Christian faith. Indeed, if we considerthe unblushing promises of reward and the staggering nature of therewards promised in the Gospels, it would seem that Our Lord findsour desires not too strong, but too weak. We are half-heartedcreatures, fooling about with drink and sex and ambition wheninfinite joy is offered us, like an ignorant child who wants to go onmaking mud pies in a slum because he cannot imagine what is meant bythe offer of a holiday at the sea. We are far too easily pleased.* 2) The second reason I stress this is that a lot of people don'tseek anything with eagerness, especially not spiritual life. Theyamble through life. They float. They coast. They are spirituallylistless. They are captive to spiritual apathy. Do you remember thatrare word I taught you more than a year ago when we were in the bookof Hebrews? Acedia. It means boredom or apathy. This is deadly.Because Paul says that eternal life is given to those who seek, notthose who dawdle. In 1 Timothy 6:12 he says, Fight the goodfight of faith; take hold of the eternal life to which you werecalled. 3) The third reason I focus on this matter is that what it means toseek glory and honor and immortality needs explaining.And so to that we turn now. Seek, Want, Pursue, Crave, Love The point this morning is that it is a good thing, indeed it is anecessary thing, to seek glory and honor and immortality.Seek it. Want it. Pursue it. Crave it. Love it. Desire it more thanyou desire any earthly thing. That is the point. Don't be a listless,apathetic, sluggish person when it comes to spiritual things. And ifyou are like that, then intensify your prayers that God would igniteyour heart with the preciousness of glory and honor and immortality. Are you fascinated by the impeachment hearings? Then ask God to helpyou transpose that fascination into glory and honor and immortality.Are you eager to have kids home for Christmas? Then ask God to helpyou transpose that eagerness into glory and honor and immortality. Doyou watch the stock market to see how your investments are doing?Then ask God to help you transpose that desire for money into desirefor glory and honor and immortality. That's the point: seek it. Eternal life is given to those who seekglory and honor and immortality. Not to the spiritually indifferent. But what does that mean? Defining Glory, Honor and Immortality Let me get at it with three E's. I use these threeE's to define glory and honor and immortality because Ithink glory is the main thing to seek and honor and immortality aresimply aspects of it. The three E's are Excellence, Echoand Extension. I'm going define glory as a kind of divineexcellence. I think honor is the echo of that excellencein the regard of God and angels and saints. Andimmortality is the extension of that excellence foreverinto the future. So picture a great and excellent person moving into eternity with nodeath. The extension of his movement forever and ever without deathor any decay or corruption or diminishing is his immortality. And ashe moves through eternity forever and ever, his excellence is seen byother excellent persons and is echoed back to him in honor andpraise. So what I hope you can see is that the excellence itself isthe main thing and that immortality is simply that it lasts foreverand honor is simply that it is recognized and approved for what it isin the minds and hearts of other excellent persons, especially God. So I want to focus on the meaning of seeking glory. Thatis the central thing. But there is something about seekinghonor that begs for comment before I take up seekingglory. Seeking Honor Whose approval and whose regard and whose praise should we beseeking? The answer is given in two places: Romans 2:29 and 1Corinthians 4:5. In Romans 2:29 Paul says, He is a Jew who isone inwardly; and circumcision is that which is of the heart, by theSpirit, not by the letter; and his praise is not from men, but fromGod. A genuine Christian is not pursuing praise from men, butpraise from God. That is the honor he wants. In 1 Corinthians 4:5,Paul says that at the judgment God will bring to light thethings hidden in the darkness and disclose the motives of men'shearts; and then each man's praise will come to him from God. Now this raises the question of what God would praise in man. Isthis idolatry on God's part? Is he putting man above his own glory?Is he implying that there is a value or a beauty or a virtue thatcomes from outside God himself that constrains God, as it were, toworship something about man? The answer lies in the meaning of theglory we seek. Seeking Glory That leads us to the final and main issue: what does it mean for usto seek glory? Whose glory? And if we say, God's glory, do we mean that we areseeking to see it or that we are seeking to share in it? And if wesay, see it and share in it, do we mean share in it theway Satan wanted Eve to share in it in Genesis 3:5? - God knowsthat in the day you eat from [the tree] your eyes will be opened, andyou will be like God. Is that the way we should want to sharein God's glory? Absolutely not. So we have to be careful here. Hugethings are at stake in the way we think about this, and the way weseek glory. I think Paul's answers to our questions go like this: We are to seekGod's glory. And seek it first in the sense of wanting to see it andenjoy it for what it is as we see it in God revealed in his word andworks. Romans 1:23 says that the folly of ungodliness is that peopleexchanged the glory of the incorruptible God for animage. This is a failure to seek the glory of God. We are toseek it as the highest treasure of our worship - our admiration anddelight and reverence - and not exchange it for anything. Romans 5:2 says Through [Christ] we have obtained ourintroduction by faith into this grace in which we stand; and we exultin hope of the glory of God. And verse 11 shortens it down tothe absolute essence of our desire: Not only this, but we alsoexult in God. Not mainly the glory of God that we might share,but God himself, period. That is the essence of our seeking. We longfor God. Or which is the same thing, God in his glory or God in hisexcellence. So yes, seeking the glory of God means seeking to see it and know itand enjoy it as it is in God. But that is not all that is meant here,in view of what Paul says in Romans 8. Look at Romans 8:17. If[we are] children [of God, then we are], heirs also, heirs of God andfellow heirs with Christ, if indeed we suffer with Him so that we mayalso be glorified with Him. So here, our seeking is not just tosee the glory of God but to share in the glory of God. Keep on going in Romans 8: For I consider that the sufferings of this present time are notworthy to be compared with the glory that is to be revealed tous. [Yes, glory will be revealed to us, but it goes on to saythat it will also transform us and make us glorious with the sameglory.] For the anxious longing of the creation waits eagerly for therevealing of the sons of God. For the creation was subjected tofutility, not willingly, but because of Him who subjected it, in hopethat the creation itself also will be set free from its slavery tocorruption into the freedom of the glory of the children of God. This is what Paul means in Romans 8:30 when he says, Thesewhom [God] justified, He also glorified. So seeking glory meansboth seeking to see it and to share it. So that leaves us with the question: if we are to share in the veryglory of God, and seek this as part of eternal life, what does itmean, and how can we keep it from being what Satan wanted Eve to doin trying to be like God? I would put it like this: to be glorified, or to share in the gloryof God, and yet not be God is to be fitted by God in mind and spiritand body to know the glory of God and enjoy the glory of God and thusdisplay the glory of God with the very energy of God. What this doesis keep the meaning of glorification radically God-centered. Eventhough we are being glorified, every aspect of our sharing in hisglory is a fitting of us to know or enjoy or display his glory. Whichis the same as to say: our glory is to know his glory. Our glory isto enjoy his glory. Our glory is to display his glory. And our gloryis to do all of that not in our own strength, but in the strengththat God himself supplies so that our joy may be full and his gloryfully shown. So I exhort you and urge you to seek glory and honor andimmortality. Seek the excellence of God - to see it and to share init - to know it and enjoy it and display it. Seek the echo of thatexcellence in the praise of God himself. And seek the everlastingextension of that excellence into all eternity. How Do I Seek Glory and Honor and Immortality? And if you ask how, I leave you with two instructions. 







1.	Look to Christ 1. One is: look to Christ and the glory of his finished work on thecross for sinners. This is what we stressed at the beginning.Justification and eternal life are not earned by our deeds. They arefreely given to those who look to Christ in faith. So if we are goingto obtain the glory of God and be glorified we must trust Christ. Weare justified by faith (Romans 5:1) and those who are justified willbe glorified (Romans 8:30). Therefore faith is the first andindispensable key to seeking the glory of God. But don't treat Christ or faith as less than they are. When I saylook to Christ I mean look steadfastly to the glory ofChrist as your greatest treasure. I mean what Paul says in 2Corinthians 4:4 and 3:18. In 2 Corinthians 4:4, Paul says that thegospel of Christ is the gospel of the glory of Christ, who isthe image of God. So to look to Christ for justification is toseek the glory of God in Christ. It is not something separate. Thisis what faith does. It receives Christ in the gospel as the glory ofGod. This is what faith feeds on in the gospel. Four verses earlier, in 2 Corinthians 3:18, Paul says, We all,with unveiled face, beholding the glory of the Lord, are beingtransformed into the same image from glory to glory, just as from theLord, the Spirit. In other words, looking to Christ in thegospel is a beholding of the glory of the Lord which changes us fromone degree of glory to the next into his image. This is where good deeds come in. Our good deeds are part of thelikeness to Christ. And this likeness to Christ comes from seeing andsavoring the glory of Christ in the gospel. This is why Paul says inRomans 2:7 that those who seek glory by perseverance in gooddeeds will receive eternal life. The likeness to Christ isevidence that we already now being glorified - not byworks, but by looking to Christ in the gospel. To see is to become.To look is to become like. 







2.	Suffering Lies inthe Path to Glory 2. The second instruction I would give in answer to the question howwe seek the glory of God comes from realizing that there are manysufferings on the path that leads to glory. How shall we respond tothem? And how will they help us on to the glory we seek. The answer of 2 Corinthians 4:16-18 is this: We do not loseheart, but though our outer man is decaying, yet our inner man isbeing renewed day by day. For momentary, light affliction isproducing for us an eternal weight of glory far beyond allcomparison, while we look not at the things which are seen, but atthe things which are not seen; for the things which are seen aretemporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. Here again the key is Where are we looking? We should be looking toeternal things gained, not temporal things lost (Philippians 1:21).This is the pathway to an eternal weight of glory far beyondcomparison. Suffering is not incidental to our quest for glory.It is an essential part of it. And this suffering is not justpersecution. It is the decaying of our bodies. Romans8:17-18 says the same thing, even more forcefully, as part of how weseek glory: If [we are] children [of God, then we are], heirsalso, heirs of God and fellow heirs with Christ, if indeed we sufferwith Him so that we may also be glorified with Him. For I considerthat the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to becompared with the glory that is to be revealed to us. That suffering includes the groaning of verse 23 as we wait for theredemption of our bodies. It is not just suffering that comes frompersecution, but all the futilities and miseries of this life. If welook to Christ in them, and suffer with him and not against him, thenverse 17 says we will be glorified with him - now and forever. So my answer to the question how we seek the glory and honor andimmortality of God is: look to Christ. Look to him for the glory thathe is in the gospel of his death and resurrection. See him and savorhim as the image of the glory of God. And look to him in yoursuffering. Look to the things that are eternal. Look to Christ. Lookto the glory of God. Taste him. Trust him. Be transformed by him.  Copyright 1998 John Piper  Piper's Notes   
