  December 14, 1986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchMorningPastor John PiperCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper    PREPARING TO RECEIVE CHRIST  HEARING MOSES AND THE PROPHETS Luke 16:19-31 "There was a rich man, who was clothed in purple and fine linen and who feastedsumptuously every day. And at his gate lay a poor man named Lazarus, fullof sores, who desired to be fed with what fell from the rich man's table;moreover the dogs came and licked his sores. The poor man died and was carriedby the angels to Abraham's bosom. The rich man also died and was buried;and in Hades, being in torment, he lifted up his eyes, and saw Abraham faroff and Lazarus in his bosom. And he called out, 'Father Abraham, have mercyupon me, and send Lazarus to dip the end of his finger in water and coolmy tongue; for I am in anguish in this flame.' But Abraham said, 'Son, rememberthat you in your lifetime received your good things, and Lazarus in likemanner evil things; but now he is comforted here, and you are in anguish.And besides all this, between us and you a great chasm has been fixed, inorder that those who would pass from here to you may not be able, and nonemay cross from there to us.' And he said, 'Then I beg you, father, to sendhim to my father's house, for I have five brothers, so that he may warn them,lest they also come into this place of torment.' But Abraham said, 'Theyhave moses and the prophets; let them hear them.' And he said, 'No, fatherAbraham; but if some one goes to them from the dead, they will repent.' Hesaid to him, 'If they do not hear Moses and the prophets, neither will theybe convinced if some one should rise from the dead." We continue with our advent question: What must happen for our hearts tobe prepared to receive Christ for who he really is? We have given two partsto the answer so far. From Matthew 16:17 we saw that something more than flesh and blood is requiredin order for us to recognize and receive Christ for who he really is. WhenPeter broke through to the insight that Jesus was the Messiah and the Sonof the living God, Jesus said, "Blessed are you Simon Bar-Jonah, for fleshand blood has not revealed this to you, but my Father who is in heaven."In order to receive Christ for who he really is, God the Father must revealto us the truth and beauty of the Son. From John 7:17 we saw that in order to know the truth of Christ's teachingso that we can receive him for who he really is, something has to happento our wills so that we will the will of God: "If anyone's will is to doGod's will he shall know whether the teaching is from God or whether I amspeaking from myself." Specifically, our will has to be freed from its passion to seek the praiseand approval of men. Instead we have to have a will that delights in theglory of God. This is implied in John 5:44, "How can you believe, who receiveglory from one another and do not seek the glory that comes from the onlyGod?" To recognize and receive Jesus for who he really is, we have to willto do the will of God, namely, pursue the glory of God above all other pleasuresin our life. Now today's text gives us another part of the answer to the question, Howis the heart prepared to receive Christ for who he really is? In Luke 16 Jesus is talking to Pharisees who were lovers of money. Noticeverse 14: "The Pharisees who were lovers of money, heard all this, and theyscoffed at him." He had just told them the parable of the unrighteous stewardin verses 1-13. The point of that parable is that the way you use your money(he calls it "unrighteous mammon") can make or break your eternal destiny.Verse 9 says, "I tell you, make friends for yourselves by means of unrighteousmammon, so that when it fails they may receive you into the eternal habitations." In other words, money is going to fail. It will do you no good at all onyour death-bed. And whether you have an eternal habitation will depend, atleast in part, on whether you used your money to advance the cause of Christin the lives of others, or whether you used it to advance your comforts andyour status symbols. That is the point of verse 11: "If then you have notbeen faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will entrust to you the trueriches?" In other words, the possession of money in this world is a test run for eternity.Can you pass the test of faithfulness with your money? Do you you use itas a means of proving the worth of God and the joy you have in supportinghis Cause? Or does the way you use it prove that what you really enjoy isthings, not God? Verse 14 says the Pharisees hear all this and scoff at Jesus because theyare lovers of money. Christ has touched a raw nerve of their lives. Beneathall their religious veneer, they love money. Jesus saw it and nailed it.So what is the real meaning of their scoffing? Verse 15 gives us the realmeaning: they are trying to justify themselves. Instead of repentance, whichwould have opened the way to receive Jesus for who he really is -- the radicalteacher of righteousness -- the Pharisees try to justify themselves by makingJesus look foolish witht their scoffing. So now we are onto something in this chapter of Luke's gospel. We need totest it further. So far it looks like the love of money is a great obstacleto receiving Christ for who he really is. And so the preparation we needin order to receive Christ for who he really is is something that frees usfrom the love of money. In verses 19-31 Jesus tells another story about money. Verse 19 presentsus with a rich man who used his money to put the finest clothes on his backand the finest foods on his table every day -- "clothed in purple and finelinen and feasting sumptuously every day." In verses 20-21 we meet a poor man with a disease of sores. He lay at thegate of the rich man where he would be seen each day as the rich man wentin and out. All he wanted was to eat what was left over from the rich man'stable. He was so destitute that dogs licked his sores. Then (in v. 22) the inexorable end comes to both, as it will to every oneof us: they die. The poor man goes to paradise where Abraham is. The richman goes to hades where there is fire and torment. Then the rich man calls out in verse 24, "Father Abraham!" In other words,this man is a Jew. And his Jewishness has not savid him. Do you rememberwhat John the Baptist preached in Luke 3:8-11? Bear fruits that befit repentance, and do not begin to say to yourselves,"We have Abraham as our father," for I tell you, God is able from these stoneto raise up children to Abraham. Even now the axe is laid to the root ofthe trees; every tree therefore that does not bear good fruit is cut downand thrown into the fire. . . He who has two coats, let him share with himwho has none. So the rich man in the parable is one of those who presumed to say, "I amsecure as a child of Abraham." But he bore no fruit that befits repentance,he shared no food, no clothes, and the axe fell and now he's in hell. Andthis is no doubt the very mockery that that the Pharisees threw back at Jesusin verse 14: "We are the children of Abraham! Don't threaten us that theuse of our money might change our eternal destiny." What would be the counterpart to this attitude in the church today? It wouldbe professing Christians who read these parables and say, "I am an eternallysecure child of God. I am justified by faith alone. Don't tell me that theway I use my money could jeopardize my eternal destiny." The answer to this contemporary form of cheap grace is this: the faith whichjustifies PURIFIES -- it purifies from the love of money. Or as Galatians5:6 says, when it comes to justification before God, "neither circumcisionnor uncircumcision is of any avail but faith working through love." The pointof this parable is that the rich man is in hell because he delighted morein luxuries for himself than in love for Lazarus. It didn't make any differencethat he thought he had a secure standing as a son of Abraham. And so in hell he looks up and pleads for some mercy from Abraham. Abrahamresponds in verse 25 by telling him why he is in hell and in verse 26 bytelling him that there is absolutely no way out. In verse 25 Abraham says, "Son, remember that you in your lifetime receivedyour good things, and Lazarus in like manner evil things; but now he is comfortedhere, and you are in anguish." In other words if during our time on earthwe pursue after "things" instead of God -- after luxury for ourselves insteadof love for others -- then earth will be the extent of our heaven and eternitywill be our hell. But if during our time on the earth God is our treasureno matter how many bad things happen, then earth will be the extent of ourhell and eternity will be our heaven. Then verse 26 adds, "Besides all this (i.e. besides the fact that your ownlove for money and lovelessness toward Lazarus consigns you to hell), betweenus and you a great chasm has been fixed, in order that those who would passfrom here to you may not be able, and none may cross from there to us." Inother words any thought of a temporary purgatory is out of the question.Death is utterly final. The bed we make in this life we sleep in for ever. This does not mean that, by using your money for the good of others in thecause of Christ, you buy a spot in heaven or earn your way to paradise. Notat all! What it means is that the way you use your money shows whether yourheart has been changed so that love for others and not luxury for yourselvesis what you long for and delight in. And this is no more legalism or salvationby works than it is to say that to go to heaven you have to be the kind ofperson who prefers what is there -- or better, who prefers Who is there. Then the rich man asks if Abraham will send Lazarus to warn his five brothersabout the danger of hell. Evidently the rich man knew that they were pursuingthe same kind of life he was and were doomed. Abraham answers in verse 29, "They have Moses and the prophets; let themhear them." In other words, God has already provided ample information andevidence about the necessity of love and the danger of judgment. He is notobliged to give any more than what he has given in the scriptures of theOld Testament. But the rich man knows that his brothers do not listen to the scriptures.They may have devotions in the morning for a few minutes and they attendchurch once a week, but he knows that their whole mindset about money isshaped by the world not God. And so the rich man knows it is not going todo any good for Abraham just to say to them: read your Bible -- read Moses,read the prophets! So in verse 30 he advises Abraham (from hell!) about how to get his brothersto repent: "No, father Abraham; but if some one goes to them from the dead,they will repent." If there could just be a resurrection from the dead --something really startling, some miracle -- then they would wake up and repent.They forsake their selfish luxury and start to live for others to the gloryof God. Then comes Abraham's final, utterly stunning statement (v. 31): "If theydo not hear Moses and the prophets, neither will they be convinced if someone should rise from the dead." Isn't that incredible! If a person is soin love with money that he is deaf to the commands and warnings and promisesof Moses and the prophets, then even a resurrection from the dead will notbring about repentance. So here we have the same point that we saw earlier in verse 14, only hereit's intensified because of the resurrection. Suppose Jesus should rise fromthe dead -- this is what Luke wants his readers to think about -- and supposehe should reveal himself to five brothers like these. Will they receive himfor who he is? O, they might be utterly knocked out of their senses by the miracle of anirrefutable resurrection. But the question is, Will they be knocked out oftheir sins? Will they repent? Abraham says no. They will not repent. Whynot? What will keep them from receiving Jesus for the financial radical thathe really is? Answer: the love of money, the love of things. Let's sum up then the two parables of the chapter. In verses 1-13 Jesus tolda parable to make the point that we should use our money shrewdly -- notas the world counts shrewdness, but shrewdly for the advancement of the gospelin the lives of more and more people so that they will receive us into eternalhabitations (v. 9). Money is a test of our faithfulness to God: if we don'tuse it in a way that shows God is more precious than things, then verse 11says there is no reason to think that we will ever be entrusted with thetrue riches of heaven. The use of money can make or break your eternal destiny. To this kind of teaching the Pharisees respond with scoffing in verse 14.Why? Because they are lovers of money and they see in Jesus a threat to theway they live. So in this text the love of money is the root cause of whythey will not receive Jesus for who he really is. Then Jesus tells another parable in verses 19-31 with basically the samepoint. If we use our money to fatten our cushions instead of seeking everyway possible to invest in the hope of others, then we will go to the placeof torment. And if our love for money and things is so deep that the writingsof Moses and the prophets of God do not change our values, then we will notbe changed even if Jesus Christ should rise from the dead. We will not receivehim for who he really is. So now we go back to our advent question: How must the heart be preparedto receive Christ for who he really is? The answer from today's text is thatthe heart must be freed from the love of things -- the love of money. As long as Jesus Christ embodies a radical freedom from the love of thingsand a deep delight in the service of others, then those who get their joyin life from luxury rather than love will not be able to receive Jesus forwho he really is. "How hard it is for those who have riches to enter thekingdom of God!" (18:24). What then shall we do to prepare our hearts to receive Christ for who hereally is? Perhaps we should take our clue from Abraham in verse 29 of ourtext: "They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them." I think thatis what we should do: go back to the scripture and read again the words of Moses. . . You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your souland with all your might. . . And your neighbor as yourself (Deuteronomy 6:5;Leviticus 19:18). And the words of the prophets. . . Thus says the Lord: Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, let not themighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches;but let him who glories glory in this, that he understands and knows me,that I am the Lord who practice steadfast love, justice, and righteousnessin the earth; for in these things I delight, says the Lord (Jeremiah 9:23-24). And the words of the apostles. . . We brought nothing into the world, and we cannot take anything out of theworld; but if we have food and clothing, with these we shall be content.But those who desire to be rich fall into temptation, into a snare, intomany senseless and hurtful desires that plunge men into ruin and destruction.For the love of money is the root of all evils; it is through this cravingthat some have wandered away from the faith and pierced their hearts withmany pangs (I Timothy 6:7-10). Turn back from the broken cisterns of materialism and drink freely this morningat the fountain of living water. May God use the words of Moses and the prophetsand the apostles to free us from the love of money so that we might receiveChrist for who he really is.  Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
