 September 10, 1989    Bethlehem Baptist Church    John Piper, Pastor    
    OLD AND YOUNG SHALL DREAM TOGETHER    (Acts 2:17)    
    And in the last days it shall be, God declares, that I will pour   out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters   shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old   men shall dream dreams;    
    
    In the last two messages I have spoken to the older saints and to   the younger saints. I tried to show from Leviticus 19:32 and Psalm   71:18 that older people are to be prized, mobilized and   evangelized. Then from Jeremiah 1 I tried to show that the fears   and hesitancies of youth should be overcome by the sovereignty of   God (in choosing us and forming us and consecrating us before we   were born), the authority of God (in his word and his sending),   and the promise of God (to be with us).    
    Now today I want us to focus on old and young together, unified by   the Spirit in ministry according to Acts 2:17. My deep desire is   to see the old and the young united in vision and in ministry at   Bethlehem. This is where the Spirit would take us. So I urge all   of us: "Walk by the Spirit!" "Be led by the Spirit!" "Bear the   fruit of the Spirit!"    
    Let's begin with the situation here in Acts 2. It is an amazingly   important turning point in history. The Son of God, and King of   glory has humbled himself and come to earth as a servant. He has   died on the cross to destroy the works of the devil and to bear   the sins of all who believe in him. He has risen from the dead to   vindicate all his claims and to give indestructible hope to all   who follow him. He told his disciples in Luke 24:49 to wait in   Jerusalem until they are clothed with power from on high. He told   them in Acts 1:8 that they would receive power when the Holy   Spirit comes upon them, and they would be his witnesses to the end   of the world. He had told them earlier in John 14:16 that he would   send the Spirit of truth to be their Counselor when he was gone.   He had promised in John 16:8 that when the Spirit comes he will   convince the world of sin and righteousness and judgment.    
    So you can see that an extraordinary turn in world history is   happening. The Son of God, the king of Glory, has made his   appearance on the earth. He has ransomed a great multitude of   people by his blood. Now he is saying that one more chapter in   world history must be written before the great and terrible day of   the Lord comes. It will be the chapter of the Spirit. The Spirit   empowering his people for witness (Acts 1:8) and the Spirit   convincing the world of sin (John 16:8). And this last chapter   will continue until the ends of the earth are reached (Acts 1:8),   until the gospel of the kingdom is preached in all the world as a   testimony to all peoples (Matthew 24:14). Then the end will come   &#151; when the Spirit has gathered the ransomed of God from every   people and tribe and tongue and nation (John 11:52; Revelation   5:9).    
    So the 120 disciples wait in Jerusalem as Jesus told them too.   They worship at the temple (Luke 24:53) and pray continually in   the upper room. Until the day feast of Pentecost. And on that,   when they were all together, the Spirit came, just as Jesus   promised he would. Acts 2:4 says they were all filled with the   Holy Spirit. According to verse 11 their mouths were filled with   the mighty works of God, and they spoke them in languages that all   different nations could understand.    
    So the promise was being fulfilled: the saints had unusual power   for witness to the mighty works of God, you can see in Acts 2:37   that the convicting work had come as well: "Now when they heard   this they were cut to the heart, and said to Peter and the rest of   the apostles, `Brethren, what shall we do?'"    
    The final chapter of the world had opened with power for witness   and power for conviction. But this needed some explaining. Some of   the people said it must be the effect of drunkenness. Acts 2:13 -   "They are filled with new wine!"    
    But Peter gives a very different understanding of what is   happening. He says it is the fulfillment of Joel's prophecy about   the last chapter of history. Let's read now verses 16 and 17.    
    This is what was spoken by the prophet Joel:    `And in the last days it shall be, God declares,    that I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh,    and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy,    and your young men shall see visions,    and your old men shall dream dreams.    
    What's happening at Pentecost, with the outpouring of the Holy   Spirit, is the opening of a new chapter of history. We live in   this chapter and I want to unfold three of its characteristics   from verse 17. But I want to do this with a very specific focus on   old and young in this congregation.    
    Notice that verse 17 says, "Your young men will see visions, and   your old men shall dream dreams." Neither will be left out. Both   will be blessed in this way. When the Spirit comes he draws   together in ministry. Sons and daughters will prophesy (v. 17) and   servants will prophesy (v. 18). The Spirit will draw men and women   together in ministry, he will draw low and upper class together in   ministry (servants), and he will draw old and young together in   ministry (v. 17). The Spirit comes upon all, fills all (Ephesians   5:18), gives gifts to all (1 Corinthians 12:7; 1 Peter 4:10), and   empowers all for witness and ministry. It is not of the Spirit   when old or young withdraw from the other or from the   ministry.    
    So let's look now at the three characteristics of this chapter of   history beginning at Pentecost and keep in mind as we go, the   truth that it is old and young together, not old and young   separated. To help you remember them, each characteristic begins   with an "F" .    
    1. First, the chapter of history beginning with Pentecost is the   FINAL chapter. Verse 17: "In the last days it shall be, God   declares." This chapter is the chapter of the "last days."    
    Peter said years later when he wrote the letter called 1 Peter   (1:20), "Christ was destined before the foundation of the world   but was made manifest at the end of the times for your sake." Paul   taught the same thing in 1 Corinthians 10:11 when he said (about   the people of Israel in the OT), "These things happened to them as   a warning, but they were written down for our instruction, upon   whom the end of the ages has come."    
    In other words, as the Bible pictures history, the first coming of   Jesus and the outpouring of the Spirit at Pentecost were the   opening pages of the last chapter. We live in the end times, the   last days. It does not matter that these last days have stretched   into 2,000 years. Peter answered this objection in his second   letter by saying that "with the Lord one day is as a thousand   years, and a thousand years as one day" (2 Peter 3:8). He said the   Lord is not slow as some count slowness, but is patiently   gathering people from all the nations lest they perish without   repentance.    
    Living in the last days means that the next great epoch-making act   of God is not another flood, and not the choice of a new Abraham,   and not another great Exodus, and not the giving of another law,   and not the taking of a promised land, and not a period of   Christian kings or an exile in Babylon, and not another Christ to   die and rise. Those chapters are all over. Living in the last days   means that the next great epoch-making act of God is the great and   terrible day of the Lord referred to in verse 20 &#151; the second   coming of Christ. We are in the final days of preparation for the   Great Day when no more conversions can be made. The final division   of sheep and goats will happen. History as we know it will be   over. All those who have loved Christ will enter the kingdom of   his glory. And all those who have rejected him will enter just and   everlasting punishment.    
    This is where we live. Old and young. And the overwhelming   significance of these days is so great as to make the tensions   between old and young in the church evaporate. If our older minds   and our younger minds could be filled with the awesome meaning of   living in the last days, it would cover a multitude of   frustrations and minor disagreements.    
    Note that word "filled" !If our minds could be filled! That is the   second "F" that characterizes this chapter of history. It is not   only FINAL,    
    2. It is a chapter designed for spiritual FULNESS. Fullness for   the old and fullness for the young. "And in the last days it shall   be, God declares, that I will pour out my Spirit . . ."    
    The point of this outpouring is not that the Spirit be spilt, but   that it fill. We know that because in verse 4 this is what   happened: "And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit." And we   know it because in Ephesians 5:18 Paul commands every believer,   "Do not be drunk with wine, but be filled with the Spirit." And in   Ephesians 3:19 Paul prays for all believers that they would be   "filled with all the fulness of God."    
    Here I want to call you &#151; young and old &#151; to a passion   for fulness. It is never too late and never too early to be filled   with the Holy Spirit. Jesus meant old and young when he said,   "Blessed are those who hunger and thirst &#151; they will be   satisfied, they will be filled." Paul meant old and young when he   prayed that we be filled with all the fulness of God. Jeremiah   meant old and young when he said, "You will seek me and find me   when you seek me with all your heart."    
    If you were to ask me, "What is this fulness?" I would say, "Why   do you want to know?" Could it be that you want to know all that   it is so that you can decide whether to obey the command to seek   it, to pray for it, to have it?    
    What I long for from myself and from all of you is the answer:   "Who knows all that the fulness of God might mean in my life. But   I have tasted of the glory of God in the face of Christ, and I   know I want all that he has to give. I want to see more of God, to   love more of God, to reflect more of God. I want the Holy Spirit   to be poured out in my life in ways that I have never known. Or   are there any older or younger people who would dare to say, I   have seen all of God I want to see; my love for him is as deep as   I want it to be; my confidence in his grace is as full as I want   it to be; my life is full enough of God for all to see as fully as   they should see.    
    And if there is none who can say that, then one thing should unite   the old and young of this church &#151; a passionate quest for all   the fulness of God.    
    In the FINAL chapter of history, I pray that the old and the young   of Bethlehem will find a deep and precious unity in pursuing all   the FULNESS of God. That is what this FINAL chapter of history is   for.    
    3. But that is not all it is for. The third and last "F"   describing this chapter of history is this: it is for "all FLESH."   Verse 17: "And in the last days it shall be, God declares, that I   will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh."    
    This means that the outpouring of the fulness of the Holy Spirit   is not to be restricted or held in; God means it to be   worldwide.    
    This too is the meaning of the time we live in. It is the great   Missionary time. We simply don't know the meaning of our day if we   are content with the present extent of the gospel and the   out-pouring of the Spirit on the unreached peoples of the   world.    
    When Joel and Peter say that the young men will see visions and   the old men will dream dreams, this is what they have in mind   &#151; dreams and visions about the spread of the kingdom of God   until "all flesh" is reached. One strong evidence for this is that   in the rest of the book of Acts all the dreams and visions are   given for missionary strategy and missionary motivation. Ananias   (Acts 9) has a vision to go commission Paul for his great   missionary work. Peter (Acts 10) has a vision to carry the gospel   and the Spirit to the gentiles at Cornelius' house. Paul (Acts 16)   has a vision of Europeans saying, "Come over into Macedonia and   help us." (See also 18:9; 26; 19.)    
    When the Spirit comes in his fulness this is what will happen for   the young and for the old. The Bible says, you are never to old to   see a vision and dream a dream for the spreading of the gospel of   Jesus Christ &#151; Never!    
    * * * * *    
    The meaning of our time is threefold: It is the FINAL time. It is   a time for FULNESS. It is a time for reaching all FLESH with the   gospel &#151; old and young together.    
    Keep these last two in the right order. First FULNESS, then   reaching all FLESH. We are not called by God to a frustrating,   unfinishable, discouraging, gloomy task of reaching all flesh. We   are called by the God of all grace first to experience all the   fulness of God (Ephesians 3:19), all the fulness of the Spirit   (Ephesians 5:18), all the fulness of Christ (Romans 15:29). And   then in the strength and joy and fulness that he supplies to   spread it to "all FLESH."    
    We live in the final years of history. God is calling us to be   FILLED with the Spirit, with all the fulness of God. And in that   fulness he is calling young and old to dream new dreams and see   new visions of how all FLESH can be drawn into the experience of   Christ. May the Lord give us this fulness and hasten the great and   final day of the Lord. Amen.    
    . This term "day of the Lord" is used in the New Testament 3 other   times: 1 Thess. 5:2; 2 Thess. 2:2; 2 Peter 3:10. But it occurs   other times in combination with the name of Jesus. "Day of the   Lord Jesus:" 1 Cor. 5:5; 2 Cor. 1:14. "Day of the Lord Jesus   Christ:" 1 Cor. 1:8. "Day of Jesus Christ:" Phil 1:6. "Day of   Christ:" Phil 1:10; 2:16. "Day of God:" 2 Peter 3:2; Rev. 16:14       
        Copyright 1989, 1998 John Piper      Piper's   Notes            
