 December 3, 1989    Bethlehem Baptist Church    John Piper, Pastor    
    
    Triumphant Light    John 1:1-5    
    In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the   Word was God. He was in the beginning with God; all things were   made through Him, and without Him was not anything made that was   made. In Him was life, and the life was the light of men. The   light shines in the darkness, and the darkness has not overcome   it.    
    
    During the four Sundays of Advent I hope to bring four messages   from John 1:1-18. The Christian purpose of the Advent season is to   focus our attention on the great reality described in verses 1 and   14. At the end of verse 1 John says, "The Word was God." And at   the beginning of verse 14 he says, "The Word became flesh and   dwelt among us." Everything we are and believe as Christians   depends upon this: That Jesus Christ is God and Jesus Christ is   man. Fully God, fully human. Everything depends on this. So even   though Christmas as a Christian festival may not be taught in the   Bible, the Christian meaning given to Christmas is the very   foundation of the Bible.    
    And the goal of the Bible and the goal of God in becoming human   and the goal of this Gospel of John are all the same. John 20:31,   "These things are written that you may believe that Jesus is the   Christ, the Son of God, and that believing you may have life in   His name." So if my messages are going to be faithful to John's   purpose in this gospel my goal must be to help you believe in the   Son of God and have eternal life. That is the direction you should   pray for me.    
    We begin today with verses 1-5 and I think I can make the point of   these verses clearest by treating them in reverse order. Here's   what I see. In verse 5 John says, "The light shines in the   darkness and the darkness has not overcome it." (Some translations   say "have not understood it." But the one other place John uses   this Greek word, not counting 8:3,4, is in John 12:35 which says,   "Walk while you have the light, lest the darkness overtake you.")   This is what I would call the "invincibility of light" .It is not   overcome. So you could label verse 5: "Light is triumphant over   darkness."    
    But why is this the case? Why does darkness not overcome the   light? How can we be sure that light will go on and completely   overcome the darkness? This is what verses 1-4 are written to   answer. They give three reasons why the light will triumph over   the darkness. So let's focus for a moment on the conflict of light   and dark in verse 5 and then look at the three reasons in verses   1-4 why light will win.    
    When John says in verse 5 that "the Light shines in the darkness,"   he means that the Word has become flesh. Jesus has come into a   dark world and is the light of the world. In John 8:12 Jesus says,   "I am the light of the world." Right here in verse 9 it says, "The   true light that enlightens every man was coming into the world. He   was in the world, and the world was made through him, yet the   world knew him not. He came to his own home, and his own people   received him not." So it's plain that Jesus is the one spoken of.   He is the light in verse 5. He is the one who shines in the   darkness.    
    The darkness is the world of evil and unbelief and death and   judgment. John 3:19 says, "This is the judgment, that the light   has come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light   because their deeds were evil." So darkness is the power of evil   and unbelief.    
    So what verse 5 is saying is that Jesus Christ, the light of the   world has entered into the darkness of evil and unbelief and   lostness and death, and this darkness does not overcome Jesus. Now   that makes a tremendous difference to those of us who believe in   Jesus. In John 12:46 Jesus says, "I have come as light into the   world that whoever believes in me may not remain in darkness." So   believers have passed from darkness to light. John 12:36 says,   "While you have the light, believe in the light, that you may   become sons of the light." When you believe in Jesus not only do   you leave the darkness and enter the light; you actually join the   family of the light &#151; you become children of the light. Paul   said, "Once you were darkness, but now you are light in the Lord;   walk as children of light" (Eph. 5:8).    
    So it makes a tremendous difference to us if the light triumphs,   or the darkness overcomes it. And that's what verse 5 makes clear:   "The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness has not   overcome it." The light will triumph and that means Jesus will   triumph and all those who believe in him, the children of the   light, will triumph. We need to hear this today in America,   because darkness is gaining ground on numerous fronts in our   land.    
    More and more often we read stories that ten years ago would have   been unthinkable. Two weeks ago TIME magazine reported that a pair   of lesbians, Ruth Frost and Phyllis Zillhart (who were trained at   Luther Northwestern Seminary here in the Twin Cities) were called   as co-assistant pastors of St. Francis Lutheran Church in San   Francisco. Michael Hiller, another pastor at the church said,   "This is not an issue of morals . . . it's an issue of   justice."    
    Study such sentences carefully. They embody the spirit of our age.   When justice is divorced from morality, when rights of individuals   are separated from right and wrong, the only definition you have   left for justice is the right for every individual to do as he   pleases. And the end of that road is anarchy and barbarism.    
    We are moving fast in that direction as a culture. But I will   stake my life on the truth of John 1:5. The light shines in the   darkness &#151; Jesus shines, the gospel shines, the church shines   &#151; and the darkness will not overcome it. How can we be   sure?    
    John gives three reasons. First, consider verse 4: "In him was   life, and the life was the light of men." This means that the   light that shines in the darkness is the light of LIFE (John   8:12). The life of the Son IS the light of the world. The first   reason the light will triumph over the darkness is that it is   life. It is living light. What does that mean?    
    Well, if the Life of the Son of God IS the light that shines in   the darkness (which is what verse 4 says) then there are at least   four things we can say about this light.    
    First, the light of life has energy and power because the life of   the Son has energy and power.    Second, the light of life has purpose and motion. It is not static   like a lamppost or a lighthouse on the shore. It plans and moves.   It shines now here now there. It is alive with the life of the   Son.    Third, the light of life grows and expands. That is the way the   Life of the Son of God is. His life is a fountain of life (Psalm   36:9). Once the rays start coming out of this light they extend   farther and farther and farther.    Fourth, the Light of life begets offspring. John 12:36, "Believe   in the light, that you may become sons of the light."    
    So the first reason the light shines in the darkness and the   darkness does not overcome it is that this light is living &#151;   it has energy and purposefulness and growth and reproduction. It   is not a static thing like a stop light that might be ignored. The   light that shines in the world today is the very life of the Son   of God.    
    To which someone might say, "So what? Maybe the powers of darkness   are just as strong as his life?" That leads us to the second   reason we can be sure the darkness will not overcome the   light.    
    It's given in verse 3: "All things were made through him, and   without him was not anything made that was made." Now the "him" in   this verse is the same him as in verse 4: "In him was life and the   life was the light of men." So the point is this: the energetic,   purposeful, growing reproductive life that shines in the darkness   is the life of none other than the One through whom all things   were made. The life that shines in the light is the life of the   Creator.    
    So we know that the powers of darkness are not as strong as this   life because this life created the powers of darkness. "Without   him was not anything made that was made." And no created thing is   more powerful than its creator.    
    Someone might say, "Isn't the Atom Bomb more powerful than the men   who created it? Can't the Atom Bomb destroy its maker?" The answer   is that there is an infinite difference between, on the one hand,   making a bomb out of materials that exist already and which are   controlled by laws you did not write, and, on the other hand,   creating out of nothing the very materials of the universe and the   laws that control them. If you can make something out of nothing,   you can always turn that something into nothing. And therefore the   Creator always has the upper hand in his world. He will   triumph.    
    And the powers of darkness know this, because when Jesus came to   the Gadarene demoniacs in Matthew 8:29 they cried out, "What have   you to do with us, O Son of God? Have you come here to torment us   before the time?" "Before the time!" They know a TIME is set for   their destruction and for their everlasting consignment to hell.   (See Luke 22:53.) They know the light will triumph.    
    The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness cannot overcome   it, first, because the light is the light of energetic,   purposeful, growing, reproducing life, and, second, because that   life is the life through Whom everything was made &#151; including   the angelic powers that fell into darkness.    
    That leaves one last reason for why we can be sure that the light   will not be overcome by the darkness. Not only is the light a   living light, and not only is the life of this light the life of   God's Word through whom He created all things, but this Word, this   life, this light, IS GOD! And God Almighty cannot be overcome.    
    Verse 1: "In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God   and the Word was God." "The Word was with God" means that they are   distinct Persons and can fellowship with one another. But "the   Word was God" means that they are one God, not two. We hold fast   to the Biblical mystery: God the Father and God the Son have such   a unity that they are one God not two, and such a distinction that   they are two Persons not one.    
    The practical point is this: the light cannot be overcome by the   darkness because 1) the light is alive &#151; it's the light of   life; and 2) through this life &#151; this living Word &#151; all   things were made; and 3) this living Word IS God.    
    * In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God and the   Word was God. He was in the beginning with God.    * All things were made through him, and without him was not   anything made that was made.    * In him was life, and that life was the light of men.    ** The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness has not   overcome it.    
    So be of good cheer. Christ has overcome the world of darkness   (John 16:33). "Believe in the light that you may become sons of   the light" (John 12:36). Take the offensive this season. Raid the   darkness. It cannot overcome the children of light.       
        Copyright 1989, 1998 John Piper      Piper's   Notes    
