  We have been moving from the inside to the outsideof life in the last three weeks.  God takes pleasure in thosewho hope in his love.  God delights in the prayers of the upright. God delights in obedience much more than in sacrifice.  Hopeis deepest within.  It expresses itself in prayer.  And then theobedience we spoke of is out in the open.  But so far we haveconfined ourselves mainly to what you might call the religiouspart of life.  Today we move out one last step to that part of lifewhich is not ordinarily considered religious.  You might callit the secular part of your life, meaning the partwhere you have ordinary dealings with the world.  You might callit the business part of your life.  It includes things like fillingup your gas tank and buying antiques and punching a time cardand paying your taxes.  Does God have an interest in this part of your life? Does he take delight in the way you do things at the store orthe office or the shop or the kitchen?  Is any wrong behaviorin these non-religious areas so significant that God would evencall them an abomination?  With this concern we have moved out just about asfar as we can go:  from hope to prayer to general obedience tonon-religious, business life.  But there is one more step we couldtake, and I want to take it today.  We could ask, Does God haveany delight in the behavior of non-Christian people in the non-religiousareas of life?  So we really have two areas to examine before ustoday: the non-religious, business life of Christians and thenon-religious, business life of non-Christians.  Does God takedelight in any or all of this life?  If so why?    The aim, as always, is to clarify the character andnature of God by examining what he loves (remember Henry Scougal'squote! The worth of a soul is measured by the object ofits love).  But I know that this message will also carrymuch practical counsel for your daily lives, and so I hope thatyou will listen for both things.  First of all, let's take both areas together andsimply ask what sorts of things are included in our text, Proverbs11:1.  The verse doesn't say whether only believers or also unbelieversare in view.  It simply says,    A false balance is an abomination to the LORD, but a just weight is his delight.   The implications here are very far-reaching.  Butlet's get the specific picture clear in our minds.  Suppose youwere a merchant in the Old Testament times and you sold corn meal. And suppose that in those days ten cents a pound was a fair price. Someone comes to you and asks to buy five pounds of corn meal. So you reach for your five pound stone and place it in the dishon one side of the scales.  Then you take your big bag of mealand start pouring it into the dish on the other side of the scale. You pour until the two dishes swing at the same level.  Thenyou pour the dish full of meal into your customer's container,and he knows that he has been given the right amount of grain. The size of a five pound stone is fairly common knowledge.  But then suppose that during the night you took avery sharp, hard blade and dug a small hole in the side of thestone and worked it around hollowing out the inside until it weighedonly four pounds.  Then you covered the little hole over withclay the same color as the stone and let it dry.  The next dayyou don't use it on the educated and strong because they mightmake a fuss over the apparently smaller pile of meal and mighteven examine the stone.  But when the child comes on behalf ofhis mother, and when the widow who is partially blind comes tobuy meal, you use your deceitful stone.      Our text says that this is an abomination to theLord, but that the full weight is his delight.  Now what sorts of acts in the 1980's are impliedin the phrase, false balances in Proverbs 11:1?  Letme just mention four categories , which are really two differentways of dividing the acts into two categories.    First, this verse refers to sellers and it refersto buyers:   1.  It includes acts of selling when the seller doesnot give goods or services worth the price or the fee that heis charging.  You can imagine a gasoline pump that reads a pennymore per gallon than it should, or a scale at the grocery storethat reads high, or a medicine label that claims too much, ora Realtor who doesn't tell a buyer about a flooding problem inthe house he is selling or a college teacher who hasn't writtena new lecture in ten years and spends his time remodeling hisbasement.  2.  It includes acts of buying when the buyer schemesto pay less than the goods or services are really worth.  Youcan see what God thinks of such an act in Proverbs 20:14 -- 'Itis bad, it is bad,' says the buyer; but when he goes away, thenhe boasts.  This would include paying some poor vendor inMexico a ridiculously small sum for a quality rug he had madebecause he is desperate for a sale and you can take it or leaveit.  It would include not paying the late penalty on my waterbill by dating my check back before the deadline.  The other way to categorize the acts denounced inProverbs 11:1 it refers to acts of deceit and it refers to actsof injustice.  3.  It includes acts that involve deceit in transactionswith other people.  And so the act expresses a lie.  For example,in the next several days as you do your tax returns this versehas something very definite to say about whether your reportingis a delight to God or an abomination to God.  Or you might filean insurance claim and lie about the extent of the damages inorder to get a better settlement.  4.  And the other side of this is that such actsalways do an injustice to another person.  A person does not getwhat is his due.  For example, you might stick a person with alemon of a car by not being truthful about its condition whenyou sell it.  Or you might rush a refugee family into signinga lease for an unseen apartment and charge them exorbitant rentand leave the apartment in poor condition with no improvements.   So I hope you can see that all such things are impliedin Proverbs 11:1, A false balance is an abomination to theLORD, but a just weight is his delight.  You can be a deceitfulseller or a deceitful buyer.  And you can do and injustice toa buyer and you can do an injustice to a seller.  One lesson to be learned from this already is thatGod has an interest in all our non-religious life.  All our businesstransactions are his concern.  God is not so distant or even soreligious that he only cares about what happens atchurch and during devotions.  Every square inch of this earthis his and every minute of our lives is a loan from his breath. He is much more secular than we often think.   And of course this should make a big difference inthe way we live our non-religious lives.  Charles Bridges, anevangelical pastor in the Church of England a century ago, asksthis searching question: Is it not a solemn thought, thatthe eye of God marks all our common dealings of life, either asan abomination or a delight?  Test yourself.  Are you beingshaped more by the secular spirit of the world or by the spiritof God?  The test is this: do you feel that minor business misrepresentationsare just part of the game rules of the day or are they an abominationto God?  Now I want to ask the question, Why is a just weighta delight to God in the hand of a believer?  And then close byasking, Is a just weight a delight to God in the hand of an unbeliever? If so, Why?  Why is a just weight a delight to God in the handof a believer?  God delights in just and honest dealings frombelievers because these dealings make their God-honoring faithvisible.  Just and honest dealings make the saving lordship ofGod visible.  Let me show you one of the places where this istaught explicitly.  In Leviticus 19:35-37 God gives instruction aboutjust weights and balances, and he gives a motive.   You shall do no wrong in judgment, in measures oflength or weight or quantity.  You shall have just balances, justweights, a just ephah, and a just hin: I am the Lord your God,who brought you out of the land of Egypt.  And you shall observeall my statutes and all my ordinances, and do them: I am the Lord.   How is God motivating honesty and justice here? Notice three things in verse 36:    First he says, I am the LORD!  That is,I am Yahweh!  He uses his personal name that he usedto Moses just before he brought the people out of Egypt.  Andyou remember he explained the meaning of that name by saying,I am who I am.  The name implies absoluteness andindependence and freedom and sovereignty.  Second, he says, I am your God!.  Inother words, I am for you.  I am on your side.  My absolutenessand independence and freedom and sovereignty are yours.  Thatis what it means if we can truly say, Yahweh is my God!  Third, he says, I brought you out of the landof Egypt.  This is the specific illustration that demonstratesonce and for all for Israel that God is for them.  He is theirGod.  He is absolute and free and sovereign -- not to destroybut to save his people.  For Christians today the death and resurrectionof Jesus -- the second Exodus -- has surpassed the first in value.   Now what does all that have to do with the way youfill out your tax forms in the next two weeks?  What does it haveto do with just balances and honest weights?  Verse 36 says, You shall have just balances,just weights, a just ephah, and just hin: I am the Lord your God,who brought you out of the land of Egypt.   Surely the pointis this:    if you really know that God is the LORD -- Yahweh,the absolute, independent, free and sovereign God of the universe; and if you trust him as YOUR GOD -- that he is foryou with all his power;  and if your faith is established and encouraged bythe great demonstration of God's love in the Exodus (and the substitutionarydeath and victorious resurrection of Jesus!),  then you will not need to fudge on your tax returnsin order to make sure that you get the most happiness.     You will believe that your omnipotent God has committedhimself with all his absolute freedom and sovereign power to rescueyou from Egypt and bring you to a land flowing with milk and honeyand care for you every step of the way.  That's what I meant when I said that God delightsin just and honest dealings from believers because these dealingsmake their faith visible.  Just and honest dealings make the savinglordship and power of God visible.  When a Christian acts withintegrity instead of trying to get ahead with deceit, he demonstratesthe power and love of the God of the Exodus.    He says, I have a great God to take care of me!     I have a Lord and Master who promises to meet allmy needs according to his riches in Glory in Christ Jesus!    I have a pillar of fire to guide me through darktimes.    I have a pillar of cloud to show me the way of joyin the day.    I have a fountain of living water that never runsdry and always satisfies my thirst.    How can I lie or deceive as though I were like menwho trust in themselves and in their deceitful ingenuity to makea better life for themselves than God can make for me throughthe obedience of faith?    Proverbs 20:17 says,    Bread gained by deceit is sweet to a man,  but afterward his mouth will be full of gravel.   In other words when we use false balances or lieon our tax returns or misrepresent the facts in our dealings weare declaring that the fleeting sweetness of sin is more to bedesired than the everlasting peace of God.  This is no honor toGod and therefore no delight to his heart.  A false balanceis an abomination to the LORD, but a just weight is his delight.  Now what about unbelievers?  There are unbelieverswho order their business lives in honest and just ways.  Is thisa delight to God?  The answer is no and yes, because God looks at thehonesty of unbelievers in two different ways.   When God looks at their honesty and justice as anoutworking of their inner life of unbelief he does not delightin it because it is sin.  Romans 14:23 says, Whatever isnot from faith is sin.    Honest unbelievers are like a rebellious teenageson who rejects his parents and everything they stand for, andgoes to another city.  But to make it in the real world, he decidesto play by some of their rules.  So he gets a job as a cook ata restaurant.  Months later his parents happen to visit that cityand go to that restaurant.  Without knowing that he is there theyorder one of their favorite delights (call just balancesor honest scales).  And without knowing it their ownson makes their meal.  But back there in the kitchen he is asrebellious as ever. He is not doing it for their sake at all. And so even this act of fixing what they have ordered is an expressionof rebellion.  And if his parents could be told the truth, theywould not rejoice and say, Oh, how wonderful, our son isnow a delight to us, because he made our favorite meal!  So God does not delight in the honesty and the justiceof unbelievers when he sees it as an expression of their rebelliousand unbelieving hearts.  Acts done without any trust in his graceor any love for God's glory are not a delight to God.  But there is a sense in which God does delight inthe just balances and honest weights of unbelievers, namely, whenhe looks at their honesty and justice as fragment of his own divinework.  I get this from Proverbs 16:11.     A just balance and scales are the Lord's; all the weights in the bag are his work.   I think this means that wherever you find just scalesand a bag of honest weights you find the work of God.  Justiceis God's creation.  Honesty is God's design.  Integrity is thework of God -- even in unbelievers; just like their head and heartand hands and feet are his work.    Theologians call this common grace.  It isn't savinggrace.  It doesn't get a man to heaven.  It is the same gracethat makes the sun come every day on the good and the evil andsends rain on the just and the unjust (Mt. 5:43-47).  It is thegrace that keeps a society from sinking into anarchy.  And whenGod sees the work of his own common grace holding the world backfrom premature ruin, and giving at least some outward expressionto his purposes of justice and honesty, he delights in what hesees.  The honesty and justice of unbelievers is like asea shell washed up on the beach.  There's no life in it.  Butit does have a kind of beauty.  There is some sturdiness to itand symmetry and order.  Life is more enjoyable because this shellexists.  It has its uses: you could plant a flower in it; or youcould use it to stud your rock wall, or you could teach thingsfrom it at school.  So it is with the integrity of unbelievers.  It isthe leftover shell of holiness. The vestige of the image of God.  The residue of something glorious and beautiful in the heart of God.  And the very work of his grace preserving and keepinghis fallen humanity back from the precipice of anarchy and chaos.  And when God looks on the honesty and justice ofhis unbelieving and rebellious creatures in this way he delightsin their justice and takes pleasure in their honesty.  It is thework of his own hands, and the gift of his grace.  Of all the lessons that we could draw out of thesetruths let me close with just one, and hope that you will makeothers to your own heart.  Since external conformity of unbelievers to God'sdesigns of justice and honesty does in one way delight the heartof God, it was right of William Wilberforce to devote 20 yearsof his life in Parliament to the abolition of English slave trading,even though the great majority of those merchants who gave upthe trade did it under constraint and not for any holy reasonsat all.  It was the work of God's grace that rid England of thebarbarisms of the African slave trade.  And therefore the Lordlooked down with delight February 22, 1807 when the House of Commonspassed the decisive bill.  He delighted most in the living power of holinessin the life of Wilberforce and Henry Thornton as they embracedone another and frolicked in the snow like schoolboys outsidethe chamber.    And, in a different and mysterious way, God alsodelighted in the shell of holiness that took shape in Englishsociety when it was purged of the slave trade once and for all. For he delights in the work of his hands.  John Wesley, the great evangelist wrote to Wilberforceto strengthen his hand in God.  He said,    Unless God has raised you up for this very thing,you will be worn out by the opposition of men and devils, butif God be for you who can be against you?  Are all of them togetherstronger than God?  Oh, be not weary in well-doing. . .    There are battles to be fought today in America againstmanifold injustices and indecencies.  May the Lord give us wisdomto know whether we are called to fight like Wesley or to fightlike Wilberforce.  
