  May 5, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor    
      SPOKEN, CONFIRMED, WITNESSED A GREAT SALVATION   (Hebrews 2:1-4)    
   For this reason we must pay much closer attention to what we haveheard, lest we drift away from it.   2 For if the word spokenthrough angels proved unalterable, and every transgression anddisobedience received a just recompense, 3 how shall we escape if weneglect so great a salvation? After it was at the first spokenthrough the Lord, it was confirmed to us by those who heard, 4 Godalso bearing witness with them, both by signs and wonders and byvarious miracles and by gifts of the Holy Spirit according to His ownwill.  
  No Escape    The point of this paragraph of God's Word is that there will be noescape for any of us who neglects our great salvation. Verse 3: "Howshall we escape if we neglect so great a salvation?" What's theanswer to that question? The answer is, There is no way we willescape if we neglect such a great salvation.  Now this is a sobering word for the world and for the church,because most people  do  neglect the greatness of salvation. Howmany people do you know who give serious, sustained attention to thesalvation accomplished by Christ -- who love it, and think about it,and meditate on it, and marvel at it, and feel continual gratitudefor it, and commend it to others as valuable, and weave it into allthe lesser things of their lives, and set their hopes on it? Do youlive this way? Is it not astonishing how neglectful even professingChristians are of their great salvation?  Is there a sense of greatness in your mind about your salvation?When something truly great is happening, there is an appropriateresponse to greatness. Do you respond to the greatness of yoursalvation? Or do you neglect it? Do you treat your salvation the wayyou treat your will or the title to your car or the deed on yourhouse? You signed it once and it is in a file drawer somewhere, butit is not a really great thing. It has no daily effect on you.Basically you neglect it.  So this is an astonishing word to the church and the world. Toneglect our great salvation is to come into judgment and there willbe no escape. Being a Christian is very serious business. Not sour  business, but  serious , very serious.    A    Great   Salvation    It's not as if he is saying, Don't neglect your arthritis. Or:Don't neglect your dandelions. Or: Don't neglect your spinach. He issaying don't neglect your  salvation . Your  great salvation. So it's as if he said, Don't neglect your steak dinners.Don't neglect your cancer-healing therapy. Don't neglect yoursunrises and sunsets. And don't neglect your Butterfinger Blizzardsor your new baby's smile, or your Rocky Mountains, or your boundarywaters' breezes under the full night sky, or your safe warm bed. It's like  that.  Only what is it really -- this great salvation? What he's reallysaying is: Don't neglect being loved by God. Don't neglect beingforgiven and accepted and protected and strengthened and guided byAlmighty God. Don't neglect the sacrifice of Christ's life on thecross. Don't neglect the free gift of righteousness imputed by faith.Don't neglect the removal of God's wrath and the reconciled smile ofGod. Don't neglect the indwelling Holy Spirit and the fellowship offriendship of the living Christ. Don't neglect radiance of God'sglory in the face of Jesus. Don't neglect the free access to thethrone of grace. Don't neglect the inexhaustible treasure of God'spromises. This is a great salvation. Neglecting it is very evil.Don't neglect so great a salvation.  Because if you do, you will perish without escape. So being aChristian is a very serious business -- not a sour business, but aserious business. We are simply blood-earnest about being happy inour Great Salvation. We will not be deflected by this world into thefleeting and suicidal pleasures of sin. We will not neglect oureternal joy in God -- which is what salvation is. We will gouge outour eyes rather than be lured away from eternal life.  Now the opposite of neglecting our great salvation is mentioned inHebrews 2:1, "We must pay closer attention to what we have heard."What we have heard is the message of a great salvation delivered bythe Son of God (see Hebrews 1:2). And "paying closer attention" iswhat "not neglecting" means. That's what we looked at last week.    A    True   Salvation    Now this week we look at the reason given in verses 3 and 4 why itis such a contemptible thing to neglect our great salvation. And thereason is that the message of our great salvation has been confirmedby a cluster of reliable witnesses. It is true and its truth has beenwitnessed to in sufficiently diverse and trustworthy ways that it isevil to reject it. This is the point of verses 3 and 4: Our salvationis not only great, it is true. Of course it could not be great unlessit were true. But the focus here is not on how great it is to besaved, but how sure you can be that it is great to be saved. Look atthese two verses with me:  How shall we escape if we neglect so great a salvation? After itwas at the first spoken through the Lord [contrast "through angels"for the law in verse 2], it was confirmed to us by those who heard[that is, the apostles, the eyewitnesses who heard the earthlyteaching of the Lord Jesus], 4 God also bearing witness with them,both by signs and wonders and by various miracles and by gifts of theHoly Spirit according to His own will.  Now what is the point of these two verses? The point is tohighlight how bad it is to neglect so great a salvation. But not byfocusing on the greatness of the salvation but on the sufficiency ofthe confirmation of the greatness of the salvation.  In other words there are at least two reasons you might neglectsomething. One is that it is not really great, and so you neglect itand spend your time and energy on something that you think is reallygreat. The other is that, even though it might be really great, youmay not have access to sufficient evidence that it really is great.In the first case, you may know the salvation, but you don't think itis so great. In the second case, you neglect it because you don'tknow the salvation.    Witnesses to the Truth of this GreatSalvation    Hebrews 2:3-4 are intended to say to the original readers -- and,I think, to us -- there have been more than enough confirmations ofthe truth of this great salvation for you to believe it and embraceit and love it and not neglect it.  Let's outline them and then ask how our confidence rises fromthese things.  There are four stages of witness:  1. When verse 3 says, "It was at the first spoken through theLord," it implies that God the Father was the first speaker of thissalvation. God spoke this great salvation "through the Lord.""Through the Lord" implies that Christ was a Go-between for thisgreat salvation. This is the same wording as in verse 2 where theword of the Old Testament was "spoken through angels." So the firstwitness is God the Father, which is exactly what you would expect ifyou recall Hebrews 1:1-2 -- God spoke first through prophets and inthese last days he has spoken by a Son. The first witness to thegreatness of our salvation is God.  2. Then the second witness is the Mediator, the Go-between, ChristJesus. "It was at first spoken through the Lord," that is, throughJesus. This is a reference to the earthly ministry of Jesus as hetaught and healed and cast out demons and preached the kingdom of Godand died and rose again. In Acts 10:36, Peter says to Cornelius thatthe gospel is "The word which [God] sent to the sons of Israel,preaching peace through Jesus Christ (He is Lord of all)." So thegreat salvation was spoken by God through Jesus Christ, who is Lordof all.  Therefore whatever stamp God the Father leaves on this testimonybears witness to its divine origin and whatever stamp the Lord Jesusleaves on it bears witness to its endorsement by the Son.  3. The third witness in the sequence is mentioned at the end ofverse 3: "It [the great salvation] was confirmed to us by those whoheard." The author puts himself in a group with the readers of theletter and says "us." And then he mentions a group called "those whoheard." Heard what? Heard what was spoken by the Lord. In otherwords, he is referring to the eyewitnesses, the apostles, those whohad spent time with Jesus and heard him teach and heard him tell thestorm to be still and heard him command demons to come out of peopleand heard him stump the Pharisees, and heard him teach theincomparable words of the Sermon on the Mount and heard him interpretthe Old Testament, and heard him make stupendous claims about his ownresurrection and his purpose to ransom many from sin, and heard himspeak from a resurrected body and command them to go and makedisciples of all nations.  These were the ones who had come to preach to the readers of thisletter. The readers had heard the stories of Jesus from the verymouths of eyewitnesses. They had heard God and they had heard Jesusby hearing the very witnesses who were there when God spoke throughhis Son, Jesus Christ.  So verse 3 says that the great salvation was "confirmed" by theseear-witnesses. Without these witnesses there would be no faith. Thesewitnesses are the indispensable link to the speaking of God theFather and of Jesus Christ. The firmness of our faith rests on thesewitnesses. Without them there would be no rock to stand on. These arethe foundation. Faith comes by hearing and hearing by the word ofChrist -- but a word mediated by personal eye-witnesses.  4. The fourth witness in this series is again God himself. Thesequence begins with God and ends with God. Verse 4: "God alsobearing witness with them [that is, with the eyewitnesses], both bysigns and wonders and by various miracles and by gifts of the HolySpirit according to His own will." God spoke the great salvation intobeing through Jesus, and now God comes in again to witness to his ownword and work.  The way he witnesses is through signs and wonders and miracles andgifts of the Holy Spirit. In other words, when the apostles came topreach and witness to what they had seen and heard, God enabled themto do miracles and he poured out on the new believers gifts of theSpirit. This was God's added testimony to the message of his greatsalvation.    How Do These Witnesses Give a Firm Foundationto our Faith?    Now here's the key question. How do all these witnesses give afirm foundation to our faith in God's great salvation? Why are wemore guilty for neglecting this great salvation because there arethese four kinds of witnesses?  The reason I ask the question is because coming to have a firm andreasonable conviction about the truth is not a simple thing. Forexample, if God speaks, you can always say, "How do I know it's God?"Or if Jesus speaks, you can say, "How do I know you are not a deludedprophet?" Or if an apostle speaks about seeing the risen Christ, youcan say, "How do I know you were not hallucinating? Or maybe you area con artist and are trying to make a name for yourself." And ifsomeone does miracles, you can say, "Maybe its magic, or maybe Satanis trying to deceive me."  If I told you right now that yesterday, as I was working on thismessage, I received over the Email a story of a miraculous healing inLyon, France, that led to the conversion of a skeptical unbelieverand former Tour de France cyclist, you could think of a lot ofreasons not to believe the story. If I showed you the message on mycomputer this afternoon, you could say I concocted it or got someoneelse to for the sake of this illustration. If I said the story wastold by the very person whom God used to perform the miracle and gaveyou his name and Email address, you could still come up with aconspiracy theory or a theory of delusion that would make it possiblefor you not to believe that it happened. And I dare say that if youhad been there in the restaurant when Ron Cohen prayed for thisskeptic's injured knee, and you saw him lay his crutches aside andwalk around the table and begin to cry, "C'est impossible," it wouldstill be possible to imagine an explanation other than that God actedto witness to his great salvation.  So here's the question: since it is always possible to doubt atestimony, what causes a person to be properly persuaded? Whathappens in the mind that brings it to rest in the truth? How do youever come to have a valid persuasion about someone's testimony --mine, or the apostles' or Jesus's or God's? How does skepticism getreplaced with well-grounded faith?  This text does not give the whole answer. It simply assumes thatGod has spoken his great salvation. Jesus, the Lord of the universewas the one through whom God spoke, and so he adds his testimony. Theapostles heard Jesus in the flesh and came and preached the greatsalvation to the readers of this letter. And God added the witness ofmiracles and gifts of the Spirit. In other words, well-grounded faithcomes through a cluster of testimonies.  But  how , since they can all be doubted if you want to doubtthem?  The text does not say specifically, but I venture an answer on thebasis of some other passages like 2 Corinthians 4:4-6 and Matthew11:27; 16:17.  Two things have to happen to move from skepticism to awell-grounded faith: first, a testimony has to make clear somethingreal -- the historical and moral and spiritual quality of the realityhas to be portrayed clearly; and second, the mind of the listener hasto be careful and clean and humble enough to perceive and embracewhat is real. In other words, coming to a valid conviction abouttruth from a testimony is ultimately the coherence or harmony betweenthe mind's view of trustworthiness on the one hand, and the witness'sembodiment and presentation of reality on the other hand.  Let me say it with a visual aid. The listening mind and the claimto truth in the witness are like a plug and a socket that aresupposed to fit with each other so that the current of conviction canflow. On the side of the witness, the plug must be clear -- it mustshow the sharp contours of the historical and moral and spiritualbeauty of our great salvation in Christ. On the side of the listener,the socket must be carefully positioned, and clean from substituterealities, and humbly willing to be penetrated by spiritual reality.When this happens the plug approaches and -- perhaps for the firsttime in your life -- it fits into the socket perfectly and a deep andjustified conviction is born.  Hebrews 2:3-4 is saying that the witnesses have done their part.The historical, moral and spiritual reality of God's great salvationhas been displayed. Any lack of conviction on our part -- any neglectof this great salvation -- is owing not to them but to us. We are theones who need to change. Our minds are careless or defiled (clingingto false ideas and desires) or too proud to receive the message thatwe need salvation.  So my prayer for us this morning is that God would shine in ourhearts and cause sockets to be careful and clean and humble -- sothat we receive and love God's great salvation and not neglect it.  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
