  May 4, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor    "I BAPTIZE YOU WITH WATER"   The Baptism of John  Matthew 3  
  Now in those days John the Baptist came, preaching in thewilderness of Judea, saying, 2 "Repent, for the kingdom of heaven isat hand." 3 For this is the one referred to by Isaiah the prophet,saying, "THE VOICE OF ONE CRYING IN THE WILDERNESS, "MAKE READY THEWAY OF THE LORD, MAKE HIS PATHS STRAIGHT!'" 4 Now John himself had agarment of camel's hair, and a leather belt about his waist; and hisfood was locusts and wild honey. 5 Then Jerusalem was going out tohim, and all Judea, and all the district around the Jordan; 6 andthey were being baptized by him in the Jordan River, as theyconfessed their sins. 7 But when he saw many of the Pharisees andSadducees coming for baptism, he said to them, "You brood of vipers,who warned you to flee from the wrath to come? 8 Therefore bringforth fruit in keeping with repentance; 9 and do not suppose that youcan say to yourselves, "We have Abraham for our father'; for I say toyou, that God is able from these stones to raise up children toAbraham. 10 And the axe is already laid at the root of the trees;every tree therefore that does not bear good fruit is cut down andthrown into the fire. 11 As for me, I baptize you with water forrepentance, but He who is coming after me is mightier than I, and Iam not fit to remove His sandals; He will baptize you with the HolySpirit and fire. 12 And His winnowing fork is in His hand, and Hewill thoroughly clear His threshing floor; and He will gather Hiswheat into the barn, but He will burn up the chaff with unquenchablefire." 13 Then Jesus arrived from Galilee at the Jordan coming toJohn, to be baptized by him. 14 But John tried to prevent Him,saying, "I have need to be baptized by You, and do You come to me?"15 But Jesus answering said to him, "Permit it at this time; for inthis way it is fitting for us to fulfill all righteousness." Then hepermitted Him. 16 And after being baptized, Jesus went up immediatelyfrom the water; and behold, the heavens were opened, and he saw theSpirit of God descending as a dove, and coming upon Him, 17 andbehold, a voice out of the heavens, saying, "This is My beloved Son,in whom I am well-pleased."  Baptism : part of Jesus' Ministry and Part of our Mission  Today we begin a brief series on the Biblical teachings concerningbaptism. There are several reasons for this. One is that in almostseventeen years I have never preached a series of messages on theBiblical meaning of baptism. This is a gaping hole in our treatmentof the whole message of the Bible for our time.  Another reason is that Jesus made baptism part of his ministry andpart of our mission. Baptism is not man's idea. It was God's idea. Itis not a denominational thing. It is a Biblical thing. It startedwith John the Baptist at the beginning of our gospels. He came, verse11 says, to "baptize with water for repentance." It continued in theministry of Jesus himself. John 4:1 says, "Jesus was making andbaptizing more disciples than John," although it was the disciples,not Jesus who did the actual immersing (John 4:2). And the practicewas picked up by the church not because of their own wisdom, butbecause of the command of the Lord. At the end of his earthlyministry Jesus said, "Go therefore and make disciples of all thenations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and the Son and theHoly Spirit" (Matthew 28:19). So Jesus made baptism part of hisministry and part of our mission.  Baptism : Universal in the Early Church  Another reason for the series is that the practice of baptism wasuniversal in the early church. It was not just for converted Jews orconverted gentiles, or any one specific church. It was practiced forall converts in all the churches. We know of no unbaptized believers(except the thief on the cross, Luke 23:43). For example, in Romans 6Paul says to a church that he has never visited (in answer to aquestion whether Christians can sin that grace may abound), "Howshall we who died to sin still live in it? Do you not know that allof us who have been baptized into Christ Jesus have been baptizedinto His death?" (Romans 6:2-3).  In other words, he bases his argument that Christians can't go onwillfully sinning on the fact that we have all died with Christ, asbaptism shows. Dead men don't sin. He assumes that the Romanbelievers were all baptized, and he was simply reminding them what itstood for. It was a universal, defining experience in the earlychurch. If we are to be in sync with the entire New Testament and theentire early church we must take baptism seriously and practice itfaithfully.  Finally, there is a reason for this series that relates to oursituation today at Bethlehem. We believe that we have been remiss innot calling for a more forthright and public declaration of faith inresponse to the ministry of the word. Most American evangelicals arefamiliar with what Billy Graham does at the end of his preaching,calling people to walk to the front. Sometimes these are called"invitations." Sometimes "altar calls." When you look for somethinglike this in the Bible there is no clear example. But what is clearis that when Paul preached the word, say in a synagogue or on theAreopagus, he got connected with those who believed (Acts17:4,12,34).  The Decisive, Public Way of Taking a Public Stand  And if you ask what the decisive, public way of taking a Christianstand was in the New Testament, the answer is, baptism. The messagePeter gave in Acts 2 ended with the words, "Repent and be baptized inthe name of Jesus Christ" (Acts 2:38). Our renewed conviction is thatwe need to regularly offer baptism as the decisive public way forpeople to respond publicly to the gospel. But to do this we felt weneeded a clearer understanding as a church of what baptism is. Hencethe series on baptism.  Then, in a step of faith and hope in God's saving power among usthrough the summer, we are planning to have baptism and testimonyservices every Wednesday evening beginning in June, with some of thembeing off-site in lakes and pools. Our thought is that God has beenand will be at work among us to bring people to faith and readinessfor baptism, and that the guests and families that come to baptismsneed to hear the testimonies of how God brought people to himself andwhat it means to be a Christian.  David Livingston is planning Sunday morning baptismal classesthroughout the summer that will prepare a person in two weeks forfollowing through on their profession of faith in baptism. We want tokeep the time between the profession of faith and the baptism fairlyshort, because that is the way the New Testament did it, and becausethen the symbol feels more like a declaration of the new reality offaith.  Beginning with John the Baptist  Today we begin our series with the baptizing ministry of John theBaptist. This is the New Testament origin of Christian baptism. Thereis a close continuity between Christian Baptism and John's baptism.John began baptizing, Jesus continued baptizing, and he commanded thechurch to keep on with the practice : though now the act would bedone in his name. So there are crucial things to learn about baptismfrom the baptism of John.  The most important thing to learn is that when a Jewish personreceived John's baptism, it was a radical act of individualcommitment to belong to the true people of God, based on personalconfession and repentance, NOT on corporate identity with Israelthrough birth.  This is one of the main reasons I am a Baptist, that is, this isone of the main reasons that I do not believe in baptizing infants,who cannot make this personal commitment or confession or repentance.John's baptism was an assault on the very assumptions that give riseto much infant baptism. Let me try to explain and show you what Imean from Matthew 3.  First of all, get the picture. According to verses 1-2, John comesinto "the wilderness of Judea, saying, "Repent, for the kingdom ofheaven is at hand.'" He is in Judea and he is preaching to Jews,God's chosen people. He is the promised prophet who would come andprepare the way of the Lord : make things ready for the Messiah. It'simportant to realize that John's ministry was to Jews, not primarilyto Gentiles.  The reason this is important is that the Jews are already God'schosen people in an outward, ethnic sense. So this means that John'sradical call to repentance was being given to Jews who were alreadypart of the historic people of God. These are the people John wastelling to repent and be baptized for the forgiveness of their sins.These were people who were part of God's covenant and they had thesign of the covenant : at least the men did : namely, circumcision.  Confess Your Sin, Repent, be Baptized  To these people, who were ethnic Jews, part of God's covenantpeople, having the sign of the covenant, circumcision, John said, ineffect, "Confess your sins, repent, and signal this with baptism,because God's wrath is hanging over you like an axe over the root ofa tree." Look at verse 6: "They were being baptized by him in theJordan River, as they confessed their sins." This is why his baptismwas called "a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins"(Mark 1:4). He called for the Jews to admit that they were sinnersand needed to get right with God, and to admit that being Jews was noguarantee of being saved. In other words baptism was a sign that theywere renouncing their old dependency on ethnic Jewishness and wererelying wholly on the mercy of God to forgive those who confess theirsins and repent.  You can see this even more clearly in verse 7: "But when he sawmany of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming for baptism, he said tothem, "You brood of vipers, who warned you to flee from the wrath tocome?'" That's the issue : the wrath of God. Not just on the nationswho are uncircumcised, but even on God's own people. In other words,Jewishness was no guarantee of salvation. Being born into a covenantfamily was no guarantee of being a child of God. Baptism is John'snew sign of belonging of the true people of God : not based onJewishness or being born into a covenant family, but based onradically personal, individual repentance and faith. They gotbaptized one by one to show that they were repenting as individuals,and joining the true people of God : the true Israel, not simply theold ethnic Israel, but the true remnant of those who personallyrepent and believe. Merely traditional Jews were become truespiritual Jews through repentance : at least that was John's aim.  "We Have Abraham as our Father"  We see even more deeply into John's position when John responds tothe Pharisees and Sadducees. He says in verse 8, "Therefore bringforth fruit in keeping with repentance." And then he reads theirminds, it seems, and says in verse 9, "And do not suppose that youcan say to yourselves, "We have Abraham for our father'; for I say toyou, that God is able from these stones to raise up children toAbraham." Now what were the Pharisees and Sadducees really sayingwith the words, "We have Abraham as our father!"? They were saying,"Don't talk to us about the wrath of God. Wrath belongs to thegentiles, not to the descendants of Abraham."  In other words, they were saying that physical descent fromAbraham guaranteed the security of their salvation. There was nothreat of wrath! "We have Abraham as our father!" What was theirreasoning? Well, John shows us by the way he responds. In verse 9b hesays, "I say to you, that God is able from these stones to raise upchildren to Abraham." In other words, what they were thinking wasthat God had made a promise to the children of Abraham that theywould be blessed, not just with temporal blessings, but with eternalblessings (he would be their God and they his people) and that Godwould always be for them as his covenant people. Since God cannotlie, the children of Abraham are safe, no matter what, because if Goddestroyed his own people, then there would be no one left of fulfilthe promises to, and he would prove to be a liar. So they use thefaithfulness of God as their warrant for security.  To this John has a stunning response: he says, you are right aboutthe faithfulness of God, but you make a terrible mistake in thinkingthat, if you perish in his wrath, he can't fulfil his promises. Hecan, and he will. God can, if he must, raise up children to Abrahamfrom these stones (or from Gentiles!). In other words God is notboxed in or limited, the way you think he is. He will be faithful tofulfill his promises to the children to Abraham, but he will notfulfill them to unbelieving, unrepentant children of Abraham. And ifall of the children should be unrepentant and unbelieving, he wouldraise up from stones children who would believe and repent.  God Can Raise up Children Who Believe and Repent  Now what does all this tell us about baptism? Three things:  1. It tells us that John's baptism is not simple continuation ofcircumcision. This is important because those who defend infantbaptism often appeal to circumcision as the old sign of the covenantand say that baptism is the new sign. The one was given to infantsand so should the other be. Circumcision was the sign of belonging tothe Old Covenant people of God. Every Jewish male received it. If youwere born Jewish, you received the sign of the covenant as a babyboy. So at least some of the Pharisees and Sadducees came to seecircumcision as the sign of God's favor and of their security as thecovenant people. But John's baptism was a radical attack on thisfalse security. He infuriated the Pharisees by calling the people torenounce reliance on the sign of the covenant that they got when theywere infants, and to receive another sign to show that they were notrelying on Jewish birth, but on the mercy of God received byrepentance and faith. A new people within Israel was being formed,and a new sign of a new covenant was being instituted. It was not asimple continuation of circumcision. It was an indictment of a misuseof circumcision as a guarantee of salvation. Circumcision was a signof ethnic continuity; baptism was a sign of spiritual reality.  2. John's baptism was a sign of personal, individual repentance,not a sign of birth into a covenant family. It is hard to overstatehow radical this was in John's day. The Jews already had a sign ofthe covenant, circumcision. John came calling for repentance andoffering a new sign, baptism. This was incredibly offensive, far moreoffensive even than when a Baptist today says that baptism is not asign to be received by infants born into a Christian home, but a signof repentance and faith that a person chooses for himself, even if healready has been christened as an infant, the way the Jews werecircumcised as infants. John's baptism is the beginning of theradical, individual Christian ordinance of baptizing those whobelieve.  3. John's baptism fits what we are going to see in all the rest ofthe New Testament, and indeed in all the first two centuries of theChristian era until A.D. 200 when Tertullian mentions infant baptismfor the first time in any historical document, namely, that allbaptism was the baptism of believers, not infants. And the reason wasthat baptism was the sign of belonging to the new people of God whoare constituted not by birth or ethnic identity, but by repentanceand faith in Jesus Christ.  The way of salvation is repentance and faith in Christ, not ethnicidentity or birth to Christian parents. God calls us today, no matterwho our parents were, and no matter what ritual we received asinfants : God calls us today to repent and believe on Christ alonefor salvation and to receive the new sign of the new covenant of thepeople of God : the sign of repentance and faith, baptism. So I callon every one of you who has not followed Christ in this way, "Repentand be baptized" (Acts 2:38). This is the call of God. This is thepath of obedience and life.  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
