  November 8, 1998 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor    THE PERILS OF DISAPPROVING GOD (Romans 1:28-32)   And just as they did not see fit to acknowledge God any longer,God gave them over to a depraved mind, to do those things which arenot proper, 29 being filled with all unrighteousness, wickedness,greed, evil; full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, malice; they aregossips, 30 slanderers, haters of God, insolent, arrogant, boastful,inventors of evil, disobedient to parents, 31 without understanding,untrustworthy, unloving, unmerciful; 32 and although they know theordinance of God, that those who practice such things are worthy ofdeath, they not only do the same, but also give hearty approval tothose who practice them.  Paul's teaching about why a society degenerates into unrestrained,debauched, destructive evil is unlike any analysis you would readtoday. One of the reasons for this is that when a society is sinkinginto moral decay, one of the traits of that decay is the inability tosee what is happening. The social mind becomes so defective in themoral decadence that it doesn't have the categories or the frameworkto recognize evil for what it really is.  We do live in such a day. The inability to render sound moraljudgments is evident almost wherever you look. Which makes thispassage of Scripture one of the most relevant and needed texts in allthe Bible for our day - precisely because it seems so foreign. Today,if something doesn't seem spiritually or morally foreign, it isprobably part of the blind and decadent atmosphere we breathe, andtherefore of no real use to us, no matter how good it makes us feel.  What we need is a word from outside our defective world and ourdepraved thinking. We need a word from God. And we may certainlyexpect such a word to be very strange, because we have becomestrangers to the reality of God in a very self-absorbed age.  What we have in today's text is a list of twenty-one ways ofsinning or twenty-one kinds of evil. And what I think we should do isnotice, first, why Paul gives us this list and where such evil comesfrom. Then we should look at the list itself and ask why it's here.Then we should ask what the solution is to these kinds of things.  1. Where Do these Evils in Verses 29-31 Come From?  So, first, where do the evils listed in verses 29-31 come from?  It all started back in verse 18 where Paul gave the reason for whythe gospel of the gift of God's righteousness is so desperatelyneeded. You recall that he said in verse 16 that the gospel is "thepower of God for salvation to everyone who believes, to the Jew firstand also to the Greek." Why? Verse 17: "For in it the righteousnessof God is revealed from faith to faith; as it is written, 'But therighteous shall live by faith.'" In other words: the gospel is thepower of God to save believers because in it God gives us what weneed and could never produce on our own, namely, his ownrighteousness. The righteousness that he demands from us he freelygives to us, if we will trust him. This is the great Biblical truthof justification by faith.  Then in verse 18 he tells us why this gospel of the gift of God'srighteousness is so desperately needed: "For the wrath of God isrevealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness ofmen who suppress the truth in unrighteousness." We need therighteousness of God because it is the only thing that can protect usfrom the wrath of God. And we need to be protected from the wrath ofGod because we are unrighteous by nature and suppress the truth ofGod. By nature we don't like God and we don't want him in our lives.I tremble just to say it.  The Effects of Suppressing the Truth of God  So what Paul does in the following verses is describe for us theeffects of suppressing the truth of God. He wants us to see all theevil of the world as a river that flows from this spring. Reject God,suppress God, distort God, recreate God in your own image to your ownliking, and the effect is worse than we expect. And the thing that isworse than we expect is that God joins our crusade against God, as itwere, and delivers us into the debasing effects of our own rebellionagainst him.  We've seen it three times. In verse 23, we exchange the glory ofGod for images, and verse 24 says, "Therefore God gave them over tothe lusts of their hearts." In verse 25, we exchange the truth aboutGod for a lie, and verse 26 says, "For this reason God gave them overto degrading passions." And today in verse 28 we see it again: "Theydid not see fit to acknowledge God (or literally: they did notapprove to have God in their knowledge), [therefore] God gave themover to a depraved mind, to do those things which are not proper."  This is what Paul means by the wrath of God being revealed (verse18): God's wrath is being revealed against the world, as human beingsall over the world set their affections on other things more than onGod. God's response to this worldwide disloyalty and treason againstour Creator is not, first, to send us to hell, but to see that wesink into the swamp we have chosen.  This is what I was referring to at the beginning when I said thatPaul's teaching about why societies often degenerate intounrestrained, debauched, destructive evil is unlike any analysis youwould read today. Today you might hear someone say: Okay, America,you have built your bed of secular, God- belittling relativism andamorality, so now sleep in it. But that is not what Paul says here.  He says something far more horrifying about God's wrath. He givesus his analysis of our situation in four steps. Just take verse 28from today's text to see all four. First, he says that the rootproblem is that we don't like having God in our knowledge. "They didnot see fit to acknowledge God." That is the fundamental problem inthe world. That is the essence of the human condition. We don't wantGod. We want self-determination and self-exaltation. That was thefirst sin in the garden. And that is the root of all evil today. Wedo not want to know God or have him in our lives.  The Depth of our Sin Is Divine Judgment  The second step of God's analysis is that God, in an act ofjudgment (recall the revealing of "wrath" in verse 18) withdraws hiscommon restraints on our rebellion and gives us over to sink in theswamp we have chosen. This is what you will not hear in any socialanalysis today. Who today has the God-centered realism to say: Thedepth of our sin does not just deserve divine judgment, it is divinejudgment? That is what Paul says. You can't really understand America(or any other country) today without this revealed truth. Even if wetried to boast over God that at least we have our self-determinationin rebelling against God, God would answer: you think so? Thinkagain.  The third step in Paul's analysis (in verse 28) is that the effectof God's giving us over and removing his common restraints (seeGenesis 20:6) is that we are imprisoned by a "depraved mind." "Godgave them over to a depraved mind." Our minds become more and moredefective in sin. Not only do we use them to sin, but we can't eventhink clearly about sin. We can't recognize it. It's as if we turnedaway from God and fell in love with the African black fly thatcarries the roundworm that causes river blindness, and then God gaveus over to the fly and the worm - and the blindness - so that all wecan do now is fondle the fly (of sin!) and keep trying to convinceourselves that it's a precious tuft of velvet.  The fourth step of the analysis (in verse 28) is that ourdefective mind produces all kinds of evils. Paul goes on to listtwenty-one of them as samples.  So now we have our answer to the first question, namely, wheredoes such evil come from? It comes from: 1) our desire not to haveGod in our knowledge; and 2) from God's judgment on mankind to giveus over to sink in the swamp we love; and 3) from the depraved ordefective mind that we sink into.  2. What Is this List and Why Is it Here?  So now we can ask the question: What is this list of evils? Whatare we to make of this long list and why is it here?  Let's read it again. Verse 28b-31: "God gave them over to adepraved mind, to do those things which are not proper, being filledwith all unrighteousness, wickedness, greed, evil; full of envy,murder, strife, deceit, malice; they are gossips, slanderers, hatersof God, insolent, arrogant, boastful, inventors of evil, disobedientto parents, without understanding, untrustworthy, unloving,unmerciful."  Of course, a person could raise an objection against Paul here:this is not the way all unbelievers are. Some are very conscientious,law-abiding, philanthropic, courteous, decent people. Yes, that'strue, and Paul knew it was true. He was quite aware, for example, ofthe Stoics of his own day - people like Seneca and later, Epictetusand Marcus Aurelius, who prided themselves in not being like thislist of evils, and yet, who were not Christians.  No, the point of this list is not to say that every society whichrefuses to love the true God will look just like this. We know thisbecause, in verses 26-27, Paul says that homosexual desire is also aresult of not loving God above other things, and being handed over byGod, and yet Paul clearly does not think that every unbeliever hashomosexual desires. Similarly, here in verse 28-31, when he says thatall these sins are the result of refusing to acknowledge God, and hedoesn't mean that every unbeliever, or group of unbelievers, has allthese sins or in the same measure. Instead, these are samples. Theyare the sort of thing that comes from rejecting God, and the more Godgives a people up to their own unrestrained depravity, the more theirsociety will have these sins in greater and greater measure.  Every Form of Evil comes from Failing to Know God  So what's the point of listing all these sins? The point, I think,is to give us enough examples to show that virtually every form ofevil has to do with God and comes from failing to know him andapprove him and love him above all things. In other words, he givesus a sweeping array of evils to waken us to the fact that the ruin ofany area of life is owing to the abandonment of God. Verse 28: theydid not want God in their knowledge, therefore . . . and then hegives his list of evils.  In other words: the point of the list is to connect God with everysin in the world. And we've seen that the connection is twofold:every sin is rooted in our preferring something else to God; andevery sin gets worse as God takes away his restraints and gives us upto sink in the swamp we have chosen.  If America has the highest murder rate in the western world, ithas to do with God. If our executives are greedy, it has to do withGod. If our politicians are deceitful, it has to do with God. If wegossip about each other behind the back, it has to do with God. Ifour talk show hosts are insolent and boastful, it has to do with God.If our children are disobedient to parents, it has to do with God. Ifwe are untrustworthy and don't keep our marriage vows, it has to dowith God. If we are blind to obvious wrongs and are unloving andunmerciful, it has to do with God.  That's the point of this list. Wherever we are sinking in sin, itis because we have jumped off the rock of the glory of God.  3. How Shall We Battle these Destructive Evils?  Which brings us finally to the third and last question: What isthe solution? How shall we battle back against these destructiveevils in our own lives and in our culture?  The answer is what the whole book of Romans is about. But let'sclose by looking at three great reversals. 1) We need the reversal ofGod's wrath against our unrighteousness. 2) We need the reversal ofGod's handing us over to a depraved mind. 3) We need the reversal ofour mind's moral decay so that it can be renewed for right and properuse in God's service.  The good news is that God has provided every one of thosereversals. You do not have to sink any further if you will embraceGod and his provision. Here is the key verse for each of thesereversals.  The key verse for the reversal of God's wrath against us is Romans1:17: In the gospel of Christ, "the righteousness of God is revealedfrom faith to faith; as it is written, 'The righteous shall live byfaith.'" In other words, the righteousness that God demands from us,he freely gives to us, if we will turn back to him and trust him tobe our greatest Good. And if you have the righteousness of God, youare not under the wrath of God any more. A very happy reversal!  The key verse for the reversal of God's handing us over to adepraved mind is Romans 6:17. "Thanks be to God that, though you wereslaves of sin, you became obedient from the heart to that form ofteaching to which you were handed over [same word as Romans 1:28]."This is the exact reversal of the hand-over in Romans 1:28. Here itis to a form of teaching that is true and holy, not false and dirty.And notice that it is God who does it. "Thanks be to God," Paul says,that you became obedient to this teaching. God gives us over to truthand righteousness as much as he once gave us over to sin.  Finally, the key verse for reversing the defectiveness of ourminds is Romans 12:2. "Do not be conformed to this world, but betransformed by the renewing of your mind, so that you may prove whatthe will of God is, that which is good and acceptable and perfect."  When God has given us his righteousness by faith in Jesus, andwhen he has handed us over to a new teaching of truth and begun tomake us obedient to it, then little by little we are transformed inthe renewing of our minds and the long list of sins in Romans 1:29-31becomes shorter and weaker to the glory of God.  This is the key to life. This is the message that we take to theneighborhood and to the nations. I call you and urge you to receivethese three reversals from the hand of God by faith: 1) the reversalof God's wrath through the gift of God's righteousness; 2) thereversal of being handed over to depravity through being handed overto truth; and 3) the reversal of a depraved mind through thetransformation of a renewed mind.  Copyright 1998 John Piper. You are permitted and encouraged to reproduce and distribute thismaterial in any format provided that: (1) you credit the author, (2)any modifications are clearly marked, (3) you do not charge a feebeyond the cost of reproduction, and (4) you do not make more than1,000 copies. If you would like to post this material to the web orif your intended use is other than outlined above, please contactDesiring God Ministries, 720 13th Avenue South, Minneapolis, MN55415. (612) 338-7653. dgministry@aol.com   Piper's Notes   Visit the  Friends ofJohn Bunyan information page .   
