  In our first two messages on the book of Malachiwe focused on the greatness of God's electing love (1:1-5) andon the honor of God's majestic fatherhood (1:6-14).  This morningwe focus again on 1:6-14, and particularly on the curse of carelessworship.    You recall that the priests were despising the nameof God by the way they handled the sacrifices in the temple. Notice a few examples.    Verse 8: When you offer blind animals in sacrifice,is that no evil?  And when you offer those that are lame or sick,is that no evil?  Verses 13-14: What a weariness this is, yousay, and you sniff at me, says the Lord of hosts.  You bring whathas been taken by violence or is lame or sick, and this you bringas your offering!  Shall I accept that from your hand says theLord?  Cursed be the cheat who has a male in his flock, and vowsit, and sacrifices to the Lord what is blemished.  The priests are offering stolen animals and animalsthat are lame and sick; and the Lord says this is unacceptable(v. 13).  It is in fact a curse according to verse 14.  Cursedbe the cheat who . . . sacrifices to the Lord what is blemished! So you can see clearly why it is that this morning we must dealwith the curse of careless worship.  In the time we have let's ponder the     origin of careless worship,   the essence of careless worship and   the opposite of careless worship.    1.  The origin of careless worship.   Malachi leaves us in no doubt about the origin ofcareless worship.  It is the failure to see and feel the greatnessof God.  He makes this clear in at least two ways.  First, by focusing our attention on the greatnessof his sovereign love and the greatness of his majestic fatherhood.   You recall that the very first thing God says inthis book in verse 2 is, I have loved you, says the Lord. They respond in their careless offhanded way, How hastthou loved us?  And what does God say?  He does not say,I forgave you.  I cared for you.  I've been patient withyou.  I've provided for you.  That's true.    But what does God call attention to for this carelesspeople?  He speaks these ominous words, Is not Esau Jacob'sbrother? says the Lord.  Yet I have loved Jacob but I have hatedEsau.  And we saw a few weeks ago what that meant:  it meantthat God's love for Israel (=Jacob) is an electing love.  Godchose Jacob not Esau -- Israel not Edom.  And his electing loveis free and unconditional: Is not Esau Jacob's brother? In other words, Didn't Esau have as much natural claimon my love as Jacob did?  Yet I chose you.    In other words in dealing with the problem of carelessworship God unfolds the nature of his love not first as somethingwarm and gentle and kind and tender, but as something awesomeand strange and fearful in its electing freedom.  There is inGod's love a great and awesome sovereignty.  And that's what Goddraws attention to first.  Then he does the same thing with his fatherhood,as we saw last week, in verse 6.  If I am a father whereis my honor?  God could again draw attention to the gentleand tender dimensions of his fatherhood, but he does here justwhat he did in the case of his love: he focuses attention on themajesty of his fatherhood, and asks not, Where is your affection? But, Where is my honor?  That is the first way that God shows the origin ofcareless worship.  It comes from the failure to feel the greatnessof God's sovereign love and the greatness of his majestic fatherhood.   It is greatness in particular that is crucial whenworship is at stake.  You might have a horse like Flika, or Furyor Black Beauty or a dog like Rin Tin Tin or Lassie or Benji thatsaves your life a hundred times.  You might have a deep affectionfor the animal and weep when it dies.  But you are never temptedto bow down and worship it.  The same is true of a human friend. The closest bond of friendship and love and unity might develop,but you never think of worshipping your friend.  Why?  Becauseone indispensable element in worship is GREATNESS, majesty, grandeur. So when careless worship is the issue God focuses attention notfirst on the gentleness of his love or the tenderness of his fatherhood,but on the sovereign freedom of his love and the majesty of hisfatherhood.  The second way God shows the origin of careless worshipis by the logic of verses 11 and 14.  Each of these verses isgiven as the reason God rejects careless worship.    Notice how verse 11 is connected to verse 10: Ihave no pleasure in you, says the Lord of hosts, and I will notaccept an offering from your hand. FOR from the rising of thesun to its setting my name will be great among the nations! In other words, the reason careless worship is so reprehensibleis because it fails to recognize the greatness of God.  Exactly the same logic turns up in the connectionbetween verses 13 and 14: Cursed be the cheat who has amale in his flock, and vows it, and yet sacrifices to the Lordwhat is blemished; FOR I am a great King, says the Lord of hosts,and my name is feared among the nations.  In other words,careless worship is unacceptable because it utterly fails to cometo terms with God's greatness.  So the origin of careless worship is a failure tosee and feel the greatness of God.  But how does this cause careless worship?  Malachi'sanswer: It makes a person bored with God and excited about theworld.  If you don't see the greatness of God then all the thingsthat money can buy become very exciting.  If you can't see thesun you will be impressed with a street light.  If you've neverfelt thunder and lightning you'll be impressed with fire works. And if you turn your back on the greatness and majesty of Godyou'll fall in love with a world of shadows and short-lived pleasures.  I get this from verse 13: What a wearinessthis is, you say, and you sniff at it, says the Lord of Hosts. They are bored with God.  Their basic attitude toward worship:What a weariness this is!  And when you become soblind that the maker of galaxies and ruler of nations and knowerof all mysteries and lover of our souls becomes boring, then onlyone thing is left -- the love of the world.  For the heart isalways restless.  It must have its treasure: if not in heaven,then on the earth.  And so when it is time to bring sheep from the flockto sacrifice, what do you bring?  You bring the sheep with diseaseand broken legs.  Or you steal a sheep to bring.  Why?  It's obvious. The good sheep sell better and you love money more than God.  So there it is: the origin of careless worship isa failure to see and feel the greatness of God.  And so God becomesboring and the world becomes exciting, and worship . . . well,there may be some social usefulness in keeping up a front of religion,but O how the heart beats fast for the world.   2. Now we turn to the question: what is the essenceof careless worship?   The essence of careless worship is worthless religiousactivity.  Or to be more precise: it's religious activity thatillustrates how little a person values God.  That is the senseof verse 10: Oh, that there were one among you who wouldshut the doors, that you might not kindle fire upon my altar invain!    There is a little Hebrew word behind that phrasein vain that carries a lot of freight.  The word ishinam.  It is used for example in 2 Samuel 24:24 in a way verysimilar to this verse, but the translation is much fuller.  Davidwas trying to avert a plague.  To do so he needed a place to buildand altar to offer sacrifices to the Lord.  The threshing floorof Araunah was in the right place and Araunah offers the threshingfloor and animals to David for nothing.  But David responds, No, but I will buy it ofyou for a price; I will not offer burnt offerings to the Lordmy God  hinam -- which cost me nothing.    In other words, I value God so much -- the sovereignfreedom of his love and the majesty of his fatherhood are so satisfyingto my soul -- that I cannot bring myself to worship in away thatlooks as if I love money more than I love him.  It must cost mesomething.  It must say that he and not the world is my treasure.  So the essence of careless worship is empty religiousactivity: it doesn't express the worth of God.  In fact it expressesthat our treasure is on the earth, and that what we really loveis the world.   3. Finally, we ask, what is the opposite of carelessworship?   And this raises the whole question of excellencein worship.  For surely one good answer to the question is thatexcellence is the opposite of carelessness in worship.  But whatis excellence?  I don't think it's helpful to talk about excellencein the abstract.  First you have to define what the nature oftrue worship is, and then define excellence in worship as thosethoughts and attitudes and words and feelings and forms whichmost successfully let the true worship happen.  And what is the nature of true worship?  I wouldput it like this: the nature of true worship is worship that doestwo things:    it expresses the feeling of God's value and greatness;  and it seeks to sustain in the congregation that same spiritual sense of God's immense worth and beauty.    Or to put it another way, true worship   comes from a heart where God is treasured above all human property and praise,  and it aims to inspire the same God-centered passion in the hearts of the congregation.   What then is excellence in worship?  What is excellencein the music of worship and the architecture of worship?  Whatis excellent dress for worship and art and posture and prayerand preaching?  We could talk for hours.  But let me be more general as we close.  Let me describethree dead end streets of excellence which are not really excellence,and then one street that I think will guide us aright.  First the dead end street of cool professionalism.   It's a dead end because it defines excellence mainlyin terms of technique and forgets that performances that do notexpress the feeling of God's worth and don't aim at to inspirea God-centered passion are not worship at all, no matter how technicallyperfect.  Second, the dead end street of warm emotionalism.  This is a dead end street because it focuses noton the feelings, short circuits the understanding and thereforeemploys manipulative means of stirring up natural enthusiasm. It neglects the centrality of God and the necessity of extensiveteaching to know him in his Biblical fullness.  Third, the dead end street of laid back spirituality.  This is not quite a dead end street, because thereis genuine spiritual feeling for the worth of God.  But thereis a lingering carelessness that hinders the intensity of a God-centeredfocus.  When you go down this street, there are recurrent distractionsbecause of individualistic indifference and inattention to thespirit of the moment and because of distracting mistakes and shortcomingsin the worship forms.  The street that has the greatest promise for reachingtrue worship is the street of conscientious spirituality.   Idon't have in mind here any particular form of worship.  WhatI have in mind is worship that really comes from a feeling ofthe greatness of God and that seeks humbly to express and inspirethat same intensity for God without the distractions of errorsor artificiality or inattention or inappropriateness or ostentatiousness.  May the Lord teach us how to worship at Bethlehem. May the Lord open our eyes to his greatness.  And may he forbidthat we offer him in the pew or in the pulpit or in the choirloft or at the instruments the leftovers of our lives. 
