  September 2l, l986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchMorningJohn Piper, PastorCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper    PUT ON THE NEW PERSON  Eph. 4:22-24 Put off your old nature which belongs to your former manner of life and iscorrupt through deceitful lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of your minds,and put on the new nature, created after the likeness of God in truerighteousness and holiness.  The New Nature I said two weeks ago that the series of messages on Ephesians 4:17 to 5:20was chosen because many of us felt the need to ponder the relationship betweenour faith and the ordinary daily affairs of our lives. That is what thissection of scripture helps us do. First we looked at verses 17-21 where Paul, for the third time in this letter,lays bare the moral misery of life without the saving grace of God. He mentionssix layers of corruption that, apart from the saving work of Christ, makeus utterly unacceptable to God and without hope. First, he says in verse 18 that our root problem is hardness of heart. Second,this hardness against God darkens the understanding (v. 18). Third, the resultof this darkness is a gross ignorance of reality (v. 18) -- even if I havethree doctoral degrees and know 10,000 facts, I am ignorant if I do not knowthe divine meaning or the purpose, of those facts, and how they relate tothe great things of eternity. Fourth, being ignorant of the true value of things in relation to God andeternity I yield naturally to coveteousness and licentiousness (v. 19), thatis, my desires go after the wrong things, or after all things in the wrongway. None of my desires has a proper relation to God, and so they are allruined. This leads, in the fifth place, to a life of futility (v. 17). Nothing ofany eternal significance is accomplished. Life is one big ash heap of wastedweeks and years. There is no service to the King of Ages, and so it is allmeaningless in the end -- like a man who works hard planting trees and landscapedflower gardens in a new housing project and then watches them get bulldozedbecause he was just doing his own thing and never consulted the master planfor where they belonged. There is only futility in the end without relatingall you do to God. The sixth layer of our corruption, and the one that seals our hopelessnesswithout some mighty work of salvation, is mentioned in verse 18, namely,that we are alienated from the life of God. Our hardness and darkness andignorance and licentiousness and futile behavior are the marks and motionsof living dead men -- like Jesus said, "Let the dead bury their dead!" (Luke9:60). And like Paul said of self-indulgent widows: "She is dead even whileshe lives" (1 Tim. 5:6). Alienated from the life of God. Dead in tresspassesand sins (Eph. 2:1), "having no hope and without God in the world" (3:12). Everyone of us is in that condition until the light of the gospel of theglory of Christ breaks in and melts the hardness, and dispels the darknessand unites us to the life of God and makes us new creatures through faithin Christ. And so Paul says in verse 17, "No longer live in the futility of your mind!"Life need not be -- must not be -- futile any more. Then in verse 20 he givesthe reason why we can no longer live like the Gentiles in futility: "Youdid not so learn Christ." Then in verse 21 he entertains the possibility that some who hear this lettermay not be true Christians. He realizes he may be out in front of some churchattenders. And so he mentions two things he is assuming when he says theydon't have to walk in futility any more. He says, "Assuming (or: if indeed)1) you have heard him (Christ) and 2) were taught in him, just as the truthis in Jesus." I take this to mean: before you can escape from all the hardness and darknessand futility of the old life you have to hear the voice of Jesus and in responseto his voice enter his school to be taught by him as a trusted master. Hisvoice is the power that breaks through all the hardness and darkness andignorance and wakens you from the hopelessness of death. And faith respondslike the Gadarene demoniac, suddenly saved from the futility of insanityand self-destruction, and says, "Lord, let me be with you." And so I want to make clear before we go on this morning that this must happenin your life before today's text can apply to you. You must hear the voiceof Jesus calling you out of darkness into light and out of death into life.This is why Jesus so often said things like, "Take heed how you hear" (Luke8:18), and "If any man has ears to hear, let him hear" (Mark 4:23). And onceyou hear the quickening voice of Jesus you must, as Paul says here in verse21, be taught in him as the truth is in Jesus. You must gladly and heartilyenroll in the school of Christ. That is where we are this morning. Verses 22-24 are the teaching of the Lordfor Christians who have been awakened by the voice of Jesus, have been givena new eternal life within and who are now in the school of Christ waitingand eager to be taught how to live, no longer like the gentiles in the futilityof their minds (v.17) but like new creatures whose lives are full of meaningand hope and joy. What is the first thing Jesus says to us when we enter his school? Answer:verses 22-24 (my literal translation): Put off the old person (or: old self, or: old man) which accords with theformer way of life and which is corrupted in accord with the desires of deceit.And be renewed in the spirit of your mind. And put on the new person whichwas created in accordance with God in righteousness and holiness of the truth. And so after you hear the voice of Christ and are made alive and broughtto faith in him and enter into his school to let him teach you how to live,the first thing he says to you is: "change your clothes." Take off the oldperson and put on the new person. So we should ask immediately: What do these two garments refer to? What isthe old person and what is the new person? Verse 25 gives a helpful clue. The same word is used for "put off" both hereand in verse 22, as though Paul meant to illustrate now what he intends byputting off the old person. He says, "Therefore putting off falsehood, speaktruth." So it seems like one example of putting off the old person is toput off bad practices that belong to the old way of life -- like lying. Another good clue to the meaning of "the old person" is in Colossians 3:8-9. But now put them all away (same Greek word as in Eph. 4:22): anger, wrath,malice, slander, and foul talk from your mouth. Do not lie to one another,seeing that you have put off the old person with its practices. So putting of the old person is more than putting off old practices, becauseColossians 3:9 says we put it off WITH its practices. And Colossians 3:8mentions things that lie beneath and behind practices -- like anger and wrath. So the old person is the old bundle of attitudes and emotions and practicesthat I used to be. That's who I was before I was called out of darkness bythe the voice of Jesus and began to be taught in his school. Colossians 3:12 gives the same kind of clue about the meaning of the newperson that we are supposed to put on. Paul says, "Put on then, as God'schosen ones holy and loved, compassion, kindness, lowliness, meekness, andpatience." So the new person is the the new bundle of attitudes and emotions and practicesthat Jesus has called us to become in his school. We must take off the oldperson and put on the new person. It is absolutely imperative that we getour moral clothes changed. If we don't we will not graduate. We will notmake it to heaven. Do you remember the parable of the marriage feast (Matthew 22:1-14)? Theinvitation was thrown open to anybody who would come. But then Jesus says, But when the king came in to look at the guests, he saw there a man who hadno wedding garment; and he said to him, 'Friend, how did you get in herewithout a wedding garment?' And he was speechless. Then the king said tothe attendants, 'Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into the outer darkness;there men will weep and gnash their teeth.' There will be many shocked church goers when the Lord comes, who think thatthey have responded to the Lord's invitation to come to the banquet of heaven,but in fact have never really, with their hearts, entered his school to getready. They walk in the door, as it were, when the bell rings, but they don'tlisten to him. With their lips they honor him as the schoolmaster, but theirhearts are far away. It's as though they were not even there. When the Mastersays, "Change your clothes," they adjust their collars or shine their shoes,or tuck in their shirts, but they won't take off those cherished habits.They won't strip away those old attitudes of racism, or the love of money,or the addiction to pornography. They want the hope of heaven, but they won'tdress for heaven. They won't change their clothes. And Jesus says in theend on the graduation day, "Bind him hand and foot and cast him into outerdarkness." He had never really enrolled with his heart. It was all a show. So when Paul says, put off the old person and put on the new person, he isnot talking about an optional elective that some true Christians enroll inand others don't. This is the core curriculum in the school of Christ. Itis a requirement for graduation. There is a holiness without which we willnot see the Lord (Hebrews 12:14). Therefore (as v. 24 says) put on the newperson created after the likeness of God in righteousness and holiness. Now why doesn't Paul just come straight out and say that when you believeon Jesus you must get rid of bad attitudes and habits and build in some newgood attitudes and habits? Why does he write in pictures like this in verses22-24? The answer is that Christianity is not like any other school. It is not amoral self-improvement course. You don't just sign up and work hard to changeyourself. That's the school of legalism, not the school of grace. In the school of Christ change comes in a totally different way, by gracethrough faith, so that the schoolmaster gets all the glory not the students.That's why Paul has to describe the coursework with such strange language.It's like nothing you have experienced anywhere before entering this school.Let's look closely at the three verses and see how the coursework is described. Verses 22 and 24 are parallel in four ways. First, put off the old personin verse 22 is parallel to put on the new person in verse 24. Second, verse22 says that the old person accords with the former way of life; verse 24says that the new person accords with God. Third, verse 22 says that theold self is corrupted through its desires; verse 24 says that the new personis created in righteousness and holiness. Fourth, verse 22 says the desiresthat ruined the old person were based on deceit; verse 24 says that therighteousness and holiness of the new person are based on truth. Verse 22 Verse 24 Old person New person. Corresponding to former life Corresponding to God. Corrupted through desires Created in righteousness and holiness Based on deceit Based on truth.  Now you can start to see how different the coursework is here than in a moralself-improvement course. In the school of legalism, where you take moralself-improvement courses, you are given the assignment to make a new setof moral clothes and put them on. But in the school of grace your new clothesare . . . what (v. 24)? CREATED! God creates the new person that we mustput on. Now remember what this new person is! It is the bundle of attitudes and emotionsand practices that make up the new me. That is what verse 24 says God creates.He creates the new me. The bundle of attitudes and emotions and practicesare created after his own likeness in righteousness and holiness, the cataloguesays. This is totally unlike any other school in the world. I am given the assignmentto become holy; but then I am told that God creates my holiness. This isa very strange school. Look at Ephesians 2:10 for one of the strangest sentencesof all in the course description: We are his his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, whichGod prepared beforehand, that we should walk in them. This boggles the mind! I am God's workmanship, God's creation. And not onlythat, the works that I am assigned to do -- he has already prepared those,too! Who is working in this school, anyway?! Do you see why Paul can't just say, "OK, you're a Christian now, get ridof your bad habits and get some good ones." That is the curriculum in theschool of legalism: God saved you, now improve yourself. No! In the schoolof grace God creates the new person -- and that includes all the new attitudesand emotions and practices that we are supposed to put on. So here I am in the school of Christ. I have heard his voice. He has calledme from death to life. I've trusted him to forgive all my sins. I've gladlysubmitted to enter his school and learn from him how to live to his glory.Now here I am, and he tells me that I am his workmanship and that the newperson I am to become is his creation and the works I am assigned to do arealready prepared by him before I even do them. What in the world am I supposedto do? Verse 24 says, "Put on the new person!" But how do you put on a bundle ofattitudes and emotions and practices that God has created? Here is THE KEYQUESTION for how to live the Christian life: How do you think in such a waythat God will be the creator of your thoughts? How do you feel in such away that God will be the creator of your feelings? How do you act in sucha way that God will be the creator of your actions? How do you put on a newperson created by God? I believe the answer is found in verse 23: Be renewed in the spirit of your mind.  This is the connection between the laying off of the old in verse 22 andthe putting on of the new in verse 24. Notice very carefully: in verse 22 the old person is corrupted by desiresthat are fueled and fired by deceit, by lies, by the absence of truth. Whenyour mind is deceived you can even love to drink poison. But then notice in verse 24 that the new person is created in righteousnessand holiness that is fueled and fired by truth. Right attitudes and emotionsand actions are born from true views of spiritual reality. And what is the bridge that leads from between the corrupting deceit in verse22 to the sanctifying truth in verse 24? It is the renewing of the spiritof the mind in verse 23. This is the key to all the assignments in the schoolof grace: "Be renewed in the spirit of your mind." If your attitudes andemotions and practices come from the spirit of a renewed mind, they willbe yours in one sense, but in a deeper sense they will be the creation ofGod in righteousness and holiness. And you will be able to say with one ofthe most advanced students in the school of grace, "I worked harder thanany of them, nevertheless, it was not I, but the grace of God which is withme" (l Cor. l5:l0). I did my assignments but really God did my assignmentsin me and through me. But how do you become renewed in the spirit of your mind? With this I close until next week when we will flesh it out with the specificexample of putting away lying and putting on honesty. The answer is to fill the mind continually with truth about spiritual, eternal,heavenly reality. In 2 Corinthians 4:16-18 Paul says, "We do not lose heart.Though our outer nature is wasting away, our inner nature is being renewedevery day." How? Answer: "Because we look not to the things that are seenbut to the things that are unseen; for the things that are seen are transient,but the things that are unseen are eternal." Paul was renewed in the spiritof his mind by filling his mind with the unseen truths of eternity, so thatthe loud, garish deceitfulness of this world was pushed out. He says in Colossians 3:2-3, "Set your minds on things that are above, noton things that are on earth. For you have died, and your life is hid withChrist in God." Fill your mind with the truth of heaven. And here in Ephesians Paul prays for us in 1:18-19 that the eyes of our heartswould be enlightened that we might know what is the hope to which God hadcalled us, and what are the riches of his glorious inheritance, and whatis the immeasurable greatness of his power. Why does he want us to see thesethings with the eyes of our hearts? Because this is what renews the spiritof the mind -- when it is full of the truth of God's power and promises. And finally, in 3:18-19 Paul prayed for us that we may have power to comprehendwith all the saints what is the breadth and length and height and depth,and to know the love of Christ which surpasses knowledge, that we might befilled with all the fullness of God." Why? Because when your mind is filled with the love of Christ and with all thefullness of God, then the spirit of your mind is renewed and freed from thedeceit of the world. And out of that renewed mind come new attitudes andemotions and practices, and they clothe you with righteousness and holiness.And this new person that you become is indeed the creation of God himself,and to him belongs all the glory for ever and ever. Amen.   Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
