  October 20, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor      The Full Assurance Of Hope To TheEnd   (Hebrews 6:9-12) 
   But, beloved, we are convinced of better things concerning you,and things that accompany salvation, though we are speaking in thisway. 10 For God is not unjust so as to forget your work and the lovewhich you have shown toward His name, in having ministered and instill ministering to the saints. 11 And we desire that each one ofyou show the same diligence so as to realize the full assurance ofhope until the end, 12 that you may not be sluggish, but imitators ofthose who through faith and patience inherit the promises. 
    "Beloved"     I have been keenly aware recently that we live in a day whenpeople's feelings are the chief measure of how to love. If feelingsare vulnerable and might be hurt by a certain action, then we say,"This is probably not the loving thing to do." Which means that wecan easily be held hostage by people's sensitivities. Good and lovingacts will be rejected because the bottom line of love is not truth orprinciple or even what's best for the person, but how they will feel.So if they can communicate that they will feel really bad, they canprotect themselves from many good things.  What makes me think of this is the word "beloved" in verse 9. Itmeans simply "loved ones" -- "you whom I love." It's the only placein the whole book where the writer says it this way -- where he callsthem "loved ones." The reason this stands out is that he has justsaid some of the hardest words in the book.  He has said that they are dull of hearing even though by this timethey ought to be teachers (5:11-12). He says that they are like babesstuck on milk (5:13-14). And he holds out the possibility that someof them have had great blessings and high religious experiences butare not saved, and are like a field that drinks rain for months andnever brings forth fruit (6:4-8).     On Being Thin-skinned and Vulnerable    And then he says, "I do love you." Now I point this out because weneed to let the Bible shape our worldview. We are a nation of victimsand whiners and pouters to a large degree. That is, if someone sayssomething negative about us -- no matter how constructive they maytry to be -- we either slump into a fit of self-justifyingwoundedness, or we file a harassment suit. We are a very thin-skinnedpeople in America these days. Easily offended and easily provoked.  This is not good. And followers of Jesus Christ should bedifferent. We don't need to be thin-skinned and vulnerable. We arechosen by God, loved by God, forgiven by God, accepted by God,indwelt by God, guided by God, protected by God, strengthened by God-- and God is more important than anyone else in the universe. We donot have to feel vulnerable or insecure. We do not have to beself-justifying or self-defensive or self-pitying. We can be quick tolisten, slow to speak, slow to anger, as James says (James 1:19). Wecan be like Paul who said, "When we are reviled, we bless; when weare persecuted, we endure; when we are slandered, we try toconciliate" (1 Corinthians 4:12-13).   And if we can relate to our enemies that way, how much more can wehandle the tough love of those who come to us with hard words for ourgood. The writer to the Hebrews says, "beloved" -- "loved ones" -- Ihave spoken to you this way because I love you.     Taking the Risks of Love     
    A few times over the last five years or so I have taken loved onesout to lunch with the express purpose of asking some hard questionsabout their spiritual lives. This is very risky and very hard to do.You know that your actions could so easily be misinterpreted. Theycould accuse you of nosiness, butting in where you don't belong. Theycould accuse you of judgmentalism, pointing a finger toward theimperfections in your own life. They could accuse you of distrust,assuming the worst instead of hoping for the best. And so on. Thepossibilities of misunderstanding and false accusation are many.  And because of this, we do not do this as often as we should. Thewriter to the Hebrews is calling us by his example to grow up and totake the risks of love. He is also calling us to be less easilyoffended. And less easily hurt. We have a massive foundation for oursalvation in the death of the Son of God and we have an advocate inheaven more powerful and more compelling than any accuser on earth.We should be the freest of all people to listen to criticism and takeit into account and not be wounded or self-pitying or resentful.  So the first thing in today's message is: let us learn how to loveand be loved when heaven and hell are at stake and hard questions arein order.     We Are Convinced of Better Things ConcerningYou      
   The second thing to notice in this text is why the writer is soconfident that his readers are  not  going to fall away andprove that they were never saved. He just said in verses 4-8 that itis possible to have great blessings and high religious experiencesand never have been saved. It is a hard warning and he says it inlove.  But then in verse 9 he says, "But, beloved, we are convinced ofbetter things concerning you, and things that accompany salvation,though we are speaking in this way." So he does not think that theywill actually fall away and be lost. He is hopeful. He believes theywill hear his warning and instead of resenting it and saying, "Youhave no business talking that way to born- again Christians," hebelieves they will say, "We know how fragile we are in ourselves.Thank you for keeping us alert to the dangers of the deceitfulness ofsin, and reminding us to fight the fight of faith every day." Hebelieves that the warnings will not drive them away in resentment,but will deepen their vigilance and earnest pursuit of assurance.  So that that is what he says in verse 9: "We are convinced ofbetter things concerning you, and things that accompanysalvation."     His Confidence is Because of the Justice ofGod     
    But why does he have this confidence? What might increase ourconfidence today that we will not fall away but will press on inbetter things that accompany salvation? He gives the reason in verse10. He says, "For [because] God is not unjust [or unrighteous] so asto forget your work and the love which you have shown toward Hisname, in having ministered and in still ministering to the saints."  Now this is remarkable because the verse speaks of God's justicenot his mercy. There is something about God's justice orrighteousness (same Greek word) that causes this writer to beconfident that the readers will persevere in faith and patience andnot fall away. "We are convinced of better things concerning you . .. because God is not unjust . . ." How does the righteousness orjustice of God give the writer this kind of confidence?  We usually think of the justice of God bringing us into  judgment   because our sins deserve it, and the  mercy   of God rescuing us from judgment because Christdied in our place. And both are true. But here the justice of God isthe reason he is confident they will be saved and not fall away. Howdoes the justice of God give him that confidence?  He says in verse 10 that God's justice will not let God forgettheir work and the love which they showed to God's name (a goodliteral rendering). And he defines this work and the love they showedto God's name (in verse 10b) as their ministry to the saints in thepast and their ongoing ministry in the present. So he is saying thatit's God's memory of their past and ongoing ministry to the saintsand their love to his name that give him the confidence they will besaved and not fall away. And it is God's justice that causes him notto forget this ministry and this love.     How Does God's Remembering Assure that Theywill Persevere?    Now why does God's remembering their ministry and their loveassure the writer that they will persevere and be saved? Remember hesays, "We are convinced of better things concerning you . . . because  God is not unjust to forget your work and love." Soit's God's remembering their ministry and love that gives us theconfidence they will persevere and be saved. But how? It must meanthat when God remembers their ministry and their love, it moves himin some way to work all the more to keep them persevering in faith.Their perseverance is dependent on God (see verse 3) and God'spreserving work is prompted in some way by his remembering the workthey showed the saints and the love they showed his name.  So the writer is saying five things: 1) you have ministered to thesaints and still are; 2) you have done this out of a love for thename of God; 3) God's justice sees this and takes note of it and willnot forget it; 4) this prompts God to work for your perseverance; 5)I have strong confidence, therefore, that you will persevere andexperience better things that belong to salvation.     Are We Meriting God's Work in OurLives?     Now here's the crucial issue for us who love the mercy of God andknow that we are sinners and do not deserve to be saved in the firstplace and do not deserve to be kept in the second place. We do notbecome Christians by merit and we do not stay Christians by merit.The question is: how does God's justice prompt him to workperseverance in us when he sees our ministry and our love for hisname?  This could very easily sound like we are meriting God's work inour lives. It could easily be taken to mean that God looks at ourministry and our love for his name and says: "They don't need mercy;they simply need justice; and so I will now deal with them in termsof justice alone: I will give them what they deserve and what theyearn. I got them started in the Christian life with the mercy offorgiveness; but they will finish the Christian life with justice: ifthey minister and love, then justice demands that I give themsalvation because they've earned it. I am not unjust so as to forgettheir work and love. I will give them their due -- salvation."  That, I fear, is the way many professing Christians see theChristian life. God may give us a jumpstart with mercy in the winterof sin, but we are the ones who keep the battery charged and prove byour efforts that we deserve to get to heaven after that.  But this would be a massive contradiction of salvation by gracethrough faith. It would be a massive contradiction of living by faithin future grace -- which is what Hebrews is all about. For example,look at verses 11-12,  And we desire that each one of you show the same diligence so asto realize the full assurance of hope until the end, that you may notbe sluggish, but imitators of those who through faith and patienceinherit the promises.     Through Faith and Patience we Inherit thePromises    What is unmistakable here is the last phrase, which is the goal ofour earnestness: "through faith and patience we inherit thepromises." Through faith! Through trust. Through hope. The greatbattle of the Christian life is not to produce merit so that thejustice of God will repay with salvation. The great battle of theChristian life is to keep  trusting  God patiently until hefreely gives the final inheritance.  So the writer is not saying: work hard to earn the just wages ofeternal life. He is saying be diligent to put your hope on God aloneand not on the things of the world; cherish God and not this age;treasure God and not this world; trust God and not your ownabilities, not even your abilities to do good things. This is theassurance of hope: hope in God, who by a single offering hasperfected us for all time (10:14).     So How Does the Justice of God Give usAssurance?    But that leaves us with the question: what about the justice ofGod? Verse 10 says that it's the justice of God that causes him toremember our ministry and the love we showed to his name, and thatgives confidence that we will not fall away. How does the justice ofGod give us this assurance?  Here's my answer. The justice of God, or the righteousness of God,is not simply his giving people what they deserve. It is his standingby the glory of his name. God would be unjust and unrighteous if heever acted in a way that belittled the greatness of his name. Thename of God, or the glory of God, has the greatest value in theuniverse -- greater than all material value and greater than allhuman value. So the greatest injustice in the universe is neglectingand dishonoring the name and the glory of God.  So when verse 10 says that "God is not unjust so as to forget yourwork and the love which you have shown  toward His name, " youcan hear what is at stake. His name is at stake. And the work heremembers is specifically the ministry to the "saints" -- the holyones, the ones set apart for God. So again what is at stake is God'sname, his glory, his honor.  In other words, the justice of God looks at this ministry to thesaints and this love to the name of God, and says: "What I see hereis not a human performance that makes me a debtor and deserves therepayment of salvation. I do not see people calling attention tothemselves and how valuable they are to God. I do not see peopledemanding a just recompense for meritorious works. What I see is aneedy people looking away from themselves to the all-satisfying gloryof God -- this is what it means to love God's name (verse 10). And Isee hearts filling up with joy because of all the promises of God.And I see a people caring for the saints of God because they careabout glory of God."  And because the justice of God is his unwavering allegiance to theglory of his own name, his justice says, "I will stand by those wholook away from self and merit and earning, and instead look to Godalone for acceptance through his Son and for the satisfaction oftheir hearts." The justice of God gives assurance because the justiceof God upholds those who cherish the mercy of God above all things.The justice of God gives assurance not because it repays merit (whichwe do not have); but because it vindicates those whose faithglorifies God as more trustworthy than anything in the universe.     Our Ministering and Our Love is Itself the Workof God in us    And then, finally, add to this that our ministry to the saints andour love for the name of God is itself the very work of God within us-- not, finally, our own work. Hebrews 13:21 says that he works in uswhat is pleasing in his sight. Therefore it is impossible that wecould ever merit anything from God's justice. All our work and allour love, comes from his hand. We cannot earn gifts from God. And youcan not put someone in your debt by giving them what is alreadytheirs.  Rather the justice of God looks at the ministry to the saints andthe love of God's name and says, "Ah, there is something beautiful,the work of God's own hands. I am the justice of God and it is mygreat work to uphold the work of God, honor the work of God andpreserve the work of God and complete the work of God. And thereforeI will not forget this ministry and this love to the name of God, forit is the gracious work of God."  And this is why we can say not only because of the  mercy  ofGod but also because of the  justice  of God, "He who began agood work in you will complete it to the day of Christ" (Philippians1:6).  The sum of the matter is that this writer, inspired by God andspeaking for God, wants you to have the full assurance of hope, asverse 11 says. He wants you to feel strong and confident and secureand bold and ready to lay down your life for the sake of ministry andfor the glory of God's name. He does not want you to cower in fearand uncertainty about your future. He is calling us this morning tobank our assurance of hope on the mercy of God and the justice ofGod. The mercy of God to reach out to the utterly unworthy and giveus faith and forgiveness; and the justice of God to uphold the honorof his name, magnified in the faith of his people.   Copyright 1997 JohnPiper    
