  December 25, 1994    Bethlehem Baptist Church    John Piper, Pastor       The Destiny: Eternal Life    (John 3:16)       For God so loved the world    That he gave his only begotten Son    that whoever believes in him    should not perish    but have everlasting life.    John 3:16       One more time I want to focus your mind and your heart on the   words of Jesus in John 3:16, "For God so loved the world that he   gave his only begotten Son, that whoever believes on him should   not perish, but have eternal life." These words warn us of the   danger we are in without Jesus -- perishing. They hold out the   wonderful hope of God's design to rescue us from perishing -- his   love that sends his Son. Last week we focused on the duty that   links us with this love -- believing in his Son. And this week we   concentrate our attention on the destiny before us if we believe   -- eternal life.       The danger: perishing    The design: love    The duty: believing    The destiny: life.       O how fitting it is that on Christmas morning we focus on   eternal life. In John 10:10 Jesus said, "I came (that's Christmas)   that they might have life, and that they might have it abundantly"   -- have it in fullness and have it forever. So eternal life is   Christ's aim at Christmas.       And my aim with him in this service is your eternal life. I   want you to have it and to know what it is and to enjoy it and to   share it.       So what I am going to do is walk us through the stages of   eternal life. You will need to ask where are you in these stages?   What is your experience of eternal life?       Stage 1. Eternal life is in Christ.       John 1:4, "In him was life, and that life was the light of   men." Or in John 14:6 Jesus said, "I am the way the truth and the   life." Eternal life is first and foremost the life of the Son of   God. It is God's life.       Therefore it is supernatural. It is not something we have by   nature. If we get it, we get it as a gift (cf. 17:2; 10:28) and as   a supernatural act above what we can manufacture. Eternal life is   Christ's life. "In him was life, and that life was the light of   men."       Stage 2. Eternal life comes to us through the word of Christ.       In John 6:68 Peter says to Jesus, "To whom shall we go? You   have the words of eternal life" (cf. 5:24). The life of Christ is   mediated to the world through his words. He himself is called the   Word of God: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with   God and the Word was God . . . and the Word became flesh, and   dwelt among us" (John 1:1,14).       And when he was with us on the earth he spoke the words of   life. And he taught his disciples to go and teach the way he   taught. And he said that others would come to believe on him   through their word (17:20). So eternal life is extended from   Christ to others through his word.       Stage 3. In the hearing of the words of eternal life, God draws   people to Christ.       In John 6:44 Jesus says, "No one can come to me unless the   father who sent me draws him." Christ is where eternal life is   received. We must come to him if we will have it (5:40). The words   of life offer it and describe it and tell how to have it and   beckon us to it.       But John 3:20 describes how by nature we hate the light of   life. We don't want to come because we are laid bare and exposed   by the light of life. Our only hope is the merciful "drawing" of   God. He overcomes our hatred for the light and opens our eyes to   start seeing Christ for who he really is.       You have seen the bumper stickers, "Start seeing motorcycles".   That's not because people aren't seeing them in one sense. It's   because they need to see them in another sense. So it is with   Christ at a very different level of seriousness. People know about   him, but they don't really see him for who he is, or they would be   overwhelmed with his greatness and beauty and power and goodness   and wisdom and love.       If eternal life is going to come into our lives, we have to   start seeing Jesus, and that is what God's drawing us does. It   opens our eyes to start seeing the Jesus we already see in the   word.       Is the this the stage of eternal life where you are?       Stage 4. We receive eternal life through believing in Christ.       When we hear the words of life, and yield to the drawing power   of God, and believe in Jesus, we receive him into our lives and   with him we receive eternal life, because he is eternal life (John   14:6).       In John 15:5 Jesus says, "I am the vine you are the branches."   In other words by believing in Christ we are united to him the way   a branch is united to a vine -- so that the life of the vine flows   into the branch. His eternal life flows into us and we now have   eternal life.       This is a great work of God that he is performing all over the   world every day. For example, my friend and pastor and pro-life   leader in Boston, John Ensor wrote in his Christmas letter this   past week:       You are aware of the many powerful works of God both in   Scripture and in the world today. God is doing some amazing things   home and abroad. Two weeks ago, Kristen and I had a chance to lead   a communist Chinese scholar to faith in Christ (she is a devotee   of Mao). She's studying for her doctorate here in Boston. We had a   chance to help her through a crisis. As a result, she gave her   life to Christ. She's already read all four gospels. She came to   our Christmas open house and sang carols to the Lord. I think in   the days ahead there will be more of Christ and less of Mao. This   is the power of God!       Stage 5. In believing we have eternal life NOW, not just in the   future.       In John 5:24 Jesus says, "Truly, truly, I say to you, he who   hears My word, and believes Him who sent Me, has eternal life (not   "will have" but "has" -- now!), and does not come into judgment,   but has passed out of death into life." In other words eternal   life is not something you wait for after death. It is something   you have NOW if you are believing in Jesus.       Believing is the link that unites us with the life of God in   Christ now. If we have Christ, we have his life now. And his life   is eternal.       Stage 6. This eternal life is a personal relationship with God   the Father and God the Son.       In John 17:3 Jesus defined eternal life like this. He was   praying to his Father in heaven, and said: "This is eternal life,   that they know you, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom you   have sent." Eternal life is a personal, intimate knowing of God.   It is not like an inoculation against the disease of death, that   works unconsciously like a spiritual antibiotic. It is a conscious   experience of knowing and relating to God.       To see why this is so, connect this with John 1:4 that we   already saw under stage one: "In him was life, and the life was   the light of men." The life is the light. What does that mean? It   means, I believe, that when the eternal life of Christ comes into   your life through faith it sheds light on God and on Christ so you   can know them personally. You now can see them far more clearly   than you ever could before. You saw them as through a fog before   faith. Then God enabled you to see enough to draw you into faith.   Now in faith the life comes and with it the lights start to go on   everywhere, and the personal reality of God is so powerful that   you can know him and relate to him and fellowship with him.       "This is eternal life, that they know you, the only true God,   and Jesus Christ whom you have sent." Eternal life brings the   light of personal knowledge into the heart, and we know him and   live with him and commune with him, NOW.       Stage 7. Eternal life is not interrupted at death.       In John 11:25-26 Jesus says, "I am the resurrection and the   life; he who believes in Me shall live even if he dies, 26 and   everyone who lives and believes in Me shall never die." I think   what he means is this: Everyone who has eternal life by faith will   never have that life stripped away from him; even if he dies he   will live." Physical death will not turn eternal life into   temporary life.       One of the most powerful moments in my seminary life was at the   funeral of one of my professors, James Morgan, 37 years old, with   a wife and four children. Lewis Smedes gave the message from these   verses and at one point he lifted his voice and said with   tremendous authority, "James Morgan is not dead! For Jesus has   said, 'Everyone who lives and believes in Me shall never die.'"       Eternal life is not interrupted by death.       Stage 8. Eternal life will be made complete when our bodies are   raised from the dead and reunited with our spirits.       In John 6:40 Jesus said, "This is the will of my Father, that   everyone who sees the Son and believes in Him, may have eternal   life; and I Myself will raise him up on the last day." He is not   only the life, as he said (11:25-26), he is the resurrection.       We buried Flossie O'Connor and Marion Newstrum this past week.   They are alive with eternal life in heaven with Christ (2 Cor.   5:8; Phil. 1:23). But their fullest experience of eternal life   will come when the Lord descends with a trumpet and with the   archangel's call and the dead bodies of those who are in Christ   are raised from the dead.       Eternal life encompasses body and soul.    Stage 9. Eternal life will last for ever and ever.       How long is for ever? Does it make you tremble? That so much   rides on your spiritual awakening in this life? How long is it. I   once heard Jerry Healy in a Bethel Chapel describe it like this:   if a little bird should fly from the coast of the sea to a great   plain and deposit a grain of sand once every thousand years, when   the mound of sand is the height of Mount Everest eternity will   have just begun.       Why does eternity exist?       It exists because it will take that long for us to know the   inexhaustible glories of God. Two-hundred-fifty years ago Jonathan   Edwards preached a sermon on what it would be like to experience   eternal life to -- see and know God for eternity. He ponders   whether that would grow dull and boring.       The fountain that supplies &#91;the&#93; joy and delight, which   the soul has in seeing God . . . is infinite. . . The   understanding may extend itself as far as it will; it doth but   take its flight into an endless expanse, and dive into a   bottomless ocean. It may discover more and more of the beauty and   loveliness of God, but it never will exhaust the fountain. . . .       Then he comments on the infinite love of God based on Ephesians   3:18-19, "That you may be able to comprehend with all the saints,   what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to   know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge; that you might   be filed with all the fullness of God."       We can never by soaring and ascending come to the height of   &#91;the love of God&#93;; we can never by descending come to the   depth of it; or by measuring, know the length and breadth of it. .   . Let the thoughts and desires extend themselves as they will,   here is space enough for them, in which they may expand for ever.   How blessed therefore are they that do see God, who are come to   this exhaustless fountain! . . . After they have had the pleasure   of beholding the face of God millions of ages, it will not grow a   dull story; the relish of this delight will be as exquisite as   ever. . . (Works of Jonathan Edwards, Edinburgh, 1974, vol. 2, p.   909)       ***       Where are you in the stages of eternal life? All of you are at   least at stage two: the hearing of the words of life. That is what   I have been speaking. And I believe God has taken many to stage   three: he is drawing you by helping you see Christ for who he is.   O that you would cross the threshold of life and believe this   morning, and come into that present possession of eternal life and   that wonderful relationship of knowing the only true God and the   one whom he sent, Jesus Christ.       What if you believe this morning? What if you finally say,   "Lord, Jesus, I see you in your word, and I no longer will resist   you. I trust you with my soul and my body. I believe the promise   of John 3:16 that whoever believes on Christ will not perish but   have eternal life. I receive your gift of eternal life." We'd   really like to know what God is doing in your life so we can pray   for you. And we'd like to point you in some helpful directions to   go on with Christ.       We have prepared the worship folder insert for all of you to   respond to these messages and God's work in your life this year.   Let's take a moment and fill it out together.       Copyright 1994 John Piper     Piper'sNotes   
