  October 12, 1986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchMorningPastor John PiperCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper    MAKE YOUR MOUTH A MEANS OF GRACE  Ephesians 4:29-30  Let no rotten word come out of your mouth, but if something is good for theupbuilding of a need, (let that come out of your mouth) in order that itmight give grace to those who hear. I remember one time as a child that my mother actually washed my mouth outwith soap. She took me to the bathroom sink, rubbed the bar of soap aroundin my mouth and then rinsed it out and made me go to my room. Do you knowwhat I had said? I think I had said, "Shut up!" to my sister. Now why should my mother wash my mouth out with soap for saying, "Shut up!"to my sister? She did it because she believed Jesus when he said, "It isnot what goes into the mouth that defiles a man, but what comes out of themouth, this defiles a man" (Mt. 15:11). I had made myself dirty by saying, "Shut up," to my sister, and my motherhad a white-hot zeal for my purity. So she used an unforgettable object lesson.I think she did right and I have risen up to call her blessed even this pastweek on her birthday. "But really!" someone will say, "What's the big deal with saying, `Shut up,'to your sister? It's not swearing. It's not taking the name of the Lord invain. It's not a dirty word. Why get so worked up? What's really so bad aboutit?" The answer is that when I said, "Shut up!" to my sister it was mean. Therewas no affection and no good will and no kindness in it. It was ugly. Therewas no moral beauty, no holiness, no love. To use Paul's phrase in Ephesians4:29, it was a "rotten word." It came from a garbage pile of pride andone-upmanship and anger and resentment -- all very normal between siblings,and all very sinful. Beware lest you grow accustomed to sin because it isso normal! But what I thank God for more than that my mother was intensely moral isthat she was intensely Christian. She knew that soap in the mouth couldn'ttouch the dirt in my heart. If she had thought it could, she wouldn't havecried. So she taught me the truth of Ephesians 4:22-24: "You must put off your oldself-assertive, mean, uncaring self, son, because it is corrupt with deceitfuldesires. And put on the new meek and kind self created by God in his ownlikeness in righteousness and holiness. In other words, son, you need tobe deeply renewed in the spirit of your mind." In the end the battle for purity in the mouth is fought in the heart, because"out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks." If you don't like whatcomes out of your mouth, listen carefully this morning, because the apostlePaul is at pains in this text to clean up your mouth from the inside out. Let's look at verse 29. I said a moment ago that Paul used the phrase "rottenword." The RSV translates it, "Let no evil talk come out of your mouths."The NIV and NASB use the word "unwholesome." And the KJV says, "Let no corruptcommunication proceed out of your mouth." What is this idea behind the words,"evil," "unwholesome," and "corrupt"? The Greek word (sapros) is used in only one other context in the NT, namely,the places in Matthew and Luke where Jesus says, "It is not the good treethat bears bad fruit "(Lk. 6:43; Mt. 7:17f; Mt. 12:33). The term for "bad"fruit here is the same word for evil or unwholesome or corrupt in Ephesians4:29 -- "Let no evil talk come out of your mouth!" The image in Paul's mindis probably one of rottenness and decay, something that is spoiled. This kind of rotten language must be taken off like the old garment. It ispart of the old self of verse 22 that needs to be stripped away when a personbecomes a Christian. The garment of a rotten mouth must be taken off andthrown into the fire just like the Ephesians had burned their old books onmagic in Acts 19:19. Now what sort of talk does Paul have in mind when he says, "Let no rottentalk come out of your mouth"? Let me suggest at least four kinds of languagethat I think Paul would include as "rotten" or "decayed" or "spoiled". First would be language that takes the name of the Lord in vain. It is agreat contradiction of who we are as Christians if we say, "God!" or "MyGod!" or "God Almighty!" or "Christ!" or "Jesus!" just because we are mador surprised or amazed. No one with a good marriage would stomp on his weddingring to express anger. It stands for something precious and pure. And sodoes the name of God and Jesus Christ. The second kind of language that Paul would call rotten would be languagethat trivializes terrible realities -- like hell and damnation and holiness.What's wrong with saying, "What the hell!" or "Hell, no" or "Go to hell!"or "Damn it!" or "Damn right!" or "Holy cow!" or "Holy mackeral!"? Among other things these expressions trivialize things of terrible seriousness.It's simply a contradiction to believe in the horrible reality of hell anduse the word like a punctuation mark for emphasis when talking about sportsor politics. The same is true of damnation. And if the divine command, "Beholy as I am holy," carries for you the same weight it carried for Mosesand Jesus and the apostles, you will simply find that "Holy cow" or holyanything will stick in your throat because it treats something infinitelyprecious as a trifle. The third kind of language I think Paul would include in his command notto let any rotten talk come out of your mouth is vulgar references to sexand the human body. With this kind of language people take good things thatGod has made, and use them like mud to smear on whatever they get upset about.The whole assumption behind the use of vulgar four-letter words is that theycommunicate scorn or disdain or hate. How does this happen? How, for example, does the act of sexual relations, created by God as goodto be fulfilled in marriage -- how does it get translated into a four letterword and carry the meaning of hate and scorn? The answer is easy: first youget God out of your mind. That's fundamental to all vulgarity. Then you getthe sanctity of his creation out of your mind. And then, in your mind, youreplace the tenderness of married love with the force of rape, and you'vegot yourself four letter word which does verbally the same thing that rapedoes physically: it expresses selfish, uncaring abusiveness. (Which,incidentally, is why I would say to Christian women, don't spend two minuteswith a man who uses this kind of language: rape and rotten language comefrom exactly the same root.) The final kind of language I think Paul would call rotten is mean-spiritedlanguage -- like, "Shut up!" The words themselves are untarnished. But theusage is vicious and loveless. Those are the four kinds of language, I think Paul would include in "rottentalk". Now let's step back and ask what Paul might mean by calling languageevil or corrupt or unwholesome or rotten. If we think of spoiled or rottenfruit, like Jesus did, four implications come to mind. First, rotten fruit does not nourish. Neither does rotten language. It doesnot strengthen or improve or help. It is not useful for food. It is goodfor nothing but to be thrown out and trampled under foot by men. Second, rotten fruit will probably make you sick if you do try to eat it.And rotten language can make people sick, too. In other words, it not onlyfails to give positive nourishment, it can cause negative harm. Words canwound a person very deeply. Words can be like the virus that transmits thedisease of meanness or vulgarity from parent to child or roommate to roommateor colleague to colleague. Rotten language makes people sick if they areforced to eat it. Third, rotten fruit smells bad and makes the atmosphere unpleasant. I recalla couple of men in graduate school in Germany who seemed to carry the aromaof vulgarity about them. All they ever seemed to laugh at was sexual innuendo.The pitiful thing about it was that the nearer they got to the gutter themore they laughed. With their mouths they created an atmosphere like a stinkinglocker room. It was unpleasant for everybody but themselves. And it madenoble and high and worthy thoughts all but impossible. It's hard to savorbeauty from a garbage dump. Can you stand in an "adult" bookstore and lookthrough the window (if there were a window) and be moved by the beauty ofa setting sun? The fourth implication that comes to mind when we think of rotten fruit androtten language is that it probably comes from a diseased tree. If the fruitis rotten as soon as it appears on the branch (as soon as the words comeout of the mouth) then the tree is bad. Jesus said, "Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. The goodman out of his good treasure brings forth good, and the evil man out of hisevil treasure brings forth evil. I tell you, on the day of judgment men willrender account for every careless word they utter; for by your words youwill be justified and by your words you will be condemned" (Mt. 12:34-37). So if a person takes the name of God in vain, or trivializes the realitiesof hell and holiness, or turns sexuality into vulgarity, or makes words intoweapons of one-up-manship and meanness, then we can say for sure, "Thereis a rottenness inside the tree as well as outside." If the fruit is badthe root is bad. If we see this, we won't be as surprised with what comes next in the text.It is not what you might expect. We might expect Paul to admonish us to cleanup our language. We might expect him to talk about words that are not vulgaror rotten or corrupt, but are pure and wholesome and creative and clear.But Paul doesn't do what we expect. Instead of proposing clean language, he proposes a whole new way of thinkingabout language. Instead of saying, "You don't need dirty language to communicateyour intention," he says, "The root issue is whether your intention is love."In other words the issue for Paul is not really language at all; the issueis love. The issue is not whether our mouth can avoid gross language; theissue is whether our mouth is a means of grace. You see he shifts from theexternal fruit to the internal root. He shifts from what we say to why wesay it. That's the issue. Let's read verse 29. "Let no rotten talk come out of your mouth, but only what is good for edifying,as fits the occasion (literally: good for edifying of need -- meeting aparticular need is in view) that it may impart grace to those who hear." Do you see the shift? He doesn't say, "Let no rotten talk come out of yourmouth, but instead let fresh clean talk come out of your mouth." He says,"Let no rotten talk come out of your mouth, but ask this: Is my mouth a meansof grace? Am I meeting a need with the words that are coming out of my mouth?Am I building up faith into the people who hear? This is a revolutionary way to think about your mouth, just like verse 28(last week) was a revolutionary way of thinking about your secular work.Do you see the parallel? In verse 28 Paul said, "Let the thief no longer steal, but let him labordoing good with his hands. . ." and then he shifts from the what to the why,". . . so that he may be able to give to those in need." In other words,it is not Christian just to stop stealing. It is not Christian just to workhonestly in order to have things. It is Christian to work to have in orderto give -- to meet needs. All our work is to be a display of grace. This is exactly what Paul does here in verse 29. He says, "Let no rottentalk come out of your mouth, but only what is good. . ." and then he shiftsfrom the what to the why, "for edification to meet a need that it may impartgrace to those who hear." It is not Christian just to stop swearing. It isnot Christian just to put good language in the mouth instead. It is Christianto ask the deeper, internal question: am I speaking now to edify? Is yourmouth a means of grace? All our secular work is to be a display of grace; and all our speech is tobe a display of grace. Do you see how all-encompassing and how far reachingour Christian faith must be. These are amazing verses about the grace ofGod in our lives. If my mother had only washed out my mouth with soap, and never prayed andlabored to wash out my unloving heart with the gospel of the grace of God,I might today have a antiseptic mouth, but I probably wouldn't be a Christian. A Christian is a person whose rotten root within has been made new by gracethrough faith in the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. The grace of God hastaken the hate and anger and resentment that spill over in mean and vulgarand irreverent language, and has covered them with the blood of Christ andkilled them along with the old unbelieving self. And do you know what the grace of God has left behind in the place of theold hate and anger and resentment? It has left hope. This is the meaningof verse 30. It says, "And do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, in whomyou were sealed for the day of redemption." What does this mean? It means that a Christian is a person in whom the HolySpirit of God dwells, and that this Spirit of God seals the believer forthe day of redemption. In other words, the Spirit God puts the stamp of hisown image (4:24) on the life of the believer and guarantees that he willpersevere to the day of redemption. The seal of the Spirit is the assuranceof a secured hope. The hope of all believers, guaranteed by the seal of the Spirit, is thatat the end of history we will come to a day of redemption instead of a dayof damnation. What then is this day of redemption? It is the day when the long battle with sin will be over. It is the day whenthe deepest longings of our heart will be satisfied with the sight of theglory of the grace of God in the face of Jesus. No more groaning withimperfection; no more waiting; no more frustrated longings. Our redemptionwill be complete. So what is the point of Ephesians 4:30 in relation to rotten language andgracious language? The point is this: Paul says that the Spirit has been given to seal us andsecure us for an infinitely wonderful future. In other words, the Spirit'ssealing work aims to give you hope! So how do you grieve this Spirit? Bynot hoping in the day of redemption! By not hoping in the power of the Spiritto secure you and help you keep you. If the Holy Spirit has been sent togive you hope in God, and instead of hoping in God you fret over your problemsand become angry and bitter and resentful, then you grieve the Holy Spiritof God. You strive against the very purpose for which he was sent. And the language that comes out of a heart that doesn't hope in God willnot impart grace to those who hear. How can you make your mouth a means ofgrace for others when you don't hope in the grace of God for yourself? Itis out of hopeless hearts of discouragement and frustration and anger andbitterness and resentment that all rotten and hurtful language comes. But if you as a believer stop and think for a moment that Christ has diedfor your sin, that God has promised to work all things together for yourgood, that he has given you his own Holy Spirit for the specific purposeof sealing you for the day of redemption, then surely a deep and confidenthope will be the root of your life. And up through that root will flow thesap of grace, and out onto the branches of your life will come the fruitof a whole new way of talking. The question for your mouth will not merely be the moral question: Am I avoidingdirty words? But the Christian question: Am I building the faith of othersby what I say? Is my mouth a means of grace? Am I frightened and anxiousand angry about my life, or am I filled and overflowing with hope that theSpirit of God will keep me safe for the day of redemption?  Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
