  July 20, l986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchMorningJohn Piper, PastorCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper   THE FRUIT OF HOPE: BOLDNESS  "Since we have such a hope, we are very bold." 2 Corinthians 3:12  Today we look at a third fruit of hope, namely, boldness. The first fruitof hope which we looked at two weeks ago was joy (Romans 12:12). The secondwas love (Colossians 1:4-5). The fourth and final fruit of hope next weekwill be endurance. The text for this morning's message is 2 Corinthians 3:12, "Since we havesuch a hope, we are very bold." You can see immediately why I think thatboldness is a fruit of hope. Paul says that because of his hope, he is verybold. Christian hope is the cause of boldness in the Christian life. If you are not bold in your witness, if you are not courageous and risk-takingin your ventures of righteousness, if you are not open and straightforwardin your speech, it may be that your hope is defective. Perhaps you are hopingin the wrong things to make your future happy. Perhaps you have never reallythought seriously about the relationship between the strength of your hopeand the boldness of your service to Christ. But Paul says, there is a veryclose relationship: "Since we have such a hope, we are very bold." This verse (v. 12) comes in the middle of a perplexing chapter that leavesmany readers in a great fog. But we need to ask, Just what is the hope Paulis talking about here in verse 12? and, Just what is the this boldness heis talking about? And to answer these two questions we need to get throughat least some of the fog of confusion that surrounds this chapter. So what I propose to do is, first, to glance at the OT background. Then,second, we will take a quick walk through the first 12 verses of this chapter.We won't explain every detail, and we won't have time to discuss the lastparagraph of the chapter (vv. 13-18); but we will try to understand enoughto be sure what Paul has in mind when he says, "Since we have such a hope,we are very bold." So the third thing to do will be to make as clear as wecan what Paul has in mind here when he speaks about hope and boldness. Then,finally, we can ponder the relationship between these two and look at someBiblical illustrations that God may use to stir us up to have stronger hopeand greater boldness in his service.  1. The Old Testament Background. Before we can understand this chapter we have to go back and get some OTpromises before us. They are Jeremiah 31:31-33 and Ezekiel 36:26-27. Behold, the days are coming, says the Lord, when I will make a new covenantwith the house of Israel and the house of Judah, not like the covenant whichI made with their fathers when I took them by the hand to bring them outof the land of Egypt, my covenant which they broke, though I was their husband,says the Lord. But this is the covenant which I will make with the houseof Israel after those days, says the Lord: I will put my law within them,and I will write it upon their hearts; and I will be their God, and theyshall be my people. (Jeremiah 31:31-33) A new heart I will give you, and a new Spirit I will put within you; andI will take out of your flesh the heart of stone and give you a heart offlesh. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutesand be careful to observe my ordinances. (Ezekiel 36:26-27) In other words, the OT promised that God would make a new covenant with hispeople some day. It would be better than the old one that he made at MountSinai when he gave the law. But it would be better not so much because therewould be new commandments, but because the same old commandments would nowbe written on the heart instead of just being written on tablets of stone. Another way of saying this is that the old covenant was not accompanied withan outpouring of God's Spirit to change the hearts of very many of theIsraelites. By and large they had hearts of stone and did not keep the covenantcommandments. But in the new covenant God would put his Spirit in his peopleand cause them to walk in his commandments. In other words, God would writehis commandments on their hearts. In the old covenant God wrote his commandmentson tablets of stone. In the new covenant he writes them on the human heart.So the old covenant came in a written code, or in "letter" (as Paul says)but the new covenant comes in the power of the Holy Spirit. The result was that the old covenant, the Mosaic law, resulted for mostIsraelites in condemnation and death, because it met with rebellion in theheart. For when the command of God meets with a rebellious unrepentant heartit sentences destruction. But the new covenant results in justification andlife, because it meets with submissive hearts of faith. Jeremiah and Ezekiellooked forward to the day when the Holy Spirit would take out the heart ofstone and put in the heart of flesh. Now we can begin to make sense out of Paul's description of his ministryin 2 Corinthians 3, because he sees himself as a minister or a servant ofthis new covenant. God is now fulfilling the promises of Jeremiah and Ezekieland he is doing it through the preaching of the gospel in the mouth of Paul.Paul sees the work of the Spirit in his own ministry as the stamp of hisapostolic authenticity. That's what he is talking about as he begins chapter3.  2. An overview of 2 Corinthians 3. So let's turn, secondly, to the wider context of 2 Corinthians 3 and walkthrough the first twelve verses together. First, verses 1-3: Are we beginning to commend ourselves again? Or do we need, as some do, lettersof recommendation to you, or from you? You yourselves are our letter ofrecommendation, written on your hearts, to be known and read by all men;and you show that you are a letter from Christ delivered (literally: ministered)by us, written not with ink but with the Spirit of the living God, not ontablets of stone but on tablets of human hearts. You can see from his language that he sees the fulfilment of the new covenantpromises happening in his own ministry. God is writing the law on the heartsof believers under Paul's ministry and they are then becoming living lettersof recommendation for him. Now verses 4-6: Such is the confidence that we have through Christ toward God. Not that weare sufficient of ourselves to claim anything as coming from us; our sufficiencyis from God, who has qualified us to be ministers of a new covenant, notin written code but in the Spirit; for the written code kills, but the Spiritgives life. Here Paul explains why he has such an amazing confidence that he is actuallyan instrument of God in the great fulfilment of the new covenant promises.His confidence is not based on anything that comes from himself. Insteadhe says it is all of God, and the evidence is that he is not merely handingon written laws or traditions like the scribes and Pharisees. Rather, heis preaching Christ in the ministry and power of the Spirit. And the resultis new life. This new life is the authentication of Paul's authority as aminister of the new covenant. So verses 1-6 end with the contrast between the written code (or the letter)which kills and the Spirit which gives life. When the problem of the worldis that human beings are dead in tresspasses and sins, the solution is notold covenant prescriptions. The solution is new covenant power to give life.Once there is life there can be obedience. The law can be written on theheart. But while there is only spiritual death, the law can only condemnand destroy. This contrast is picked up in verses 7-11: 7) Now if the dispensation of death carved in letters on stone, came withsuch splendor that the Israelites could not look at Moses' face because ofits brightness, fading as it was, (that refers to the old covenant, the giving of the law at Mt. Sinai. Itwas a spectacular event, but it did not create spiritual life. The law meansdeath where the Spirit does not awaken hearts.) 8) will not the dispensation of the Spirit be attended with greater splendor? (Notice that the opposite of the dispensation of death is the dispensationof the Spirit, because the Spirit gives life -- as verse 6 said. Paul believesthat this dispensation, or time, of the Spirit has begun, and that it isa glorious work of God, and will some day be consumated with the conversionof all Israel, and the ingathering of the full number of the Gentiles --Romans 11:26-27 -- and the establishment of the kingdom of God. More glorywill come as a result of the new covenant fulfillment than came as a resultof the old covenant preparation.) 9) For if there was splendor in the dispensation of condemnation, thedispensation of righteousness must far exceed it in splendor. 10) Indeed,in this case, what once had splendor has come to have no splendor at all,because of the splendor that surpasses it. 11) For if what faded away camewith splendor, what is permanent must have much more splendor. (Notice first that the new covenant is called a dispensation of righteousnessbut the old covenant is not called a dispensation of unrighteousness (v.9). The law is not unrighteous; it is holy just and good -- Romans 7:12.The contrast is between the dispensation of righteousness and the dispensationof condemnation. The point of the contrast is that when the Spirit comesand changes people's hearts, they believe and receive the righteousness ofGod as a gift. But before the Spirit changes a person's heart, there is onlyrebellion and the result is that the law brings condemnation. The other contrast to notice is that the new dispensation is permanent (v.11) and so has far more glory than the old dispensation, whose glory is virtuallynothing by comparison and is fading away.) Now comes our text in verse 12: "Since we have such a hope, we are very bold."  3. The meaning of hope and boldness. Now we should be able to see what the hope is that Paul has in mind. It isthe hope of the new covenant promise. It is the confidence that the sovereignSpirit of God is at work in his ministry to change hearts of stone into heartsof flesh and to give life (v. 6) and righteousness (v. 9) and permanence(v. 11) to all God's people. God is at work! Not simply to tell them on tabletsof stone what they must do but to do it in them! Paul's hope is that God has now undertaken to fulfil his ancient promiseto take out the heart of stone, to write his law on soft hearts of flesh(Jeremiah 31:33) and put his Spirit within them and cause them to walk inhis statutes (Ezekiel 36:27). The age of fulfilment has begun! And the victoryof God's purpose is certain because his Spirit is sovereign. He will createnew hearts wherever he pleases. He will cause the obedience he requires.He will preserve permanently all that he calls. And the glory of his workwill be great beyond anything the Old Testament ever knew. "Since we have such a hope, we are very bold." It is the hope of a victorious gospel -- the good news that God the Fatherchose his people, God the Son died for their sins and God the Holy Spiritwill bring them to faith and write God's law on their hearts! The gospelwill accomplish all that it is sent to do. It will not come back empty anymore than the word of God can fall to the ground. Paul is utterly confidentthat the Spirit of God will conquer and justify and preserve for glory allwhom God has chosen for himself. His missionary labors cannot fail. By thealmighty power of the Holy Spirit through the preaching of the gospel, everyoneappointed unto eternal life will believe (Acts 13:48). And all the peopleof God, ransomed from every tribe and tongue and people and nation will begathered to the Lamb and will shine like the sun in the kingdom of theirFather. Since Paul has such a hope, he is very bold. If that is Paul's hope, we should ask now, What is his boldness. The wordPaul uses here has three connotations. There are three aspects of boldness.You could probably come up with these yourself by asking what the oppositeof boldness is. 1. First, the opposite of boldness is fear or timidity. And so one aspectof boldness is the courage of fearlessness. Example: 1 Thessalonians 2:2, "Though we had already suffered and been treatedinsolently at Philippi, as you know, we had courage (same word in Greek!)in our God to declare to you the gospel of God in the face of great opposition."Boldness overcame the fear of suffering persecution. 2. Second, the opposite of boldness is also shame. And so another aspectof boldness is the courage of being unashamed. Example: Philippians 1:20, "It is my eager expectation and hope that I shallnot be at all ashamed, but that with full courage (same word!) now as alwaysChrist will be honored in my body, whether by life or by death." Boldnessovercame the temptation to feel shame about the gospel. 3. The third aspect of boldness (not so much in English, but definitely inthis peculiar Greek word, parresia) comes out when you see that often inthe NT the opposite of boldness is guarded speech and minced words and indirect,vague, obscure communication. So the third aspect of NT boldness is direct,open, frank, straightforward, forthright, plain speech concerning the thingsof God. When a bold person speaks people know what he means; his cards areon the table; he doesn't seek to protect himself with obsurities or subtltiesor euphemisms or generalities. Example: John 10:24. The Jews say to Jesus, "If you are the Christ, tellus plainly." This word "plainly" is the same as the word for boldly in allthese other places. So boldness overcomes the temptation to conceal the truthin vagueness. It is frank and plain and straightforward. It is not politicaland cagy and slippery So when Paul says here in 2 Corinthians 3:12 that his great hope in thefulfilment of God's promises makes him very bold, I think he probably hasin mind mainly this third aspect of plain and open speech (since the contrastis with the veiled ministry of Moses, vv. 13ff.) But since all three of thesemeanings are so closely tied together I think it would be fair to say thathe means is this: since we have such a great hope, we are unafraid of whatman can do to us, and we are unashamed of the gospel, and we are unwillingto cloak the word of God in palatable generalities and euphemisms that obscurethe clear and sharp contours of the truth. "Since we have such a hope, weare very bold!"  4. The relationship between hope and boldness and some illustrations. The main point of the text is that a great hope produces great boldness."Since we have such a hope, we are very bold." What takes away Paul's fearand shame and fuzzy talk is the utter confidence that the new covenant hasbeen inauguarated and and that he is a part of it now and will be a partof it when it climaxes in great glory. He has utter confidence in the sovereignpower of the Spirit of God to give life to the dead, to make hard heartssoft, and to justify the ungodly. And he knows that this work of salvationis permanent and glorious beyond all the works of God under the old covenant. If we don't share Paul's boldness it may be that we are ignorant of the greatnessand certainty of the new covenant promises coming to fulfilment in our ownday -- the dispensation of the Spirit. Or it may be that we have known thesethings but have resisted setting our hope on them because they are too humbling. The issue of pride is very closely related to the issue of hope and boldness.It comes out when we ask two final queations. 1. Someone may ask, Aren't there people who are very bold who do not havehope? Aren't there mountain climbers who risk their lives on sheer rock cliffsnot because they know the summit is guaranteed, but because it is not guaranteedand they want to make it? Isn't that more admirable than only being boldwhen there is someone at the top holding the rope? 2. And the second question is, How do you keep boldness from becoming brashand boastful? There is really one answer to both these questions. The answer to the firstquestion is Yes, it is more admirable to take courageous risks without anystrong man holding you safe from the top of the cliff -- IF your aim is tobe admired yourself. But if your aim in climbing is to delight in and displaythe strength and skill of the strong man at the top, then you will make yourdangerous moves of love and justice precisely because you know they willmagnify his faithfulness and power not your heroism. And that is the answer to the second question as well: How do you keep boldnessfrom becoming brash and boastful? Answer: by only jumping over chasms whereyour Daddy has promised to catch you no matter what. Since we have such a hope -- and ONLY because we have such a hope -- canwe, and must we be very bold -- fearless in righteousness, unashamed of thegospel, and forthright in all we say. May God perform it within us accordingto his new covenant promises.   Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
