  May 4, l986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchJohn Piper, PastorCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper    HOW CAN I KEEP ON HOPING? THE SCRIPTURES!  Romans 15:4 For whatever was written in former days was written for our instruction,that by the endurance and by the encouragement of the scriptures we mighthave hope. Last week we focused on the text from 1 Peter which said, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ who, according tohis great mercy, has caused us to be born anew to a living hope through theresurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. And from that text we learned that the aim of God in regenerating sinnersis to give them a living hope -- by his great mercy we have been born anewunto a living hope. In other words, what happens when a person is born again is something likethis. You are sitting here as a lost sinner. You feel a general uneasiness,but nothing that a little afternoon TV and a good dinner won't fix. It'sa little bit awkward to be around people who seem to take religion so seriouslyand who actually show emotion for God in their singing and praying. But then it is kind of interesting, too, and you wonder sometimes if youmight ever really become religious -- really serious about God, so that itchanged your life and actually showed. Then, as you sit here, you hear the message of God's word that all men aresinners -- that we not only do things contrary to God's will, but we loveto do them. We are enslaved to disobedience; our very nature is anti-God.And for some reason this time as you listen, it rings true. You don't needany arguments, your conscience bears witness: this is the truth -- I am asinner, and my heart is hard against God. Then you hear the message that the wages of sin is death -- that those whodisobey God and reject his Son shall not see eternal life, but the wrathof God abides on them. And for the first time in your life this is not onlya possible thought, but an almost certain reality. It hits you with force,and it doesn't seem at all unreasonable. It seems very just and right, and your sense of guilt begins to rise, andthis time all the escape hatches are closed. You are being stalked by thehound of heaven and he cuts you off at every turn. He means to save you today. Then in your growing sense of guilt and hopelessness you hear the messagethat Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners; that he died to coverand cancel the worst of sins; that he actually justifies the ungodly, andpurifies the unclean; that he actually forgives cheaters and prostitutesand liars and middle class agnostics. You hear that. And for the first time in your life Jesus Christ makes sense.Pieces begin to fall into place. And then you hear the message that God isrich unto all who call upon him; that everyone who calls upon the name ofthe Lord will be saved; that salvation from the guilt and power of sin isa free gift of grace; that every one who thirsts -- no matter how long youhave resisted, no matter how long you have been drunk with the godless pleasuresof the world -- everyone is invited to drink freely from the wells of livingwater and be saved. And suddenly, probably at first unperceived, a miracle of grace happens.The Spirit of God, by the instrument of his word, begets and quickens a newspiritual life in your heart. No thunder, no lightning, maybe even no wavesof emotion, but just this: the letting go of all resistance and the humblebowing before Jesus Christ in your heart, and the meeting of your eyes andhis eyes and the drinking in of mercy. And as you drink, there rises in your heart the hope -- the confident expectation-- that you are included; that the invitation is yours, the promises areyours, the forgiveness is yours, the acceptance is yours despite all yoursin. You are saved. You are no longer a mere sinner; you are a saved sinner.You are no longer a child of the flesh. You are a child of God. You havebeen born again. And the result is a new hope in God. "Blessed be the God and Father of ourLord Jesus Christ, who according to his great mercy has begotten us anewto a living hope!" Now just at this point we must be on our guard. A great mistake can be madehere. Satan, realizing that he may have just lost one of his victims, willassault you with all his deviousness. And one of his most common devicesis to sow this thought in your mind: "That was a wonderful experience. I will never forget it. How good it isto be free from the need to struggle with guilt and fear! Now I can go aboutmy business in peace." Sounds good, doesn't it. But there is a lie in it. You are NOT free fromstruggle with guilt and fear! Your future will not be all peace and sweetness.This beautiful experience of new hope is already being threatened. The point of my message this morning is that when you are born again, youare born for battle -- a battle to maintain the full assurance of hope tothe end (Hebrews 6:11), a battle that can only be fought and won with theword of God. Let me say it again: when we were born anew by the Spirit of God, we wereborn for battle -- the battle of perseverance (Mark 13:13), the battle tohold fast to our confession of hope (Hebrews 10:23), the battle not to shiftfrom the hope of the gospel (Colossians 1:23). And the only way anyone canwin this battle and maintain the full assurance of hope firm to the end isby fighting hopelessness with the word of God. We simply must learn this lesson. Let me illustrate before we turn to Romans15:4. Henry Martyn was a young missionary to India and Arabia and Persiain the early 1800's. He had left his fiance Lydia Grenfell behind in Englandin 1806 and would never see her again -- he died at 31. On the boat he fought back self-pity and discouragement with the promisesof God's word. He arrived in Calcutta in May and two months later had adevastating experience. One of the veteran missionaries preached a sermondirected against Henry Martyn and his doctrines. He called his teachinginconsistent, extravagant, and absurd. He accused him of seeking only to"gratify self-sufficiency, pride and uncharitableness." How could this lonely young man endure such a crushing experience and notonly endure but during the next six years have the perseverance to translatethe NT into Hindustani, Persian and Arabic? We can hear the answer in his own journal: In the multitude of my troubled thoughts I still saw that there is a strongconsolation in the hope set before us. Let men do their worst, let me betorn to pieces, and my dear Lydia torn from me; or let me labour for fiftyyears amidst scorn, and never seeing one soul converted; still it shall notbe worse for my soul in eternity, nor worse for it in time. Though the heathenrage and the English people imagine a vain thing, the Lord Jesus, who controlsall events, is my friend, my master, my God, my all. Henry Martyn fought the battle against discouragement and hopelessness withthe truths of God's word: "Jesus is my friend, my master, my God, my all!"And that is the way we must fight every day, and never stop until the waris over and the Commander puts the wreath of victory on our heads. To instruct us and and encourage us in this battle lets look at Romans 15:4. For whatever was written in former days was written for our instruction,that by the steadfastness and by the encouragement of the scriptures we mighthave hope. Let's focus on three truths from this verse. 1. All the scriptures are for our instruction. 2. All the scriptures are intended by God to give steadfastness andencouragement. 3. All the scriptures have this goal: to sustain our hope.  1. All the scriptures are for our instruction. I focus on this first because we are prone to short circuit this step. Allof us who have been born again are hungry to be encouraged by the scriptures.Therefore we are often impatient with the need to be instructed by them.We would often rather have the fruit without laboring in the vineyard. So the first lesson in this verse is that the scriptures are for instruction.Literally: for teaching. We must be willing to learn what the scripturesteach if we expect to be encouraged by the truth of scripture rather thanby an accidental sound of words or reflections of our own ideas and desires. I don't want to turn you all into academic scholars. And I don't want toput the Bible out of reach for anyone. But it is no accident that whereverChristianity has gone the first institution to follow the church is the medicalclinic and the second is the school. Why? Because the better you can readthe Bible, the more accurately you will grasp its teaching and the resourcesof hope you have at your disposal. And so we should give ourselves to understandthis teaching. Benjamin Warfield, the great Princeton teacher, was told one time by anunsympathetic saint of his day (in 1911): "Ten minutes on your knees willgive you a truer knowledge of God than ten hours over your books." Warfield'sresponse was beautiful. He said, "What! [More] than ten hours over your books,on your knees?" Another Princeton saint, Philip Lindsay, used to make the same point by sayingto his NT classes, "One of the best preparations for death is a thoroughknowledge of the Greek grammar." Now the point is not that everyone should spend ten hours a day in booksor that everyone should master the Greek NT. But some should! And the restof us should be glad they do! But all of us should do our best not just tofly over the scriptures on the way to work or the way to bed, but to understandthem. We need a systematic diet of instruction, not just a few crumbs a day,if we are going to fight successfully to maintain the full assurance of hopeto the end. "Whatever was written in former days was written for our instruction." That'sthe first point of Romans l5:4. But the second point in the verse stressesthat the instruction is not finally for the head but for the heart.  2. All the scriptures are intended by God to give steadfastness andencouragement. Whatever was written in former days was written for our instruction, thatby the steadfastness and by the encouragement of the scriptures... When the instructions of the scriptures are properly understood, they producesteadfastness and encouragement. Steadfastness means endurance. It's whatyou have to have to keep on going in a path of obedience when you feel miserableand when you meet all kinds of opposition. Where does endurance come from? It comes from the scriptures. This is exceedinglypractical! Noel and I wrote a personal note to one of the couples on themarriage enrichment retreat this weekend. For my part I shared a passageof scripture that I think gives great power to endure through the tough timesin marriage, even if they last for years. It was 2 Corinthians 4:16-18. We do not lose heart... For this slight momentary affliction is preparingfor us an eternal weight of glory beyond all comparison... We look to thethings that are unseen...because the things that are unseen are eternal. Again and again the scriptures will give you God's perspective on thingsand that Biblical perspective will make a hard situation endurable. Thescriptures are given to us for our encouragement and our endurance in hardtimes. O how foolish we are if we neglect them. But on the other hand Blessed is the man who walks not in the counsel of the wicked, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of scoffers; but his delight is in the law of the Lord, and on his law he meditates day and night. He is like a tree planted by streams of water, that yields its fruit in its season, and its leaf does not wither...  It ENDURES! Endurance comes from meditating on the word of God. If you want to have staying power, if you want to endure to the end in thepath of costly obedience, then turn off the radio and meditate on the scriptures.  3. All the scriptures have this goal: to sustain our hope. The final point of Romans 15:4 is that all the scriptures have this goal:to sustain our hope. For whatever was written in former days was written for our instruction,that by the endurance and by the encouragement of the scriptures we mighthave hope. There are stories of endurance in the scriptures. There are words ofencouragement. But the way these stories and these words actually makes adifference in our lives is by sustaining our hope. It's hope that keeps us going in tough situations. Christian endurance isnot just teeth-gritting will power against all odds. We are driven and sustainedby hope. Will Steger and his crew would not have endured 56 days of freezing painand danger and weariness if they did not believe in the North Pole. So itis with Christians. Christ commands us to cross an ice field of tribulationon the way to the crown. The strength to endure comes from the hope beforeus. And the hope before us comes from the scriptures. We are familiar with the slogan, "No pain no gain." That is true. But thereverse is true too. If you can't be sure there is going to be gain you won'tendure the pain of obedience to Christ. That is where the word of God becomesabsolutely essential; because your own feelings and all the wisdom of theworld is going to tell you again and again, it isn't worth it -- being a pastor isn't worth it; being a wife and mother isn't worth it; being honest at work isn't worth it; spending evenings at the mission isn't worth it; working in the nursery isn't worth it; teaching this class of boys isn't worth it; staying sober isn't worth it. That's what your feelings will often say, and that is what the world willoften say. But it is NOT what the scriptures say. The scriptures say, The LORD commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear the Lord our God,for our good always (Deuteronomy 6:24). And now, Israel, what does the LORD require of you, but to fear the LORDyour God, to walk in all his ways, to love him, to serve the LORD your Godwith all your heart and with all your soul, and to keep the commandmentsand statutes of the LORD, which I command you this day for your good?(Deuteronomy 10:12-13) I will make with them an everlasting covenant and I will not turn away fromdoing them good ... I will rejoice in doing them good with all my heart andwith all my soul" (Jeremiah 32:39-4l). No one has ever left house or brother or sisters or mother or father or childrenor lands, for my sake and for the gospel, who will not receive a hundredfoldnow in this time... with persecutions, and in the age to come eternal life. Obedience is always worth it. The "world" endures to reach the north pole and the Guinness Book of WorldRecords; the Christian endures to reach the age to come, eternal life, thepresence of Christ and infinite joy for ever and ever. But neither endureswithout hope. So let's take the motto, "No pain, no gain," and turn it around and makeour own little slogan: "No hope, no cope." If it is true that the battle to cope with the daily temptations to disobeyand throw in the towel on your responsibilities -- if that battle to copecan only be fought with the weapon of hope, then never for get the truthof Romans 15:4 -- that the battle to keep on hoping can only be fought withthe weapon of the scriptures. For whatever was written in former days was written for our instruction,that by the endurance and by the encouragement of the scriptures we mighthave hope.   Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
