  June 1, 1986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchJohn Piper, PastorCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper   OUR HOPE: RIGHTEOUSNESS  Galatians 5:1-12 For freedom Christ has set us free; stand fast therefore, and do not submitagain to a yoke of slavery. Now I, Paul, say to you that if you receivecircumcision, Christ will be of no advantage to you. I testify again to everyman who receives circumcision that he is bound to keep the whole law. Youare severed from Christ, you who would be justified by the law; you havefallen away from grace. For through the Spirit, by faith, we wait for thehope of righteousness. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision noruncircumcision is of any avail, but faith working through love. You wererunning well; who hindered you from obeying the truth? This persuasion isnot from him who calls you. A little leaven leavens the whole lump. I haveconfidence in the Lord that you will take no other view than mine; and hewho is troubling you will bear his judgment, whoever he is. But if I, brethren,still preach circumcision, why am I still persecuted? In that case the stumblingblock of the cross has been removed. I wish those who unsettle you wouldmutilate themselves! Needless to say, Paul is angry. "I wish those who unsettle you would mutilatethemselves" (5:12). That is very strong language! Who are these people andwhat have they done to bring down this judgment on themselves? Well, according to verse 7 they are hindering the believers in Galatia fromobeying the truth. "You were running well; who hindered you from obeyingthe truth?" They were trying to persuade the believers of something that was not fromGod. Verse 8: "This persuasion is not from him who called you." The were trying to bring the believers back under a yoke of bondage afterChrist had set them free; and specifically that meant a burden to keep theMosaic law in order to earn a righteous standing in the presence of God.Verse 1: For freedom Christ has set us free; stand fast therefore, and do not submitagain to a yoke of slavery. Now I, Paul, say to that if you receive circumcision,Christ will be of no advantage to you. In 6:12-13 Paul makes clear what these troublemakers are doing: It is those who want to make a good showing in the flesh that would compelyou to be circumcised, and only in order that they may not be persecutedfor the cross of Christ. For even those who receive circumcision do notthemselves keep the law, but they desire to have you circumcised that theymay glory in your flesh. So here is a group of people in the churches of Galatia who are pushing theJewish requirement of circumcision on the Gentile Christian converts. Paul'sproblem with this is not that circumcision is bad -- he had circumcised Timothyfor strategic missionary reasons according to Acts 16:3. His problem wasthat the motive behind the requirement of circumcision was all wrong. Itwas diametrically opposed to the meaning of Christ's cross and to the freedomof grace. The cross means the end of all boasting in anything we can do. But thesepeople were making circumcision a ground for boasting. They were treatingit not as a gift of grace from God but as a debt or price paid to God. Andso the way they treated circumcision it called attention to their religiousability and not to God's free grace. And nothing made Paul angrier than thereligious nullification of the freedom of God's grace. Now right in the middle of this dispute Paul says something that is tremendouslyencouraging to imperfect, sinful saints like you and me. In 5:5 he says,"For through the Spirit, by faith, we wait for the hope of righteousness." He gives this verse as a way of life that is utterly opposed to the way theseopponents in Galatia are living. He speaks of a righteousness that is yetfuture -- a "hope of righteousness". He speaks of life now as a "waiting"for righteousness, not a possessing of righteousness. He speaks of this waitingas waiting "through the Spirit". And he speaks of it as waiting "by faith"."Through the Spirit by faith we wait for the hope of righteousness." There is a whole way of life in this one little verse. The very essence ofwhat makes a Christian different from others is in this verse. Paul clearlymeans for this verse to describe another way of life than the one he warnsagainst in the first four verses of the chapter. So lets very briefly lookat those verses. Verse 1: "For freedom Christ has set us free; stand fast therefore, and donot submit again to a yoke of slavery." If you want God's favor, there are two ways to relate to him. You can relateto him as an heir, or you can relate to him as a slave. The difference isthat a slave tries to become acceptable to his master by presenting him valuableservice; but the heir trusts that the inheritance of his father is his byvirtue of a will that was drawn up without his earning it at all. A slaveis never quite sure he has done enough to please his master and win an honorablestanding in the house. A son rests in the standing he has by virtue of hisbirth and the covenant his father made in his will to bless his children. Look at 4:4-5,7: But when the time had fully come, God sent forth his Son, born of woman,born under the law, to redeem those who were under the law, so that we mightreceive adoption as sons.... So through God you are no longer a slave buta son, and if a son then an heir. So in 5:1 Paul reminds the Christians that through Christ God has adoptedthem into the freedom of a child. They don't have to work to get into thefamily. They don't have to put themselves in the position of slaves any more.Don't do that, he says. Why do you want to be slaves again and treat Godlike an employer instead of a Father! Then verse 2 says that if you want to be the workman in relation to God thenChrist won't be. Now I Paul, say to you that if you receive circumcision, Christ will be ofno advantage to you. Christ is a great advantage to us! He paid all our debts on the cross andgot us out of the debtors prison of guilt. He frees us from the slavery ofhaving to earn our keep in the Father's house. And he exerts himself forus with kingly omnipotence so that everything works together for our good.Christ is our great advantage and profit! BUT! If you start to follow the advice of these false teachers and getcircumcised in the hopes of earning God's blessing -- in other words if yougo back and take up the mindset of a slave instead of an heir -- then youhave taken over the work of Christ, and treated his work as insufficient.He will be of no advantage to those who try to do his work for him. Verse 4 gives the same gracious warning: You are severed from Christ, you who would be justified by the law: you havefallen from grace. Look carefully what is at stake here. It is the freedom and glory of thegrace of God in Christ. Paul is saying that if we will not live from gracewe are cut off from Christ and fallen from grace. If we insist on using thecommandments of the law (good as they are!), like a slave uses his jobdescription, in order to earn a good standing with the master, then we haveabandoned the way of grace. And we are severed from Christ. We are like the elder brother in the parable of the prodigal son in Luke15:25-31. You recall how the father with overflowing grace received the broken,contrite, poverty-stricken prodigal. The Father didn't make him a slave toearn his way back into favor. The freedom and glory of his grace overflowedwith a robe and a ring and celebration. But what was the response of the elder brother? He would not go into thefeast. His father came out and entreated him, but he answered with wordsthat put him squarely in the camp with the false teachers in Galatia: Lo, these many years I have SERVED you, and I never disobeyed your command... The elder brother had the mindset of a slave. He worked for the Father. Hedid not rest joyfully in the father's beneficence. And as long as he insistedon treating the commandments of his father as a job description for slaves,he would be cut off from Christ and a stranger to grace. Christ is at the feast with broken, forgiven sinners who have learned thattheir service is utterly inadequate. And he invites you and entreats youthis morning to forsake the mindset of a slave and accept the gift of adoption."To as many as received him to them gave he the power to become childrenof God" (John 1:12). But mark well, this would be the end of all boasting in your life. The endof all self-reliance. The end of all independence. When you come home tothe Father, you come broken and destitute and helpless. And that is goodnews for sinners -- unless you have the mindset of a slave who has to provehis own worth to the master. I urge you this morning to forsake the way ofservitude that prides itself in its accomplishments, and to take up the songof grace that Paul sings in 6:14, Far be it from me to glory except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ bywhich the world was crucified to me and I to the world. Cast yourself wholly on the grace of God this morning. Look to the crossof Christ as the one boast of your life. Turn away from every form ofself-exalting servitude, and receive the free and gracious gift of acceptancein the Father's house. God aims to glorify the all-sufficiency of his Son and the wonder of hisgrace in this affair of salvation. Therefore, no sin, regardless of how greatit is, should keep you from coming to Christ for help. There is a great incentivein the heart of God to glorify his Son and magnify his grace by forgivingthe chief of sinners. Now, let us suppose that we have come. I pray that you have come! And wehave been received by the Father. We are children and heirs, and no longerfearful servants. What is the new and different way of life that Paul describesas an alternative to the servitude that nullifies grace? The answer is given in verse 5. For through the Spirit, by faith we wait for the hope of righteousness. This verse is full of instruction and full of encouragement for saints whohave come to Christ and forsaken the way of servitude and long to stand fastin grace but know that they are still sinful and imperfect. Let's look brieflyat four things in the verse. 1. Righteousness is a hope and not a full present reality. Very probably the legalists in Galatia were teaching a kind of perfectionism.They were saying that by strict adherence to the mosaic ceremonial law youcan go beyond the beginnings of faith and be perfected in righteousness. You can see this behind 3:3. Paul asks the believers, "Are you so foolish?Having begun with the Spirit, are you now ending with (literally: being completedby) the flesh?" The two words used for "begin" and "end" in this verse arethe very same used in Philippians 1:6 where Paul says, "He who began a goodwork in you will bring it to completion at the day of Jesus Christ." Surelythat is the meaning the words should have here in Galatians 3:3. Having begunin the power of the Spirit, are you so foolish as to think you can bringyourselves to completion or perfection by the flesh?" This is what the legalists were saying. It is fine to begin the Christianlife by trusting Christ, but if you want to be completed in righteousness,you need to go beyond faith and do some works of merit, beginning withcircumcision. So in Paul's opposition to this in 5:5 he very boldly says, there will beno perfection in this life. Full and perfect righteousness lies in the future.It is our hope not our possession. (See Philippians 3:12-16 and Romans 7:21-23.) That is the first thing to see in verse 5, and it should prevent us fromfalling into the trap of judging ourselves as hopeless because we have notyet attained the full righteousness we long for. 2. The second thing to see in verse 5 is that our present life is a lifeof waiting, eager waiting. "Through the Spirit, by faith, we wait for thehope of righteousness." The word for "wait" here is exactly the same one used in last week's text,Romans 8:23. There Paul says, "Not only the creation but we ourselves whohave the first fruits of the Spirit groan inwardly as we wait for adoptionas sons, the redemption of our bodies." He says that we Christians groanbecause we have to wait for new bodies. Well, Galatians 5:5 says the same thing about the moral condition of oursouls that Romans 8:23 says about the physical condition of our bodies. Wewait for the hope of righteousness, and we should understand that there isgroaning and frustration and disappointment in ourselves while we wait. Wecry out with Paul in Romans 7:24, "Wretched man that I am! Who will deliverme from this body of death?" There is a great comfort and an exhortation in this word "wait". The comfortis that the presence of a struggle with sin in this life is not a sign thatwe are lost. Perfection is not the test of spiritual life in this age. Andthat is a great comfort to saved sinners. The exhortation is this: we must not be indifferent to righteousness in thislife; we must wait eagerly for it. The word implies eager expectation andlonging. (See Hebrews 9:28.) "Blessed are those who hunger and thirst forrighteousness, for they shall be satisfied." We hunger for it as we wait. Therefore, we are not content with sin. There is battle and struggle andfailure and confession and forgiveness and relief and joy and power and thenfailure again and confession and forgiveness and deeper love to Christ. Andso it goes til the great day when the work which he began in us he himself,by his grace, will complete. 3. The third thing to see in verse 5 is that the way we wait for the hopeof righteousness is "through the Spirit" or "by the Spirit". This takes us back to 3:3 again. "Are you so foolish? Having begun by theSpirit (same phrase), are you now being completed by the flesh?" So the pointof 5:5 is to say that we wait for righteousness by the Spirit not by theflesh. Which means, we wait by God's power not our power. We did not begin the Christian life by relying on ourselves. We do not goon living the Christian life by relying on ourselves. We do have the firstfruitsof the Spirit. And to the Spirit we owe all of our waiting. You and I would never wait for righteousness on our own. It is by the Spiritthat we are able to wait. And therefore it is by grace. So we are not cutoff from Christ and we have not fallen from grace. All the good that weaccomplish is a work of the Spirit who dwells within. Therefore the wholeChristian life is a gift of grace. That is God's work as we wait for the hope of righteousness. Now what finallyis our work? 4. The fourth thing to see in verse 5 is that the human counterpart to thedivine work of the Spirit is faith. "Through the Spirit, by faith, we waitfor the hope of righteousness." What does this mean? Galatians 2:20 gives the exposition. "I am crucified with Christ; it is nolonger I who live, but Christ who lives in me (that is the presence of theSpirit, 5:5); and the life I now live in the flesh (the state of imperfectionand waiting, 5:5) I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gavehimself for me." We look back at the the death of Christ for us while we were still sinners.We feel again the immensity of his love. Then we turn our eyes to the day'swork and to the uncertainties of the years ahead, and we trust that becauseof this unfailing love he will not leave us or forsake us. He will work allthings together for our good. And so there comes into our lives a freedomfrom self-protecting anxiety, and a passion to double our joy in God by givingit away to others. Stand fast in freedom, all his saints! Your God is love and never faints! Though you must wait and oft confess, He gives at last full righteousness.   Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
