  November 23, 1986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchJohn Piper, PastorCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper   URGENCY AND GRATITUDE  Ephesians 5:15-20 Look carefully then how you walk, not as unwise but as wise, making the mostof the time, because the days are evil. Therefore do not be foolish, butunderstand what the will of the Lord is. And do not get drunk with wine,for that is debauchery; but be filled with the Spirit, addressing one anotherin psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody to theLord with all your heart, always and for everything giving thanks in thename of our Lord Jesus Christ to God the Father.  Urgency One way to describe the Christian life is to say that it is made up of paradoxes.That means that there are things in our lives that don't seem to make sense,don't seem to fit with other things in our lives. And yet we Christians haveseen enough of God's power and wisdom and love that we believe with goodreason that the paradoxes of our lives really do fit together in God's mindeven if we can't always figure them out now. Let me illustrate some the paradoxes of the Christian life by simply quotingthe apostle Paul. He described his own life in 2 Corinthians 6:8-10 likethis: ... as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; ashaving nothing, and yet possessing everything. This is what I mean by the paradoxes of the Christian life. Paul says heis "sorrowful, yet always rejoicing." How can you be always rejoicing ifyou are sometimes sorrowful? There must be some kind of "sorrowful joy" and"joyful sorrow." Indeed, there is -- that is one of the deep paradoxes oflife for those who rest in a sovereign God and live in a sinful world. Paul says that he "has nothing, yet possessing everything." You may recallthat on Reformation Sunday -- the last Sunday of October -- I commended MartinLuther's essay called "The Freedom of a Christian". In that great essay Luthercaptures this particular paradox of the Christian life in two sentences.Paul said he has nothing, yet possesses everything. Luther put it this way, A Christian is a perfectly free lord of all, subject to none. A Christian is a perfectly dutiful servant of all, subject to all. In other words, when you are adopted into the royal family of God throughfaith in Jesus Christ, some of the same paradoxes that marked Jesus markyou as well. Having nothing yet possessing everything. Subject to no man,yet servant of all. There is another place where Paul describes some of the paradoxes of theChristian life, namely, 1 Corinthians 7:29-31, The time has grown very short; from now on, let those who have wives liveas though they had none, and those who mourn as though they were not mourning,and those who rejoice as though they were not rejoicing, and those who buyas though they had no goods, and those who deal with the world as thoughthey had no dealings with it. If we obey these admonitions of the apostle we husbands will love our wiveswith the faithfulness and firmness and tenderness of Christ and yet in asense as though we had no wives. Those of us who grieve will grieve in asense as though there were no tragedy. And when we do business with the worldwe do it as though our dealings with the world were nothing. So the Christian life is the living of many paradoxes. Little by little aswe draw near to God we begin to see the unity and harmony of it all. Butin every case we see through a glass darkly. We know in part. And we waituntil the last day when the secrets of the human heart will be made plain. But I don't think the Lord wants us to live in continual confusion andfrustration. There is some light to shed on the paradoxes of our lives. Andsometimes even just being aware that the paradox is Biblical helps us livewith it and even thrive on it. So what I want to do today is focus our attention on the paradox I see intoday's text and simply ponder it with you and see how it applies to ourlives. Let's read the text (Eph. 5:15-20). Look carefully then how you walk, not as unwise but as wise, making the mostof the time, because the days are evil. Therefore do not be foolish, butunderstand what the will of the Lord is. And do not get drunk with wine,for that is debauchery; but be filled with the Spirit, addressing one anotherin psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody to theLord with all your heart, always and for everything giving thanks in thename of our Lord Jesus Christ to God the Father. When I was pondering this as our Thanksgiving text back in August I was grippedby the tension in the verses. Let me try to capture it for you. On the one hand the text says, Watch carefully how you live, that is, bealert, be vigilant. Apply wisdom to redeem the time. That opportunity willnever come again. The days are evil, opposition is great; be wise as serpents.Understand what the will of the Lord is. Don't surrender your powers of judgementto alcohol. These words ring with a sense of urgency. They are like the words of a platoonleader addressing his unit just before they enter combat. The air is tenseand your heart is beating fast and, even if you love battle, your hands aresweaty. "Watch your step; be smart; don't miss your opportunity; keep yourselflean for the battle!" Then come verses 18b-20: Be filled with the Spirit, and sing to each other-- sing psalms and hymns and spiritual songs. And let your heart fill upwith melody where nobody else can hear but God. And let the golden threadof all your songs be thanksgiving to your heavenly Father -- thanksgivingfor everything! Now it sounds like the war is over! The tension and vigilance of conflictare gone. We're back home with the family. It's Thanksgiving Day. There'sa fire in the fireplace and marshmallows on the skewers, and a game spreadout on the dining room table; and sweet music is in the air. And so I have called this message "Urgency and Gratitude". And I want usto just meditate on this paradox of being a vigilant people at war and yeta thankful and singing people at peace. And even if we can't fully explainhow this can be, my prayer is that the mere awareness of it will help youlive with it, and perhaps even thrive in it. So let me try to take the overall paradox that I see between urgency in verses15-18a and gratitude in verses 18b-20 and break it up into three parts --three ways of expressing the tension of these verses. First, there is the paradox here between the evil days in verse 16 and thecall to be thankful for everything in verse 20. Verse 16: "Making the mostof the time, because the days are evil." Verse 20: "Always and for everythinggiving thanks." Paul is not naive about the world. He says the days are evil. In Galatians1:4 he said that "Christ gave himself for our sins to deliver us from thispresent evil age." The age is evil because God gives Satan so much leashthat he can be called "the god of this age" (2 Cor. 4:4). The age is evilbecause God allows so much pride and wickedness in the human heart to gounrestrained for now. The age is evil because so many natural catastrophesbring suffering and misery on the the world, on both the good and the bad. And Paul knew all of this first hand. He was not an armchair critic. He wrestledwith his own sin in Romans 7. He felt the sins of others when he was stonedand beaten with rods and imprisoned. He went without food and clothes andshelter. He was harassed in almost every city, never knowing when his lifewould be put out by a dagger beneath the robes of some mercenary. And on top of everything, he suffered some kind of chronic ailment that Godwould not remove no matter how hard Paul prayed. Instead God taught Paulsome of the purposes of struggling with sin and suffering. One lesson he tells about in 2 Corinthians 12:9-10. Christ told him thathis power was made perfect in Paul's weakness. So Paul is given the graceand faith to say, "I will all the more gladly exult in my weaknesses, thatthe power of Christ may rest upon me." And so when Paul gets to verse 20 of Ephesians 5 he is not in some dreamworld where all is easy and healthy and holy. He is not telling us to doany more than the Lord has given him grace to do: be thankful for everything.It does not say "in" everything (like it does in 1 Thess. 5:18). It says"for" everything. But let us be very careful here. It doesn't say you should dance around thecoffin. It doesn't say you can't cry if you have cancer. It doesn't say thereis no place for anger against injustice. But it does say, "Always be thankfulfor everything." And this is the word of God, not merely the word of man. If it puzzles us, if it even provokes us, we must not become cynical orrebellious; we should be like Mary when the angel said she would conceivea son without a husband. She asked humbly, "How can this be?" And Gabrielgave her not a whole explanation, but all she needed: "The Holy Spirit willcome upon you and the power of the Most High will overshadow you. . . withGod nothing will be impossible." And is that not the same answer Paul would give to our perplexity here inEphesians 5? Wouldn't he say from verse 18: It is beyond your understandingand beyond your emotional ability to give thanks to God for all things; itcomes with the filling of the Holy Spirit: "Be filled with the Spirit." For the Spirit searches everything, even the depths of God (1 Cor. 2:10).If you trust him he will unfold for you how your omnipotent and all-wiseFather in heaven can even take the evils of the world and work them togetherfor your eternal good. And when he begins to teach you that lesson, you will experience the truthand the depth, and maybe even the unity, of this first paradox: the daysare evil, but give thanks always for everything to God the Father. He iswise and he is sovereign and he is good. The second way of expressing the paradox of these verses is to say that wemust live in the tension between analysis and exultation. Let me try explainwhat I mean. Verse 15 says, "Look carefully then how you walk." Verse 17 says, "Do notbe foolish but understand what the will of the Lord is." So together theseverses call us to use our minds in careful thought. Look carefully! Knowyourself, know your enemy, know your commander, know the situation, applyyour mind understand what the Lord wills in this crucial time. This is whatI mean by analysis. It is the use of the mind to scrutinize, to examine,to sort out distinctions and seek relationships and patterns and to drawconclusions and inferences. But then verse 19 says that we should be full of exultation. We should makemelody to the Lord in our hearts. Our emotions, not just our minds shouldbe engaged. We should not merely scrutinize the providence of God, we shouldalso be carried away by it. We should not just analyze the message of theBible, we should be swept up into song when we read it. We shouldn't be contentto formulate a theory of salvation, we should be filled with thanksgivingthat we are saved. This is a burdensome paradox for us because the two states of mind don'tfit easily together and yet both are crucial: analysis and rigorous thoughton the one hand and exultation and thanksgiving on the other. This is whywe get concerned when our young people go off to college or seminary or graduateschool. It's not just because they will sometimes have unbelieving teachersand wrestle with secular ideas. It's because we know that exultation andthanksgiving can be swallowed up by the analytic demands of academic work. But on the other hand this paradox is why many of us are unimpressed by muchcharismatic renewal. It's because the life of the emotions is often cultivatedat the expense of the life of the mind. Careful thought and study and rightdoctrine is swallowed up by the ecstatic demands of the community. My admonition this morning is this: Keep these two things alive and wellin your life, the powers of analysis and the pleasures of exultation. If you are all cerebral with little emotion, don't brag about it. It's aweakness not a strength. Strive to nurture your your heart's capacity forjoy in God, lest you be stunted for ever and have a little cup of joy allthrough eternity. And if you are all emotional with little bent for study and analysis, don'tbrag about it. It's weakness, not a strength. Strive to nurture your mind'scapacity for thinking and understanding the work of God. Don't surrender the paradox. It stands in scripture. And without it yourcelebration of Thanksgiving will have exultation and yet be superficial orit may have intellectual depth and yet be lukewarm. Hold the paradox togetherand your heart may experience the deepest gratitude you've ever known becauseyour mind has seen more of God's truth that it has ever known. The third way of describing the paradox of these verses is to say that wemust live in the tension between being vigilant people at war and yet a thankfulpeople at peace. Or another way to say it is that we must be careful aboutour walk in the world and yet carefree about the outcome of our lives. Vigilantyet secure. Careful yet carefree. You can see the call for vigilance and carefulness in verse 15: "Look carefullythen how you walk." You can see it in verse 16: "Since the days are evilbe alert how you can snatch up every opportunity for good." You can see itin verse 17: "Don't be foolish. Apply your mind. Think through what the willof the Lord is." In other words, the Christian life is a vigilant life, defensively guardingitself from the subtleties of the evil days and offensively redeeming thetime to strike for love and righteousness again and again. We are a vigilantpeople at war with unbelief and evil. But on the other hand you can see the the restful, thankful peace, especiallyin verse 19. What amazes me about verse 19 is not that we are supposed tosing songs of thanks to God, but that we are to have a musical heart. I canimagine a wartime scene with a church surrounded by hostile forces. Theyhave no escape and so the company commander (i.e., the minister of music)leads the church in hymn after hymn while the enemy closes in. I can imaginethat. But what is harder to imagine is that not only outwardly would the mouthbe singing, but inwardly the heart would be singing. This is what I meanwhen I say we should be a thankful people at rest in God. Our hearts shouldbe carefree about the outcome of our lives. This is what Paul says happenswhen a person becomes a Christian. A paradox is born: vigilance and carefulness in the way we live our lives lest evil gain theupper hand, and yet carefree restfulness and thankfulness that the out come of the battle willbe victory.  "He who called us is faithful, and he will do it" (1 Thess. 5:24).  What is the glue that holds the pieces of these three paradoxes together? -- the paradox between living in evil days and being thankful for everything. -- the paradox between rigorous analysis and thankful exultation. -- the paradox between being vigilant people at war and being thankful peopleat peace. The glue that holds them all together is the work of the Holy Spirit: "Donot be drunk with wine, but be filled with the Spirit!" And God will uncoverfor you the mystery of gratitude for all things, even when the days are evil, the pleasures of exultation even in the midst of analysis, and the peace that passes all understanding even in the vigilance of ourdaily conflict with evil. Urgency and gratitude. Glued together in one heart by the work of the HolySpirit. This morning we have been heavy on the side of urgency, analysisand vigilance. Tonight we will pluck the fruit of our analysis and blow theroof off this old building with exultation in the sixth annual Festival ofThanksgiving.  Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
