  September 7, l986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchMorningJohn Piper, PastorCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper    ESCAPE FROM FUTILITY  (Eph 4:17-21) This I say therefore, and affirm together with the Lord, that you walk nolonger just as the Gentiles also walk, in the futility of their mind, beingdarkened in their understanding, excluded from the life of God, because ofthe ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their heart; andthey, having become callous, have given themselves over to sensuality, forthe practice of every kind of impurity with greediness. But you did not learnChrist in this way, if indeed you have heard Him and have been taught inHim, just as truth is in Jesus. We begin this morning a series of eleven messages based on Paul's letterto the Ephesians, 4:17 through 5:20. There are two reasons that I feltconstrained to preach from this portion of Scripture. One is that many of us have sensed the need to ponder the significance ofour faith in the area of personal relationships and related practical matters.Do we treat each other the way Christians should? The other reason is that I am deeply convinced that the upshot of the 17messages on hope from last spring and summer should be a new way of lifein all its most ordinary parts. That's what this portion of Scripture isabout. The sermons will have titles like, "Speak truth to your neighbor,""A small place for anger," Don't steal, work and give," "Make your mouthmeans of grace," "Be kind to each other," and so on. I think it would be a fair question if someone were to ask, "Why do you focusour attention on such small, personal matters when there are large socialand global issues to be concerned about? What about racial unrest in SouthAfrica, and religious oppression in Russia and eastern Europe, and war inthe Middle East, and the export of terrorism, and the threat of AIDS, andthe almost forgotten hunger and refugee problems, and the elections on Tuesday? My answer would not be antagonistic, because I really believe that the Christianmessage of salvation in Christ does have something to say about every problemthe world faces. I would simply say two things: 1) When you read the NT what you find is that by and large (though notexclusively: cf. Rom. 13:1-7 e.g.) God inspired the writers to apply thegreat doctrinal truths of his word to the most ordinary personal mattersand daily relationships of family and work and neighbors. I got a good letter from one of our members this week in which he said, "Theologyis not optional or a toy. It is intensely practical. My view of God willdetermine how I live every day. It will determine how I respond when my computercrashes." That's absolutely right, and Biblical preaching will reflect thisemphasis. 2) The other thing I would say is that the reason for this personal focusin the NT is probably because on the one hand it is fairly easy to be a crusaderfor a distant cause, say in South Africa or Central America, and yet at thesame time be a very self-exalting, corrupt and God-belittling person. Buton the other hand it is very hard to endure the personal, practical scrutinyof NT commands about our eating habits and sexual habits and the way we useour tongue and our money -- its hard for us to stand under this kind of moralsearchlight and not be humbled by the corruption of our hearts and feel theneed for a deep work of renovation in our very nature. And wouldn't you agree that the message of Scripture is that what the worldneeds most -- from South Africa to Central America and from Libian terrorismto Russian oppression -- is the supernatural, spiritual renovation of humanhearts? For Jesus said in Matthew 15:19, "Out of the heart come evil thoughts(thoughts like atheistic oppressions, and racial degradation, and calculatedterrorism) -- out of the heart come evil thoughts, murder, adultery, fornication,theft, false witness, slander." And therefore the world is full of futility,because hard and darkened hearts have not been renovated. And so that iswhere our very practical text begins today. It begins with a very penetrating analysis of the hardness and darkness andignorance and corruption and futility of the human heart. Why does he dothis? Because it's so important that the root of our problem be recognized.There is no point in going on in this text and telling people how to managetheir anger (4:26) and their money (4:28) and their sexuality (5:3) and andtheir time (5:16) and their tongue (4:29) if you don't help them to knowand heal the disease that turns all these things into futility. If we want to escape from futility in the practical affairs and relationshipsof our daily lives we have to first of all become deep people -- people wholook deeply within ourselves for the cause of our futility, and who don'tsettle for quick fixes and superficial, upbeat attitude changes. We don'twant the surgeon to keep back anything! Tell us everything you found, God!We want to be healed. We want to be free from the very root of futility. So in 4:17-19 we get the surgeon's report on the human heart. Now this I affirm and testify in the Lord, that you must no longer live(literally: walk) as the Gentiles do, *in the futility of their minds; theyare darkened in their understanding, alienated from the life of God becauseof the ignorance that is in them, due to their hardness of heart; they havebecome callous and have given themselves up to licentiousness, greedy topractice every kind of uncleanness. (*NOTE: these readers were once among this number; in fact, 2:3 says we wereALL among this number; in other words, apart from the renovation that Christbrings what we read here is the universal condition of the human heart) This is what God sees when he looks into the human heart. Until we see thisclearly and agree that this is what we are by nature, we probably will behealed very lightly and very superficially, and the disease will break outmore easily and we will wonder why our external clean up operations soconsistently fail. We haven't seen the real disease and haven't severed theroot of our futility. As I have meditated on these three verses I have seen six levels of evilin my own heart that stand in opposition to Christ and the work he is doing. First, the deepest problem is hardness (v. 18 at the end): "due to theirhardness of heart." My deepest problem in life is that apart from the freeand sovereign grace of God my heart is hardened against God. I am like astone toward all that is spiritual. It does not move me, attract me, delightme. This is a far deeper problem than ignorance. It is the cause of ignorance,and the guilt of ignorance. Do you see this in the last two phrases of verse 18? "The ignorance thatis in them, due to their hardness of heart." The hardness is deeper thanignorance. And therefore my ignorance of spiritual things is not innocent.It is evil. It is blameworthy, because it comes not from lack of truth orevidence, but from a deep hardness in my heart against God. That is the firstand deepest problem that the surgeon shows me about myself and why my lifeis so futile. Second, there is in me a deep darkness that swallows up my understanding,and keeps me from seeing the glory of the gospel or the excellency of Christ(v. 18 at the very beginning): "they are darkened in their understanding."Notice 5:8: "Once your were darkness, but now you are light in the Lord;walk as children of the light." Before the Lord shined in my heart I wasdarkness (2 Cor. 4:4-6). There was no light in me. And Jesus said in John3:20 that I would not come to the light because I hated the light. And thisis true whether I am a college professor or an illiterate native. Third, the result of this darkness is a deep ignorance of reality (v. 18):"alienated from the life of God because of the ignorance that is in them."I say it is a DEEP ignorance, for there is a superficial knowledge in thedarkened mind of man. Apart from spiritual light I can know ten thousandthings, but I can't know the true meaning of anything -- not one thing. Becauseto know the meaning of a thing is to know why it exists. But Colossians 1:16says, "All things were created through Christ and for Christ." So until Iknow in my heart that every molecule in this universe exists for the sakeof Jesus Christ, I don't know the final meaning of anything. I misunderstandeverything, until the darkness of my mind is taken away. Fourth, the hardness and darkness and ignorance of my heart results inlicentiousness. Verse 19: "They have become callous (which is the same as"hard,") and have given themselves up to licentiousness." The sense of thepassage seems to be that when a person is ignorant of the true meaning ofthings, and the true values of life as God sees them, that person will makehis goal in life something other than God. It may be the gratification ofhis body in sex or drink or drugs or food. Or it may be the gratificationof his ego with more refined intellectual and cultural pursuits. Anythingbut God, and everything apart from God. The heart that is hard and dark andignorant of God will also be a licenteous and coveteous heart. Fifth, inevitably the hardness and darkness and ignorance and licentiousnessspill over into practices of uncleanness. Notice how verse 19 ends: "greedyto practice every kind of uncleanness." Literally, their coveteousness drivesthem to pursue practices that in God's eyes are impure. So we have finally reached the level of outward behavior, or what verse 17calls "walking" or "living" -- "don't walk as the Gentiles do, in the futilityof their minds." In other words, Escape from futility! Live a different way.Walk a different path. But now that we have read the surgeon's report in verses 17, 18 and 19 weknow that the disease is massive. The cancer of hardness and darkness andignorance and licenteousness has spread everywhere. And we will never behealed, we will never escape from futility by means of a psychological quickfix or a superficial, up-beat seminar on how to change our attitude. That'sman's way, not God's way. God has a way. But that leads to the sixth level of evil in my disease thatI haven't mentioned yet. Verse 18 says I am "alienated from the life of Godbecause of the ignorance that is in me, due to my hardness of heart." Hardnessand darkness and ignorance and licenteousness and the practice of uncleannesscut me off from the one thing that could save me -- the "life of God," andleave me dead (2:l,5). But even though there is no man or woman or book or seminar or program thatcan save me from the disease and futility of my own deep depravity, God can.It IS possible not to live in futility. That's what Paul assumes when hesays in verse 17: "Now this I affirm and testify in the Lord, that you mustno longer live as the Gentiles do, in the futility of their minds." Thereis an escape from futility! What is it? He begins his answer in verses 20-21. The reason, he says, thatyou must not follow the Gentiles in futility is that, "You did not so learnChrist (then he mentions what he is assuming!), assuming that your have heardof him (literally: not "heard OF" but "heard": assuming you have heard him)and were taught in him, as the truth is in Jesus." What is the escape from futility this morning? It is hearing the voice ofJesus and being taught by him (verse 2l). If you have heard him and if youhave been taught by him you need not and you must not walk in futility. Jesussaid, "The hour is coming, AND NOW IS, when the dead will hear the voiceof the Son of God, and those who hear will live" (John 5:25). No longer alienatedfrom the life of God. Jesus Christ has spoken this morning in the truth ofhis word. He has diagnosed our disease and now he gives himself as a cureand as a teacher to everyone who hears his voice and becomes his pupil. On another occasion he said, "My sheep hear my voice and I know them andthey follow me; and I give them eternal life" (John 10:16). If you hear thevoice of Jesus this morning, and not just my voice, and if you follow him(like a sheep follows a shepherd), then you will no longer be alienated fromthe life of God. Nothing will be futile for you any more. He will make youlive for ever in the presence of God and every detail of your ordinary lifewill have meaning in him. The text ends with these great words: "The truth is in Jesus." And Jesussaid, "The truth will make you free." Free from hardness and darkness andignorance and licentiousness and uncleanness and alienation. The truth shallset you free from futility. And the truth is in Jesus. The door to his hospitaland to his school is open this morning. And I urge you in his name, becomehis trusting patient and become his eager pupil.   Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
