  Two assumptions lie at the foundation of this newseries of messages on the pleasures of God.   1. The first assumption is that The worth andexcellency of a soul is measured by the object of its love. (Henry Scougal).  If we apply that to God, then one way of beholdingthe worth and excellency of God is to meditate on what he loves.   Another way to put it would be to say that the measureof God's dignity is determined by what he delights in.  Or anotherway would be to say that the greatness of God's excellence isregistered by his enjoyments.  What he takes pleasure in signalsthe beauty and the preciousness of his character.  2.  The second assumption is that when we fix ourmind's attention on the worth and excellency of God, that is,when we meditate on his glory, we are changed little by littleinto his likeness.   And we all with unveiled face, beholding the gloryof the Lord, are being changed into his likeness from one degreeof glory to another. (2 Cor. 3:18)  So my goal in these next 12 weeks is to direct your attention to the pleasures of God revealed in Scripture; in the hope that you will see in them some of the infinite measure of God's worth and excellency; and in seeing this glory that you might rise one step at a time into his likeness; so that at home and work and school people will see your good works and give glory to your Father in heaven.  Portray his pleasures in preaching.  Behold his gloryin listening.  Approach his likeness in meditation.  Display hisworth in the world.  May God be gracious to bless the ministryof his word in these weeks.  Last week we focused on the pleasure that God theFather has in his Son.  The most important lesson to be learnedfrom that truth is this: God is and always has been an exuberantlyhappy God.  He has never been lonely.  He has always rejoice withoverflowing satisfaction in the glory of his Son.  You might saythat the Son of God has always been the landscape of God's excellenciesor the panorama of God's perfections.  And therefore from alleternity God has beheld with overflowing satisfaction the magnificentterrain of his own radiance reflected in the Son.  A second lesson to learn from this truth is thatGod is not constrained by anything outside himself to do anythinghe does not want to do.  If God were unhappy, if he were in someway deficient, then he might indeed be constrained from outsidein some way to do what he does not want to do in order to makeup his deficiency and finally to be happy.  That is the way we are.  We come into the world knowingalmost nothing and have to spend years and years going to classesor learning in the school of hard knocks.  Parents and teacherstell us to do things that we don't like to do because we needto do them to overcome some deficiency in ourselves -- to increaseour knowledge or strengthen our bodies or refine our manners.  But God is not like that.  He has been complete and overflowing with satisfaction from all eternity.  He needs noeducation.  No one can offer anything to him that doesn't alreadycome from him.  And so no one can bribe him or coerce him in anyway.  You can't bribe a mountain spring with bucketfulls of waterfrom the valley.  Therefore God does what he does not begrudginglyor under external constraint as though he were boxed in or trappedby some unforeseen or unplanned situation.    On the contrary, because he is complete and exuberantlyhappy and overflowing with satisfaction in the fellowship of theTrinity, all he does is free and uncoerced.  His deeds are theoverflow of his joy.  This is what it means when the Scripturesays that God does something according to the good pleasureof his will.  It means that nothing outside God's own pleasure-- the pleasure he has in what he is, nothing but that pleasure-- has constrained his choices and his deeds.  This brings us to the focus of today's message --The Pleasure of God in All that He Does -- and today'stext: Psalm 135.  The Psalm begins by calling us to praise the Lord:Praise the Lord.  Praise the name of the Lord.  Then,starting in verse 3 the psalmist gives us reasons for why we shouldfeel praise rising in our hearts toward God.  It says, for example,Praise the Lord, for the Lord is good.  The list ofreasons for praise goes on until it comes to verse 6, and thisis the verse I want us to focus on this morning:   Whatever the Lord pleases he does, in heaven and on earth, in the seas and all deeps.   Psalm 115:3 says the same thing:    Our God is in the heavens; he does whatever he pleases.   This verse teaches that whenever God acts he actsin a way that pleases him.  God is never constrained to do a thingthat he despises.  He is never backed into a corner where hisonly recourse is to do something he hates to do.  He does whateverhe pleases.   And therefore, in some sense, he has pleasure inall that he does.    Isaiah uses the same Hebrew word (as a noun) in Isaiah46:10 where the Lord says,   My counsel shall stand, and I will accomplish all my pleasure.   On the basis of these texts and many others we shouldbow before God and praise his sovereign freedom -- that in somesense at least he always acts in freedom, according to his owngood pleasure, following the dictates of his own delights. He never becomes the victim of circumstance.  He is never forcedinto a situation where he must do something in which he cannotrejoice.  This is a glorious picture of God in his sovereignfreedom -- to do whatever he pleases and to accomplish all hispleasure.  But it would be a fuzzy picture, a bit out of focus,if we stopped here.  To bring it into focus and sharpen it upwe have to ask this question:  How can God say in Ezekiel18:23 and 32 that he does not have pleasure in the death of anyimpenitent person, if in fact he accomplishes all his pleasureand does whatever he pleases?  In Ezekiel 18:30 God is warning the house of Israelof impending judgment: Therefore I will judge you, O houseof Israel, every one according to his ways, says the Lord. And he is urging them to repent: Repent and turn from allyour transgressions.  At the end of verse 31 he says, Whywill you die, O house of Israel?  For I have no pleasure in thedeath of any one, says the Lord God; so turn, and live.  This seems to be a very different picture than theone we saw in Psalm 135, where God does whatever he pleases. Here he seems to be cornered.  It seems that he is forced intojudging them when he really doesn't want to.  He seems to be aboutto do something that he is not pleased to do.  Is he going toaccomplish all his pleasure or not?  Is God really free to doall everything according to his good pleasure?  Or does his sovereignfreedom have its limits?  Can he do whatever he pleases up toa point, and then after that is he cornered into doing thingshe only grieves to do?  We might try to solve the problem by going back toPsalm 135 and saying that God does whatever he pleases in thenatural world but not in the personal sphere.  After all it saysin verse 7:  He it is who makes the clouds rise at the end ofthe earth, who makes lightnings for the rain and brings forththe wind from his storehouses.  But this effort to limit God's freedom to the sphereof nature will not work for two reasons.    l)  One is that if God controls the wind and makesit blow whenever and wherever he pleases -- which is certainlytrue (remember Jesus' Peace! Be still!) -- then God is responsiblefor the destruction of thousands of lives by drowning becauseof the storms and hurricanes and tornadoes and monsoons and typhoonswhich God has brought forth from his storehouses over the centuries.   So when Psalm 135 says that the Lord does whateverhe pleases it has to include the taking of personal life at seathrough the wind which he alone controls.  2)  But the text doesn't leave us to draw out silentinferences like that.  The Psalmist goes on in verses 8-11 tosay that God's sovereign freedom was shown most vividly in theExodus out of Egypt:   8) He it was who smote the first-born of Egypt, bothof man and of beast. . . 10) who smote many nations and slew mightykings. . .   That is the second reason you can't limit the freedomof God in this Psalm to the natural realm.   When the Psalmistsays in verse 6 that whatever the Lord pleases he does,he doesn't just refer implicitly to the tragedies owing to wind;he also refers explicitly to the destruction of rebellious Egyptians,and nations and kings.  This is the scope of what God does whenhe does whatever he pleases.  So in Ezekiel it says that God is not pleased withthe death of unrepentant people, and in Psalm 135 it says thatGod does whatever he pleases including the slaying unrepentantpeople.  And the very same Hebrew verb is used in Psalm 135:6(he pleases) and Ezekiel 18:32 (he has pleasure).  Before I suggest a solution to this problem let memake it worse.    Many Christians today have a conception of God thatisn't troubled by his being cornered into doing things he doesn'twant to do.  And I can easily imagine that one response to whatwe have seen so far would be to say that we have  created an artificialproblem because Psalm 135 doesn't actually say that God takesdelight in destroying the Egyptians.    Perhaps someone would say that doing whateverhe pleases in Psalm 135:6 is just a figure of speech anddoesn't carry the sense of pleasure or delight.  And so they wouldsay that God only grieves when he must judge unrepentant sinners,and there is no sense in which he is doing what he is pleasedto do.  In answer to this I would say again that the sameword used in Psalm 135:6 for God's being pleased isused in Ezekiel 18:32 for God's not being pleased. Then I would direct attention to Deuteronomy 28:63 where Moseswarns of coming judgment on unrepentant Israel.  But this timeit says something strikingly different from Ezekiel 18:32,  And as the Lord took delight in doing you good andmultiplying you, so the Lord will take delight in bringing ruinupon you and destroying you.  (Cf. Prov. 1:24-26; Rev. 18:20;Ezek. 5:l3)  So we are brought back to the inescapable fact thatin some sense God does not delight in the death of the wicked(that is the message of Ezekiel 18), and in some sense he does(that is the message of Psalm 135:6-11 and Deuteronomy 28:63).  I have commended a solution to you before and I willcommend it again: namely, that the death and misery of the unrepentantis in and of itself no delight to God.  God is not a sadist. He is not malicious or bloodthirsty.  Instead when a rebellious,wicked, unbelieving person is judged, what God delights in isthe vindication of truth and goodness and of his own honor andglory.    When Moses warns Israel that the Lord will take delightin bringing ruin upon them and destroying them if they don't repent,he means that those who have rebelled against the Lord and movedbeyond repentance will not be able to gloat that they have madethe Almighty miserable.  Quite the contrary. Moses says that whenthey are judged they will unwittingly give an opportunity forGod to rejoice in the demonstration of his justice and his powerand the infinite worth of his glory.  Let this be a warning to us this morning.  God isnot mocked.  He is not trapped or cornered or coerced.  Even onthe way to Calvary he had legions at his disposal.  No onetakes my life from me; I lay it down of my own accord --of my own good pleasure, for the joy that is set before me.  Atthe one point in the history of the universe where God lookedtrapped he was totally in charge doing precisely what he pleased-- dying to justify the ungodly like you and me.  So let us stand in awe and wonder this morning: OurGod is in heaven; he does whatever he pleases.  Amen.   Almighty God and Merciful Father, We praise you for your everlasting happiness in the fellowship of the Trinity; that you are an infinitely exuberant God; satisfied with the panorama of your own perfections reflectedin the radiance of your Son.  And we praise you that you are freeand sovereign in your own self-sufficiency and cannot be bribedor coerced because of some deficiency or craving in your heart. We praise you that your plan and counsel is governed not by ourwill but by your good pleasure.    
