 December 10, 1989    Bethlehem Baptist Church    John Piper    
    
    A BURNING WITNESS TO THE LIGHT    John 1:6-8    
    There was a man sent from God, whose name was John. He came for   testimony, to bear witness to the light, that all might believe   through him. He was not the light, but came to bear witness to the   light.    
    
    Let's remember why this Gospel was written. John 20:31, "These   things were written that you might believe that Jesus is the   Christ, the Son of God, and that believing have life in His name."   So my aim this morning as a minister of these words is that you   would believe in Jesus as Son of God and that you would experience   newness of life.    
    The reason I say newness of life is because in John 10:10 Jesus   said that the reason he came into the world was that his sheep   might have overflowing life: "I came that they might have life and   have it abundantly." This word (perisson) speaks of excess,   overflow, surplus. The idea is that Jesus gives life that is more   than ordinary life. The life of a Christian is life upon life.   Excess life. Life added to life.    
    And the way to have this life from Jesus is to believe in him.   John 5:24, "Truly, truly, I say to you, he who hears my word and   believes him who sent me, has eternal life; he does not come into   judgment, but has passed from death to life." Notice: NOT just   will have eternal life some day beyond the grave; BUT has passed   now (by believing) from death to life. You can have new life this   morning: life that is more than the life you have known before,   life that is so wonderful it is a passing from death to life. And   even Christians who have weakened in faith and lost the full power   of new life can find stronger faith and fuller life in these words   this morning.    
    That's our goal: these things are written (in John) and this   message is preached that you might believe in Jesus (like you have   never believed before) and believing have life (like you've never   had before.)    
    Our text today can be summed up in three statements:    
    1. God sent a man named John. (v. 6)    
    2. John came for testimony to bear witness to the light. (v.   7a)    
    3. The aim of this testimony was that all might believe. (v.   7b)    
    Let's take these one at a time and let them move us to the goal of   the gospel and the goal of the message: belief in Jesus Christ and   overflowing life in his name.    
    1. God sent a man named John.    
    John 1:6, "There was a man sent from God whose name was John."    
    Why does John, the writer of this gospel, introduce John the   Baptist like this right here? It seems abrupt. Verse 5 is talking   about the light shining in the darkness and the darkness not   overcoming it, and verse 9 goes on to talk about the light coming   into the world. And verses 6-8 seem like an interruption. Why not   get Jesus all the way introduced, and then introduce John the   Baptist?    
    Well, John could have written it that way. But he didn't .And the   effect of the way he did write it is to make crystal clear from   the very outset that God's way of letting the light of Christ   shine in the world is by human witnesses. God's way of pushing   back the darkness is by human witnesses.    
    It didn't have to be this way. God could have caused the light of   Christ to spread in some other way. He could have done it with   angels. He could have written the gospel in the sky with big puffy   white letters made out of clouds. He could have caused the wind to   talk. But instead God chose to call and send human beings to bear   witness to the light. "There was a man (a human being) sent from   God, whose name was John."    
    This general principle is even more clear because John was sent to   testify to the light while the light was there. As soon as the   light was in the world &#151; as soon as Jesus came &#151; God   prepared and sent a human being right alongside the light to bear   witness to the light. Jesus did not need John the Baptist to make   him known. He could have managed by himself &#151; he was the   light of the world. But evidently God's wisdom dictates that his   Son should be heralded, announced, proclaimed by people that he   sends. Evidently God knows that this is the way to bring the   greatest happiness to men and the greatest glory to his Son.    
    There are at least two implications of this for you today.    
    1.1 One is that you should be alert to the possible call of God in   your life. All Christians are to be the light of the world (Matt.   5:16). All are called to witness to the light (Acts 1:8, 1 pt.   2:9). But God still calls some in a special way and for special   tasks.    
    "Pray the Lord of the harvest to send forth laborers into his   harvest" (Matt. 9:38). "How shall they hear without a preacher?   And how shall they preach unless they are sent?" (Rom. 10:14-15).   "Take heed to yourselves and to all the flock in which the Holy   Spirit has set you as overseers" (Acts 20:28).    
    It may be a vocational sending to the ministry. It may be a single   or periodic sending for some special mission (across the ocean or   across the street). But it is God's way to speak to a person and   send that person to testify to the light. Be ready and open to   hear that call and accept that commission. Don't assume that what   you are doing now is your only mission for the future.    
    1.2 And the other implication is that you should be ready and open   to hear the testimony from others who are sent to you. God means   to communicate to you not merely through your own private Bible   reading, but also through other people. He means to communicate to   you through my preaching and through your Sunday School teacher   and through godly parents. We should be aware that it is God's way   to communicate with us through those that he calls and sends.   Otherwise why send them if he has nothing to say to us through   them?    
    I pray that by the time my life is over on earth thousands of   people will have heard such a decisive, life-changing word from   God through me that they will say, "There was a man sent from God   whose name was John." And will not many young women say, as they   look back on their girlhood, "There was a woman sent from God   whose name was Marlene." And I wonder how many will say, "There   was a woman sent from God whose name was Lollie."?    
    Be ready and open to God's call on your life to send you to bear   witness to the light; and be ready and open to recognize the word   of God to you when it comes from others that God has sent to   you.    
    That's the first step in our text: God sent a man named John (v.   6). God's way of spreading the light of Christ is by human   witnesses.    
    2. John came for testimony to bear witness to the light. (v.   7a)    
    The second step in the text is that the way God uses people to   promote the light is by their testimony. John was a witness. A   witness is a person with some experience and knowledge that can   help establish the truth of some fact that is in dispute. God had   spoken to John in the wilderness about the coming Messiah, and his   meeting with Jesus at the baptism gave him the experience he   needed to be a bona fide witness.    
    Verses 33-34: "I myself did not know him; but he who sent me to   baptize with water said to me, 'He on whom you see the Spirit   descend and remain, this is he who baptizes with the Holy Spirit.'   And I have seen and have borne witness that this is the Son of   God."    
    So God had spoken to John earlier about the One who was coming.   And then he gave him a sign to let him know that Jesus was this   One. From then on John bore his testimony to Jesus faithfully   until he was put to death for his witness.    
    On August 30, 1744 Jonathan Edwards preached an ordination sermon   for Robert Abercrombie, and took as his text John 5:35 where Jesus   says of John's witness, "He was a burning and shining lamp, and   you were willing to rejoice for a while in his light." Edwards   developed the point that a faithful witness to the gospel burns   and shines. That is, there is the warmth of zeal and the light of   truth. John the Baptist had both of them, and in this he is a   great example for us.    
    2.1 First there was the light of truth in his witness. God showed   him many magnificent things about Jesus. Here are some of the   things he said about Jesus:    
    2.11 John 1:23, He is "the Lord." John identifies himself as the   voice crying in the wilderness, "Make straight the way of the   Lord." This is an amazing thing because in Isaiah 40:3, "the Lord"   was a reference to God himself. John was applying it to Jesus.    
    2.12 John 1:27, Jesus is so great John is not worthy to untie the   strap of his sandal. John speaks of Jesus as, "He who comes after   me, the thong of whose sandal I am not worthy to untie."    
    2.13 John 1:29, Jesus is the Lamb of God that takes away the sin   of the world. John says, "Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away   the sin of the world!" John had probably discovered this in   meditating on Isaiah 53:6-7.    
    2.14 John 1:33, Jesus is the one who is going to baptize his   people with the Holy Spirit. John says, "He on whom you see the   Spirit descend and remain, this is he who baptizes with the Holy   Spirit." He pours out the Spirit. He is the Source of the   Spirit.    
    2.15 John 1:34, Jesus is the Son of God. John testifies, "I have   seen and have borne witness that this is the Son of God." This   fits well with Jesus being called "the Lord."    
    (See also 1:30 and 3:29 for John's other testimonies.)    
    2.2 But not only was his witness a bright beacon of truth, it was   also a burning zeal. John's life as well as his message was a   faithful testimony to the truth. Consider at least three things   that would make our testimony to Christ more credible too.    
    2.21 John's simplicity. He had lived in the wilderness for years.   He dressed in simple leather clothes (Mark 1:6). He ate honey and   locust (Mark 1:6). His whole life stood over against the luxuries   of his day (Luke 7:25-26). This gave a tremendous power to his   prophetic message when he said to the multitudes, "He who has two   coats, let him share with him who has none" (Luke 3:10-14).    
    2.22 John's humility. In a sense John's role was tragic &#151; the   last prophet before the Lord, and killed for it while the   Christian movement he served was just getting started (like Moses   dying without entering the promised land, only John had done no   wrong like Moses).    
    But John took his role without resentment. He said in 1:27, "I am   not worthy to untie Jesus sandals." And when his disciples   complained that Jesus was stealing the show ("all are going to   him" - 3:26), John said in 3:29-30, "He who has the bride is the   bridegroom; the friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears   him, rejoices greatly at the bridegroom's voice; therefore this   joy of mine is now full. He must increase, but I must decrease."   John's testimony was burning with authenticity because he was a   truly humble man.    
    2.23 John's courage. John held to his message of righteousness to   the end, and it cost him his life. How many reasons we could think   of why it would not be prudent to cry out against Herod's sin in   taking his brother's wife! John is a great example of one who   acted on principle not prudence. And Jesus said there wasn't a   greater man who ever lived (Luke 7:28). His testimony burned with   reality because he was a man of tremendous courage.    
    So the first step in our text (v. 6) was that God sent a man named   John. It is God's way to spread his light by using people.    
    And the second step in out text is that "John came for testimony   to bear witness to the light" (v. 7a). The way God uses people to   spread the light is by their testimony. John was a burning and a   shining lamp to Jesus. He was burning with zeal and shining with   the light of truth. And that's the way our witness should be   too.    
    3. Finally the third step in the text is that we would   believe.    
    Verse 7: "John came for testimony, to bear witness to the light   that all might believe through him." Notice: "Through him" not on   him. The aim of his testimony was that we all believe on   Jesus.    
    John's whole life pointed to the truth and worth of the One that   was to come after him, Jesus. God sent him so that we would   believe in Jesus. John witnessed to the truth so we would believe   in Jesus. John burned with zeal so that we would believe in Jesus.   This gospel was written so that we would believe on Jesus. And I   would like to pray now for us all that we would believe in   Jesus.    
    Father, I pray now in Jesus' great name that you would incline the   hearts of all of us to believe in Jesus.     To believe . . .    &#151; that he is the Lord,    &#151; that he is so great the greatest man was not worthy to   untie his shoes,    &#151; that he is the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the   world     &#151; the sin of anyone in the world who believes (3:36),    &#151; that he is the very Son of God,    &#151; that he is the bridegroom and all who follow him are his   beloved and cherished bride,    &#151; that he baptizes with the Holy Spirit. He pours his Spirit   out upon those who believe, swallows us up in the spirit of his   love and gives us life, abundant, overflowing, excessive life upon   life.    
    If something is hindering you from fully believing in Jesus, let   us know so we can show you more reasons to believe and pray with   you for the grace to believe. Christmas is a wonderful time to be   believe and have eternal life.       Copyright 1989, 1998 John Piper      Piper's   Notes            
