  Bethlehem Baptist Church October 13, 1996 John Piper, pastor     When Is Saving RepentanceImpossible?   Hebrews 6:4-8    
   For in the case of those who have once been enlightened and havetasted of the heavenly gift and have been made partakers of the HolySpirit, 5 and have tasted the good word of God and the powers of theage to come, 6 and then have fallen away, it is impossible to renewthem again to repentance, since they again crucify to themselves theSon of God, and put Him to open shame. 7 For ground that drinks therain which often falls upon it and brings forth vegetation useful tothose for whose sake it is also tilled, receives a blessing from God;8 but if it yields thorns and thistles, it is worthless and close tobeing cursed, and it ends up being burned.   Being Serious, But not Sad   There is a big difference between being serious and being sad. Theopposite of sad is happy. But the opposite of serious is glib (orjoking). So you can be serious and happy at the same time. In fact,C. S. Lewis said, "There is a kind of happiness and wonder that makesyou serious." Everybody knows the difference between what a comedianmakes us feel and what a friend who lays down his life for us makesus feel. Most people know the deep difference between a day at DisneyWorld and a day at the Grand Canyon.  It seems to me that the book of Hebrews has a special way ofmaking us serious. It is a very sobering book. It is not a sad book.But it is a serious book. If you hear what it says, it blows awayglib, trite, trivial attitudes about life. It does this not to makeus sad, but to make us unshakably happy in God (see 10:34; 12:2;13:17).   A Kind of Happiness that will Kill You   One of the ways that Hebrews does this is with warnings aboutfalse security. There is a kind of happiness that will kill you. Andthe book of Hebrews is relentlessly loving in exposing this dangeroushappiness and warning us to flee from its deceptions and pursue thesolid happiness that will never let us down. In other words, Hebrewsis written to deepen and strengthen the joy of our assurance in God,and one of the strategies of the book is to expose false assurancesand fleeting pleasures.  That's what we are reading in Hebrews 6:4-8. This passage saysthat there is a spiritual condition that makes repentance andsalvation impossible. And it says that this condition may look inmany ways like salvation, but it isn't. And it leads to destruction.And so this text is a warning to us not to assume that we are securewhen our lives have some religious experiences but no growing fruit.And the reason for showing us this serious situation is so that wewill flee from it, and move to solid ground and lasting joy.  Let's look at the flow of thought. Hebrews 6:1 said, "Let us presson to maturity." And verse 3 said, "This we will do if God permits."In other words, whether we have the grace to overcome our naturalpride and rebellion and unbelief will depend ultimately on God.  Now verses 4-8 illustrate this utter dependence on God by showingthat there is a situation where repentance and pressing on tomaturity is impossible. And since it is impossible, we should shudderat the prospect of being in this situation and we should see howutterly dependent we are on the sovereign God of verse 3.   When Repentance is Impossible   What is this situation where repentance is impossible? It isdescribed like this:  For in the case of those who have once been enlightened and havetasted of the heavenly gift and have been made partakers of the HolySpirit, 5 and have tasted the good word of God and the powers of theage to come, 6 and then have fallen away, it is impossible to renewthem again to repentance, since they again crucify to themselves theSon of God, and put Him to open shame. (Hebrews 6:4-6)  The situation is this: first, someone receives great blessings andhas high religious experiences (verses 4-5). And then second, thatsame person falls away and, in doing so, re-crucifies the Son of Godand puts him to an open shame. And then third, it is impossible torenew that person to repentance.  Let's look at these three parts of the situation.  1. There are great blessings and high religious experiences. Hementions four. First, a person may be "enlightened" (verse 4).Second, a person may have tasted the heavenly gift and become apartaker of the Holy Spirit (verse 4). The heavenly gift probably isthe Holy Spirit. Third, a person may have tasted the good word of God(verse 5). And fourth, the person may have tasted the powers of theage to come (verse 5; see Hebrews 2:4).  2. In spite of all these blessings and experiences, this personthen falls away (verse 6). That is, he falls away from Christ and theSpirit and the word and the powers of the age to come. He turns hisback on the worth of these great realities and goes after otherthings with his heart. The effect of this is to re-crucify Christ andput him to open shame (verse 6b).  Why is that called re-crucifixion? There are at least two reasonswhy this kind of apostasy is re-crucifixion of Christ.   Why is it Called Re-crucifixion   One is that Christ was crucified the first time to make his peoplepure and holy. That's why he shed his blood. Hebrews 13:12 says,"Jesus also suffered outside the gate that He might sanctify thepeople through His own blood." He died to sanctify us. He died tomake us pure and holy and devoted to him (see Hebrews 9:14; Titus2:14). So when we turn our backs on purity and holiness and devotion,which his cross was designed to bring about, we say yes to theimpurity and worldliness and unbelief that nailed him there in thefirst place. Which means we crucify him again.  There is another reason this kind of falling away is are-crucifying of Christ. When a person chooses against Christ andturns back to the way of the world and the sovereignty of his ownwill and the fleeting pleasures of earth, he says in effect thatthese are worth more than Christ is worth. They are worth more thanthe love of Christ and the wisdom of Christ and the power of Christand all that God promises to be for us in Christ. And when a personsays that, it is the same as saying: I agree with the crucifiers ofJesus. Because what could shame Christ more today than to havesomeone taste his goodness and wisdom and power and then say: No,there is something better and more to be desired. That puts him to apublic shame.  It is one thing for a stranger to the faith to resist Christ. Butit is another thing for a person who has been in the church and hasbeen enlightened and tasted of the heavenly gift and become apartaker of the Holy Spirit and tasted of the good word of God andthe powers of the age to come -- it's another thing for that personto say after all those blessings and all those experiences: I thinkwhat the world offers is better than this. That is a re-crucifying ofJesus and a putting him to public shame worse than any outsidercould, who never tasted the truth.  3. Which leads, to the conclusion that "it is impossible to renew[such a person] again to repentance" (verse 6). We saw anillustration of this last week from Hebrews 12:16-17. There it speaksa similar kind of warning as here:  [Let] there be no immoral or godless person like Esau, who soldhis own birthright for a single meal. 17 For you know that evenafterwards, when he desired to inherit the blessing, he was rejected,for he found no place for repentance, though he sought for it withtears.  Will Genuine Repentance be Rejected by God? Don't make the mistakeof thinking that Esau genuinely repented and was rejected by God. Goddoes not reject genuine repentance. The text says plainly that hefound no place for repentance. In other words, he couldn't repent. Hewas so hardened (see Hebrews 3:8,15; 4:7) that he cried out forthings to go better in his life, but inside he would not submit toGod's terms. He was, as verse 16 says, "immoral and godless." This isan illustration of what the writer has in mind in Hebrews 6:6 when hesays it is impossible to renew this person again to repentance. Thisis the terrifying prospect behind all the warnings of this book notto drift but to take heed and consider Jesus and to exhort each otherevery day and to fear unbelief and carelessness. Why? Is anythingreally at stake? The prospect exists that you and I who believe weare chosen and called and justified might slide into a slow processof indifference and hardening and eventually fall away and rejectChrist and put him to an open shame. We may actually come to a pointwhere there is no return, because we have been forsaken utterly byGod. That's what the word "impossible" means in verse 6. and Oh, howit should put you on an urgent pursuit of mercy this morning!   Can One be a "Partaker" and not be Justified?   Now the question we all ask here is whether the person who fallsaway like this was ever truly "saved" or "justified" or "called" or"born again." Can you taste and be a partaker of the Holy Spirit andthe word of God and the powers of the age to come and not bejustified? In other words, is this text teaching that you can loseyour standing as a truly saved person and be lost? Or is it teachingthat you can have these experiences in verses 4 and 5 and never havebeen saved? Both teachings are shocking and sobering. Which is true?  Without weakening the seriousness and the warning of these versesI want to argue that it is possible to have all these blessings andall these experiences and not be justified or born again or saved. Iwill mention only five reasons, all of them taken from Hebrews -- andthere are many more outside Hebrews (Romans 8:29-39; Jude 24-25;Ephesians 1:3-14; 1 John 2:19; 1 Peter 1:5; Philippians 1:6; 2:13; 1Corinthians 1:8-9; 1 Thessalonians 5:23-24; Ezekiel 11:19; 36:27;Deuteronomy 30:6; Jeremiah 24:7; 32:40).  1. Consider verses 7-8. Here the situation with those who fallaway is put in a picture. After verse 6 says that repentance isimpossible for the apostates, verses 7-8 say,  For ground that drinks the rain which often falls upon it [thisdrinking of frequent rains is a reference to all the blessings ofverses 4-5: the light, the Spirit, the word the powers] and bringsforth vegetation useful to those for whose sake it is also tilled,receives a blessing from God; 8 but if it yields thorns and thistles,it is worthless and close to being cursed, and it ends up beingburned.  So the picture is not of a field that had life and vegetation andthen lost it. The picture is of two different kinds of fields -- oneis fruitful and blessed; the other is barren and cursed. I think thepoint is: if we have sat in church with the light and the Spirit andthe word and the work of God coming to us and blessing us and evenshaping us in some degree, but then turn our back on it, we are likea field without vegetation and will come into judgment. The rain wehave drunk (light, Spirit, word, powers) produced no life in thefield.  2. Consider verse 9. After holding out the real possibility thatsome in the church might commit apostasy, he says,  But, beloved, we are convinced of better things concerning you,and things that accompany salvation, though we are speaking in thisway.  The key phrase is "things that accompany salvation." The "betterthings" that he is confident about are things that always go withsalvation (literally, are possessed by salvation). They belong tosalvation. So what he is saying is that he believes they really are"saved" and that therefore they will not commit apostasy and be abarren field. They will bear fruit. They will not fall away. Thephrase "things that accompany salvation" shows that the writer reallybelieves that they have salvation and therefore will have the thingsthat always accompany salvation: persevering faith and fruitfulness.He does not believe that fruitlessness and apostasy accompanysalvation. Better things do.  3. Consider Hebrews 3:14 (and 3:6).  We have become partakers of Christ, if we hold fast the beginningof our assurance firm until the end.  The key thing here is the tense of the verb, "we have becomepartakers of Christ." Not we "will become partakers" and not "we arenow partakers," but: "we have become partakers of Christ -- if wehold fast our assurance." In other words, perseverance in faithproves that you became a partaker in Christ. Which means that if youdo not persevere in faith, it does not show that you fall out ofpartaking in Christ, but that you never became a partaker in Christ.If we hold fast to our assurance, we have become partakers of Christ;and if we do not hold fast, but commit apostasy (as Hebrews 6:6describes) then we have not become partakers of Christ. (The sameargument holds for the tense of the verb in Hebrews 3:6.) Therefore,it seems clear that this writer does not believe you can be in Christand then out again.  4. Consider Hebrews 10:14.  By one offering He has perfected for all time those who are beingsanctified [present tense, ongoing action].  If Hebrews 6:6 meant that you could be justified by the blood ofChrist and then lose that standing with God, this verse would seem tohave no meaning. It says that for those who are now being sanctified(that is, who are now indwelt by the Spirit and born of God and aregrowing in holiness by faith), the offering of Christ on the crosshas perfected that person for all time. For all time! In other wordsto become a beneficiary of the perfecting, justifying work of Christon the cross is to be perfected in the sight of God forever. Thissuggests that Hebrews 6:6 does not mean that those who re-crucifyChrist were once really justified by the blood of Jesus and werereally being sanctified in an inward spiritual sense.  5. Consider Hebrews 13:20-21.  Now the God of peace, who brought up from the dead the greatShepherd of the sheep through the blood of the eternal covenant, evenJesus our Lord, 21 equip you in every good thing to do His will,working in us that which is pleasing in His sight, through JesusChrist, to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen.  Verse 20 speaks of an eternal covenant sealed by the blood ofJesus. That is the new covenant which this book has made much of inchapters 8 and 9. The new covenant is the promise that God will put anew heart in us and cause us to walk in his ways and not turn awayfrom doing us good (Ezekiel 11:19; 36:27; Jeremiah 24:7; 32:40). Soin verse 21 he says that it is not finally dependent on us whether wepersevere in faith and bear fruit. It is finally dependent on God: Heis working in us that which is pleasing in his sight. He isfulfilling the new covenant promise to preserve us.  This means that Hebrews 6:6 would contradict the new covenant ifit meant that people could be truly justified members of the newcovenant and then commit apostasy and be rejected. That would meanthat God did not fulfill his promise to "work in them what ispleasing in his sight." He would have broken his new covenantpromise.  For these five reasons I conclude that if a person falls away andre-crucifies the Son of God, he has never been justified. His faithwas not a saving faith.   What Then Do These Verses Mean for Us?   I'll be very personal, to give it it's sharpest point. If in thecoming years I commit apostasy and fall away from Christ, it will notbe because I have not tasted of the word of God and the Spirit of Godand the miracles of God. I have drunk of his word. The Spirit hastouched me. I have seen his miracles and I have been his instrumentfor a few.  But if, over the next ten or twenty years, John Piper begins tocool off spiritually and lose interest in spiritual things and becomemore fascinated with making money and writing Christless books; and Ibuy the lie that a new wife would be exhilarating and that thechildren can fend for themselves and that the church of Christ is adrag and that the incarnation is a myth and that there is one life tolive so let us eat drink and be merry -- if that happens, then knowthat the truth is this: John Piper was mightily deceived in the firstfifty years of his life. His faith was an alien vestige of hisfather's joy. His fidelity to his wife was a temporary passion andcompliance with social pressure; his fatherhood the outworking ofnatural instincts. His preaching was driven by the love of words andcrowds. His writing was a love affair with fame. And his praying wasthe deepest delusion of all -- an attempt to get God to supply theresources of his vanity.   If this possibility does not make me serious and vigilant inthe pursuit of everlasting joy, what will?   The practical conclusion of this awesome truth is given in nextweek's text. In the meantime, I pray that you will not be glib, butserious, about whether Christ is your highest joy. If you really bankyour hope on him and in him, he will not let you go.   Copyright (C) 1996 John Piper    
