  September 1, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor   
       Be Diligent to Enter God's Rest   (Hebrews 4:1-11)    Therefore, let us fear lest, while a promise remains of entering Hisrest, any one of you should seem to have come short of it. 2 Forindeed we have had good news preached to us, just as they also; butthe word they heard did not profit them, because it was not united byfaith in those who heard. 3 For we who have believed enter that rest,just as He has said, " AS I SWORE IN MY WRATH, THEY SHALL NOT ENTERMY REST," although His works were finished from the foundation of theworld. 4 For He has thus said somewhere concerning the seventh day,"AND GOD RESTED ON THE SEVENTH DAY FROM ALL HIS WORKS"; 5 and againin this passage, "THEY SHALL NOT ENTER MY REST." 6 Since therefore itremains for some to enter it, and those who formerly had good newspreached to them failed to enter because of disobedience, 7 He againfixes a certain day, "Today," saying through David after so long atime just as has been said before, "TODAY IF YOU HEAR HIS VOICE, DONOT HARDEN YOUR HEARTS." 8 For if Joshua had given them rest, Hewould not have spoken of another day after that. 9 There remainstherefore a Sabbath rest for the people of God. 10 For the one whohas entered His rest has himself also rested from his works, as Goddid from His. 11 Let us therefore be diligent to enter that rest,lest anyone fall through following   the same example ofdisobedience.     We Must Help Each Other FightUnbelief    Chapter 3 ended with the warning that it was unbelief that keptthe people of Israel from entering into the promised land and therest God had promised there. Verse 19: "And  so  we see thatthey were not able to enter because of  unbelief ." The point wedrew from this two weeks ago was that we must care enough about eachother that every day we get in each other's lives and exhort eachother not to let distrust in God creep in and destroy our lives. Wegot this from Hebrews 3:12-13: "Take care, brethren, lest thereshould be in any one of you an evil, unbelieving heart, in fallingaway from the living God. But encourage one another day after day, aslong as it is called 'Today,' lest any one of you be hardened by thedeceitfulness of sin."  So one conclusion to draw from the warning of 3:19 is thatunbelief is such a constant and dangerous temptation that we musthelp each other fight it off. Persevering in faith to the end is acommunity project. Small groups at Bethlehem will have a tremendousseriousness about them, if you believe what this says. We meet andform relationships of mutual accountability and love because ourfaith depends on it. And our entering into God's rest depends on ourfaith.  
    Fear Unbelief    Now at the beginning of chapter 4 the writer draws anotherconclusion from the warning of 3:19. He says "Therefore, [that's thesign that he is drawing a conclusion from what he just said in 3:19]let us fear [the NIV irresponsibly weakens this by the translation:"let us be careful"] -- let us fear, lest, while a promise remains ofentering His rest, any one of you should seem to have come short ofit." So what is his conclusion from the fact Israel was not able toenter God's rest because of unbelief? His conclusion is that weshould fear!  But fear what? "Fear lest . . . any one of you should seem to havecome short of God's rest, -- the restful haven of salvation." Thatis, fear so that you won't even appear to have missed heaven, becauseif you go on in this way you WILL miss it (3:6, 14, 19; 4:2 etc.).Yes, yes, that's the outcome of fearing -- not coming short of God'srest -- but what is it that we fear?  The connection with verse 19 surely tells us the thing we are tofear is unbelief. Verse 19: "They were not able to enter [God's rest]because of unbelief," Therefore fear  that unbelief , becausethat's what will keep you from entering God's rest -- God's haven ofsalvation and God's heaven. Fear unbelief. Fear not trusting God.  You can see this confirmed if we just keep on reading into verse2. Notice that verse 2 begins with "For." That means that he isgiving a reason for verse 1 -- a reason for why they should fear."Fear," he says in verse 1, " for      indeed we havehad good news preached to us, just as they also [had good newspreached to them]; but the word they heard did not profit them,because it was not united by faith in those who heard."  So he continues to compare Israel's situation in the wilderness tothe situation of believers in his day. They had good news preached tothem and we have had good news preached to us. What was the good newspreached to them? Well, among many other things it was God's word toIsrael from Mount Sinai in Exodus 34:6-7, "Then the LORD . . .proclaimed, 'The LORD, the LORD God, compassionate and gracious, slowto anger, and abounding in lovingkindness and truth; who keepslovingkindness for thousands, who forgives iniquity, transgressionand sin.'" It was good news of love and mercy and forgiveness ofevery kind of iniquity and transgression and sin. And it was the goodnews of God's promise that God would bring them into the land of milkand honey and be with them if they would trust him and not rebel(Numbers 14:8-9).  So this writer says that the Israelites had heard the gospel justlike his readers had -- not the foundation of it in the death andresurrection of Christ, which his readers have heard -- but still thepromise that God is merciful and forgives sins and promises rest andjoy for those who trust him. So there is a very similar situationbetween Israel and the readers of this letter, and the point is: thisgood news was not believed by Israel and so they did not enter God'srest, God's promised joy. Verse 2: "The word they heard [= the goodnews of forgiveness and promised joy] did not profit them, because itwas not united by faith in those who heard." In other words, theydidn't believe it. They doubted God. They distrusted him. They didnot have faith in his promise to give them a better future than theyhad in Egypt and so they gave up on God and wanted the old life.  And what was the result of that unbelief? Verse 2 says: thepromise "did not profit them." It was of no value to them. It did notsave them. As 3:19 said, they did not enter God's rest. They fell inthe wilderness. God swore in his wrath that they would never enterhis rest -- a picture of missing heaven.  So the point of verse 2 is exactly the same as the point of 3:19-- its a reason for why we should fear unbelief. Verse 19: "They werenot able to enter because of unbelief." Therefore (v. 1) fearunbelief; because (v. 2) when the good news to Israel was not unitedto faith, it profited them nothing and they perished in thewilderness. The main point is: fear this happening to you. Fearhearing the promises of God and not trusting them. Because the samething will happen to us as to them: we will not enter into God's rest-- God's heaven -- if we do not trust his promises.    
      Be Diligent to Enter God's Rest    That's the main point of the paragraph: Fear unbelief. In the lastsentence of the paragraph he says the same thing in different words.Verse 11: "Let us therefore be diligent to enter that rest, lestanyone fall through following the same example of disobedience." Inother words, Israel fell from the promised joy of God because of thedisobedience of unbelief. And the same thing can happen to anyprofessing Christian. To keep it from happening -- and to show thatwe are more than mere professing Christians -- he says, "Be diligentto enter God's rest" -- God's heaven. Be diligent! Pay closeattention to what you've heard (2:1); don't neglect your greatsalvation (2:3); consider Jesus (3:1); do not harden your hearts(3:8); take care against an unbelieving heart (3:12); exhort oneanother every day against the deceitfulness of sin (3:14); and FEARthe unbelief that will keep you from your promised rest (4:1).  Do you see the great lesson here? The Christian life is a life ofday by day, hour by hour trust in the promises of God to help us andguide us and take care of us and forgive us and bring us into afuture of holiness and joy that will satisfy our hearts infinitelymore than if we forsake him and put our trust in ourselves or in thepromises of this world. And that day by day, hour by hour trust inGod's promises is  not  automatic. It is the result of dailydiligence and it's the result of proper fear.    
      Do We Live in Constant Fear of BeingLost?    Now ponder this fear with me for a moment. You may be asking, "Youmean the ideal Christian life is lived in constant fear of beinglost?" Now be careful here, lest you ask that question to me asthough it were my theology you doubt. It is Hebrews 4:1, written to"holy brethren" (3:1), that commands, "Therefore, let us fear . . ."And Hebrews 4:1 is not unique in the New Testament. Jesus said inLuke 12:5, " Fear  the One who after He has killed has authorityto cast into hell." Paul said in Philippians 2:13, "Work out yoursalvation with  fear  and trembling." He says in Romans 11:20,"You stand fast only through faith; so do not become conceited but fear ."  So be careful how you query this truth. It is God's word, not myword, that says the Christian is to fear. So with all humility andopenness we ask God, are we supposed to live our lives in fear ofmissing heaven?  First of all remember 2:15, "[Christ died to] deliver those whothrough fear of death were subject to slavery all their lives." Loudand clear, Christ died to deliver us from slavish fear; Christ wantsa fearless people. Christ wants a people who live in the mostdangerous neighborhoods without fear, who go to the unreached peoplesbehind closed doors without fear, who speak to neighbors about Christwithout fear. How? By faith in his promises. Faith in the promises ofGod makes you fearless before the threats of men (Hebrews 10:34).  So there is only one thing to fear: faithlessness. Fear unbeliefin the promises of God. Because as long as you are trusting in thepromises of God you can be utterly fearless in the face of anything,even death, even God (see 4:16).  Now what is this like? You children know what it is like. When youwere real little your mother and father said, very firmly, "Don'tever run out in the street. Always hold my hand." Why? It isdangerous in the street. You could be killed by a car. In otherwords, Fear running out in the street. But did that mean that youcould not have fun in the back yard and on the sidewalk and in theparks. No. In fact most of the time you never even thought about howfearful the street was. Only when you got near to the street andmaybe when your ball rolled out in the street, or maybe somebodytempted you to run across the street when you weren't supposed to.Only then did you feel the fear of the street. The rest of the timethe fear kept you playing in places where you didn't have to feel anyfear at all.  That's the way it is with the fear of unbelief. You don't livewith a constant bad feeling. You only experience the bad feeling whenthere are temptations to distrust God's promises. And even then, youuse the bad feeling of fear to send you running into the safe yard ofGod's goodness and promises. So normal Christian life is aware of thefearful danger of unbelief, but does not live paralyzed or terrorizedby it. It lives in faith. Fear only rises where faith starts toweaken. And it only rises long enough to get us back into thepeaceful fearlessness of faith.    
      There    was   a Place of Rest for God'sPeople    Now there is one more thing I want to do with this text. Verses3-10 are written to support the main point which we have looked at inverses 1 and 11, namely, be diligent to enter God's rest and fearlest you fail to enter it because of unbelief. The way verses 3-10support this main point is by showing from the Old Testament thatthere is a rest to enter into -- that is, that God has a plan for hispeople to join him in the wonderful restfulness of heaven where allweariness and burdensomeness will be lifted. "Come to me all you wholabor and are heavy laden and I will give you rest," Jesus said(Matthew 11:28). Verses 3-10 are written to show that this promise isreally there in the Old Testament.  The text is very complicated, so let me just sketch a very briefoutline for you. The writer focuses on five points in history to showhow God keeps opening his rest for believing people.  First, he starts at creation (Genesis 2:2) and says in verse 4:"He has thus said somewhere concerning the seventh day, "God restedon the seventh day from all his works." So he sees in this a restful,peaceful, sovereign God who has a rest and a peace and a place of joywhere his people can enjoy fellowship with him. He will call it a"Sabbath rest" because on the seventh day God rested. But in realityit lasts for ever.  Second, he focuses on the period when Israel was wandering in thewilderness and rebelling against God. Verse 5 (quoting Psalm 95),"And again in this passage, "They shall not enter my rest." Thepromised land is a picture of God's ultimate rest, and theirunbelieving rebellion excludes them from it. Which raises thequestion whether there remains a Sabbath rest for the people of God.  The third focus is on the time of Joshua, who took the people intothe promised land. Is that the final, ultimate rest God in mind forhis people? Verse 8 answers no: "For if Joshua had given them rest,He would not have spoken of another day after that." In other words,even though Joshua gave some relief to the people of God in thepromised land, that was not the final rest God has planned for them.How do we know that? God spoke of another day -- another restcenturies later.    
      Today, There Still Is a RestingPlace    Which brings us to the fourth period of time the writer focuseson, the time of David writing in Psalm 95. Verse 7: "He again fixes acertain day, 'Today,' saying through David after so long a time justas has been said before, 'Today if you hear his voice, do not hardenyour hearts.'" In other words, long after the people enjoyed the restof the promised land, David says that God is still holding out to hispeople an offer of salvation rest: Don't harden your hearts, and youwill enjoy God's rest (referred to at the end of the Psalm, 95:11 =Heb. 3:11 = 4:3)  From this the writer draws the all-important conclusion aboutGod's Sabbath rest of salvation -- and this is his fifth period ofhistory, namely, today -- Verse 9: "There remains therefore a Sabbathrest for the people of God." In other words, Today, the rest is stillopen.  And that is the foundation of God's message to you today: There isa rest open to you today. God offers rest. The door is not shut. Thetime is not past. You have not missed your last opportunity. Hear thewords of verse 9: "There remains therefore a Sabbath rest for thepeople of God." The door is open. The time is now.  Ah, but someone says, "Yes, a rest remains for the people of God-- but not for me." But I answer, do not rule yourself out. Look atverse 3 -- our last word, "We who have believed enter that rest."There is one door to the safe, peaceful, happy rest of God -- thedoor of faith. Anyone who puts faith in God's promises bought for usby the blood of Jesus, and is diligent not to throw that faith away, is  a part of the people of God. So on behalf of God, I callyou this morning, put your trust in the promise of God's rest.  Copyright 1996 John Piper  
