  The whole time I was traveling in the Philippinesand Singapore I wrestled and prayed concerning what texts I shouldtry to expound in these first weeks after coming home.  I askedthe Lord again and again what we as a church should focus on inthese first summer Sundays together.  The upshot of that meditationis that I just couldn't imagine coming back and starting a seriesof sermons that had no connection with what I have been thinkingabout for the last five weeks.    Instead, it seemed best to unfold in these firsttwo messages some of the new Biblical insights that have dominatedmy thinking during these days.  And I hope that I can relate themto our vision and our calling here at Bethlehem.  Today I want us to think together about Paul's wordsin Acts 17:30-31,   The times of ignorance God overlooked, but now hecommands all men everywhere to repent, because he has fixed aday on which he will judge the world in righteousness by a manwhom he has appointed, and of this he has given assurance to allmen by raising him from the dead.   Paul is standing on the Areopagus (translated MarsHill in the KJV) in the city of Athens, surrounded by theintellectuals of the city.  He takes the starting point of hissermon (verse 23) from the observation that these Athenians havean altar in the city to an Unknown God.  And so hesays, What therefore you worship as unknown, this I proclaimto you.  Another way to say that would be: The timeof your ignorance is over.  Then in verses 24-25 he explains that the Lord ofheaven and earth is absolutely self-sufficient.  Verse 25:    God is not served by human hands, as though he neededanything, since he himself gives to all men life and breath andeverything.   Then in verse 26 he explains that this self-sufficientGod created all the various nations from one man and that Godhimself determines how long a nation survives and how far itsborders extend. Verse 26:   And he made from one every nation of men to liveon all the face of the earth, having determined allotted periodsand the boundaries of their habitation.   Then in verse 27 Paul says that God's purpose inruling the nations like this is to put them on a search for God. Verse 27:   . . .that they should seek God, in the hope thatthey might feel after him and find him.   Then in the last part of verse 27 Paul clarifiesthis search for God.  It is not a search for a distant deity. God is very near for those who seek him.     . . .yet he is not far from each one of us (v. 27).   And he points out in verse 28 that even Greek poetshave said the same thing.  They have even said that humans areGod's offspring.  If so, Paul reasons in verse 29, is it not wrongheadedand ignorant to treat God as though he were an idol made withour hands, when we in fact have been made by his?   Now having begun with the absolute self-sufficiencyof God above and beyond the service of man,  and having asserted God's sovereignty over the lifeand destiny of nations,  and having, made clear that God's aim is to rulein a way that will set men searching for the meaning of life outsidethe created world,  and having assured us of the nearness of God forthose who seek him, and the folly of treating him as an idol, Paul declares with amazing authority in verse 30,  The times of ignorance God overlooked but now hecommands all men everywhere to repent.   The age of ignorance is over, and the age of repentanceis here!  What does this mean?   Let's begin by looking at the phrase, the timesof ignorance in verse 30: The times of ignorance Godoverlooked. . .  What I had never seen before in studying this verseis the close connection between the times of ignoranceand the mystery of Christ which had been kept secretfor generations.  Let me show you what I've seen.  In Ephesians 3:4-6 Paul says,   When you read this you can perceive my insight intothe mystery of Christ, which was not made known to the sons ofmen in other generations as it has now been revealed to his holyapostles and prophets by the Spirit. . .   Note that the mystery of Christ is now being madeknown but before this now it was not made known. It was concealed.  These were generations of ignorance concerningthe mystery of Christ.  Then Paul goes on and tells us preciselywhat the mystery of Christ is:   . . .that is, how the Gentiles are fellow heirs,members of the same body, and partakers of the promise in ChristJesus through the gospel.   What then is the mystery of Christ?  It is the fullmembership of Gentiles in the people of God.  The Jews do nothave solitary privilege of access to the kingdom.  Gentiles arefellow heirs, and full members in the same body, the church, andpartakers of the same great promises.  That is the first thingin the mystery of Christ.    The other thing is that this access to the inheritanceand the body and the promises is in Christ Jesus throughthe gospel.  So there are two parts to the mystery of Christ:    Gentiles are not second-class citizens in thebody of Christ: there is neither Jew nor Gentile (Gal.3:28, Eph. 2:14).  Both are fellow heirs of the same inheritance.   This Gentile privilege comes only through thegospel of Jesus Christ.  Where Christ is preached and believed,Gentiles are grafted into the tree of God's people.   Now Paul says in verse 5 that this is a mystery (notbecause it is paradoxical or confusing but) because it was notmade know to the sons of men in other generations as it has nowbeen revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit. In Colossians 1:26 he says that this mystery was hiddenfor ages and generations but now is made manifest to his saints.  And in Romans 16:25 he says that the mystery was keptsecret for long ages but is now disclosed.  My conclusion from these passages about the mysteryof Christ is that this secret corresponds to the timesof ignorance in Acts 17:30.  Now what does this teach usabout the times of ignorance?  At least two things:  1)  The times of ignorance were part of God's sovereignplan for world history.  God is not the helpless victim of humanignorance.  Ephesians 3:5-6, Colossians 1:26, and Romans 16:25-26make it plain that the mystery of Christ was kept secret by Godfor generations.  The mystery was hidden.  It was not revealed. God looked down on a rebellious creation, where the nations weregoing their own ways and instead of sending immediate judgment,and rather than sending foreign missionaries he looked away andleft the nations in their ignorance for a season.  This is what Paul means when he says in his lettersthat the mystery of Christ was kept secret for ages.  And thisis what he means here in Acts 17:30 when he says that God overlookedthe times of ignorance.  Overlooking does not mean indulging orignoring the ignorance of the nations.  We know this because inRomans 2:12 Paul says, All who have sinned without the lawwill perish without the law.  In other words, judgment willbe according to the knowledge at a person's disposal.  But allpeople in the world have enough knowledge of God in nature andin their own conscience, which they do not live up to, that theywill be judged on account of it.  God does not indulge or ignoresin during the times of ignorance.  That is not what overlookmeans.  It means that God took no notice of ignorance, asit were.  Instead of tending to it, he looked the other way andlet it be.  This is confirmed by Paul's words in Acts 14:16. He is preaching to the unbelievers at Lystra and says,  In past generations he allowed all the nations towalk in their own ways.  In other words, the times of ignorance God overlookedin the sense that he allowed them to walk in their own ignorantways.  He did not come forth in immediate judgment nor did hecome forth with the revelation of the mystery of Christ.  He letthe nations go their own way, as he says in Acts 14:16.    And so I infer that the times of ignorancewere part of God's sovereign plan for world history.  Not thatGod instilled ignorance into innocent people, but that he withheldrevelation from guilty people.  And he did so according to thedictates of infinite wisdom (l Cor. l:2l).  The revelation of the mystery of Christ was kepthidden for ages.  But when the iniquity of the nations was complete(Genesis 15:16) and when the fullness of the times was come (Gal.4:4), God sent his Son into the world to die for sinners and torise again.  And that leads us to the second thing we learn fromcomparing the times of ignorance and the hiding of the mysteryof Christ.  2.  The times of ignorance are over, and from nowon Jesus Christ is the necessary object of all saving faith.  Remember, Paul said in Ephesians 3:6 that the mysterynow being revealed is that Gentiles are now partakers ofthe promises IN JESUS CHRIST THROUGH THE GOSPEL.  What God had kept secret for generations was thatthe Gentiles would one day be full fellow heirs with the peopleof God AND that this great ingathering of the nations would bethrough the gospel of Jesus Christ.  Before the coming of Christ people were saved bytrusting in the mercy of God.  The looked to his mighty deedslike the Exodus.  And they looked to the blood sacrifices.  Andthey looked to the promises of a Redeemer.  But they did not knowJesus Christ, and they did not know how the nations would be saved,and how they would be related to the Jews in the kingdom of God.  But now the mystery is revealed.  The times of ignoranceare over.  Jesus Christ has come, and the revelation of the mysteryis that Gentiles are full fellow heirs with Jews, and all thisis THROUGH THE GOSPEL. That's the point of Ephesians 3:6.  And the same point is made here in Acts 17:30-31. When Paul says that the times of ignorance God overlooked, hegoes on to say,    But now God commands all men everywhere to repent, because he has fixed a day on which he will judge the world inrighteousness by a man whom he has appointed, and of this he hasgiven assurance to all men by raising him from the dead.   In other words, since Jesus Christ has been raisedfrom the dead, God no longer intends for the times of ignoranceto continue.   Paul says that by the resurrection God has givenassurance to all men that Jesus is the universal Judge.  Thismeans that the resurrection must be preached to all the peoplesof the world.  From this point on, only through faith in the risenJesus can men be saved.  During the times of ignorance this was not so.  Butnow it is so.  The times of ignorance are over and from now onJesus Christ is the necessary object of all saving faith.  Here is the way Paul put it in Romans 10:13-15,   Everyone who calls upon the name of the Lord willbe saved.  But how are men to call upon him in whom they havenot believed?  And how are they to believe in him whom they havenever heard?  And how are they to hear without a preacher?  Andhow can men preach unless they are sent?     Put this together with Acts 17:30 -- God commandsall men everywhere to repent and gives them assurance of Christ'sauthority by the resurrection.  But how do people know of thisassurance if they never hear?  And they will not hear unless thereis a missionary who is sent.  And if they don't hear they willnot be saved, For there is salvation i no one else, forthere is no other name under heaven given among men by which wemust be saved (Acts 4:12).   Now what does this have to say to us here at Bethlehemtoday?  Mainly, it makes plain for us the meaning of theday in which we live.  And it makes a great difference in yourlife and in our life as a church if we know the meaning of theday -- the period of time -- in which we live.  What is the pointof these days?  What is unique about these days?   Are we letting the six o'clock news interpret themeaning of these days for us -- or the Minneapolis Tribune orUSA Today or Time or Newsweek?   They have much that is importantfor us to know -- but not the most important thing, namely, themeaning of these days.  Only God can do that.  Because only Godis designing and guiding these days.  Only God's plan will beestablished.  What is the meaning of the period of time in whichwe live?  Three things come out of our text.   1.  It is a day of repentance and salvation.   Paul faced the Athenians and he faces Minneapolisand every people on the earth and says, The meaning of yourday is that the times of ignorance are over and God commands youto repent, believe in Jesus Christ and be saved from the judgmentof God.    The meaning of these days is that they are days ofgrace and days of salvation.  God is no longer allowing the nationsto go their own ways.  The Great Sheep-gatherer has come intothe world, he is risen from the dead, and he has sworn: Ihave other sheep that are not of this fold, I must bring themalso (John 10:16).  God is on the move as he never was beforeto gather his children from all the peoples of the earth.   2.  Therefore, secondly, this is a day of missionsand evangelism.   God commands all men everywhere to repent!   Yes,but how?  Whatever Israel should have done to reach the nationsin the Old Testament days, one thing is sure: she didn't do it. God did not overcome her weakness and by his Spirit empower agreat world missions movement in the Old Testament.  Rather, Paulsays, God allowed the nations to walk in their own ways.   But no longer.  The days of ignorance are over. The days of a missionless people of God are gone.  The mysteryof the ingathering of the nations through Christ has been revealed. The call to repent goes out to all the world.  And thereforethe call to missions goes out to all the church.  But not as it went to Israel, dimly and without power. Now the command is unmistakable and the power is the power ofthe Holy Spirit:  You shall receive power when the HolySpirit has come upon you and you shall be my witnesses. The meaning of these days is that the times of ignorance areover.  The day of repentance and salvation and world missionsand local evangelism is here.   3. Finally, this is a day of loving and of sending.   -- of loving someone enough here in Minneapolis totell them about the greatness of Jesus Christ.    And a day of sending.  If we know the meaning ofthe day in which we live, then Bethlehem will bend every effortto be a sending church.  And that means a deep and wonderful partnershipbetween the senders and the sent.    I suppose the most amazing news that I got from Bethlehemwhile I was away was that Tom Steller had called a meeting ofall Bethlehem members who are definitely planning to enter full-timecross-cultural mission service in the next 5 years and 44 peoplecame.    I was stunned and thrilled by that news.  But whata burden, what a joyful burden that will mean for those of uswho stay!  And one of the secrets of bearing that burden, thesecret of joyful wartime austerity at home, is to know the meaningof our day.    The age of ignorance is over!  Today is a day ofrepentance and salvation, a day of missions and evangelism, anda day of loving and sending -- for God has fixed a day onwhich he will judge the world in righteousness by a man whom hehas appointed, and of this he has given assurance to all men byraising him from the dead.  
