  February 16, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor  
   PERFECTED FOR ALL TIME BY A SINGLE OFFERING   (Hebrews 10:1-18, NASB)   
  For the Law, since it has only a shadow of the good things to comeand not  the very form of things, can never by the same sacrifices year byyear, which  they offer continually, make perfect those who draw near. 2Otherwise, would  they not have ceased to be offered, because the worshipers, havingonce been  cleansed, would no longer have had consciousness of sins? 3 But inthose  sacrifices there is a reminder of sins year by year. 4 For it isimpossible  for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins. 5 Therefore,when He  comes into the world, He says, "Sacrifice and offering Thou hastnot desired,  but a body Thou has prepared for me; 6 in whole burnt offeringsand  sacrifices for sin Thou hast taken no pleasure. 7 Then I said,‘Behold, I  have come (in the roll of the book it is written of me) to do Thywill, O  God.’" 8 After saying above, "Sacrifices and offerings and wholeburnt  offerings and sacrifices for sin Thou has not desired, nor hastThou taken  pleasure in them" ( which are offered according to the Law), 9then He said,  "Behold, I have come to do Thy will." He takes away the first inorder to  establish the second. 10 By this will we have been sanctifiedthrough the  offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. 11 And everypriest stands  daily ministering and offering time after time the samesacrifices, which can  never take away sins; 12 but He, having offered one sacrifice forsins for  all time, sat down at the right hand of God, 13 waiting from thattime onward  until his enemies be made a footstool for his feet. 14 For by oneoffering He  has perfected for all time those who are sanctified. 15 And theHoly Spirit  also bears witness to us; for after saying, 16 "This is thecovenant that I  will make with them after those days, says the Lord: I will put mylaws upon  their heart, and upon their mind I will write them," He then says,17 "And  their sins and their lawless deeds I will remember no more." 18Now where  there is forgiveness of these things, there is no longer anyoffering for  sin.  
  What Happens When We Turn Our Eyes Upon Jesus?  
  I would like us to turn our eyes upon Jesus especially in verse 14of Hebrews  10.  We need to remember what happened when Peter turned his eyeson the  power and grace of Jesus in Luke 5:8, "When Simon Peter saw [thepower of  Jesus in the great catch of fish], he fell down at Jesus’ feet,saying,  ‘Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord!’"  In other wordsseeing  Jesus clearly causes us to be deeply conscious of our sinfulnessand our  unworthiness.  
  This is a wonderful thing.  Most of us are in a deadly dream worldmost of  the time when it comes to how seriously we are in trouble with Godbecause of  our sin.  We worry more about being stopped by a policeman forspeeding than  we do about the seriousness of sin.  But sin is infinitelyserious.  And  God’s anger at sinners is the biggest problem in everyone’s life,whether we  know it or not.    
  Several times in the book of Hebrews we are warned about the angerof God  against those who turn from him in sin.  For example, Hebrews3:10-11, "I was  angry with this generation, and said, ‘They always go astray intheir heart;  and they did not know my ways;’ as I swore in my wrath, ‘Theyshall not enter  my rest.’"  
  To be blind or oblivious to this wrath of God against sinners isincredibly  dangerous, like not being able to smell the gas leak gatheringaround the  pilot light of your water heater, ready to blow your basement tosmithereens  and burn your house to the ground.   It is so dangerous not beaware of the  anger of God against those who turn from him in sin.  And thereason it is so  dangerous is that, if you are blind to this reality of God’swrath, you won’t  take steps to find a remedy for sin and an escape from God’sanger.  
  So I say again, this is wonderful what happened to Peter when hefell at  Jesus’ feet and said, "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O,Lord."  This  is not an experience to be avoided, but to be cherished.  O thatGod would do  it this morning, as we turn our eyes on Jesus!  Because when ithappens, the  Lord gives relief.    
  Glimpsing the Lord in Hebrews 10:14  
  One great glimpse at the Lord Jesus is given in Hebrews 10:14.  Solet’s  focus on that verse this morning: "For by one offering He hasperfected for  all time those who are sanctified."  Now let’s do some verypreliminary  clarification of the words themselves.    
  The word "offering" refers to the death of Christ, the offering ofhis own  body in death on the cross.  You can see that in verse 10: "Bythis will we  have been sanctified through the offering of the body of JesusChrist once  for all."    
  The "He" who does the perfecting is Jesus Christ.  We know thissimply by  following the line of thought from the previous verse (13) whereChrist sat  down at the right hand of God and waits there, triumphantly, untilall his  enemies are put under his feet.  
  Thirdly, the tenses of the words "perfected" and "sanctified" areextremely  important. The NASB says, "He has perfected for all time those whoare  sanctified.  This is not the best translation of the Greek tenses. The  translation of "has perfected" or "has made perfect" is good,because the act  of perfecting is viewed as complete: He has perfected a group ofpeople by  means of his sacrifice for sins.  This perfecting is viewed ashaving been  accomplished and finished and completed.  It is done "for alltime."  We’ll  come back to that awesome reality in a few minutes.  
  But the translation, "those who are sanctified," at the end of theverse,  could also look in English as if the sanctifying is also complete.  They  "are (now, already) sanctified."  But that is not what the tensein the  original Greek means.  It is the present tense and signifies anongoing  process.  So this time the NIV gets it exactly right, not theNASB.  The NIV  says, "By one sacrifice he has made perfect forever those who arebeing made  holy."  "Are being made holy", that’s exactly right.  The processof  sanctifying is continuing now in their lives.  So the NIV makesthe process  idea of the tense much clearer and this is going to be veryimportant in  understanding what this verse is teaching.  
  So let’s step back now and put the whole verse before us again inits  context: "For by one offering [the sacrifice of his own body onthe cross]  Jesus Christ has perfected for all time those who are being madeholy [or:  are being sanctified] now progressively in this life."  
  Repeated Animal Sacrifices Were Not Once-for-All  
  Up to this verse (14) in chapter 10 the point has been thatChrist’s death  for sin replaces the provision for sin in the Old Testament Law. It’s an  elaborate argument which we don’t have time to look at in detail,but the  point is fairly clear and straightforward.  The law prescribedrepeated  animal sacrifices for sin.  And the very repetition of thesacrifices showed  that they did not perfect the sinners.  Nothing decisive andonce-for-all  happened to deal with sin.  Because if they had perfected thepeople once for  all, the sacrifices would have stopped being offered. Verses 1-2:  
  The Law, since it has only a shadow of the good things to come andnot the  very form of things, can never by the same sacrifices year byyear, which  they offer continually, make perfect those who draw near. Otherwise, would  they not have ceased to be offered?    
  So the point is clear: the prescribed repetition of sacrifices forsin in the  Old Testament Law was a built-in testimony to their inadequacy. They did not  perfect the people. They did not deal with sin decisively,finally, once for  all.  
  Then the writer refers to Psalm 40 (in verses 5-8) and shows thatalready in  the Old Testament itself, it is plain that the sacrifices andofferings of  animals were not God’s main plan for dealing with sin, because, asverse 4  says, "It is impossible for the blood of bulls and goats to takeaway sins."  God knew that from the beginning when he commanded that bulls andgoats be  offered.  They were "shadows," as verse 1 says.  The main plan wasalways  Christ.  That is what all the shadows were pointing to.  So at theend of  verse 9 it says, "He takes away the first in order to establishthe second."   The first will of God was that there be an age of shadows, a kindof 2,000  year lesson book  (historical flannelgraph) to prepare us tounderstand what  Christ really did for us on the cross.  
  Great Differences Between Christ and the Old Testament Priests  
  The great difference between what Christ did and what the priestsof the Old  Testament did is summed up briefly in verses 11 and 12:   
  Every priest stands daily ministering and offering, time aftertime, the same  sacrifices, which can never take away sins; but He, having offeredone  sacrifice for sins for all time, sat down at the right hand ofGod.  
  Notice the contrasts: many priests vs. Christ as our one HighPriest; many  sacrifices vs. the one sacrifice of himself; repeated offeringsvs. one  offering for all time; and one you might have missed: notice that(verse 11)  "every priest stands daily;" but when Christ has made his singlesacrifice he  (verse 12) "sat down at the right hand of God."    
  The sitting of Christ at God’s right hand means at least threethings here:   one is that the work is done.  He does not "stand daily" to offersacrifices  for sin.  The one sacrifice of himself was perfectly complete. Second, it  means that God is satisfied with the sacrifice.  God honors Christwith the  seat at his right hand to show how fully he is satisfied with thedebt paid  for sin.  This is a great picture to encourage us that our sinsare fully  dealt with.  Third, it means that Christ, together with hisFather, is the  sovereign ruler over all his enemies.  They will be defeated. That’s what  verse 13 stresses: He is "waiting from that time onward until hisenemies be  made a footstool for his feet."  In other words, everything Christdied to  accomplish will be accomplished.  No enemy can hinder his work inthe end.   The atonement was utterly complete; the Father was utterlysatisfied; and  all the enemies will fall utterly before the reigning Christ inheaven.  
  Two Things That Relate Directly to Your Life  
  Now we come to our focus in verse 14: "For by one offering He hasperfected  for all time those who are being sanctified."  Turn your eyes uponJesus here  and see two things about Jesus that relate directly to your lifetoday.  
  1.  First notice that Christ has perfected his people, and it isalready  complete.  "For by one offering He has perfected for all timethose who are  being sanctified."  He "has" done it.  And he has done it "for alltime."   The perfecting of his people is complete and it is completeforever.  Does  this mean that Christians don’t sin?  Don’t get sick?  Don’t make  mathematical errors in school?  That we are already perfect in ourbehavior  and attitudes?  
  There is one clear reason in this very verse for knowing that isnot the  case.  What is it?  It’s the last phrase.  Who are the people thathave been  perfected for all time?  It is those who "are being sanctified." This is why  the tense is so important.  Now "those who are being sanctified"are  not yet  fully sanctified in the sense of committing no more sin. Otherwise they  would not need to go on being sanctified.  So here we have theshocking  combination: the very people who "have been perfected" are theones who "are  being sanctified."  Besides, you can also remember from chapters 5and 6,  that these Christians he is writing to are anything but perfect. For  example, in 5:11 he says, "You have become dull of hearing."  Sowe may  safely say that "perfected" does not mean that we are sinlesslyperfect in  this life.  
  Well what does it mean?  The answer is given in the next verses(15-18).  The  writer explains what he means by quoting Jeremiah again on the newcovenant,  namely, that in the new covenant which Christ has sealed now byhis blood,  there is total forgiveness for all our sins.  Verses 17-18  "Theirsins and  their lawless deeds I will remember no more.  Now where there isforgiveness  of these things, there is no longer any offering for sin."  So heexplains  the present perfection in terms of forgiveness.  
  Christ’s people are perfected now in the sense that God puts awayall our sin  (9:26), forgives them, and never brings them to mind again as aground of  condemnation.  In this sense we stand before him perfect.  When helooks on  us he does not impute any of our sins against us, past, present orfuture.   He does not count our sins against us.     
  2. Verse 14 tells us plainly: "By one offering he has perfectedfor all time  those who are being sanctified."  So notice, secondly, for whomChrist has  done this perfecting work on the cross. You can put itprovocatively like  this: Christ has perfected once and for all those who are beingperfected.   Or you could say (and the writer does say as much in verse 10):Christ has  fully sanctified those who are now being sanctified.  Or Christhas fully  accomplished and guaranteed the holiness of those who are nowbeing made  holy.  
  What this means is that you can know that you stand perfect in theeyes of  your heavenly Father if you are moving away from your presentimperfection  toward more and more holiness by faith in his future grace.  Letme say that  again, because it is full of encouragement for imperfect sinnerslike us, and  full of motivation for holiness.  This verse means that you canhave  assurance that you stand perfected and completed in the eyes ofyour heavenly  Father not because you are perfect now, but precisely because youare not  perfect now but are "being sanctified", "being made holy", that,by faith  in God’s promises, you are moving away from your lingeringimperfection  toward more and more holiness. (See Hebrews 10:32-35; 11:24-26etc. for  examples of  how faith in future grace sanctifies.)    
  Does Your Faith Make You Eager to Make Progress in Holiness?  
  Last week we asked: does your faith make you eager for the secondcoming of  Christ.  Today I ask: does your faith make you eager to forsakesin and make  progress in holiness?  That is the kind of faith that in the midstof  imperfection can look to Christ and say: "You have alreadyperfected me in  your sight."  This faith says, "Christ, today I have sinned.  ButI hate my  sin.  For  you have written the law on my heart, and I long to doit.  And  you are working in me what is pleasing in your sight.  And so Ihate the sin  that I still do, and the sinful thoughts that I contemplate.  Andin this  hatred of my sin, and in my meager advancements in holiness Irejoice that,  according to your promise in Hebrews 10:14, I have been perfectedfor all  time by a single offering, your precious self."  
  This is the true and realistic faith that saves.  It is not theboast of the  strong.  It is the cry of the weak in need of a Savior.  I inviteyou and  urge you to be weak enough to trust Christ in this way.  
  COPYRIGHT 1997 JOHN PIPER   Return toPiper's Notes - The 1996-1997 Index.    Returnt to Piper'sNotes Front Page   
  
  
  
  
