 January 26, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor 
  HOW THE CALLED RECEIVE AN ETERNAL INHERITANCE  (Hebrews 9:15-22) 
 And for this reason he is the mediator of a new covenant, in order thatsince a death has taken place for the redemption of the transgressions thatwere committed under the first covenant, those who have been called may receive the promise of the eternal inheritance. (16) For where a covenant is,there must of necessity be the death of the one who made it. (17) For a covenantis valid only when men are dead, for it is never in force while the onewho made it lives. (18) Therefore even the first covenant was not inauguratedwithout blood. (19) For when every commandment had been spoken by Moses to allthe people according to the Law, he took the blood of the calves and thegoats, and all the people, (20) saying, "This is the blood of the covenantwhich God commanded you." (21) And in the same way he sprinkled both the tabernacleand all the vessels of the ministry with the blood. (22) And according tothe Law, one may almost say, all things are cleansed with blood, and without shedding of blood there is no forgiveness. 
 
 You might think that God would be more careful in the kinds of comparisons and analogies he uses to explain his work. He is pretty daring in theway he uses human language and images. For example, he says that the comingof Jesus will be like a thief in the night; and so he dares to link hisperfect Son with a thief. And there are other comparisons like that in the Bible. In one place he compares his wrath to a man being raised from a drunken stupor. Why does God do this? Why does he use comparisons that couldbe misleading? 
 The answer is that every comparison could be misleading when the workof God is being compared to the work of man. God is unique. There is no human experience that perfectly fits the way he acts or the way he is. Butif God wants to communicate with us, which he does, he has no other languageto use but a language we can understand, a human language that has beenbuilt around human experience. 
 For example, when we talk about servanthood, we use human language thathas grown up on the basis of our experience of servants or various human services. Well, if God wants to communicate something about his ownservice of us, or our service of him, he will use this language. But, sincehe is God, who is utterly unlike us in many ways, this language of servanthoodis going to be misleading in part. We will have to ask, "What part of this comparison is true with God, and what part of it is not true with God?"If we are servants of God, does that mean we are not children of God? Doesit mean we are not heirs of God? Does it mean that we live in servants’ quarters and have no place at the Father’s table? What does God wantus to understand when he calls us servants? That’s just one illustration. 
 All comparisons between the way God relates to us and the way we relateto each other are like that. You have to ask what part of this comparisonor analogy leads into the deep truth God wants to reveal about himself,and what part of it leads down a dead end road to misunderstanding? 
 Well, in today’s text the writer introduces the comparison between the"new covenant" and a last will and testament. And so we need to be carefulhere to make sure we see what parts of this comparison are helpful, and whatparts of it might be misleading. 
 First let’s review just a moment and make sure we recall what the new covenant is, and how it is different from the "first covenant" thatPaul refers to here in verses 15 and 18. The new covenant is the arrangementwith his people that God promised in Jeremiah 31:31. The book of Hebrewsquotes the terms of this arrangement in Hebrews 8:10-12. It says, This is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel afterthose days, says the Lord: I will put my laws into their minds and write themon their hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people .. . for I will be merciful toward their iniquities, and I will remember theirsins no more. 
 So in this arrangement God no longer writes his will on tablets of stone outside the heart; he moves, by his Spirit, inside and makes the willof God part of what we love. He changes us from the inside out so that we lovehis will. Not only that, it says that in the new covenant he is mercifulto our transgressions and remembers our sins no more. In the old covenant therehad been no sacrifice that could truly take away human sin. There had been animal sacrifices, but Hebrews 10:4 says plainly, "It is impossiblefor the blood of bulls and goats to take away sin." So the new covenant promises that these sins will be taken away which means that the foundation ofthe new covenant is a better sacrifice, namely, the sacrifice of God’s ownSon. 
 So the new covenant is all about how God deals with sin to make us rightwith him, how he deals with the guilt and condemnation of sin by sendinghis Son to die for sinners and bear our guilt so that there could be forgivenessand cleansing, and good consciences before God, as we saw last time. Andhow God deals with the power of sin by writing the law on our hearts sothat we hate sin from the inside and love God’s will and walk in his ways freely,not merely by external legal constraint. That’s the new covenant. That’s Christianity. And the death of Christ, the shedding of Christ’s blood,is the basis of it. By his blood-shedding he purchased our justificationand he purchased our sanctification. He took away our guilt and he is takingaway our corruption. 
 Now in Hebrews 9:15-22 the writer gives a new slant on the new covenant.He compares it to a" last will and testament." Look at verses 15 and 16.In verse 15 he calls Christ the "mediator of a new covenant," and he refersto Christ’s death that redeems from sins that the "first covenant" couldnot take away. And he says that this new covenant, based on this death of Christ, happened so that all who are called might receive an "eternal inheritance." 
 So far this sound wonderfully familiar. But then in verse 16 he makesthe comparison between this new covenant and a "last will and testament."Now you all know what that is. But maybe the children don’t. A "last willand testament" is a very important and very official, legal paper that aperson writes down to say what should be done with his possessions after hedies. That’s a "last will and testament." Every adult should have one. 
 That’s the comparison with the new covenant that the writer makes inverses 16-17. He says 
 For where a covenant is [RSV and NIV say "will," though it is the sameGreek word as the one translated "covenant" in verse 15], there must of necessity be the death of the one who made it. For a covenant [a "will"] is validonly when men are dead, for it is never in force while the one who made itlives. 
 So you can see that the term "covenant" in verse 15 is given the meaning "last will and testament" in verses 16 and 17, which most translationsshow by translating it "will" even though it is the same word in Greek as "covenant." 
 Now why does this writer make this comparison? Why does he bring inthis idea that the new covenant is in fact a "last will and testament"? Ithink there are at least five reasons. 
 1) This is the ordinary meaning of the term in the common Greek cultureof those days: a "diatheke" was a "last will and testament." 
 2) The basis of the new covenant is the death of Christ. A death hadto take place to give force and validity to the new covenant. So it is likea last will and testament. A death makes it come into effect. 
 3) Even the first covenant was associated with a death. Look at verse18, "Therefore even the first covenant was not inaugurated without blood."In other words, even though it wasn’t clear in the old covenant that thedeath of the Messiah would be the foundation of the new covenant and the forgiveness of sins, yet there were pointers. Death was required ofanimals. And that anticipated and foreshadowed the death of Christ, and so eventhe first covenant was validated by a death, and was like a "last will and testament" in that sense. 
 4) The fourth reason the writer treats the new covenant as a "last willand testament" is that in verse 15 he has just referred to an "eternal inheritance." You see that: "Christ is the mediator of a new covenant,in order that . . . those who are called may receive the promise of theeternal inheritance." And we can all see that if there is an inheritance theremust be some kind of last will and testament that tells who the heirs areand what inheritance they get. That is what he says the new covenant does. 
 5) Finally, he compares the new covenant with a "last will and testament" because a "will" is not something the heirs negotiate about. It comes unilaterally from the one who wrote it down and the heirs take it orleave it as it is. They can’t change the decisions of the one who wrote the will. The new covenant is drawn up by God without consulting the heirs, oranyone else. It is a sovereign expression of God’s will, not a negotiated agreement. 
 For these five reasons, at least, the writer says that the new covenantis like a "last will and testament." 
 Yes, but this is a daring way to talk about God’s relation to his people. This analogy is fraught with possible misunderstanding. 1) Did God writea last will and testament because he would one day die, and wanted toleave his possessions to another? 2) Who is he executor of God’s last will and testament? A will usually specifies that, and it is never the dead person who executes his own will. 3) Was this will not in force beforethe death occurred? If not, how did David and Moses and all the saints get forgiveness for sins? 4) Who are the heirs of this last will and testament? Often the heirs of the second generation are not known to the one whomakes the will. Is the inheritance of God left to an uncertain, indefinitegroup? Or are there names written in the will? Let’s look at the answers tothese four questions and let each one have its powerful effect to deepen and strengthen our security in God and our confidence that the eternal inheritance, eternal life, is ours. 
 1) Did God write a last will and testament because he would one daydie, and wanted to leave his possessions to another? 
 The closest answer we get to that question in Hebrews is in 2:14. "Sincethe children share in flesh and blood, he himself likewise also partookof the same, that through death he might render powerless him who had the powerof death." In other words, No, God, as God cannot die. He is "immortal"as 1 Timothy 1:17 says. But Yes, he wills to experience death so as to destroy death from the inside and deliver those who are enslaved to death. Howcan the immortal experience death? He takes on the flesh-and-blood humannature as his own and in that nature experiences death. So the answer is Yes,God wrote a last will and testament because he intended to experience deathin the death of his Son through the human nature that he took on in the incarnation. 
 Let this establish your faith and deepen your security and your assurancein God, because he wrote this will in eternity past. From all eternityGod willed to pass on his "eternal inheritance" to you by grace (2 Timothy1:9). The death is over and done that is required for the heirs to come intotheir possession. There does not need to be another one. 
 2) Who is the executor of God’s last will and testament? A will usually specifies that, and it is never the dead person who executes his ownwill. 
 The answer is that the comparison breaks down, and the same person whodies to put the will in force is also the executor of the will. How can thisbe? Answer: the resurrection of Jesus from the dead and the installationof him at the Father’s right hand as High Priest of all the good things tocome. When verse 15 calls Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, the lastwill and testament, it means not only that he is the one whose death releases all the inheritance of God for us, but also that once that inheritanceis released, Jesus makes sure we get it. He is the one who dies. And heis the Executor. 
 You can see this in Hebrews 13:20-21: 
 Now the God of peace who brought up from the dead the great Shepherdof the sheep through the blood of the eternal covenant [Jesus himself was anheir of the last will and testament that his blood set in force; see Hebrews1:2], even Jesus our Lord, equip you in every good things to do His will,working in us that which is pleasing in his sight [that’s the new covenant promise], through Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen. 
 The new covenant inheritance of God’s inner work in our lives is givento us, it says, "through Jesus Christ." He is the executor of the will. 
 So let this establish your faith and deepen your security and your assurance in God, that Christ, the Son of God not only is the one who died torelease the Father’s inheritance in your life; he is also the one who rose fromthe dead and is the sovereign Executor of the Father’s will and makes surethat you get all the inheritance in this life and the next. 
 3. Was this last will and testament, this new covenant, not in forcebefore the death of Christ occurred? If not, how did David and Moses and allthe saints get forgiveness for sins? 
 Hebrews 9:17 says, "For a covenant [= will] is valid only when men aredead, for it is never in force while the one who made it lives." That wouldseem to say, No, the forgiveness of the new covenant was not available inthe Old Testament times before Christ died. But notice how verse 18 starts, "Therefore even the first covenant was not inaugurated without blood."And then he goes on to show how Moses made the shedding of blood centralto the old covenant. 
 What’s the point here? I think the point is this: in the old covenantChrist had not yet died, but all the blood-shedding of animals was meant topoint forward to the day when a death would occur that would indeed purchaseonce for all the forgiveness of God, and if those saints put their faithnot in animals, but in the grace of God, they could have a foretaste of that experience now. In other words, some, but not all, of the last willand testament was inherited before the death of Christ (Hebrews 11:39-40). 
 Here again the analogy is not perfect. Yes, without the death of Christ there would be no forgiveness in the Old Testament. But, No, those saints did not have to wait thousands of years to experience the forgivenessthat the death bought for them. In Exodus 34:7 God says, as part of the Old Covenant, that he "forgives iniquity, transgressions and sins." 
 So let this strengthen your faith in the greatness of Christ’s achievementon the cross: it was great enough to release the inheritance of forgivenessnot only forward two thousand years to us, but also backward two thousandyears and more. 
 4. Finally, Who are the heirs of God’s last will and testament? Most urgently, are you an heir? Are you listed in God’s last will and testament? Does he bequeath to you the eternal inheritance? Is the inheritanceof God left to an uncertain, indefinite group? Or does he have in view particular people that he loves as children, and to whom he leaves his eternal inheritance? 
 The answer is found in verse 15, specifically in the word "called."The writer says, "And for this reason he is the mediator of a new covenant,in order that . . . [leaving out the intervening clause] those who havebeen called may receive the promise of the eternal inheritance." 
 Who receives the eternal inheritance? "Those who are called." Calledby whom? Called by God. In other words, God’s last will and testament is notleft to chance. God not only wrote the will; and he not only put it in forceby the death of his own Son; and he not only raised his Son to be the executorof that will; and he not only spread the inheritance of eternal life backward for thousands of years and forward for thousands of years; but he isalso today calling people out of darkness and death and unbelief to becomefellow heirs with his Son. In other words, "from him and through him and tohim are all things; to him be glory forever and ever." 
 Give heed to his call. Open your spiritual ears to the voice of your Shepherd, and your spiritual eyes to the glory of your God. And believe. 
 COPYRIGHT 1997 JOHN PIPER 
  Returnt to Piper's NotesFront Page  
 
