  January 7, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor 
     Prayer Week 1996   part two
   Prayer Changes People's Wills   (Romans 15:30-31)     Now I urge you, brethren, by our Lord Jesus Christ and by thelove of the Spirit, to strive together with me in your prayers to Godfor me, that I may be delivered from those who are disobedient inJudea, and that my service for Jerusalem may prove acceptable to thesaints.   I begin today by asking two questions about prayer from verse 30before turning today to verse 31.  1. Why does Paul give the Roman Christians incentives to pray forhim instead of just telling them to pray? Recall, there are twoincentives: 1) I urge you "by our Lord Jesus Christ." 2) I urge you"by the love of the Spirit." Why does Paul use these incentives? Whynot just say, "Pray for me!"?  The reason is this: God's customary way to move your will isthrough your mind. That is, he typically draws the will into actionby displaying truth to the mind. So in this case, through Paul, Goddesires that the will of the Roman Christians incline to pray -- andnot just incline but incline  vigorously.  He calls it"striving" in prayer. So to awaken their will to this kind ofvigorous inclination, and pull it out into dynamic action, he putstwo God-centered truths in their minds: 1) Jesus Christ is Lord ("byour  Lord  Jesus Christ"); 2) the Holy Spirit is a Spirit oflove ("by the love of the Spirit").  I suggested last week that these two incentives correspond to thetwo prayer requests in verse 31. Since Jesus is Lord, you may praywith confidence that he as the right and authority and power torestrain the disobedient in Judea. And since the Spirit of God is aSpirit of love, you can pray with confidence that he will lovinglyfill the saints in Jerusalem with love for Paul so that his ministryis accepted and not resented.  So what we learn here is that energetic vigorous responses of theheart in prayer (and other ways) are meant by God to be responses togreat God-centered truth -- in this case, Jesus is Lord of theuniverse; and the Spirit is full of love. Why is this? Why is it notGod's usual way to just tell us to do things without giving usincentives like this to do them?  The reason is plain: God would not get glory for our actions ifthey were not stimulated by views of God. God is in the main businessin the world of magnifying the worth of his Son and the power of hisSpirit and the glory of his own name. So his will is that we be awareof these things. That we know them. That we think on them, and thatthey become conscious incentives in the way we make choices and theway we get stirred up to pray.  If someone says, "Why are you praying?" and we say, "I don't knowI just felt this impulse," God would not get the glory he would getif you answered, "I'm praying because Jesus is Lord and has the rightto overrule human plans in answer to prayer; and I'm praying becausethe Spirit of God is a Spirit of love, and will hear my prayer formercy.  God wants our minds to be filled with this kind of God-exaltingtruth as the incentive to our praying and our living. We are not toact on mere impulse or whim. We are to act on the knowledge ofGod-centered incentives. This is why we read the Bible. It is why wehave Sunday School and BITC. It is why I preach and write books -- tostir you up with truth about God, so that when you act, God will getthe glory.  2. The second question from verse 30 is this: why do the prayersof the Roman Christians promise more help than if Paul simply prayedalone for his two requests? Notice the wording: "I urge you,brethren, by our Lord Jesus Christ and by the love of the Spirit, tostrive together   with me   in your prayers to God for me."Paul says, he is praying for the same thing. So if he is praying, whydoes he need more people praying?  Some of you have wondered, Why do we have prayer meetings? Whygather in St. Paul tonight in a larger group? Why have prayer chainsand prayer groups? If God is God, and it is his power that makes adifference in answering prayer, why does it matter how many peopleask him? If I pick up Noel from the library because our son asks meto, she is just as picked up as if four sons asked me to.  One answer is that the more people that are praying for a thing,the more thanks and honor God will get when he acts. We see this in 2Corinthians 1:10b-11: "And [God] will yet deliver us, 11 you alsojoining in helping us through your prayers, that thanks may be givenby many persons on our behalf for the favor bestowed upon us through the prayers of  many."  The assumption behind the answer to both of these questions isthat the divine purpose of prayer is to magnify the greatness of God.Prayer exists for the glory of God. Jesus said in John 14:13, "Andwhatever you ask in my name, that will I do,  that the Father maybe glorified in the Son ." The aim of prayer is that the Father beglorified through Jesus.  So the more people there are praying for something, and thusdepending on God for mercy and power, the more people will give himthanks and glorify him when the answer comes.  Now these two questions from verse 30 set the stage for the lessonof verse 31. What we have seen in verse 30 is that Biblical prayerand Biblical incentives to prayer imply a radically God-centereduniverse, and God-centered way of looking at the universe. Prayer isfor the glory of God and incentives to prayer are God-centered sothat when our hearts are moved by those incentives it will be clearthat we are acting because of the way God is.  Now in verse 31 assumes this same view of the world. The point Isee is very simple and far-reaching in its implications. The point isthat prayer changes people's wills. Or, more accurately, God changespeople's wills in answer to prayer.  Let's see this from the text. Verse 31 gives Paul's two prayerrequests: "1) . . . that I may be delivered from those who aredisobedient in Judea, and 2)  that  my service for Jerusalem mayprove acceptable to the saints." So he had two concerns: 1) that thenon-Christians in Judea would kill him and end his ministry; 2) thatthe Christians would find fault with his ministry. So Paul urges theRoman Christians 1300 miles from Jerusalem to ask God not to let thathappen.  The implication is that the will of the unbelievers to hurt Pauland the will of the believers to disapprove Paul's ministry are bothin the power of God to change. There would seem to be no point inpraying for these two things if God could not do them. In both casesthe wills of people are involved and the answer to the prayer isgoing to involve God changing those wills -- in the one case so thatthe ill-will of unbelievers is restrained, and in the other case sothat the good will of believers is assured.  Matthew Henry put it like this 300 years ago: "As God must besought unto for the restraining of the ill will of our enemies, soalso for the preserving and increasing of the good will of ourfriends; for God has the hearts both of the one and the other in hishands."  That's the implication of verse 31. Let's see how it works bygoing to the book of Acts and watching God answer this prayer.  Take the first request -- that Paul be delivered from those whoare disobedient in Judea. How did God answer that? Well, in Acts 21Paul meets a very hostile city, just as he expected. Verse 30: "Andall the city was aroused, and the people rushed together; and takinghold of Paul, they dragged him out of the temple; and immediately thedoors were shut." Mob violence is not easy to restrain. So how wasPaul saved?  He was saved by the working of the will of secular authorities.Verse 31: "And while they were seeking to kill him, a report came upto the commander of the  Roman  cohort that all Jerusalem was inconfusion. 32 And at once he took along  some  soldiers andcenturions, and ran down to them." So here we see an answer toprayer. First, someone willed to run and tell the commander there wasa riot. Second, the commander willed to take it seriously and came tosee. Third, the rest of the verse says, " . . . and when they saw thecommander and the soldiers, they stopped beating Paul." So their evilwill was restrained and they stopped short of killing Paul and theprayers of the Roman Christians 1300 miles away were answered. Godinfluenced the wills of someone to inform the commander, the will ofthe commander and the will of the mob. And Paul was spared.  But his danger is not over. In chapter 23 Paul is in jail and someof his enemies form a conspiracy to ambush him when he is transferredto Caesarea. They take an oath not to eat until he is dead. Now howwill God answer the prayers of the Roman Christians? He influencedthe will of a boy, Paul's nephew to be in a place to overhear theconspiracy, and then influenced him to have the courage to tell Paulabout it. Verse 16: "But the son of Paul's sister heard of theirambush, and he came and entered the barracks and told Paul."  Then (vv. 17-23):  "Paul called one of the centurions to him and said, "Lead thisyoung man to the commander, for he has something to report to him."18 So he took him and led him to the commander and said, "Paul theprisoner called me to him and asked me to lead this young man to yousince he has something to tell you." 19 And the commander took him bythe hand and stepping aside,  began  to inquire of himprivately, "What is it that you have to report to me?" 20 And hesaid, "The Jews have agreed to ask you to bring Paul down tomorrow tothe Council, as though they were going to inquire somewhat morethoroughly about him. 21 "So do not listen to them, for more thanforty of them are lying in wait for him who have bound themselvesunder a curse not to eat or drink until they slay him; and now theyare ready and waiting for the promise from you." 22 Therefore thecommander let the young man go, instructing him, "Tell no one thatyou have notified me of these things." 23 And he called to him two ofthe centurions, and said, "Get two hundred soldiers ready by thethird hour of the night to proceed to Caesarea, with seventy horsemenand two hundred spearmen."  So not only did God influence the will of the boy to be in theright place at the right time and to have the courage to go tellPaul, but he also influenced the will of the centurion to take theboy to the commander and influenced the will of the commander to takethe boy seriously and then to make a plan or Paul's escape. And soagain Paul was delivered from the unbelievers in Jerusalem just theway he asked for prayer in Romans 15:31.  Now what about the believers. How did they respond to Paul inanswer to the other prayer in Romans 15:31, that his ministry beacceptable to the saints. Acts 21:17-20 gives the answer:  And when we had come to Jerusalem,   the brethren received usgladly  . 18 And now the following day Paul went in with us toJames, and all the elders were present. 19 And after he had greetedthem, he  began  to relate one by one the things which God haddone among the Gentiles through his ministry. 20 And   when theyheard it they began glorifying God  ."  So we don't read anything about the church rejecting Paul or hisministry. God had heard the striving of his people in Rome, and hehad acted. The fruit of the Holy Spirit is love and joy and that iswhat Paul met with in the church of Jerusalem. God heard and answeredwith the love of the Spirit.  I conclude then that Matthew Henry is exactly right: In prayer weseek God to restrain the ill will of our enemies, and we seek God topreserve and increase the good will of our friends, because "God hasthe hearts both of the one and the other in his hands."  Or to put it simply, In answer to prayer God changes people'swills. This brings us to the very point where we are in our study ofprovidence in the BITC on Wednesday nights. So I will say more thenabout the results of the sovereignty of God and humanaccountability..  But in closing this morning ask yourself if you believe thissimple and powerful truth about prayer. In response to prayer Godchanges peoples wills. I pray that the Lord will influence your willsto believe it! And if you do, then consider three implications:  1. Stand in awe of the Lordship of God and his Son Jesus. Paul hadsaid, "I urge you to strive in prayer   by the Lord JesusChrist  ." Now we see even more clearly that Jesus is the Lord.He is the Lord over the wills of Centurions, and Commanders and mobsand little boys. All authority in heaven and on earth has been givento him. So stand in awe of your Lord Jesus. Worship him. Trust him.Follow him. And count on him to help you in your longings to seepeople change.  2. Be glad and rejoice that the Spirit of God is a Spirit of love.Paul had said, "I urge you   by the love of the Spirit   tostrive in prayer." Think what it must have meant for Paul as he cametoward Jerusalem to have Christian groups "receive him gladly." "Thebrethren received him gladly." O how precious is the love of theSpirit when it flows to us from other believers. Be glad that God islike this. Be glad that the Lord of the universe has a Spirit oflove. Be glad that that God has both a powerful Son and a lovingSpirit. When these two things unite, infinite power and overflowinglove, nothing can befall you but what God wills for your good.  3. Finally, don't neglect the amazing influence you have in theworld for good through prayer. By prayer God calls us to join him inshaping history. By prayer we are to influence the wills ofpresidents and kings and senators and governors and mayors (1 Timothy2:1-2). By prayer we are to influence the wills of professors andwriters and entertainers and editors and pastors and elders andmissionaries. By prayer we are to influence the wills of our friendsand our enemies. We are to influence the wills of our children byprayer, and our husbands and wives and mothers and fathers andsisters and brothers and neighbors and colleagues and fellowstudents.  The amount of transforming good you can do by prayer isincalculable. Don't neglect this great work God has put into yourhands. This year let's use both our instruments to win people over toChrist. Let's work to change people's minds with truth and peopleswills with prayer.  Copyright 1996 John Piper  
  
