 January 19, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor 
 
  BE STRONG AND FERVENT IN SPIRIT IN THE CAUSE OF TRUTH AND LIFE  (Romans 12:9-11) 
 
 Let love be without hypocrisy. Abhor what is evil; cling to what isgood. 10 Be devoted to one another in brotherly love; give preference to oneanother in honor; 11 not lagging behind in diligence, fervent in spirit, servingthe Lord. . . 
 
 A Word I Did not Know 
 I chose this text on this Sanctity of Life Sunday because of a wordin an article by William Bennett that I did not know and had to look up. Manyof you know who William Bennett is. He has become famous as the editorof The Book of Virtues and The Moral Compass and as the former Secretary of Education under President Reagan. He was writing about how the courtsin America, especially the Supreme Court, are finding various rights inthe Constitution that the framers of the Constitution never dreamed of andwhich remove from public debate crucial moral issues that ought to be settledin the political process rather than by arbitrary judicial decision thathas no clear root in the constitution. 
 What he said was that this problem with the courts today is not themain problem in America. Then came the word I had to look up. He said, "The problem is not simply with the Court; the problem is also with the citizenry itself. It seems to me that that is the heart of the matter: a cultureof acedia has taken deep root in the soil of late twentieth century America, which has led to acquiescence and passivity. Have we lost our capacityfor justifiable outrage? Can we be roused to act against the spread of fouland wicked practices?" (First Things, January, 1997, No. 69, p. 20, emphasis added). 
 So I looked up "acedia" in my Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary andit simply said, "Apathy, boredom." So he is saying that, here at the endof the twentieth century, a culture of apathy and boredom has taken deep rootin America. This is different from fear. It’s also different from disinterest in moral issues that comes because one has a passion for something else. This is a cultural yawn. 
 
 "Acedia" = Boredom, Apathy 
 It’s the sort of mood that explains the incredible prevalence of sportsand video games and movies that explode with tension and danger and riskand close calls, and stunning explosions and feats of daring. In all these things we see the attempt of a culture to find excitement and adventureand strong feeling in a workaday world that is just plain boring. It’s asif we were made for exploits and adventure and exertion and passion and risk-taking in some great cause, and instead what we do all day is sit in frontof a computer or shuffle papers or make deliveries or drive a bus or cleana room or sell a product or shuffle portfolios or prescribe medicines or fix gadgets. Life in the real world seems to fall so far short of what our hearts cry out for that the best we can do is create substitute, artificial exploits -- football, basketball, hockey, explosive movies, shockingvideo games -- anything to transport us out of the boredom of the real world,and give us a little taste of passion and zeal and daring and energy andstrategy and courage -- even if it is an artificial world. Somehow it seems tohelp satisfy the craving of our hearts. 
 
 Cultural Acedia 
 I think William Bennett is right -- there is in America today a deepcultural acedia -- boredom and apathy. We look like we are having a great timeas we go from one entertainment event and program and mall and movie to another, but it is all artificial. We are not excited with real life. We are desperately waiting for the weekend when we can play, because real lifeis just not connected with any great cause that inspires in us exploitsof courage or daring or risk or adventure or strategy or dreaming or deep camaraderie. We wonder why our relationships are so feeble and thinand fragile. And deep down we know that part of the reason is that relationships go deep when arms are linked in a great cause that you are ready tolay down your lives for. Deep relationships are not cultivated by watching television or going to movies. 
 So I looked up the word acedia: apathy, boredom. As I thought aboutthis in relation to abortion -- one of the greatest evils of our nation -- what struck me was that God’s will for us in relation to the cause of truthand life is that we not be bored or apathetic, but zealous and fervent andstrong in the service of Christ and his kingdom. The culture of acedia is contrary to the Christian mind and heart. That is why I chose Romans 12:9-11, especially verses 9 and 11. 
 The words used in verse 9b are strong words. Really strong. "Abhor whatis evil; cling to what is good." "Abhor" and "cling" are not your ordinary, workaday words for dislike and like. They are not acedia words. Theyare words that say, GET UP! Think about this! Look at this! Is this evil?Is this evil? Well if this is evil, abhor this. Feel intensely about this! Don’t abhor people, but abhor evil. Abhor this evil! 
 And cling to the good. Don’t just say, "Yes, that is good. Birth isgood. Life is good. Adoption is good." Take hold of the good and love thegood. Embrace the good. Cherish the good. Feel strongly about the good. Youcan hear in these words a call to fight acedia. These are not words thatfit with boredom and apathy. They are words that call our personalitiesinto question. We may say, "Well, I am not a passionate person," and thenjustify lukewarm responses to evil and good. But in Christ we are all beingchanged into the image of God -- and God is not lukewarm about evil and good. Christianity is diametrically opposed to the culture of acedia -- the culture of boredom and apathy. 
 What We Already Know About Abortion 
 For many years I have been delivering messages here at Bethlehem that describe the evil of abortion and the goodness of birth and, if necessary, hardship or adoption. 
 &middot; We have seen that abortion is evil because what ishappening in the womb is the unique person-forming work of God, and therefore abortion is anassault on the Creator-rights of the King of the Universe to bring eternal persons into existence. 
 &middot; We have seen that abortion is evil because taking non-criminallife is the blessed privilege of God alone, not man. I call it "blessed" becausethat’s what Job called it when his ten children were killed. "The Lord gaveand the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord" (Job 1:21). 
 &middot; We have seen that abortion is evil because the babies tornapart in the womb bear the image of God. It is profoundly significant that John the Baptist was filled with the Holy Spirit while still in his mother’swomb (Luke 1:15). Therefore human life, born and unborn, has a dignity that should not be despised. 
 &middot; We have seen that abortion is evil because God has revealedto us that his way is to care for the weak and the helpless, and that is why any ofus is saved (Isaiah 25:4). 
 &middot; We have seen that abortion is evil because it is a sign ofunbelief in the promises of God to think that killing the unborn is the only way Godcan make a livable future for you. "Is anything too hard for the Lord?" (Genesis 18:14). 
 &middot; We have seen that abortion is evil because those who performthe act know what they are doing, with many of them admitting it is the killing ofa child, but saying it the lesser of two evils. 
 &middot; And we have seen that abortion is evil because it is essentiallya way of providing women with the same supposedly consequence-free life of unlicensed sex that men seem to get. 
 And there are many other reasons why abortion is evil. We have seenall these. We need to be reminded of them, lest we be become calloused tothe carnage down the street. But as I asked myself about this morning’smessage, I said, "Do I add to the list of reasons that abortion is evil, or doI assume that the people will share that conviction and so, rather, preachto stir them up not to grow weary -- not to sink in the culture of acedia.I decided that is what I should do. 
 Especially when I read on in William Bennett’s article, and read onin Romans 12. Let me read one more paragraph to you. Here he gives evidence thatwe are a nation in the grip of weak, irresolute, lazy acedia with regardto abortion. 
 Partial-Birth Abortion 
 But before I read it, I wonder if you all know what partial-birth abortion is. Both the Senate and House of Representatives passed a bill banningthis hideous procedure unless the mother’s life were at stake. On April 10,1996, President Clinton vetoed the bill and the override was not sustainedin the Senate. The President insisted that there must be an exception clausefor the "health" of the mother -- which, as in Roe v. Wade, has proved,as everyone knows, to be an abortion license whenever the mother wantsone. 
 What is this procedure? 
 In September, 1993, Brenda Shafer, a registered nurse with thirteenyears of experience, was assigned by her nursing agency to an abortion clinic.She considered herself pro-choice and didn’t see a problem. She was wrong.Here is what she said: 
 I stood at the doctor’s side and watched him perform a partial-birthabortion on a woman who was six months pregnant. The baby’s heartbeat was clearly visible on the ultrasound screen. The doctor delivered the baby’s bodyand arms, everything but his little head. The baby’s body was moving. Hislittle fingers were clasping together. He was kicking his feet. The doctortook a pair of scissors and inserted them into the back of the baby’s head,and the baby’s arms jerked out in a flinch, a startle reaction, like a babydoes when he thinks that he might fall. Then the doctor opened the scissors up.Then he stuck the high-powered suction tube into the hole and sucked thebaby’s brains out. Now the baby was completely limp. I never went back to the clinic. But I am still haunted by the face of that little boy. It wasthe most perfect, angelic face I have ever seen. (Quoted from the InternetHome Page for "Campaign to End Partial-Birth Abortions.") 
 Now this is what prompted William Bennett to say that we are grippedby a culture of acedia. Here is what he said. And I hope the words land onyou with the weight they should. 
 The Congress’ failure to override President Clinton’s veto of the ‘partial-birth abortion’ legislation is illustrative [of the cultureof acedia]. When it comes to the subject of abortion, I believe that thereare a limited number of hard wrenching cases. But here is an easy one: the presidential sanctioning of a procedure that is, for all intents and purposes, infanticide. What was most striking to me was the lack of virtually any public response [I think this is a serious overstatementeven if the outcry was far from what it should have been]. Now it is truethat most people do not know about the partial-birth abortion procedure,that most people who do are opposed to that awful procedure; and that the pro-abortionists spread misinformation. Still, we cannot escape thefact that we had something of a national debate about infanticide -- and infanticide prevailed (because of a popular President’s veto); that very littlewas heard from those Americans who did follow the debate; that the Republican presidential and vice-presidential candidates, and many congressional candidates, said little or nothing about the issue during the 1996 campaign; and that Americans reelected a President, by a wide margin, the manwho looked at infanticide and said yes to it." (First Things, January, 1997,p. 20) 
 "Not Lagging. . . Fervent" 
 That is what I saw when I kept reading in William Bennett’s article.Here is what I saw when I kept reading in Romans 12 -- verses 10-11: 
 "Be devoted to one another in brotherly love; give preference to oneanother in honor; 11 not lagging behind in diligence, fervent in spirit, servingthe Lord." 
 It’s verse 11 that I believe God wants us to hear this morning witha new responsiveness. These words are launched directly against the cultureof acedia -- the culture of apathy and boredom. 
 "Not lagging behind in diligence, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord."All of life is a serving of the Lord. We do not serve the Lord one day aweek and serve some other god on the other six. This is a verse about life. About living life as to the Lord, whether we are eating or drinkingor whatever we are doing -- to do it in the name of the Lord and for theglory of the Lord, since all of life belongs to the Lord. That includes allyour family life and vocational life and leisure life and civic life andpolitical life. So this verse is about how we deal with significant issues inpublic life. 
 There are two phrases that describe how we are to serve the Lord. Theyare the opposite of the culture of acedia. One expresses the opposite ofacedia negatively and the other positively. 
 First we are to serve the Lord by "not lagging behind in diligence." Literally, "not lazy in earnestness." The RSV says, "Never flag in zeal." The NIV says, "Never be lacking in zeal." This is a rebuke to passivityand laziness and lethargy and apathy and boredom. Paul assumes that if yousee this in yourself you can do something about it. We have been given theHoly Spirit and the Word of God and the power of prayer precisely to fightagainst the encroachments of the culture of acedia in our own hearts. So hespeaks this word directly to us this morning as relates to the cause of truthand life: don’t lag, don’t float, don’t drift, don’t sit mindless in frontof TV, don’t have only little dreams of playing on the weekend. Stir up zealfor God and for the cause of God and truth and life. There are great things worth living for; and giving in to acedia is a sacrilege against the greatness of God and his glorious purposes in the world. 
 Second, in verse 11, Paul says, "[Be] fervent in spirit." The Greekword behind "fervent" --"zeontes" -- means "boiling." That’s where we getthe English word "fervent," because it comes from the Latin word "to boil."Here is the positive side. Don’t lag behind in diligence and earnestnessand zeal, but rather, positively, "be fervent," "boil" in the spirit. Todaywe might say, "Be passionate" in your spirit. This is why our Church mission statement is not just a trendy adaptation to the use of the word "passion," but an explicit effort to capture this biblical demand. We exist tospread a passion for the supremacy of God in all things. The word "passion" isbased squarely on Romans 12:11, "boil in the spirit." "Be fervent in the spirit." 
 "Boil in the Spirit" 
 So my simple pastoral plea to you this morning is that you not be partof the culture of acedia, especially when it comes to abortion. That you fight against the encroachments of apathy and boredom and laziness and indifference. That you go to the word of God and let the Lord of gloryspeak life and energy and hope and zeal and passion and earnestness into your spirit. I’m talking to the young and the old. 
 That is his will for you this morning. If you have it -- this "boilingin the Spirit" -- you will find ways to pour your life out in the causeof truth and life. God will give more significance to your life than you couldget from a thousand artificial games. Remember, we are Christians. Our lives are linked with Jesus Christ by faith, and he is the Lord of all things. Through him and for him all things were made (Colossians 1:16). Godcalls you to invest your life in something great. There is not Christian warrant for the culture of acedia. Christ is too great for that. Boredom with Christ and his kingdom means we are blind. Open your eyes this morningand let him inspire in you afresh a passion for his supremacy in all things, including the cause of truth and life in our tired and decaying culture. 
 COPYRIGHT 1997 JOHN PIPER 
  Returnt to Piper's NotesFront Page  
 
