     June 14, 1998    Bethlehem Baptist Church   (Praise Procession Follows the Service)    John Piper, Pastor    
       Not Ashamed of the Gospel       (Romans 1:16)      
           For I am not ashamed of the gospel,    for it is the power of God for salvation to everyone who believes, to the Jew first and    also to the Greek.        
       Today we will take the gospel of God and our praises of God  and go to the streets. We will walk and sing and pray and shout our faith and our love to  all who will listen. Which will raise for many the question: Am I ashamed to do this? So  the Lord seems to have ordered the timing of our series of messages in Romans so that  today&#146;s text is Romans 1:16, and in particular the beginning words: I am not  ashamed of the gospel. This verse and the next one are the very heart of the book of  Romans &#150; a kind of thesis statement of the book. So we will spend at least three  weeks on verse 16.    
       What Makes a Person Feel Shame?       Today we will focus on the  words: For I am not ashamed of the gospel. You see the link with verse 15. The  reason he is eager to preach the gospel in Rome is that he is not ashamed of the gospel.  Let&#146;s begin with the general question: What makes a person feel ashamed? Consider  some examples.     1) Suppose a boy brags to his friends that he can outrun the skinny new  kid in the neighborhood. So the kids set up a race &#150; say, once around the block. Both  boys walk the route and see where all the obstacles are and where the turns are made. Then  they line up. The neighborhood kids are all out watching. Someone says, Ready. Set.  Go! And the bragging boy is simply left in the dust. The skinny new guy finishes 40  or 50 yards ahead of the braggart. When that happens it is very likely that the braggart  feels ashamed. He feels that he has made a fool of himself.    2) Or suppose someone you don&#146;t like at school has a dad who is in  jail. And suppose that you make fun of him for this and call him names and point out to  people that his dad is a crook. And you boast that your dad is a successful financial  officer at a major bank. Then one day you go home to the terrible news that your dad has  been arrested and charged with embezzling hundreds of thousands of dollars. The next day  you don&#146;t even want to go to school because you are so ashamed &#150; both of your  father and yourself.    3) Or suppose you put a lot of stock in how you look &#150; having your  hair just the way it is supposed to be and your clothes in perfect taste. You are invited  to a party and you check with people whom you think are reliable advisers about what to  wear and how to look. But when you get there you realize that you are totally wrong in the  way you dressed. You are so embarrassed that you don&#146;t want to go into the room.    4) Finally, suppose you have a part in a play &#150; just a small one  perhaps, because you are nervous and not very good at acting. Maybe you have two lines at  some key point in the play. You memorize the lines. The play begins. Your heart pounds out  of your chest. The audience is large. Everyone is doing beautifully and setting a high  standard. Your moment is drawing near. And at the exact moment, you freeze. You try to say  the two lines. Everybody is looking at you. But you can&#146;t do it. Someone whispers to  you your lines. To no avail. Somehow they get around you. You run off the stage, and want  to run off the planet, you feel so ashamed.    We all know what it is to be embarrassed &#150; or to be ashamed.    What would keep you from being embarrassed or ashamed in situations  like that? Well, one answer would be that stronger legs would have kept you from losing  the race and being put to shame by the new skinny guy. And a more honest dad would not  have embezzled, so you wouldn&#146;t be ashamed of him. And with better counsel from your  friend you wouldn&#146;t have dressed all wrong for the party. And better nerves in front  of a group would have let you remember your lines and speak them with excellence. In other  words, you could avoid being ashamed if you and your family and friends could always keep  yourselves in the best light and never let anyone feel negative things about you.    
       The Gospel Causes Shaming and  Gives Freedom from it       Now when Paul says in Romans  1:16 that he is not ashamed of the gospel, is this what keeps him from being  ashamed? Does he escape being ashamed because he keeps himself in the best light? No.  Exactly the opposite. Believing and preaching the gospel constantly put Paul in a bad  light. It constantly stirred up other people to shame Paul. He gives us a list of ways  that he was shamed in the ministry of the gospel (in 2 Corinthians 11:23-26):            . . . in far more labors, in far    more imprisonments, beaten times without number, often in danger of death. Five times I    received from the Jews thirty-nine lashes. Three times I was beaten with rods, once I was    stoned, three times I was shipwrecked, a night and a day I have spent in the deep. I have    been on frequent journeys, in dangers from rivers, dangers from robbers, dangers from my    countrymen, dangers from the Gentiles, dangers in the city, dangers in the wilderness,    dangers on the sea, dangers among false brethren . . .             In other words, Paul&#146;s way of not being ashamed of the gospel was  not   that he could keep himself in the best light or that he had enough savvy that people  always liked him and approved what he did. Look back at Romans 1:14, I am under  obligation [I am debtor] both to Greeks and to barbarians, both to the wise and to the  foolish. When Paul looked out on the huge world of unbelief in his day he felt a  debt to all. He didn&#146;t look with utter disdain on the pagans of his day. Beware of  doing this. Our conservative lifestyle has been so politicized in America that we slip  easily into feeling disdain rather than debt to unbelieving people. Not so with Paul,  though he hated sin. Rather, he felt so overwhelmed with undeserved grace that he knew  himself a debtor to all &#150; Greek and barbarian, wise and foolish.     But did they want him to pay them his debt? Do the unbelieving  neighbors and colleagues around you want what you have to give? Not many. In 1 Corinthians  1:22-23 he says, Jews ask for signs and Greeks search for wisdom; but we preach  Christ crucified, to Jews a stumbling block and to Gentiles foolishness. Paul had a  debt to pay to Jews and Greeks and barbarians, but most of them &#150; as today &#150; did  not want his message of love and grace and hope. It was foolishness and a stumbling block.    So, before we can see in Romans 1:16 that the gospel is the basis of  Paul&#146;s freedom from shame, we see that it was first the basis of his being shamed.  The gospel does two things: it brings out shaming behavior in those who will not believe  it. And it gives freedom from shame to those who do believe it.     Paul knew both. He was like Jesus. Jesus was abandoned by his friends,  falsely accused of blasphemy, beaten with rods, ridiculed and taunted, stripped of his  clothes, scourged with a whip, tortured in public, and made to look like a fool as people  hollered at him on the cross: You who saved others, save yourself.    
       What Did Jesus and Paul Do with  the Shame Poured on Them?       What did Jesus do with all this  shame &#150; this shaming behavior? What would you do with it? Hebrews 12:2 tells us what  he did with it: For the joy set before Him [he] endured the cross  ,  despising  the shame , and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God. Jesus  despised the shame. What does that mean? It means that when shame began to threaten his  heart and to tempt him to abandon a clear and obedient witness to God and to the gospel,  he said to shame, Shame, I despise you. I will not yield to you. I will not give to  you any satisfaction. You may do with me whatever you please &#150; in the short run  &#150; but I will not obey you or follow you or give in to you. I despise you, shame, and  will not let you rule me.    How could he do that? How can you do that? Hebrews 12:2 says he did it  for the joy that was set before him. Shame was stripping away every earthly  support that Jesus had: his friends gave way in shaming abandonment; his reputation gave  way in shaming slander; his decency gave way in shaming nakedness; his comfort gave way in  shaming torture. So, if his present supports were all being stripped away in shaming  persecution, how did he not capitulate to such shame? Hebrews 12:2 says, he set his heart  not on the supports of the present, but on the joy of the future where very soon he would  sit down at the right hand of the throne of God.    Though he was being shamed, Jesus was not ashamed of his God and  Father. Why? Because God had power to save him from death and give him all-satisfying  glory at his right hand forever.    Now, I say Paul was like this. What did he say in Romans 1:16? I  am not ashamed &#150; in spite of all the cultured Greeks who mock me as preaching  foolishness and all the unbelieving Jews who deride me as preaching a false Christ &#150;  I am not ashamed of this gospel. Why? For it is the power of God unto  salvation. In other words, this message of Christ crucified for the sake of sinners,  of Christ raised from the dead as the Son of God in power (1:4), of grace given freely to  those who will trust in Jesus &#150; this message will bring all who bank on it to  everlasting salvation.    
       Shamed, but not Ashamed       How then do you overcome  feelings of shame when you are shamed for believing and sharing the gospel? Answer: ponder  the power of the gospel to bring forgiven sinners to final, everlasting joy. Nothing in  the world can do this except the gospel of Jesus Christ. Judaism (that stops short of  Jesus), Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam &#150; they do not have a Savior who can solve the  problem of separation from a holy God through sin and offer sinners hope by grace through  faith and not works. Only one message saves sinners, and brings them safely into the  presence of God &#150; the gospel of Jesus Christ. It alone is the power of God unto  salvation.    Therefore, Paul would say &#150; Jesus himself would say &#150; suffer,  yes. Be misunderstood, yes. Be shamed, yes. But do not be  ashamed . You will be  shamed, but you need not be ashamed. Because the message of God&#146;s saving work in  Christ is the only final triumphant message in the world. Short-term pain. Long-term gain.  For the joy (of salvation!) set before you, take up your cross, follow Jesus, be shamed  and despise the shame.    In closing, let me put a point on it for what&#146;s left of the  &#146;90s. How do people shame you today for believing and sharing the gospel? It&#146;s  not exactly the same as the way they did in the &#146;60s. I heard Alistair Begg say  recently that his unbelieving friends criticized him in the &#146;60s because they did not  believe that the gospel was true. In the &#146;90s they criticize him for claiming that  there is any truth. In other words, today the shaming is not to say that you are wrong,  but to say that you are arrogant if you think others are wrong. Not that you have bad  thinking, but that you have a bad attitude. Not that your worldview is defective, but that  it is divisive. The greatest weapon of shaming today in the world of religious claims is  the accusation that you are intolerant and therefore mean-spirited and egotistical.    To that we must steadfastly respond: It is the most loving thing in the  world to tell the truth about the way of salvation. If Jesus has said, I am the way,  the truth, and the life; no man comes to the Father but by me (John 14:6), then, for  the sake of love, we must pay our debt to the world, and despise the shaming of the  tolerant &#145;90s and tell them, There is salvation in no one else; for  there is no other name under heaven that has been given among men by which we must be  saved (Acts 4:12). The gospel of Christ alone is the power of God unto salvation.     Copyright 1998 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
