  February 9, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor  
   WHAT CHRIST WILL DO AT THE SECOND COMING   (Hebrews 9:27-28)  
  And inasmuch as it is appointed for men to die once and after thiscomes  judgment, so Christ also, having been offered once to bear thesins of many,  shall appear a second time for salvation without reference to sin,to those  who eagerly await Him.  
  So Christ Also  
  Notice the structure of this sentence.  "Inasmuch as it isappointed unto men  . . . (28) So Christ also . . ."  The comparison is made betweensomething we  do, die and later come into judgment, and something Christ does,die and  later come to save from judgment.  There is a parallel between ourexperience  and Christ’s.  For every decisive experience that you have (likedying and  facing God in judgment), the Son of God has a correspondingexperience.    
  Only Christ’s experiences are not merely alongside ours and likethem.  His  have an impact on ours.  His death and our death are not parallel. His  utterly transforms ours.  Our arrival at the judgment and hisarrival at the  judgement are not parallel.  His rescues us.  In other words, theparallel  between our life and Christ’s life is designed to show how utterlydependent  on him we are at every point of our lives, and  how great he is. He is the  strong saving one and we are the weak and desperate ones.  
  So it’s not accurate to say merely that we run the race and heruns the race  . . . just as we will cross the river, so he will cross the river;just as we  will face the dragon, he will face the dragon.  No, it’s not likethat.  It’s  like this.  We have to cross the river, yes.  And he did too.  Buthe died  crossing the river to build a bridge for us to cross the river. And we have  to face the dragon at the end, yes.  And he will face it too. Only he will  save us from the fiery breath of the dragon and bring us into thejoy of  eternal life.  
  So the point of these two verses is to get us to think of the bigissues of  our lives, like death and judgment, and then to help us see thatChrist has  gone before us in these experiences.  And that his experience ofthem is so  powerful that when we have to walk through death and judgment,those  experiences will be radically different because of Christ.  Thepoint here is  to magnify Christ, and by that magnificence to unleash confidentand  courageous Christians in the world for his glory.  
  Christ’s Experience Prepares the Way  
  So let’s look at these things one at a time as they come in theseverses of  Scripture.  Verse 27, "And inasmuch as it is appointed for men todie once .  . ."  Now this is a rich sentence.  God has been very merciful tosay this to  us.  Listen to two things God means for us to hear in this word.  
  1.  One is that all of us have an appointment with death.  "It isappointed  for men to die."  Who made this appointment with death?  I surelydidn’t.  I  make some appointments that I don’t like to make, like with thedentist or  with the car mechanic.  But I would never make this appointment ifit were up  to me.  Who made it for me?  
  The answer is, God made it.  When Adam and Eve sinned, human deathentered  the world.  And God appointed the curse of death for everyone oftheir  ancestors.  Romans 5:12 gives us the background.  It says,"Through one man  sin entered into the world, and death through sin, and so deathspread to all  men, because all sinned."  God had warned this is what wouldhappen.  And he  brought it to pass.  
  So death is not an appointment that comes to us only by naturalprocesses.   That would be far from the Biblical view.  As if the world justruns on its  own laws without God’s daily oversight and guidance.  No, ourappointment  with death comes not merely by natural processes but at thedivinely  appointed moment.  God plans our birthday and our death day. Psalm 139:16  puts it like this: "And in Thy book [O God] they were all written,the days  that were ordained for me, when as yet there was not one of them." A certain  number of days are ordained for me by God.  God sets thisappointment, not  Satan and not my enemy and not cancer and not me.  
  But not only that, God sees to it that we keep the appointment. He plans it  and he brings it to pass.  You recall how Job said, when hischildren were  killed by the collapse of their home, "The LORD gave and the LORDhas taken  away. Blessed be the name of the LORD" (Job 1:21).  So the Lordmakes the  appointment.  And the Lord sees to it that death and we keep theappointment.   There is no absurd, meaningless fatalism here.  All is governedby an  all-wise, all-powerful, all-loving God, no matter what it lookslike to us.  God makes our appointment with death in his sovereign planning ofall things.   You recall how Jesus spoke to the apostle Peter in John 21:19that the day  was coming (the appointment was made) when he would be crucifiedlike Jesus.   And a few minutes later Jesus spoke to Peter about the apostleJohn and  said, "If I want him to remain [alive] until I come, what is thatto you? You  follow Me!" (John 21:22).  In other words Christ himself decideswhen and how  his servants will die.  "If I want him to remain, he will remain. If I want  to take him, I will take him. You are all in my hands" (SeeRevelation 6:11).   So Henry Martyn, the young missionary to Persia, was right tosay, "If  [Christ] has work for me to do, I cannot die." (Journal andLetters, New  York: Protestant Episcopal Society for the promotion ofEvangelical  Knowledge, 1851, p. 460).  
  So it is appointed to us all to die.  And we may rest assured, itis not man  or Satan or fate or disease that makes that final, ultimatechoice.  It is  Christ himself, our creator and king.  
  2. "It is appointed for men to die once."  But there is anotherkey word here  besides the word "appointed," namely the word "once." This meansthat you can  stop dreaming right now about reincarnation.  We are not comingback to die  again.  We are not coming back in any form at all.  The point ofthe word  "once" here is to stress the finality of death.  We die once.  Andthat is  the end of our experience of earthly dying.  
  Now all of this should have a profound effect on us.  SamuelJohnson said, in  1777, "Depend upon it, sir, when a man knows he is to be hanged ina  fortnight, it concentrates his mind wonderfully" (Boswell’s Lifeof Johnson,  Sept. 19, 1777).  Moses put it like this in Psalm 90:12, "So teachus to  number our days, that we may  get a heart of wisdom."    
  Surely the writer of Hebrews wants us to hear this word of theLord in verse  27 and be wakened from the usual numbness and sleepiness of ourlives.  Most  people think very little about what matters most and think verymuch about  what matters little.  The Bible is God’s gift to us to keep usfrom that  foolishness and to make us wise.  Wise people are people who haveproportion  in their lives.  What matters most they are most concerned with,and what  matters least they are least concerned with.  Death is huge anddeath is  sure.  And so God is calling us here to think about it and getserious about  it in a way that fits with how momentous death is.  
  And After This Comes Judgment  
  The next phrase is what gives death its greatest seriousness. Hebrews 9:27  says, "It is appointed for men to die once and after this comesjudgment."   Death is not the end of our existence.  That is what is soawesome about it.   We are not mere material beings that simply go out ofconsciousness and  decompose in the ground.  This word from God stands over againstthe common  evolutionary idea expressed, for example, by William Provine, thehistorian  of science at Cornell.  He says that evolution finds nointelligent design  operating in nature and "no such thing as immortality or lifeafter death."   According to him "we’re produced by a process that gives not onedamn about  us" (First Things, February, 1997, p. 32).  
  Well the word "damn" is a very important word in this connection,but not the  way Provine thinks.  When Hebrews 9:27 says, "After death comesjudgement,"  that is exactly what he it means.  God does give damnation afterdeath.  And  it is the most terrifying prospect in the universe, that we mightbe met  after death with a holy and angry and omnipotent God holding usaccountable  for whether we trusted him and worshipped him and followed hisways in this  life.  That is a fearful prospect.    
  Hebrews does not leave us in the dark about what this means.  InHebrews  10:27 it says, "A certain terrifying expectation of judgment, andthe fury of  a fire which will consume the adversaries" awaits us.  And threeverses later  it says, "We know him who said, ‘Vengeance is mine, I will repay.’And again,  ‘The Lord will judge his people’" (verse 30).  So when our textsays that we  have an appointment with death and after death with judgment, itmeans that  it will be terrifying and a furious fire and a great act of divinevengeance  even on those who claim to be part of God’s people, but are onlyexternal  Christians.  
  These are sobering realities. O, may God use them to wake us upand make us  alive to what really matters in this world!    
  Now in verse 28 the writer makes the comparison between ourexperience and  Christ’s. "It is appointed to us to die once and after that comesjudgment."   What about Christ?  "So Christ also, having been offered once tobear the  sins of many, shall appear a second time for salvation withoutreference to  sin, to those who eagerly await Him.  
  Christ Joins Us in Death and Judgment  
  Notice for your great encouragement here how Christ joins us indeath and  judgment.  There is a parallel, he dies and he comes to thejudgement.  But  the difference is infinite. Let’s see how.  
  Verse 28 says that his death is "an offering once to bear the sinsof  many."   We will see who the "many" are at the end of the verse.  But themain thing  to see is that the death of Jesus bears sins.  This is the veryheart of  Christianity and the heart of the Gospel and the heart of God’sgreat work of  redemption in the world.  When Christ died he bore sins.  He tooksins not  his own.  He suffered for sins that others had done, so that theycould be  free from sins.  Look back at verse 26 (from last week).  The lastline says,  "He has been manifested at the end of the ages to put away sin bythe  sacrifice of Himself."  So verse 28 says that "he bore the sins ofmany," and  verse 26 says that the effect of this is that "he put away sin."  
  This is the answer to the greatest problem in your life, whetheryou feel it  as the main problem or not.  There is an answer to how we can getright with  God in spite of being sinners.  And the answer is that Christ’sdeath is "an  offering to bear the sins of many."  He lifted our sins andcarried them to  the cross and died there the death that I deserved to die.  
  Now what does this mean for my dying?  "It is appointed [to me]once to die."   It means that my death is no longer punitive.  My death is nolonger a  punishment for sin.  My sin has been borne away.  My sin is "putaway" by the  death of Christ.  Christ took the punishment.    
  Why Is There Death?  
  Why then do I die at all?  Because God wills that death remain inthe world,  even among his own children, as an abiding testimony to theextreme horror of  sin.  In our dying we still manifest the external effects of sinin the  world.  But the inner relation of sin to God has been radicallychanged.  The  death of God’s children is not wrath against them.  Paul cries outin 1  Corinthians 15:55-57, "O death, where is your victory? O death,where is your  sting?  The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is thelaw; but  thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord JesusChrist."   In other words, the sting is removed because the death of Christsatisfied  the law’s demand and set us free from condemnation.  Death becomesan  entrance into salvation not condemnation.  
  That is what the next phrase means.  "Christ also, having beenoffered once  to bear the sins of many, shall appear a second time for salvationwithout  reference to sin."  There are two great truths here.  One is thatthe first  coming of Christ and his offering himself to bear the sins of manywas  completely sufficient.  He does  not have to do any more to paythe price for  sin or to remove the guilt of sin.  This is why it says here"without  reference to sin."  He came the first time to deal with sin.  Heput away  sin.  It is finished.  This is the wonder of the gospel.  Yourguilt is  already removed. That much of the end-time salvation is past anddone.  "Once  for all at the end of the ages" this great salvation happened.  Itcannot be  improved on.  
  But there is more.  This is the second great truth.  We had toface the issue  of death, and so Christ faced death and bore the guilt andpunishment of it  for us. Now, we must face judgment, so Christ comes a second timefor us,   this time not to deal with sin, but to save us from judgment. That’s what it  means in verse 28 when it says, "He shall appear a second time for  salvation."  This is not an addition to the salvation that thedeath of  Christ purchased; it is an application of the salvation  thatChrist  purchased.  This is what Christ bought in his death.  In otherwords Christ  died to bear our sin and to free us from condemnation, and theapplication of  this is the asbestos shield he gives us in the "fury of fire whichwill  consume the adversaries" (Hebrews 10:27; see 2 Thessalonians 1:7and I  Thessalonians 1:10).    
  This is exactly what Paul said in Romans 5:9-10,    
  Much more then, having now been justified by His blood, we shallbe saved  from the wrath of God through Him.  For if while we were enemies,we were  reconciled to God through the death of His Son, much more, havingbeen  reconciled, we shall be saved by His life.    
  It’s the past death of God’s Son for us that guarantees his futuresalvation  of us from the wrath of God at the judgment.  
  Now finally, the utterly crucial personal question: who are the"many" in  verse 28a?  "Having been offered once to bear the sins of many . .."   And  for whom is he bringing salvation at his second coming?  Theanswer is given  at the end of verse 28.  He is coming for those "who eagerly awaithim."    
  Faith That is Eager for Him to Come  
  If you ask right now, and you should, What must I do so that I mayknow  that my sins are taken away by the blood of Christ, and that, whenhe comes,  he will shield me from the wrath of God and bring me into eternallife . . .  if you ask that right now, the answer is this: trust Christ in away that  makes you eager for him to come.  He is coming to save those whoare "eagerly  waiting for him."  So how do you get ready?  How do you experiencethe  forgiveness of God in Christ and prepare to meet him?  By trustinghim in a  way that makes you eager for him to come.    
  This eager expectation for Christ is simply a sign that we lovehim and  believe in him authentically.  There is a phony faith that wantsonly escape  from hell, but has no desire for Christ.  That does not save.  Andit does  not produces an eager expectation for Christ to come.  It wouldrather that  Christ not come for as long as possible so that it can have asmuch of this  world as possible.  But the faith that really holds on to Christas treasure  and hope and joy is the faith that makes us long for Christ tocome, and that  is the faith that saves.  
  So I urge you, turn from the world and from sin and to Christ. Take him not  just as your fire insurance policy, but as your eagerly awaitedbridegroom  and friend and Lord.    
  COPYRIGHT 1997 JOHN PIPER   Return toPiper's Notes - The 1996-1997 Index.    Returnt to Piper'sNotes Front Page   
  
  
