     August 16, 1998    Bethlehem Baptist Church   John Piper, Pastor    
       How Does the Gospel Save  Believers?     Part 2      (Romans 1:16-17)      
           For I am not ashamed of the gospel,    for it is the power of God for salvation to everyone who believes, to the Jew first and    also to the Greek. For in it the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith; as    it is written, BUT THE RIGHTEOUS man SHALL LIVE BY FAITH.          The Gospel Saves Believers       We are asking the question, How  does the gospel save believers?, not: How does the gospel get people to be believers? When  spoken in the power of the Holy Spirit, the gospel  does  have power to open  people&#146;s eyes and change their hearts and draw them to faith, and save them.  That&#146;s what is happening on Tuesday nights and Wednesday nights this summer. People  are being drawn to Christ through the power and beauty of the gospel. But I am stressing  what Paul says here in verses 16 and 17, namely, that the gospel is the power of God  for salvation to everyone who believes. Believers need to be saved. The gospel is  the instrument of God&#146;s power to save us. And we need to know  how  the gospel  saves us believers so that we make proper use of it.    Notice the link between verses 15 and 16: So, for my part, I am  eager to preach the gospel to you also who are in Rome. Who is this you?  Verses 6-7 tell us: . . . among whom you also are  the called of Jesus Christ ;  to all who are  beloved of God  in Rome, called as  saints . So he says in  verse 15 that he is eager to preach the gospel to these called, loved, saints  whose faith is being proclaimed all over the world (v. 8). Why? Verse 16:  For I am not ashamed of the gospel, for it is the power of God for salvation  to  everyone who believes  (literally: who is believing) namely, you. And, namely,  you Bethlehem believers.    I say it with Paul: I, John Piper, am eager to preach the gospel to you  who believe &#150; exactly to you who believe &#150; because this gospel which is laid out  in the book of Romans, is the power of God to save you. You believers need to hear the  gospel in order to be saved. And Paul labors mercifully for 16 chapters to tell us the  gospel and how it works to save believers.     
       Believers Are Dependent on the  Gospel Every Day       And I fully believe that the  reason he does is that when believers know and love and live on the meat of the gospel, we  will be so gospel-filled and gospel-shaped and gospel-dependent and gospel-driven and  gospel-hoping and gospel-joyful that no one will need to tell us why we need to share the  gospel or how to share the gospel. We will be so thankful and so desperately, day-by-day  dependent on the gospel for our own hope of eternal life, and our own sanity, and our own  stability, and our own marriages or singleness, that it will be impossible not to know  that people need the gospel and why they need it and how it relates to their biggest needs  &#150; because we know  we  need it, and why  we  need it, and how it meets  our   biggest needs day by day.    One of the great reasons Paul was so eager to preach the gospel to  believers (verse 15) and why I am so eager to preach his gospel to you, is that, if we  thrive day-by-day on the meat of the gospel &#150; if the gospel becomes a day-by-day,  hour-by-hour instrument of God&#146;s power in our lives to save us &#150; then our  witness to family and friends and strangers will not be an artificial scheme but the very  heartbeat of the way we think and feel and fight the fight for faith and love every day.    Paul was utterly convinced &#150; and we should be too &#150; that  preaching the gospel to believers would bear fruit. Look back at verse 13: I do not  want you to be unaware, brethren, that often I have planned to come to you (and have been  prevented so far)    so that I may obtain some fruit among you also,  even as  among the rest of the Gentiles. When the gospel is preached among believers there  will be fruit! All kinds of fruit. Righteousness, peace, joy (Romans 14:17) &#150; and  converts who hear and see the gospel from the people of God.    
       How Does the Gospel Save  Believers?       So I am focusing on verse 17 for  three weeks because verse 17 answers the question:  How  does the gospel saves  believers? If we believers are going to live on the gospel, this is how we do it. We learn  from God&#146;s word how the gospel is going to save us, and then we believe it, and yield  to it, and cherish it, and follow God&#146;s design day by day for how he plans to save us  from everything that would destroy us, especially the righteous judgment of  God (Romans 2:5) and the wrath to come (Romans 5:9). That&#146;s what  salvation refers to mainly in verse 16: The gospel is the power of God  for salvation to everyone who believes. Those who go on believing, year after year,  will be saved from wrath by the power of God in the gospel (see Mark 13:13).    How? How does the gospel save believers from the wrath to come, and  bring us safely into the joy of our God (Matthew 25:21,23)?    Verse 17 says it works like this: The gospel is the power of God  unto salvation to everyone who believes  because  in it &#150; in the gospel &#150;  the righteousness of God is revealed. We saw last week that Martin Luther at first  hated this verse because he thought the revelation of God&#146;s righteousness was not  good news, but more bad news. It&#146;s the righteousness of God that creates our problem:  we are  un righteous and suppress the truth (Romans 1:18). So we are under  condemnation by the righteousness of God.    God demands righteousness from us. That&#146;s his nature and what his  law demands. He  is  righteous. But we don&#146;t have it to give. So we are guilty  and condemned and perishing, alienated from God and without hope in the world. So  what&#146;s the good news? What&#146;s the gospel? The good news is that the righteousness  which God demands from us, he gives to us. That was last week&#146;s point. That is what  verse 17 means: the gospel is the power of God to save believers because, day by day, all  through our lives, we see revealed in the gospel of Christ&#146;s death and resurrection  the gift of divine righteousness that supplies to us what God demands from us.    
       What does The Righteousness  of God Mean?       Then I asked at the end, What  does this gift of God&#146;s righteousness refer to? I mentioned the three possibilities  that seem most likely to me. So today I want to show you which of these I think Paul means  and why.    Does the righteousness of God mean: 1) the vindication or demonstration  of his own righteousness in forgiving sin because he punishes that sin in our substitute,  Jesus? 2) Or does he mean our right standing with God as forgiven and acquitted sinners  without guilt in his presence? 3) Or does he mean the moral change in us that actually  makes us obedient, righteous children of God?     Now we are going to see over time in Romans that all three of these  are, in fact, true meanings of God&#146;s righteousness, and that it is part of the gospel  that all three of them are free gifts for us, obtained by the death of Jesus in our place.  And it may be that Paul has all of them in mind in verse 17: the righteousness of God  &#150; in all these ways &#150; is being revealed in the gospel to faith; and that is why  it is the power of God to save believers. It&#146;s true that we see in the gospel, day by  day, all that is needed for God to  be  righteous, and to  declare  us  righteous, and to progressively  make  us righteous. That&#146;s what the gospel  reveals to us day by day. That is what we grasp hold of by faith. That is what keeps us  believing and helps us fight the fight of faith and persevere to the end and be saved.    
       Our Right Standing Before God       But there are several reasons  why I think Paul&#146;s main intention in verse 17 is the righteousness of God  in the sense of our right standing before him as forgiven, acquitted sinners without guilt  &#150; in other words, as people who are justified, or declared righteous because the  righteousness of God has been imputed to us. In Christ, we now have a right standing with  God. God imputes to us his own righteousness even while we are still ungodly. He counts us  as having his righteousness. That&#146;s what I think verse 17 mainly refers to.  That&#146;s what is revealed in the gospel.    Here are my reasons.       1. God credits his righteousness to man       1. Notice the connection between  the first part of verse 17 and the last part, the quote from Habakkuk 2:4. For in it  the   righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith. Then comes an Old  Testament quote introduced with as it is written. In other words, what he has  just said about the righteousness of God being revealed in the gospel is  as  &#150;  is  like  &#150; what he is about to quote from Habakkuk 2:4, namely, BUT THE  RIGHTEOUS man   SHALL LIVE BY FAITH.    Do you see what has happened to the word righteousness (or  just, which is the same in Greek)? In the first half of the verse, the  righteousness is God&#146;s (the righteousness of God is revealed), but in the  second half of the verse the righteousness is man&#146;s (the righteous man shall  live by faith). How can Paul give an Old Testament quote to illustrate his point if  there is such a huge difference in the use of the very words he wants to compare? The  answer is that there is  not  a huge difference. This quote from the Old Testament  shows that what Paul has in mind when he speaks of the gospel revealing the  righteousness of God is not mainly that God himself is righteous, but that he  imputes or credits his righteousness to man so that man can be called just or  righteous. The righteous man, he says, &#150; the one who is now  righteous because of the gift of God&#146;s righteousness &#150; shall live by  faith.    So what verse 17 means is that, in the gospel, the righteousness of God  is revealed in the sense that we see it being given to sinners so that we are justified  &#150; have a right standing with God. What we can&#146;t provide on our own, God imputes  to us so that we are forgiven and acquitted and justified before him. Now, there is  another reason to see verse 17 this way. So add to this one the following one.    
       2. God&#146;s righteousness is manifested  through faith       2. Here&#146;s my second reason  for thinking that this is what Paul has in mind in verse 17. Turn with me to Romans 3:20.  The parallel between these next verses and Romans 1:17 is so close that I can&#146;t help  letting these verses guide how I fill out the shorthand of 1:17.     Romans 3:20: By the works of the Law no flesh will be  justified   in His sight; for through the Law comes the knowledge of sin. So you see that the  issue here is how sinners are justified. That is, how do we get a right  standing with God when we have no righteousness of our own? How do we get acquitted in the  courtroom when we are guilty sinners? Then he continues in 3:21 with words that are very  close to Romans 1:17, But now apart from the Law  the righteousness of God   [same phrase as in 1:17] has been  manifested  [very close to the word  revealed in 1:17], being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets. So he  explains justification (verse 20) as a manifestation of the  righteousness of God (verse 21). And he continues to do so in verses 22-24, which  shed bright light on the revealing of the righteousness of God in 1:17.    He says (please try to see all of verses 22-24 as one piece) that this  righteousness that is now manifested is even the righteousness of God through faith  in Jesus Christ for all those who believe; for there is no distinction; for all have  sinned and fall short of the glory of God,  being justified  as a gift by His grace  through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. In the flow of Paul&#146;s thought,  the phrase being justified as a gift by God&#146;s grace in verse 24 is a  restatement and explanation of what he meant in verse 22 by the righteousness of God  through faith. So we have God&#146;s act of justifying sinners in verse 20 and again  in verse 24 and in between we have two references to God&#146;s manifesting his  righteousness through faith (verses 20, 22).    So I take Paul to be saying this: In the death of Jesus (verses 24-25),  God has manifested his own righteousness by imputing or crediting that righteousness to  sinners and pronouncing them righteous or just with his own righteousness. This is called  justification. This idea of manifesting his righteousness now apart from the law (verses  21-22) is so close to the revealing of the righteousness of God in 1:17, that I think they  are the same.    This is my second reason for saying that Romans 1:17 refers to the  righteousness of God given to man in the act of justification &#150; the act of declaring  sinners righteous through faith in Jesus.    
    
    
       Not Pressing Artificial  Separations        But I don&#146;t want to press  artificial separations here between these ways of looking at God&#146;s righteousness.     The gospel  does  reveal that God demonstrates his attribute of  righteousness in justifying sinners who trust Jesus (Romans 2:25-26); that&#146;s why  Jesus had to die &#150; to show that sin was dealt with righteously, to show that God was  both  just  and the  justifier  of the one who has faith in Jesus  (3:26).     And the gospel  does  reveal that the death of Jesus purchased not  only a  declaration  of our right  standing  before God, but also a  development   of our right  living  before God. Romans 8:3-4 says, Sending His own Son in the  likeness of sinful flesh and   for sin, [God] condemned sin in the flesh  [that&#146;s what happened at the cross: sin was punished, executed. Now here is the  purpose that the cross enables:] (4)  so that  the [just] requirement of the Law  might be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to the flesh but according to the  Spirit. Because our sins have once for all been condemned in the death of Christ, we  now have new power and freedom to make real progress in fulfilling the moral law of God by  the power of his Spirit. He breaks the power of cancelled sin, as Charles  Wesley wrote (O For a Thousand Tongues).     
       The Gospel Reveals to Us  God&#146;s Work for Us       But for all that, which we will  see fully in the weeks to come, don&#146;t miss the glory of the main point in verse 17.  How does the gospel save believers? How does it save you? The gospel is the power of God  to save everyone who believes (Romans 1:16), because in it is being revealed for our  encouragement and for our endurance in faith the precious truth that God gives to us what  he demands from us, namely, his own righteousness. And he does this mainly in the sense  that he declares believers to be righteous with his own righteousness. He counts us as  righteous with a perfect righteousness, namely, his own. He forgives us, acquits us,  justifies us by our faith.    This is how the gospel saves us. It reveals these things for us to see  and believe.    What we need day in and day out, in order to make our way to heaven, is  to see and receive and feed on this gift of imputed righteousness. This is the way God  saves believers. This can be and should be grasped by children. Let me try to say it  simply. We all do bad things and we all  are  bad in the sense that the bad we do  comes from a deeply rooted badness. Our bad deeds come from a bad heart. But God says that  we should be good or he cannot accept us, because his own goodness would be ruined by our  badness. So what we need is for God to take our badness and punish it in the death of  Jesus, and then take the goodness of Jesus &#150; his own goodness &#150; and make it  ours.     That&#146;s what he did. So everyone who believes in Jesus receives the  gift of God&#146;s goodness, God&#146;s righteousness. That is called justification by  faith.    
       Feed on the Gospel Daily       Look to it daily in the gospel.  Be relieved by it daily from the gospel. Be encouraged by it daily from the gospel. Be  emboldened by it daily. Be empowered daily. You live by an alien righteousness. Not by  your performances, but by God&#146;s. This is the gospel we live by and this is the gospel  we will share this week with family and friends. And this is the gospel that will save us  and bring us safely home to God.       Copyright 1998 John Piper    Piper's Notes          
   
