  Why does the flock of God struggle with fear?  Luke12 implies clearly that we do, and that we don't need to.  Itpoints to at least four things that we are prone to fear.    First, in verse 4 Jesus says, I tell you, friends,do not fear those who kill the body, and after that have no morethat they can do.  So it implies that we are prone to feardeath -- especially death by persecution.  Second, in verse 11 Jesus says, And when theybring you before the synagogues and the rulers and the authorities,do not be anxious how or what you are to answer or what you areto say; for the Holy Spirit will teach you in that very hour whatyou ought to say.  So Jesus implies that we are prone tofear public shame.  We are prone to be anxious about what otherswill think of us if we don't have the right thing to say.  Third, in verse 22 Jesus says, Therefore donot be anxious about your life, what you shall eat nor about yourbody, what you shall put on.  So he implies that we areprone to worry about whether our basic physical needs will bemet -- food and drink and clothing and shelter.  In every case Jesus' purpose is to give reasons whyhis friends (verse 4) and his disciples(verse 22)  -- his flock --do not need to fear these things. He wants us to be free from fear.  So he says. . .     First, death is not the worst thing, hell is.  AndGod will keep you out of hell and care for you with detailed tenderness-- the hairs of your head are all numbered.  Second, he says that the Holy Spirit will teach youwhat to say in an hour of public testing.  You will not be leftalone.  And third, he says your Father knows your daily needsand is far more inclined to give you what you need than he isto feed the ravens and clothe the lilies, but look how he takescare of them!  So Jesus does not want us to fear -- no fear of death,no fear of public shame, no fear of poverty and want.  He wantsus to see that God is the kind of God whose people do not needto fear.  But there is another thing we are prone to fear thatgoes right to the heart of God.  It is perhaps the deepest fearof all and the one that may lie behind all the others.  Perhapsthat's why Jesus keeps it for last.  We see it in verse 32:  Fearnot, little flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to giveyou the kingdom.  What fear is Jesus trying to eliminate here?    He is trying to eliminate the fear that God is notthe the kind of God who really wants to be good to his children. This is a fear that rises up in the hearts of those of us whoare prone to feel that God does not want to be gracious to us,that he does not want to be generous and helpful to us.  We areprone to think of God as one who is basically irked with us --ill-disposed and angry.    Sometimes even if we believe in our heads that Godis good to us, we may feel in our hearts that his goodness issomehow forced or constrained, perhaps like a judge who has beenmaneuvered by a clever attorney into a corner on some technicalityof court proceedings where he must dismiss the charges of theprisoner that he really would rather send to jail.   Today is Palm Sunday.  We picture ourselves welcomingthe King into our city and into our hearts.  He tries to makehis intentions known by not coming on a great stallion but ona lowly donkey, meek and humble.  But I wonder how many here look upon this lowly Servant-Kingand feel that this is just a thin veneer, and that really beneaththis lowly exterior there is a terrible power and authority whichis just waiting to burst out against you if you slip in any way. I wonder how many feel that it is not really the deepest pleasureof this King's heart to serve his people and meet their needs.   I wonder how many feel that he's riding this donkeyof lowliness as a kind of camouflage.  And once he gains a footholdhe will throw off his rags, pull out his sword and storm forthto do what he really loves to do, namely, judge and destroy. Of course, some will be saved -- the few who somehow could pleasehim.  But that is not his heart's desire.  He is basically angry-- always angry.  And the best we can do is stay out of his way,and maybe, if we keep the rules well enough, we could sneak byhim when he is in one of his temporary good moods.  This morning Jesus is at pains to help you not feelthat way about God.  And I want to simply spend the time we havemeditating on one verse, namely, Luke 12:32, because every littlepiece of this verse is intended to help take away the fear thatJesus knows we struggle with, namely, that God begrudges his benefits,that he is constrained and out of character when he does nicethings, that at bottom he is angry and loves to vent his anger.   Luke 12:32 is a verse about the nature of God.  It'sa verse about what kind of heart God has.  It's a verse aboutwhat makes God glad -- not merely about what God will do or whathe has to do, but what he delights to do, what he loves to doand takes pleasure in doing.    Fear not, little flock,  for it is you Father's good pleasure  to give you the kingdom.   Let's begin with the phrase good pleasure. It is a verb in Greek: to be a pleasure or tobe pleased by.  You could translate it: it pleasedGod, or God chose it gladly.  One of the bestplaces to see the meaning of the word is in Philippians wherethe noun form of the word is put over against its opposite.  In Philippians, you recall, Paul is in prison inRome.  There are professing Christians who do not like Paul andthere are Christians who do.  Both of them begin to preach theGospel while Paul is in prison.  But their motives are very different. In Philippians 1:15 Paul says, Some indeed preach Christfrom envy and rivalry, but others from good will -- or wecould say, from good pleasure.    The word good will is the word we areconcerned with.  What is he saying?  He is saying: both groupsare preaching, but one group is being driven to preach not becausethey love Paul or because they love the preaching of the Gospel,but because they hope to increase Paul's affliction.  But theother group is preaching because they really love to preach thegospel and because they love Paul.  They are doing what they reallylove to do.  It is out of good will.  It's out ofgladness.  It is their good pleasure to preach.  Their heart isnot divided.  Preaching is not a cloak for envy or rivalry.  Itis a real delight.  Now that is what Jesus means in Luke 12:32 when hesays, It is God's good pleasure to give you the kingdom. In other words, God is not acting in this generous way in orderto cloak and hide some malicious motive.  The word goodpleasure utterly rules that out.  He is not saying inside,I will have to be generous for a while even though I don'twant to be, because what I really want to do is bring judgmenton sinners.    The Lord's meaning is inescapable:  God is actinghere in freedom.  He is not under constraint to do what he doesn'treally want to do.  At this very point, when he gives his flockthe kingdom, he is acting out his deepest delight.  This is whatthe word means: God's joy, his desire, his want and wish and hopeand pleasure and gladness and delight is to give the Kingdom tohis flock.  Fear not, little flock, it is your Father'sgood pleasure -- not his duty, not his necessity, not his obligation,but his pleasure -- to give you the kingdom.  That is thekind of God he is.     Second, let's look at the phrase your Father. Fear not, little flock, it is your Father's good pleasureto give you the kingdom.  Jesus does not say, It is your employer's goodpleasure to give you your salary.  He does not say, Itis your slavemaster's good pleasure to give you your lodging. He does not even say, It is your King's good pleasure togive you the kingdom.  He chooses every word in this sentenceto help us get rid of the fear that God is ill-disposed to us-- that he is begrudging in his generosity, or constrained inhis kindness.  So he calls God your Father.  Now, not all of us have had fathers who patternedtheir lives after God.  And so the word father maynot be full of peace the way Jesus means it to be.  So let metry to fill the word Father with some of the meaningJesus intended it to carry for you this morning.  Two things:  First, if the King is our Father, then we are heirsof his kingdom.  There is something natural about our receivingit -- it's our inheritance.  In Matthew 25:34 it says that inthe last day King Jesus will say, Come, O blessed of myFather, inherit (note the word!) the kingdom prepared for youfrom the foundation of the world.  From before the world God prepared a kingdom forhis children.  It is theirs by the right of inheritance.  AndGod does not begrudge his children coming into their inheritance. It is his good pleasure to give them the kingdom.  Second, if the King is our Father, then we are freefrom being taxed.  In Matthew 17:25 Peter wondered if the discipleshad to pay the temple tax.  Jesus says, What do you think,Simon?  From whom do kings of the earth take toll or tribute? From their sons or from others?  And when he said, Fromothers, Jesus said to him, Then the sons are free.  God does not levy taxes against his children.  Itis those outside the palace who feel the burden of law, not thechildren within.  The children are free!  The Fatherhood of Godmeans freedom.  The list of implications of what it means to haveGod as our Father could go on -- and all of them would serve toovercome the fear that God is begrudging in his kindness to us. Just the opposite is the case.  He is our Father, and if we whoare evil know how to give good things to our children, how muchmore will our Father in heaven give the kingdom to those who askhim.   Third, consider the word give.   Itis your Father's good pleasure to GIVE you the kingdom.  Jesus does not say, sell you the kingdom.  He does not say,trade you the kingdom.  He says it is the Father's good pleasureto give you the kingdom.    We have seen it again and again in this series --and O, how I hope it is sinking in -- that God is a mountain springand not a watering trough.  And therefore he delights to overflow-- to give, give, give!  And therefore the gospel is that Goddoes not need a bucket brigade or sweaty pumpers, he wants drinkers!! People who will get down on their faces and satisfy their thirstwith his love.  He gives the kingdom!  It cannot be bought or barteredfor or earned in any way.  There is only one way to have it, andit is the easiest way of all -- the gospel way -- the way of Luke18:17, Truly, I say to you, whoever does not receive thekingdom of God like a child shall not enter it.    God is not stingy.  He is not a Scrooge.  He is notmiserly or tight-fisted or parsimonious or niggardly.  He is liberaland generous and ungrudging and bountiful.  It is his good pleasureto GIVE us the kingdom. (See Luke 8:10.)   Fourth, consider the word flock.  Fearnot, little flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to giveyou the kingdom.  Look how Jesus is piling up the metaphors.  God isour Father.  And since he gives us a kingdom, he must be a King. And since we are his flock, he must be a Shepherd.  Jesus isat pains to choose every word he can to make his point clear:God is not the kind of God who begrudges his blessings.   We are his flock.  What does that mean?    It means Psalm 23!  And it means that we should remember that the goodshepherd lays down his life for the sheep.  Begrudgingly?  Underconstraint?  Emphatically NO!  No one takes my life fromme, but I lay it down of my own accord.  I have power to lay itdown and I have power to take it again (John 10:18).    The Father did not begrudge the gift of his Son andthe Son did not begrudge the gift of his life.  It is the Shepherd'sgood pleasure to give the kingdom to his flock.   Fifth, consider the word little.  Fearnot, little flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to giveyou the kingdom.   Jesus is as pains to choose every word that willhelp us see God the way he really is.  Why does he say littleflock?   I think it has two effects.  First, it's a termof affection and care.  If I say to my family when they are indanger, Don't be afraid, little family, what I meanis: I know you are in danger and that you are small and weak,but I will use all my power to take care of you because you areprecious to me.  So little flock carries the connotationof affection and care.  It also implies that God's goodness to us is notdependent on our greatness.  We are a little flock -- little insize, little in strength, little in wisdom, little in righteousness,little in love.  If God's goodness to us depended on our greatness,we would be in big trouble.  But that's the point.  It doesn't. So we aren't.  Fear not little flock, it is the Father'sgood pleasure to give us the kingdom.  Finally, consider the word kingdom.  There might be one little foothold left for the feeling thatGod is begrudging and ill-disposed toward us.  Someone might say,OK, God is our Father and not our slavemaster; he enjoysgiving instead of selling;  he treats us the way a good shepherdtreats his flock;  he has an affection and pity toward us in ourlittleness.  But what after all does he promise to give?    He doesn't promise to give money.  In fact, he says,It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needlethan for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God (18:25).   He doesn't promise popularity or fame or admirationamong men.  In fact, he says, Blessed are you when men hateyou, and when they exclude you and revile you, and cast out yourname as evil, on account of the Son of man! (6:22).    He doesn't even promise security in this life.  Infact, he says, You will be delivered up even by parentsand brothers and kinsmen and friends, and some of you they willput to death; you will be hated by all for my name's sake(21:16).  What does he promise to give to his little flock-- to prove once and for all that it is not only his good pleasureto give, but that it is his good pleasure to give big?  He promisesto give them the kingdom of God.    And what does it mean to be given the sovereign reignand rule of God?  It means simply and staggeringly and unspeakablythat the omnipotent rule and authority of the King of the universewill be engaged for ever and ever on behalf of the little flockof God.  What no eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor the heart ofman conceived, God has prepared for those who love him (1 Cor.2:9).  And it is the Father's good pleasure to give it to hislittle flock.  Who can describe what it will be like when that sayingcomes to pass which Jesus spoke at the last supper, As myFather has appointed a kingdom for me, so do I appoint for youthat you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom (22:29)?  Jesus knows that the flock of God struggles withfear.  He knows that one of those fears is that God is the kindof God who is basically angry and delights most of all to judgesinners and only does good out of a sense of constraint and duty,not delight.  Therefore the Lord is at pains this morning to freeus from this fear by telling us the truth about God.  He has chosenevery word for our comfort and joy and peace.  Fear not, little flock for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you  the kingdom!  
