  Introduction:  The truth about our experience is that we fail tolive at the level of holiness that we know is fitting for a followerof Christ.  We need to see how this same reality of imperfectionturns up in the saints of Scripture and how they handled it.  Psalm 119 is the most sustained act of praise andcommitment to the Word of God in all the Bible.  It is composed of 22 stanzas of 8 verses each.  Eachof the 22 stanzas is built on a different Hebrew letter, of whichthere are 22 in the Hebrew alphabet.  In each of the stanzas eachof the eight verses begins with the letter of that stanza.  Why?  It is the sort of thing your do when you delightin the law of the Lord (Psalm 1:2) and when you believe(with Ps. 19:7-10) that    The law of the Lord is perfect, reviving the soul; the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple; the precepts of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart; the commandment of the Lord is pure,  enlightening the eyes; the fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever; the ordinances of the Lord are true,  and righteous altogether. More to be desired are they than gold, even much fine gold; sweeter also than honey  and drippings of the honeycomb.   It is a way of passing the time of night or day rollingthe word over in your mind seeing how many different angles youcan see.    It is a reveling in the riches of the word.  Likewhen we wanted to honor Elsie, we took the letters of her nameand thought up words to describe her.  That is the background for the last verse of thePsalm, a verse that comes as a shock, because there is nothingquite like it anywhere else in the Psalm -- a confession thatin spite of all that has gone before he has now gone backsliddenand gone astray. Verse 176:   I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek they servant, for I do not forget thy commandments.    THREE PARTS TO THE ANATOMY OF THE PSALMISTS BACKSLIDING:    1.  I have gone astray like a lost sheep. ..     The saints sometimes go astray.   He was a saint:   his love for the law - 97 his life of prayer - 145, 147 (whole Psalm!) his persistent praise of the word - 164 his track record of obedience - 22, 100f, 110, 121    He went astray:   e admits it openly in this verse - 176 it is not the first time - 67 the battle will not be over to the end of lifeperhaps this is why he puts it last: after all hissuccess the battle for holiness goes on!    Like a lost sheep:   lost in Hebrew also means perishing. sheep will die if not found.    Therefore: backsliding is very serious. . .     2.  . . . seek your servant. . .     True saints cry out to be found when straying    he is not content to stray  he admits his need of help: Seek me! How does he anticipate God's intervention?    be gracious 58 revive me 25 open my eyes 18 (cf. 129!) incline my heart 36f. 112 (cf. 165!) teach me 12, 26f., 29 etc. strengthen me 28, 133 afflict me 67, 71   Note: though he gives God the tribute of having powerto rescue him, he does not fault God for his straying.  God isnot guilty that I am prone to wander.  He is not bound to rescueme in any time but his own if at all.    What is the saint's assurance of God's willingnessto seek him?    3.  . . . for I do not forget you commandments.     True saints cannot erase the law that has beenwritten on their heart by the Spirit of God.  They remain therebeckoning and enticing.     The spiritual taste for God cannot be wholly obliteratedin the heart of the saints.   Saints not only call on God to seek them, theyseek God through his word.  Not forgetting is a litotesfor really remember and call to mind.    Especially the commandments to believeGod's promises (Prov. 3:5-6).   Ezek. 34: 11-12 I will seek my sheep  Luke 19:10 Son of man came to seek  John 10:27-29 I will keep my sheep  Luke 15:3-4 He leaves the 99 to find one  Jude 24-25 He is able to keep you       Connection to Communion:    Isaiah 53:6 -- All we like sheep. . .  John 10:11 -- I am the good shepherd.  The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.   
