 October 17, 1993    Bethlehem Baptist Church    John Piper, Pastor       
       THE ELECT ARE KEPT BY THE POWER OF GOD    (1 Peter 1:5)       
        Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus      Christ, who according to His great mercy has caused us to be      born again to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus      Christ from the dead, to obtain an inheritance which is      imperishable and undefiled and will not fade away, reserved in      heaven for you, who are protected by the power of God through      faith for a salvation ready to be revealed in the last      time.         
       There are no commandments in the first 12 verses of this   letter. No demands or requirements or directions. What Peter is   doing here is not telling us what to do but telling us what to   enjoy. He is not exhorting, he is exulting.       We saw this last week in verse 3 where Peter begins this   paragraph not with commands or even instruction, but with worship.   "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ." His aim   is to move us to bless God. To show us that God is the greatest   value in the world.       He starts by blessing and honoring God. And God is the center   of what he says in verses 3 and 4:              God is great in mercy.              God causes us to be born again              God gives us a living hope.              God raised Jesus Christ from the dead.              God promises an indestructible inheritance.              God is keeping that inheritance so that it will never,      perish or soil or fade.            But we stopped at verse 4 last week. The reason we stopped   there is because I think verse 5 deserves a sermon of its own. You   might believe all the great truth about God in verses 3 and 4 and   then worry about one crucial danger not covered there; at least   not explicitly.        Protected by the power of God through faith   now        You may know that God is merciful. You may know that God has   caused you to be born again. You may know that God raised Jesus   from the dead. You may know that God promised to keep your   inheritance imperishable in heaven. In other words, you know what   God has done in the past to give you life, and you know what God   is going to do in the future to give you your inheritance.       But what about now? What about the time between new birth and   final salvation? What about the temptations, pressures, stresses,   weariness, persecution, frustrations, suffering, confusion,   perplexity, fears and traps that we face now? Does God do anything   about that? Does he send his Son to die for our sins, raise him   from the dead to open eternal life, cause us to be born again, and   then stand back to see if we will make it to heaven? Peter is not   about to leave that question unanswered, or even implicit. He   makes the answer explicit, clear and powerful in verse 5.       Those who are born again "are protected (i.e. now are being   protected) by the power of God through faith for a salvation ready   to be revealed in the last time." There's Peter's answer: NO. God   does not just stand back after he has caused us to be born again.   He uses his divine power to protect us all through life for the   salvation ready to be revealed.       What Peter wants us to see here is that God means for his   people to be profoundly secure in him. He wants us to feel that   God himself is doing everything that must be done to guarantee our   final, eternal salvation.        Chain illustration        Picture it like this. Your salvation is like a chain that   extends back into eternity and forward into eternity. It is an   unbreakable chain. Wherever you look on this chain you find links   of iron forged by God himself.       If you look back into eternity as far as you can look you find   election (1:1-2): "To the elect aliens." "God chose you from the   beginning," Paul says in 2 Thessalonians 2:13, "for salvation."       If you look forward into eternity as far as you can on this   chain of salvation you see an inheritance that (according to verse   4) is reserved by God for you, and is therefore imperishable and   undefiled and unfading. God took charge of your salvation at the   beginning before you existed, and God is securing its great goal   before you ever get there in the future.       If you look back on this chain a couple thousand years you find   God sending his Son Jesus to shed his blood for your sin (the   sprinkling in verse 2). And then you find him raising Jesus from   the dead to conquer death and give you hope (v. 3).       If you look back one or two or twenty or seventy years as a   believer you see that great link in the chain called new birth,   and you see from verse 3 that it is not a link forged by you but   by God: "Blessed be God who caused us to be born again unto a   living hope."       And if you look now at the chain of salvation being forged this   very day in your life what do you see? If you look at the chain   that connects new birth in the past with your inheritance in the   future, what do you see?       Let me tell you what I hope you DON'T see first. I hope you   don't see two images.       One image is of the Christian walking along the edge of a great   chasm which he needs to cross to get to heaven. He is holding on   to one end of the chain leading into the past. Day by day he is   forging the links of faithfulness as best he can with some help   from the Holy Spirit (not infallible help) so that eventually he   can try to connect with the chain of heaven that hangs down from   the high cliff on the other side. But he is never sure that he   will forge the links well enough or have the strength to finish   the chain.       In other words, I hope the image you have of the chain of   salvation is not one that leaves the believer insecure and ready   to fall out of faith and into destruction. I will tell you why in   a minute.       The other image, which I hope you don't have, errs in the   opposite direction. It's almost the same image as before. the   Christian with the chain of salvation leading into the past is   walking along the chasm attempting with some help of the Holy   Spirit (not infallible help) to forge the links of faithfulness   and eventually link up with the chain of heaven on the other side.   But in this image the Christian has a safety belt around his waist   tied to the chain of heaven on the other side so that even if he   lets go of the chain leading to the past or stops forging any   links of faithfulness, he will not fall to his death but be drawn   into heaven another way than by the chain.       In the first image, the believer has no security or confidence   that he will make it to heaven. In the second image the believer   has security in the wrong place; a kind of automatic eternal   security that can get you to heaven another way than by the chain   of God's saving, persevering acts revealed in scripture.       Verse 5 points to a very different image. Remember, the   question we are asking is: "If you look now at the chain of   salvation (which connects new birth in the past with your   inheritance in the future) being forged this very day in your life   what do you see?       Verse 5 says, "&#91;We&#93; are &#91;now being&#93; protected   by the power of God through faith for a salvation ready to be   revealed in the last time." Now what image do you see of the chain   of salvation in that verse? Here's what I see.       Standing in the middle of this chasm which disappears into the   abyss so deep no one can see the bottom is God Almighty. Under his   right arm he is squeezing against his chest the chain of my   salvation that leads into the past and connects with election, the   death of Jesus, his resurrection and my new birth. Under his left   arm he is squeezing the chain of heaven. The end of the chain of   heaven hangs loosely over his left forearm waiting for the   eventual attachment to my life. The end of the other chain is in   his hands. And he is forging the necessary links of faithfulness   that will make the chain long enough to connect properly with the   chain of heaven.       Now there are two crucial differences between this image and   the other two:       A. One of the differences is that the last image seems to make   the security of the believer uncertain while the second image   seems to make it certain. The reason the last image could appear   to make our security uncertain is that there is no safety belt and   the links of the chain are not connected yet. Either there will be   links of faithfulness forged in our lives or we will not connect   with heaven. The Bible does not guarantee security at the expense   of faithfulness to Jesus. That seems to many to make our security   uncertain.       B. But the other difference is that God himself is holding the   chain and forging the links with infallible power. It is we who do   the acts of faithfulness--the chain of salvation is now being   forged in our lives--but it is God who "works in us to will and to   do his good pleasure" (Phil. 2:13).        What is God protecting his elect from?        Now let's check this out with verse 5: "&#91;We&#93; are   &#91;now being&#93; protected by the power of God through faith   for a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time."        Notice several things:               There is a salvation ready to be revealed. We are saved      now, but our salvation is not complete. There is an inheritance      imperishable, undefiled and unfading yet to be received. There      is much more grace and glory to be experienced (1:13; 4:13;      5:10). We are not yet across the chasm.                     There is danger on the way to salvation in heaven. We need      ongoing protection after our conversion. Our security does not      mean we are home free. There is a battle to be fought. And in      this battle we need protection and help far beyond what we can      supply for ourselves.                     Our protection comes from God. More specifically, from the      power of God. "&#91;We&#93; are &#91;now being&#93; protected      by the power of God." In verse 3 we saw that God causes the new      birth, and in verse 5 we see that God protects his children all      the way to heaven. So our security doesn't mean that there is      not battle, or that we don't have to win it, but that God will      fight for us with infallible skill and omnipotent power.                     The means God uses to protect us is faith. "&#91;We&#93;      are &#91;now being&#93; protected by the power of God through      faith." Now think with me carefully about this for a moment.      What is God protecting us from? That is, what, in the end, is      the only thing that can keep us from salvation ready to be      revealed in the last time?            Death won't keep us from salvation. It takes us straight to   heaven. So we don't need protection from that. Suffering won't   keep us from heaven. Verses 6-7 says suffering will refine our   faith. So that's not what we need protection from.       It's true we need protection from Satan "who prowls around like   a roaring lion seeking someone to devour" (1 Peter 5:8). And we   need protection from overwhelming temptations and "lusts that wage   war against the soul" (2:11). So we should pray, "Lead us not into   temptation, and deliver us from the evil one" (Matt. 6:13; cf. 1   Cor 10:13).       But why? What's the bottom line in the damage that these   enemies can do? What is the one thing that cuts us off from   heaven? The answer is unbelief. Not trusting God. Not living "by   faith in the Son of God who loved us and gave himself for us"   (Gal. 2:20).       So what does verse 5 mean then when it says we are "protected   &#91;from losing our final salvation&#93; by the power of God   through faith." It means that God's power protects us for   salvation by sustaining our faith. The only thing that can keep us   from heaven is forsaking our faith in Christ, and turning to other   hopes, other treasures. So to protect us God prevents that. He   inspires and nourishes and strengthens and builds our faith. And   in doing this he secures us against the only thing that could   destroy us; unbelief, lack of trust in God.       This is very different from the security of the safety belt.   Some people think that, because of some past experience, they have   a safety belt and can leave the forging of faith behind, drop off   into the chasm of sin and unbelief and just swing low over to the   promised land. Well, there is no safety belt. There is one way to   heaven: the way of persevering faith. And this is why verse 5 is   so important.       Our security is not in making heaven unconditional. Our   security is in God's infallible commitment to fulfill the   conditions of heaven.       Let me close with an experience that Peter had which taught him   this lesson very powerfully. On the night when Peter betrayed   Jesus, the Lord said to him, "Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has   demanded permission to sift you like wheat &#91;in other words to   press Peter through sieve of temptation to try to strain out his   faith&#93;; but I have prayed for you, that your faith may not   fail; and you, when once you have turned again, strengthen your   brothers" (Luke 22:31-32).       Jesus prayed that Peter's faith not fail utterly. That is why   Peter wept bitterly and returned from his sin. But to whom did   Jesus pray? To God, his Father. And what did he ask God to do? To   not let Peter's faith come to an end. So who forged the link of   faithfulness in Peter that awful night? God did. And who brought   him back from precipice of unbelief and gave him tears of remorse?   God did.       Peter knows first hand what he is talking about. Those who are   born of God "are protected by the power of God through   faith--through God's sustaining their faith--for a salvation ready   to be revealed in the last time. He caused us to be born again by   creating our faith; and he protects us on the way to heaven by   preserving our faith.       The chain of salvation is a God-forged chain. And therefore it   is gloriously and invincibly secure. We have a great God and a   great salvation!       
       For more on the preserving power of God in the life of the   believer see 1 Peter 4:19; 5:10; John 6:37-39; 10:27-30; 1 Cor.   1:8-9; Phil. 1:6; 1 Thess. 5:23-25; 2 Thess. 3:13; 2 Tim. 1:12;   Heb. 13:20-21; 1 John 2:19.       Copyright 1993 John Piper     Piper's Notes  
