  The Baptist General Conference has just passed ahistoric milestone.  On Thursday it approved a new constitution. On Friday it elected a new President, Robert Ricker.  And if we took a survey we would probably discoverthat dozens of churches within the BGC are on the brink of similarhistoric decisions.  Bethlehem, for one, will be facing majordecisions this fall concerning the building of a new sanctuary,and the revision of our governance structure.  The deacons have been studying the constitutionalissue for well over a year and the long range planning committee-- in one form or another -- has been in existence for almostthree years.  If I read the signs correctly both of these groupswill lay their recommendations before the church for our considerationin the next several months.  That's the institutional background for today's message. There is a personal background.  Two weeks ago I preached atIrvine Presbyterian church in California.  At the end of the serviceI had a chance to talk briefly with Jim Conway.  He's probablybest known for his writings about men in mid-life crisis.  We talked a little about Bethlehem -- that I havebeen here for seven years and that I have no dreams after Bethlehemexcept heaven.  He said, So you haven't hit your mid-lifecrisis yet?  I said, I don't know; I'm forty-one. He laughed and said, You're not there, yet.  The averageage is 42.5!  So what do we need institutionally and personallyat this particular point in our history?  From the institutionalstandpoint we will face the greatest change and challenge sincethe early '50's.  And from the personal standpoint I am supposedto hit the wall next summer and either become an insurance salesmanor buy a sailboat.  Well, I think what we need -- what we need as a churchand what I need as a 41 year old pastor who has been at Bethlehemseven years -- is to hear a clear and powerful statement fromGod about who we are and why we are here.  What is our identityand what is our destiny?  It is absolutely essential for long-termfruitful ministry that we be able to give clear, resounding Biblicalanswers to the questions: Who are we?  And why are we here?    There are many ways that the Bible says it.  Thismorning I want us to listen to a text that had never struck methe way it has in the last six or seven weeks.  The text is Acts15:16-18.  First let's get the context clearly before us.  It's about fifteen years since Jesus died and roseagain.  Some zealous Jewish Christians from Jerusalem make a tripto Antioch and begin to preach among the Gentile Christians: Unlessyou are circumcised according to the custom of Moses, you cannotbe saved (15:1).  This does not go over well with Paul and Barnabas. In fact, if we can judge from Paul's attitude in his letter tothe Galatians, the controversy was red hot.  The church decides to send Paul and Barnabas to theapostles and elders in Jerusalem to see if some doctrinal unitycan be achieved.  Luke records four phases of the controversy in Jerusalem:    In verse 5 he tells us what the Christian Phariseessaid: Gentiles must be circumcised.   In verses 7-11 he tells us what Peter said: Backat Cornelius' house God made no distinction between Jew and Gentilebut gave them the Holy Spirit and cleansed their hearts by faith. Both Jew and Gentile are saved through the grace of the LordJesus.   In verse 12 he tells us how God had done signsand wonders among the Gentiles through the hands of Paul and Barnabas.   Finally, Luke tells us in verses 13-21 how Jamesgave the concluding resolution that carried the day.     It's James' argument from the prophets that I wantus to look at this morning.  Let's begin reading at verse 14. James says,   Symeon (= Peter) has related how God first visitedthe Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his name.  Andwith this the words of the prophets agree, as it is written,   After this I will return, and I will rebuild thedwelling of David, which has fallen; I will rebuild its ruins,and I will set it up, that the rest of men may seek the Lord,and all the Gentiles who are called by my name, says the Lord,who has made the things known from of old.   Therefore my judgment is that we should not troublethose of the Gentiles who turn to God. . .  I have at least four questions to ask of this text:    What is this quotation from the OT prophets intendedto support?  Why is it brought in?   What does this prophecy mean in its OT contextof Amos 9?   How does this prophetic word support what Jamesis trying to say?   What does it have to say about who we are atBethlehem and why we are here?     1.  What is this quotation from the OT prophets intendedto support?  Why is it brought in?   The answer is given in verses 14 and 15.  Verse 15says, And with this the words of the prophets agree. . . And then James quotes the prophecy.  So James wants to show thatwhat he has just said is in agreement with prophecy: WithTHIS the words of the prophets agree.  So what does this refer to?  What isit that the prophets agree with?  THIS refers back to what hejust said in verse 14, namely, Symeon has related how Godfirst visited the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for hisname.  With THIS the words of the prophets agree.  So what is it that James wants to support with thisprophetic Scripture?  He wants to support the fact that in theministry of Peter God himself visited the Gentiles and by hisown initiative took out of them a people for his name.    God himself did the visiting and took a peoplefor himself;   the people he visited were uncircumcised Gentiles;  and the instrument he used to take them was a minister of the church.   For James those were the decisive truths that settledthe issue of whether uncircumcised Gentiles could be acceptedinto the people of God or not.  Could these truths be supported from prophetic Scripture? James clearly believes they can.  He gives a loose renderingof Amos 9:11-12.  But notice he does not claim to be quoting Amos. He says in verse 15: With this the words of the prophetsagree.  He uses the words of Amos to say what he believesall the prophets taught to one degree or another.  But let's go back now to the 9th chapter of Amosand try to answer our second question:    2.  What does this prophecy, that James cites inActs 15:16-18, mean in its OT context?   Let's start reading at Amos 9:8.  God is prophesyingjudgment upon his own people:   Behold, the eyes of the Lord God are upon the sinfulkingdom, and I will destroy it from the surface of the ground;except that I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob, saysthe Lord.    For lo, I will command, and shake the house of Israelamong all the nations as one shakes with a sieve, but no pebbleshall fall upon the earth.  All the sinners of my people shalldie by the sword, who say, Evil shall not overtake or meetus.     Then at verse 11 the focus turns from judgment torescue and rebuilding and hope:   In that day I will raise up the booth of David thatis fallen and repair its breaches, and raise up its ruins, andrebuild it as in the days of old; that they may possess the remnantof Edom and all the nations who are called by my name, says theLord who does this.   Now what is God saying here through his prophet Amos? He is saying that the time is coming when his anger will be turnedaway and that the ruined people will be restored.    It's PEOPLE that he has been talking about in thepreceding verses: All the sinners of my PEOPLE shall dieby the sword (v. 10).  And it is people that he has in mindin verse 12: That THEY may possess the remnant of Edom.. .  So I conclude that the repairing of the booth orthe tent of David in verse 11 is a graphic way of speaking ofthe restoration of his people to spiritual wholeness.  It is thepeople who have fallen into the ruin of sin and judgment.  Nowit is the people who will be repaired and rebuilt.  Then in verse 12 the purpose of that rebuilding isthat Edom, the typical hostile Gentile nation, might be possessedby the new, rebuilt people of God.  At first that might sound merely like defeat andsubjugation of Israel's enemies.  But look at the second halfof verse 12.  The purpose of repairing and rebuilding the sinfulpeople is not merely to possess the remnant of Edom, but to possessall the nations who are called by my name, says the Lord.  If defeat and subjugation were in view he would notsay that the target is the nations called by God's name.  Theseare not enemies.  People called by God's name are God's people. So the point in this text is not defeat and enslavement, butconversion and ingathering.  This is world missions in Amos 9:12,not world domination.  And just like James says, this is not unique to Amos. Isaiah 11:10,    In that day the root of Jesse shall stand as an ensignto the peoples; him shall the nations seek [this is not enslavement!],and his dwellings shall be glorious.   And Zechariah 2:11 says,   And many nations shall join themselves to the Lordin that day, and shall be my people; and I will dwell in the midstof you.   So the answer to our second question is that theprophecy James cites in Acts 15:16-18 means in its OT contextthat there is a day coming when God will return in favor to hispeople, repair them and rebuild them and make them a means togather in all the nations who are called by his name.  Now for question #3. . .    3.  How does this prophetic quotation support whatJames is trying to say?   Recall James' words to the Council in Jerusalem.They are summed up in Acts 15:14 --    through the ministry of Peter  God himself visited the uncircumcised Gentiles  and took out from them a people for his name.   Does the quotation from Amos agree with this?  Ifwe let the OT context be our guide, it does indeed!  First of all, James quotes God in verse 16, Iwill return, and I will rebuild the dwelling of David, which hasfallen; I will rebuild its ruins, and I will set it up. And we understand this to refer primarily to the restorationof God's people (especially the Jews).    Jesus came into the world and began to gather a truebelieving remnant of Israel.  First there were 12 apostles; thenthere were 5,000 converts in Jerusalem.  And so it spread as Godbegan to fulfill his promise to rebuild the dwelling of Davidand repair the ruins of his people.  Then James goes on in verse 17 and says that purposeof these rebuilt ruins was not to horde the blessing of God butto make a way for the rest of men to seek the Lord, specifically,all the Gentiles who are called by the name of the Lord.  So here's what James is saying:     Peter is part of the rebuilt ruins of the peopleof God; and, right in line with prophetic Scripture, he did not hordethe blessing of salvation.     And so he became the instrument by which God himself visited the Gentiles at the house of Cornelius.   And through this human instrument and this divine visitation God took out from the Gentiles a people for his own name.   So the answer to question #3 is that the quotationof Amos 9:11-12 hits the nail right on the head.  It supportsJames' main point by showing that God had promised to come andrebuild the ruins of his people and make those very people theinstrument by which he would reach the Gentile world -- the uncircumcisedworld -- and gather his elect (those who are called by his name)from every tribe and tongue and people and nation.  That leaves one last urgent question for this morning:    4.  What does this have to say about who we are andwhy we are here?   The answer from the text is very simple:    We are ruins in the process of being repairedand rebuilt by the grace of God,    and we are here that the rest of men may seekthe Lord, all the Gentiles who are called by his name.   But some one may ask, Didn't you imply that the rebuiltruins of the dwelling of David were converted Jews like Peterand not Gentiles like us?  The answer is yes, that's the way therebuilding starts.  But just as soon as the rebuilt dwelling beginsto fulfill its destiny described in verse 17 and Gentiles startto be gathered in, they too become part of the rebuilt ruins.  This is what Paul meant in Ephesians 2:19-20 whenhe said to the converted Gentiles -- you and me -- You areno longer strangers and sojourners, but you are fellow citizenswith the saints and members of the household of God, built uponthe foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himselfbeing the cornerstone.  So let me give the answer again.   Who are we at Bethlehem?  We are ruins -- we need to pause there and let thatsink in -- we are ruins. . . in the process of being repairedand rebuilt by the grace of God.   And why are we here?    The logic of verse 17 is unmistakable: it beginswith the glorious little world that (or: inorder that).  We are here THAT the rest of men may seekthe Lord, even all the Gentiles who are called by his name.   Now let me draw this message to a close by givingtwo practical applications of what we have seen.  1.  Let us be encouraged -- mightily encouraged --that the times of tearing down are over, and that we live in theday of divine rebuilding.  Let it sink into your mind that welive in a day when God's purpose is to rebuild the ruins of hispeople.  Specifically let it be an encouragement in your ownlife when you still feel very much ruined and fallen and brokendown like a booth in the wilderness.  Preach to yourself fromthis text that today is a day of repair and a day of rebuilding. God's will, revealed in prophetic Scripture and reaffirmed inthe apostolic word, is that we not languish in ruin and disrepair. He is eager to rebuild the ruins of your life.  And let this be an encouragement to pray for thechurch -- across this city, across the BGC, across the nationand around the world.  O how grievous it is to read in OperationWorld of the weakness and nominalism and leadership void in thechurches around the world.  This does not accord with the revealedwill of God for this age of salvation.    This is a time for lifting up what is fallen andrebuilding the ruins.  And so God has given us strong encouragementin this text to pray and work for the awakening and deepeningand strengthening of God's church around the world, and for anew day of power in the BGC.  But power for what?  That leads to the second andfinal application.  2.  If God is rebuilding the ruins of his peoplethat the rest of men may seek the Lord, -- if, asverse 17 says, that is God's purpose for rebuilding the ruinsof his church -- then let us be perfectly honest with ourselves:we will only experience the ongoing blessing of God if devoteourselves to helping the rest of mankind find the Lord.   If I have been on the right track, we now know whowe are, and why we are here in downtown Minneapolis.  We are ruins being rebuilt by the grace of God.  And we are here that the rest of men may seek theLord -- even all the Gentiles who are called by his name.  And my prayer for myself and for this church is thatthe crystal clear statement of who we are and why we are herewill give us great faith and courage to face the challenges ofthe fall, and will keep me from throwing my life away on a sailboatwhen I turn forty-two and a half.  
