  I want to try to answer three questions this morningwith regard to abortion:    What is happening? Why is it happening? What should our response be?    1.  What is happening?   When the American Medical Association was formedin 1847 abortion was commonly practiced before quickening. But through the efforts of the AMA and antiobscenity crusadersand (ironically) feminists, abortion became illegal every wherein the U.S. by 1900.  Abortions went underground or out of thecountry.  The key reversal of this legal situation came onJanuary 22, 1973 when the Supreme Court in Roe vs. Wade made thefollowing rulings.    that no state may make laws regulating abortionduring the first three months of pregnancy except to provide thatthey be done by licensed physicians.  that laws regulating abortion between the thirdmonth and the time of viability are constitutional only in sofar as they are aimed at safeguarding the health of mothers.  that laws relating to the time from viability(6-6 1/2 months) until the end of the pregnancy may not preventabortion if it is to preserve the life or health of themother.  that the health of the mother includesall factors -- physical, emotional, psychological, familialand the woman's age -- relevant to the well-being of the patient.   Then on July 1, 1976 the Court extended its originaldecision to affirm:    that abortions may be performed on minor daughterswithout the knowledge or consent of their parents, and  that women (whether married or unmarried) mayobtain abortions without the knowledge or consent of the baby'sfather.   In effect, therefore, the law of our land today isthat any abortion is legal in America until birth if the mothercan give reason that the pregnancy or the child will be an excessiveburden or stress on her well-being.    Since that ruling 14 years ago Thursday, about 20,000,000babies have been aborted in America.  That is the first answer to what is happening.  Thesecond answer  moves from laws and statistics to the event itself. Here is an account taken from the Minneapolis Tribune (May 29,1976) of a married woman who got an abortion at a Minneapolisclinic.  Though I would march myself into blisters for a woman'sright to exercise the option of motherhood, I discovered therein the waiting room that I was not the modern woman I thoughtI was.   When my name was called, my body felt so heavy thenurse had to help me into the examining room.  I waited for myhusband to burst through he door and yell Stop, butof course he didn't.  I concentrated on three black spots in theacoustic ceiling until they grew in size to the shape of saucers,while the doctor swabbed my insides with antiseptic.  You're going to feel a burning sensation now,he said, injecting Novocain into the neck of the womb.  The painwas swift and severe, and I twisted to get away from him.  Hewas hurting my baby, I reasoned, and the black saucers quiveredin the air.  Stop, I cried, Please stop. He shook his head, busy with his equipment.  It's too lateto stop now, he said.  It'll just take a few moreseconds.  What good sports we women are.  And how obedient. Physically the pain passed even before the hum of the machinesignals that the vacuuming of my uterus was completed, my babysucked up like ashes after a cocktail party.  Ten minutes startto finish.  And I was back on the arm of the nurse.  There were 12 beds in the recovery room.  Each onehad a gaily flowered  draw sheet and soft green or blue thermalblanket.  It was all very feminine.  Lying on these beds for anhour or more were the shocked victims of their sex life, theirfull wombs now stripped clean, their futures less encumbered.  . . .  Finally, then, it was time for me to leave. . . Myhusband was slumped in the waiting room, clutching single yellowrose wrapped in wet paper towel and stuffed into a Baggie.  We didn't talk all the way home. . .  My husband and I are back to planning our summervacation now and his career switch.  It certainly does make more sense not to be havinga baby right now -- we say that to each other all the time.  ButI have this ghost now.  A very little ghost that only appearswhen I'm seeing something beautiful, like the full moon on theocean last weekend.  And the baby waves at me.  And I wave atthe baby. Of course, we have room, I cry to the ghost.Of course, we do.  That is a second way to answer the question of whatis happening in our culture.  There is a third.  Is this woman overly sentimental in seeing avery little ghost when she looks at something beautiful? Was her baby anything like a real person?  Suppose she had missedone period and let it go.  Then when the second passed she testedand discovered she was pregnant.  By the time she goes to theclinic the baby is 7 or 8 weeks old.  Here is a description ofher baby from Dr. Paul Rockwell of Troy, NY:  Eleven years ago while giving an anesthetic for aruptured ectopic pregnancy (at two months gestation) I was handedwhat I believed was the smallest living human ever seen. . . Withinthe sac was a tiny human male swimming extremely vigorously inthe amniotic fluid. . . This tiny human was perfectly developed,with long, tapering fingers, feet and toes.  It was almost transparent,as regards to the skin, and the delicate arteries and veins wereprominent to the ends of the fingers.  The baby was extremely alive and swam about the sacapproximately one time per second, with a natural swimmer's stroke.  It is my opinion that if the lawmakers, and peoplerealized that very vigorous life is present it is possible thatabortion would be found more objectionable than euthanasia. (Froman MCCL pamphlet, Their Lives -- A Single Issue)  Contemporary medical technology gives every womanand man who is willing to look a clear picture what happens inabortion at every level.  In this case it is the taking of thislittle life with arms and legs and fingers and toes and head andeyes and nose and a heart that has been beating for a month anda body not quite as long as your little finger, and crushes itor poisons it, or starves or in some other way takes away itslife.  That is the third way of describing what is happeningtoday.  Let me give one more answer to this first question.  Canwe say anything from Scripture about what is happening when alife in the womb is aborted?  Let me direct your considerationto two texts, one familiar and one perhaps not.  Psalm 139:13   Thou didst form my inward parts, thou didst knitme together in my mother's womb.     The least we can draw out of this text is that theformation of the life of a person in the womb is the work of God,and it is not merely a mechanical process but a work on the analogyof weaving or knitting: Thou didst knit me together in mymother's womb.  The life of the unborn  is the knittingof God, and what he is knitting is a human being in his own image,unlike any other creature in the universe.  The other less known text is in the book of Job. Job is protesting that he has not rejected the plea of any ofhis servants, even though in that culture many thought that servantswere non-persons and only property.  The thing to watch for hereis how Job argues.  Job 31:13-15   13) If I have rejected the cause of my manservantor my maidservant, when they brought a complaint against me; 14)what then shall I do when God rises up?  When he makes inquiry,what shall I answer him?  15) Did not he who made me in the wombmake him?  And did not one fashion us in the womb?   Verse 15 gives the reason why Job would be withoutexcuse if he treated his servant as less than a human equal. The issue isn't really that one may have been born free and theother born in slavery.  The issue goes back before birth.  WhenJob and his servants were being fashioned in the womb the keyperson at work was God -- the same God, shaping both the fetus-Joband the fetus of his servants.  It is irrelevant that Job's motherwas probably a freedwoman and the mother of the servant was probablya bondwoman.  Why?  Because mothers are not the main nurturersand fashioners during the time of gestation -- God is, the sameGod for both slave and free.  That's the premise of Job's argument.  So both Psalm 139 and Job 31 emphasize God as theprimary workman -- nurturer, fashioner, knitter, Creator -- inthis time of gestation.  Why is that important?  It's importantbecause God is the only One who can create personhood.  Mothersand fathers can contribute some impersonal egg and some impersonalsperm, but only God creates independent personhood.  So when theScripture emphasizes that God is the main nurturer and shaperin the womb, it is stressing that what is happening in the wombis the unique work of God, namely, the making of a person.  Fromthe Biblical point of view gestation is the unique work of Godfashioning personhood.  We can argue till doomsday about when this littlebeing becomes a whole person.  That argument willprobably never be settled.  But this we can say, I think, withgreat confidence: what is happening in the womb is a unique person-formingwork of God, and only God knows how deeply and mysteriously thecreation of personhood is woven into the making of a body.  Andtherefore it is arbitrary and unwarranted to assume that at somepoint in the knitting together  of this person its destructionis not an assault on the prerogatives of God the Creator.  Letme say that again positively: the destruction of conceived humanlife -- whether embryonic, fetal, or viable -- is an assault onthe unique person-forming work of God.  And therefore to the degree that we recognize evenin fallen personhood a unique value, because of its potentialto glorify God with conscious obedience and praise, to that degreewill we shrink back with reverence and fear from assaulting orobstructing the divine work of God fashioning such a person inthe womb.  So the fourth way of answering our first questionis to say that what is going on in America today is by and largea cavalier, irreverent assault on the unique person-forming workof God.  What God is knitting together into personhood, man istearing asunder as something less significant than flesh and bones.    2. Now the second question is Why?  Why is this happeningwith unprecedented frequency and flippancy in our day?   One answer is given in James 4:2 (following the punctuationof the RSV and NASB):    You desire and do not have; so you kill.     Desire what?  More financial security perhaps ormore leisure or more education or more unrestrained teenage sexactivity or more career options or the avoidance of a child whomay be handicapped, or perhaps just less hassle for the next 18years.  We desire, and the desires may be good or bad.  But then comes the pregnancy -- the beginning ofa divine work of person-forming in the womb.  And the result? The desires are threatened.  We desire and then, because of thepregnancy, we cannot have.  The child is going to cost money;or cramp our travel plans and our leisure; or keep us out of school;or hinder our career advancement; or consume thousands of hourswith a possible handicap; and limit our freedom in a hundred waysfor the next 18 years or more.  Now what?  James says, You desire and do nothave so you kill.  We kill marriages and we kill unbornbabies because they cut across our desires; they stand in theway of our unencumbered self-enhancement.  And we live in a culturewhere self-enhancement and self-advancement is god.  And if self-enhancementis god, then the One who is at work in the womb shaping a personin his own image is not God and the assault on his work is notsacrilegious, but obedience to the god of self.    Why has abortion on demand reached such awesome proportionsin our land?  Because at beneath all the rhetoric it is the agendaof Satan, who, according to Jesus, has been a murderer from thebeginning (John 8:44).  The apostle Paul said that when we lovethe world and follow its desires, we are following the princeof the power of the air (Eph. 22-3).  Many of you know Steve Calvin, a physician with aspecialization in obstetrics.  He was a member of our church untilhe took an appointment in Tucson at the University of Arizonaalong side his involvement in a Hispanic HMO and a Crisis PregnancyCenter.  He is an articulate opponent of abortion on demand.  He wrote me a letter a couple years ago and said,  To better know the opposition I checked out the book____________ by ____________(1983), the premier text on the medical,social and logistical aspects of this grisly business.  Aftertwo days of reading and analysis. . .  I'm convinced we are dealinghere with forces of spiritual darkness that enslave men's minds.   And so James counsels us in verse 7,   Submit yourselves therefore to God.  Resist the deviland he will flee from you. Draw near to God and he will draw nearto you.   A heart that is deeply submitted to God no matterwhat, and reverences his word and his work above all worldly self-enhancement,will find the grace (as verse 6 says: he gives more grace!)not only to conquer the frustrated desires that lead to killing,but also to be transformed with a new set of desires that findtrue and everlasting joy in submission to the one and only trueGod who speaks with authority in the Bible, and always for ourgood.  So the answer to the second question, why abortionabounds is that men and women are not submitted to their Creatorbut instead have made self-enhancement their god, have fallenin step with the the ruler of this world, and so are willing todestroy virtually anything that stands in their way of unencumberedself-advancement.   3.  The final question is what should our responsebe?   I will mention five kinds of things:  First, submit yourselves to God.  Draw near to him. Live by the power of his grace.  Let him shape your desires ratherthan the world and the feisty, self-centered temperament of ourculture.  Let your life and your mouth bear witness to the realdelights of knowing and trusting and obeying and being shapedand guided by the Creator of all things who loved us and gavehimself for us.  Be a Christian -- and a visible and audible one. The world needs you so badly.  Second, pray earnestly and regularly for awakeningin the churches that will spill over in city-wide and nation-wideand world-wide evangelization of the lost and reformation of life.  Third, use your imagination to see what abortionreally is!  Fight against the kind of social stupor that grippedNazi Germany -- the feeling that the problem is so huge and sohorrendous an so out of our control that I just can't be wrongto let it be.  Use your imagination to see and feel what is reallyhappening behind those sterile clinic doors.    If you could see each little handiwork of God andwhat it looks like when it is being crushed or poisoned or starved,you would say, this can't be happening.  Civilized people do notdo this!  The children will not be saved and God's work will notbe reverenced  without an act of sustained sympathetic imagination. Otherwise it is out of sight out of mind -- just like Dachau,Buchenwald, Belsen, and Auschwitz.  It just couldn't be happening. And so we act as if it isn't.  If you faint in the day of adversity, your strengthis small.  Rescue those who are being taken away to death; holdback those who are stumbling to the slaughter.  If you say, Behold,we did not know this, does not he who weighs the heart perceiveit?  Does not he who keeps watch over your souls know it, andwill he not requite man according to his work? (Proverbs 24:10-12)  Fourth, support alternatives to abortion with yourmoney and time and prayers.  I refer you to the New Life HomesCrisis Pregnancy Center sponsored by the Greater Minneapolis Associationof Evangelicals, and the table that they will have in the hallwayafter between the services (phone: 920 1006).  Finally, use your democratic privileges of free speechand representation and demonstration to press for legal protectionfor the unborn.    One of the strongest arguments against legal enactmentsto protect the unborn is the claim that legal constraints withoutwidespread social consensus is tyranny.  And there is no widespreadsocial consensus regarding the personhood of the unborn.  The argument loses much of its force when appliedto the historical situation of slaves in this country.  On March6, 1857 the Supreme Court, in Dred Scott vs. Stanford, ruled thatno act of Congress or territorial legislature could make lawsbanning slavery.  The fundamental argument was that salves arenot free and equal persons but the property of their masters.   The ruling is analogous to Rowe vs. Wade becausetoday no state may make a law banning abortion to protect theunborn.  The argument is similar: basically because the unbornare at the sovereign disposal of their mothers and do not havepersonal standing in their own right.  There was no consensus in this country on the personhood and rights of salves.  We were split down the middle.  Butthe issue was so fundamental that the states went to war and inthe end the Lincoln administration overturned the Dred Scott decision. And today 130 years later we look back with amazing consensus and marvel at the blindness of our forefathers.  May we not dare to believe that by the grace of Godand the perseverance of his people in prayer and piety and politicalpressure there could emerge in the coming decades a consensusfor life, and that the 21st century could look back on our generationwith the same dismay that we look back on the slave laws of thisland and on the concentration camps of World War II.  Nationwidereformation has happened before -- with Wilberforce in Englandand Lincoln in America.  It can happen again.  May God help us!  
