 June 25, 1989    Bethlehem Baptist Church    John Piper, Pastor    
    AFFIRMING THE GOODNESS OF MANHOOD    AND WOMANHOOD IN ALL OF LIFE    (1 Timothy 2:13-14)    
    
    I promised last Sunday that I would pick up today where we left   off in 1 Timothy 2:13. You recall that in verses 11-12 Paul said,   "Let a woman learn in quietness with all submissiveness. I permit   no woman to teach or to have authority over men; but to be in   quietness." After studying the words "quietness" and "teach" and   "authority", we came to the conclusion that the kind of teaching   which is inappropriate for women is the teaching that is part of   expressing the authority spoken of here in verse 12.    
    What authority is being spoken of here? The clue was found in   this: the two things that are mentioned here as inappropriate for   women (teaching and exercising authority over men) are the very   two things that define the job of an elder in the church &#151; to   govern and to teach. This is most easily seen in 1 Timothy 5:17.   Elders (=pastors, overseers) are charged with two spheres of   responsibility: governance and the guardianship (or stewardship)   of doctrine.    
    Therefore the authority of 1 TImothy 2:12 is most probably the   governing authority of the eldership, and the simplest way to   describe what is inappropriate for women from this verse is to say   that Paul did not think it was appropriate for women to be elders   in the local church.    
    We summed it up with two definitions: of authority (v. 12) and   submission (v. 11).    
    "Authority" refers to the divine calling of spiritual, gifted men   to take primary responsibility as elders for Christ-like,   servant-leadership, and teaching in the church.    
    "Submission" refers to the divine calling of the rest of the   church, both men and women, to honor and affirm the leadership and   teaching of the elders and to be equipped by them for the hundreds   of various ministries available to men and women in the service of   Christ.    
    These definitions are intentionally parallel to the definitions of   headship and submission and marriage which we learned from   Ephesians&yuml;5:    
    Headship is the divine calling of a husband to take primary   responsibility for Christ-like, servant-leadership, protection and   provision in the home.    
    Submission is the divine calling of a wife to honor and affirm her   husband's leadership and help carry it through according to her   gifts.    
    The reason this is important to see is that both in the case of   church order and family order Paul is basing his teaching on God's   original order in creation. Paul is not arbitrarily choosing roles   for men and women, nor is he simply adapting to the cultural   expectations of the day. He is saying that there is something   about the way God set things up in the beginning that makes this   kind of order good. In other words true manhood and true womanhood   mesh more effectively in ministry &#151; they are better preserved   and better nurtured and more fulfilled and more fruitful &#151; in   this pattern of home and church than in any other pattern &#151;   because God made it to be this way. It is part of His gracious   design for the good of men and women.    
    Now that brings us to verses 13 and 14 of 1 Timothy 2. In these   verses Paul gives two reasons for saying that men, and not women,   should bear the primary responsibility for leading and teaching   the church.    
    For Adam was formed first, then Eve; and Adam was not deceived,   but the woman was deceived and became a transgressor.    
    There are two reasons given here. Let's take them one at a time.   First in verse 13, "Adam was formed first, then Eve." The point   here is very simple, and we dealt with it already in the message   from Genesis 2 and 3 (and handled objections there). Paul sees in   God's order of creation a teaching concerning the responsibility   of man to be a leader in relationship to woman. God created man   first, put him in the garden, gave him the responsibility over the   garden and the moral pattern for life in the garden, and then   created woman as his partner and assistant to help him carry that   responsibility into action.    
    In other words when Paul teaches that men should bear the primary   responsibility for governance and teaching in the church he is   basing it not on any culturally temporary situation at Ephesus but   on something woven into the fabric of manhood and womanhood by   virtue of our creation. Not on the basis of sin, but on the basis   of how God wanted it to be before there was any sin &#151; for the   good of his people, both women and men.    
    The second point from verse 14 is this: "And Adam was not   deceived, but the woman was deceived and became a transgressor."   Now most commentators in the history of the church have taken this   very simply to mean that women are more vulnerable to deception,   and therefore should not be given the responsibility of leading   and teaching the church. My guess is from what I have read and   experienced that women are more vulnerable to deception in some   kinds of situations and men are more vulnerable to deception in   other kinds of situations.    
    Let me insert a parenthesis here that I think will really help us   in talking about the differences of manhood and womanhood.   Whenever anyone asks me if I think women are, say, weaker than   men, or smarter than men, or more easily frightened than men or   something like that, I almost always answer like this: I think   women are weaker in some ways and men are weaker in some ways; and   women are smarter in some ways and men are smarter in some ways;   and women are more easily frightened in some kinds of   circumstances and men are more easily frightened in other kinds of   circumstances.    
    It's real dangerous to put negative values on the so called   weaknesses that each of us has. Because God intends for all the   "weaknesses" that characteristically belong to man to call forth   and highlight woman's strengths. And God intends for all the   "weaknesses" that characteristically belong to woman to call forth   and highlight man's strengths.    
    So even if this verse means that in some situations women are   characteristically more vulnerable to deception, that would not   settle anything about the quality or worth of manhood and   womanhood.    
    Statistics I just read say that six times more men than women are   arrested for drug abuse. Ten times more men than women are   arrested for drunkenness. 83% of serious crimes in America are   committed by men. Twenty-five times more men than women are in   jail. Virtually all rape is committed by men.    
    I point that out to show that boasting in either sex as superior   to the other is a folly. Men and women as God created them are   different in hundreds of ways. And I believe that being created   equally in the image of God means this: that when the so-called   weakness and strength columns for manhood and for womanhood are   added up, the value at the bottom is going to be the same for   each. And when you take those two columns from each side and lay   them on top of each other, God intends them to be the perfect   complement to each other, so that when life together is considered   (and I don't just mean married life), so-called the weaknesses of   manhood and the so-called weaknesses of womanhood don't make the   whole weaker but stronger.    
    Is the eye of a needle really nothing but air? Or is it the   indispensable "nothing" that makes the needle work? Is hunger   nothing but a pitiful need and an empty stomach? Or is it the   messenger of health and the seasoning of our food? If you believe   that manhood and womanhood are to complement rather than duplicate   each other, and if you believe that the way God made us is good,   then you will be very slow to gather a list of typical male   weaknesses or a list of typical female weaknesses and draw a   conclusion that either is of less value than the other.    
    End parenthesis.    
    Now having said all of that, let me take you back to Genesis 3 to   show you what I think 1 Timothy 2:14 means when it says, "Adam was   not deceived, but the woman was deceived and became a   transgressor."    
    The first thing to notice in Genesis 3:1 is that Satan in the form   of a serpent spoke to the woman and not the man. "Now the serpent   was more subtle than any other wild creature that the Lord God had   made. He said to the woman . . ." Paul saw this, and believed it   had significance.    
    The second thing to notice is that Adam is evidently with Eve   while Satan is talking to her. When we come to verse six and the   woman is about to eat of the forbidden fruit the verse says (most   literally from the NASB), "When the woman saw that the tree was   good for food, and that it was a delight to the eyes, and that the   tree was desirable to make one wise, she took from its fruit and   ate; and she gave also to her husband with her (NIV: who was with   her) and he ate." It does not say that she went to get him. It   does not say that he arrived on the scene after the serpent was   gone. It moves directly from the words of temptation to the act of   eating and says that the man was with her.    
    The third thing to notice is that God disapproves not only of the   eating of the fruit but of the way the man and woman related to   each other here. In Genesis 3:17 God reprimands man like this:   "Because you have listened to the voice of your wife, and have   eaten of the tree of which I commanded you, 'You shall not eat of   it,' cursed is the ground because of you." The words, "You   listened to the voice of your wife," are very significant. There   is no record in chapter three that she said anything to Adam   directly. But there is good reason to believe that Adam was there   listening to her interchange with the serpent, and falling into   line with her.    
    So what we saw several weeks ago was that God's reprimand is not   merely a reprimand that Adam ate the forbidden fruit but also that   he forsook his responsibility to be the leader and the moral   guardian of the home. Satan's subtlety is that he knew the created   order God had ordained for the good of the family, and he   deliberately defied it by ignoring the man and taking up his   dealings with the woman. Satan put her in the position of   spokesman and leader and defender. And at that moment both the man   and the woman slipped from their innocence and let themselves be   drawn into a pattern of relating that to this day is   destructive.    
    I think this is what Paul means in 1 Timothy 2:14. Let me try to   paraphrase it to bring this out. "Adam was not deceived (that is,   Adam was not approached by the deceiver and did not carry on   direct dealings with the deceiver) but the woman was deceived and   became a transgressor (that is, she was the one who took up   dealings with the deceiver and was led through her direct   interaction with him into deception and transgression).    
    If this is right, then the main point is not that the man is   undeceivable or that the woman is more deceivable; the point is   that when God's order of leadership is repudiated it brings damage   and ruin. Men and women are both more vulnerable to error and sin   when they forsake the order that God has intended.    
    So Paul's argumentation in 1 Timothy 2:11-14 is that men ought to   bear primary responsibility for leadership and teaching in the   church (that is, be the elders): 1) because in creating man first   God taught that men should take responsibility for leadership in   relation to woman and 2) because the fall of Adam and Eve shows   that the neglect of this divine pattern puts men and women in a   more vulnerable position and leads to transgression.    
    Let me close by saying a few words about the relationships between   men and women in general apart from marriage and church order. The   fact that the meaning of manhood and womanhood is rooted in   creation shows that it is relevant in all of life, not just   marriage and church. Books could be written on this. So I am   taking a big risk in a few minutes of very selective   application.    
    1. A word to single men in personal relationships with single   women. First, let's not pity ourselves too much over the fact that   most young men grew up in homes where dad was not a great model   for how to be a strong spiritual servant-leader. Let's grow up and   stop shifting responsibility. Here we are with all our male   weaknesses and insecurities and we have some things to learn and   they can be learned. We can do what God expects of us, if we trust   Him.    
    Namely, He expects that single men in relationship to single women   will bear primary responsibility for a pattern of initiative. I   say pattern because a man's responsibility is not compromised by   occasional initiatives of women, for example, to get some guys   together. But I can say with complete confidence that almost no   women want that to be the pattern. And God doesn't.    
    I think the reason many guys do not take this kind of initiative   is that they are afraid of rejection. That certainly was true for   me. Things haven't changed much. I think the only reason I am   married today is because of an accident that God made happen. Noel   and I found ourselves in a fine arts room in the basement of   Fischer Hall with several common friends and accidentally talked   for two hours. And that was that.    
    From nine years of watching the single scene at Bethlehem I'll   tell you what I see and what I hear: there are a lot of   intelligent, attractive, spiritual single women in this church who   are not church hopping to find husbands and who trust God enough   to be a happy single person if that is God's will. But 99% of   these women would not mind it if a group of guys in this church   took the initiative to get together with a group of them. (Twins   game. Picnic in the park. Rent a good video and have pizza. Visit   old-folks home. Take some inner city kids to the zoo.)    
    I stress the group approach just because the emotional stakes of   being rejected are so much higher when you go it alone. It seems   far more natural and helpful to me to let individual relationships   grow out of a lot of group gatherings. And in both kinds of   relationships it is the men who bear the responsibility for the   pattern of initiative.    
    (And don't let your fears and inadequacies hinder you. The first   time I ever tried to put my arm on the seat behind Noel I elbowed   her in the eye. And look at us! Twenty years of marriage and I can   hardly wait for her to get back from Guatemala.)    
    2. The one other thing I have time to say is something very brief   about the issue of women in the work place. What about leadership   of men there?    
    My answer is probably going to be dissatisfyingly general rather   than specific. But that's because the Bible does not address this   as clearly as marriage and the church and because the nature of   leadership in many jobs is so fuzzy.    
    I give my answer in the form of a principle. Leadership can be   measured on two scales or continuums: on a scale of directive to   non-directive and on a scale of personal to impersonal. Let me   illustrate.    
    Personal-Impersonal    
    A woman who designs the traffic patterns of city streets exerts   remarkable leadership over all the drivers in that she determines   how they drive. But this leadership is very impersonal. On the   other hand the relationship between a husband and a wife is very   personal. All leadership falls somewhere on the scale between very   impersonal (little personal contact) and very personal (a lot of   personal contact).    
    Directive-Nondirective    
    A drill sergeant is the essence of directive leadership. On the   other hand non-directive leadership is much closer to entreaty and   suggestion. A good example of non-directive leadership is when   Abigail talked David out of killing Nabal (1 Samuel 25:23-35). She   was totally successful in guiding David's behavior but did it in a   very non-directive way.    
    My principle then is this: To the degree that a woman's leadership   of man is personal it needs to be non-directive. And to the degree   that it is directive it needs to be impersonal. To the degree that   a woman consistently offers directive, personal leadership to a   man, to that degree will his God-given manhood &#151; his sense of   responsibility in the relationship &#151; be compromised. What's   at stake every time a man and a woman relate to each other is not   merely competence (that is very naive), but also whether God-given   manhood and womanhood are affirmed in the dynamics of the   relationship.    
    I feel like what I have done in this series is simply show you   that there is a beautiful ballet to learn and an exciting drama to   be a part of. It's more beautiful and more exciting because we are   so different as male and female. My challenge to you is that you   now take up the script of God's word and ask him to help you learn   your personal part. The world is in desperate need to see what the   true drama of manhood and womanhood really looks like.       
        Copyright 1989, 1998 John Piper      Piper's   Notes            
