     June 21, 1998    Bethlehem Baptist Church   John Piper, Pastor      
       The Gospel Is the Power of God  unto Salvation       (Romans 1:16)      
           For I am not ashamed of the gospel,    for it is the power of God for salvation to everyone who believes, to the Jew first and    also to the Greek.        
          Be Shamed, but not Ashamed       Last week I focused on the first  words of Romans 1:16, For I am not ashamed of the gospel. I tried to make  plain that there is a difference between being  shamed for  the gospel and being  ashamed    of  the gospel. If you are a faithful Christian, you will be shamed for the gospel.  That is, you will be the target of shaming behavior. But there is a very good reason why  you do not have to be ashamed when that happens.     I compared Paul&#146;s reason with Jesus&#146; reason for not being  ashamed when they were shamed for the gospel. Hebrews 12:2 says, For the joy set  before Him [Jesus] endured the cross, despising the shame. The shaming behavior  against Jesus was as ugly and cruel and demeaning as it gets. But instead of letting the  shame eat him up, or make him ashamed, or turn him into someone as weak and ugly as his  shamers, he fixed his heart on the joy set before him. In other words, the assured triumph  of his death and resurrection to save sinners and vindicate his righteousness and bring  him home to God kept him from being ashamed or disobedient. When he was tempted to feel  ashamed, he focused his mind on the joy set before him. He endured short-term pain because  of long-term gain.    And Paul was like that. He said, I am not ashamed of the  gospel, &#150; I am not ashamed of the message and the reality of Christ crucified  for sinners and raised with power and saving all who trust in him. Why not? Because  [the gospel] is the power of God for [unto] salvation to everyone who  believes. This is the same way that Jesus overcame feelings of shame when he was  shamed for the gospel. Jesus looked to the joyful triumph of his cross and resurrection;  Paul looked to the joyful triumph of the gospel in eternal salvation.    We do not avoid feelings of shame by altering the gospel to make it  popular and inoffensive (see I Corinthians 1:18). We avoid feelings of shame by  remembering that the gospel is going to be vindicated in the end. We remind ourselves that  the gospel alone brings forgiven sinners to final, everlasting joy. Nothing in the world  can do this except the gospel of Jesus Christ. Judaism, Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam &#150;  they do not have a Savior who can solve the problem of separation from a holy God through  sin, and offer sinners hope by grace and not works. Only one message saves sinners and  brings them safely into the presence of God &#150; the gospel of Jesus Christ. It alone is  the power of God unto salvation.     Therefore, Paul would say &#150; Jesus himself would say &#150; suffer,  yes. Be misunderstood, yes. Be shamed, yes. But do not be  ashamed . Because the  message of God&#146;s saving work in Christ is the only final triumphant message in the  world. Short-term pain. Long-term gain. For the joy set before you, for the salvation that  only the gospel can gain, take up your cross, follow Jesus and despise the shame.    
       The Gospel Is the Power of God  unto Salvation       Now today I want to dwell on the  words, for it [the gospel] is the power of God for salvation to everyone who  believes. And I will take up only one question: What is this salvation that the  gospel so powerfully brings about? We will see in answering this how our faith relates to  the gospel in bringing about our salvation.    There are other crucial questions, especially the question of how the  gospel becomes the power to save. But that is the point of verse 17, which we will plan to  take up on August 9. The gospel . . . is the power of God unto salvation . . .  for   [= because] in it the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith &#150;  that&#146;s why the gospel is the power of God to salvation.    So the question today is: What is this salvation that the gospel so  powerfully brings about? The gospel is the power of God for [unto] salvation.  Does this mean, The gospel is the power of God to win converts? Now I do think  that is true, but I don&#146;t think that is what this statement means.     The reason I think it is true that the gospel converts people &#150;  brings them to faith and repentance &#150; is because Romans 10:17 says, So faith  comes   from hearing, and hearing by the word of Christ. And 1 Peter 1:23-25 says,  You have been born again not of seed which is perishable but imperishable,   through  the living and enduring word of God. . . . And this is the word which was preached to  you. So it is true that we are born of God and converted by means of hearing the  powerful word of God, the gospel.     And it&#146;s true that this conversion is called salvation  in the New Testament. For example, Ephesians 2:8-9: For by grace you have been  saved   through faith; and that not of yourselves, it is   the gift of God; not as a result  of works, so that no one may boast. So conversion to Christ by faith is called  being saved. If you are a believer in Christ this morning, you have been  saved. The book of Romans should be precious beyond words to you, because, like no  other book in the Bible, it unfolds for you what has already happened in God&#146;s saving  you &#150; your election, your predestination, your calling, your justification, your  sanctification, and the obedience of faith. These are all part of the salvation that is  already true of you through faith.    
       T he  F inal  T riumph  of the  G ospel        But what is the salvation  that Paul has in mind in Romans 1:16 when he says, For [the gospel] is the power of  God  for salvation  to everyone who believes? I think he has in mind not  primarily the first event of conversion, but primarily  the final triumph of the gospel  in bringing believers to eternal safety and joy in the presence of a holy and glorious God .  There are four reasons why I think this is what he means. Looking at these reasons is the  best way to unpack the meaning of the verse.                                       1. The power of the gospel is what frees          us from being ashamed of the gospel                               The first reason is that the  power of the gospel to bring about salvation is what frees us from being ashamed of the  gospel. I am not ashamed of the gospel, for it is the power of God for  salvation. But if this meant only that the gospel has the power to make converts,  why would that solve the shame problem? Lots of religions make converts. Lots of different  religious and secular movements win people over to their faith. When Paul said that the  gospel has such a powerful effect that you don&#146;t have to be ashamed of it, did he  simply mean that it does what other religions do: win converts? I don&#146;t think so.     Jesus triumphed over shame by looking at the future joy that was set  before him as he died. I think this is what Paul, as well, has in mind in Romans 1:16. You  don&#146;t have to be ashamed of the gospel because it doesn&#146;t just make converts; it  saves those converts utterly. It brings them to final safety and ever-increasing joy in  the presence of a glorious and holy God forever and ever. This is what makes us bold with  the gospel &#150; not that it can make converts; any religion can do that &#150; but that  it is the only truth in the world that can really save people forever and bring them to  everlasting joy with God.    
                                       2. Salvation is          future-oriented elsewhere in Paul and the New Testament                               The second reason I think  salvation in verse 16 refers to  the final triumph of the gospel in bringing  believers to eternal safety and joy in the presence of a holy and glorious God , is  that the phrase for salvation or unto salvation has this  future-oriented meaning elsewhere in Paul and other New Testament writers.    For example, in 2 Thessalonians 2:13 Paul says, God has chosen  you from the beginning  for salvation  through sanctification by the Spirit and faith  in the truth. Now here, salvation is not just what happens at conversion, which  leads  to  sanctification, but salvation is what comes later  through   sanctification, and is in the future. In other words, salvation is the future  triumph that brings the saint into God&#146;s presence with everlasting joy.    Or again, in 2 Corinthians 7:10, Paul speaks to Christians who are  already converted and saved, but need fresh repentance for their sins: The sorrow  that is according to the will of God produces a repentance without regret,  unto  salvation , but the sorrow of the world produces death. Here again unto  salvation refers not to conversion, but to the final, future state of safety and joy  in the presence of God. (See also 2 Timothy 3:15.)    Similarly, Hebrews 9:28 says, Christ . . . will appear a second  time  for salvation  . . . to those who eagerly await Him. This final, complete  salvation happens at the Second Coming. 1 Peter 1:5 says, [Believers] are protected  by the power of God through faith  for salvation  ready to be revealed in the last  time. This salvation is ready to be revealed in the last time. It is not  conversion. It is the last great work of God to rescue us and bring us to safety and joy  in his presence forever.    In Romans 5:9-10, Paul talks about this future salvation as rescue from  the final wrath of God: Much more then, having now been justified by His blood  [that&#146;s the present reality of salvation!], we  shall be saved from the wrath of  God  through Him. For if while we were enemies we were reconciled to God through the  death of His Son [here again is the present reality of salvation!], much more, having been  reconciled,  we shall be saved  by His life. In other words, the full  experience of salvation, in Paul&#146;s thinking, is still future. Romans 13:11:  Salvation is nearer to us than when we believed.    So when Paul says in Romans 1:16 that [the gospel] is the power  of God unto salvation, I take him to mean that the gospel is the only message in the  world that powerfully can bring a person not just to conversion, but to everlasting safety  and joy in the presence of a holy and glorious God.    
       3. Ongoing belief is the condition for  this salvation       The third reason I think  salvation in Romans 1:16 is  the final triumph of the gospel in bringing  believers to eternal safety and joy in the presence of a holy and glorious God  is that  ongoing belief is the condition for this salvation. Notice that verse 16 does not say,  The gospel . . . is the power of God to bring about faith and salvation. It  says, The gospel is the power of God for [unto] salvation to everyone who is  believing [present tense in Greek, signifying continuous action]. In other words,  Paul&#146;s point here is not that the power of the gospel creates faith, but that, for  those who have faith, the gospel brings about salvation. So the point is not that the  gospel is the power for conversion  to  faith; the point is that the gospel is the  power to bring about future salvation  through  a life of faith.    The tense of the verb believe here is crucial. It signifies  ongoing action, not just the first act of faith when you were converted: The gospel  . . . is the power of God unto salvation to everyone who  is believing  &#150;  who goes on believing. It&#146;s the same as 1 Corinthians 15:1-2 where Paul says, I  preached to you [the gospel], which also you received, in which also you stand, by which  also you are being saved,  if you hold fast the word which I preached to you, unless you  believed in vain . Faith that does not persevere is a vain and empty faith &#150;  what James calls dead faith (James 2:17, 26).    So the point of Romans 1:16 is that you don&#146;t have to be ashamed  of the gospel, because it is the only truth in the world which, if you go on banking on it  day after day, will triumph over every obstacle and bring you to eternal safety and joy in  the presence of a holy and glorious God.    
       4. Paul says the gospel is for believers,  not just unbelievers       The last reason I think this is  what salvation means in verse 16 is that the verse is given as the reason Paul  wants to preach the gospel to believers (not just unbelievers). We&#146;ve seen this, but  look again. In verse 15 Paul says, I am eager to preach the gospel to you also who  are in Rome. He is eager to preach the gospel to you &#150; you  believers &#150; not just unbelievers. Then he gives the reason: because I am not  ashamed of it, because it is the power of God unto salvation to all such believers.     So I conclude that the reason Paul is not ashamed of the gospel is that  it is the only truth in all the world that will not let you down when you give your life  to it in faith. It will bring you all the way through temptation and persecution and death  and judgment into eternal safety and ever-increasing joy in the presence of a holy and  glorious God. All the other gospels in the world that win so many converts  will fail you in the end. Only one saves from the final wrath of God and leads to fullness  of joy in his presence and pleasures at his right hand forever. Therefore, there is no  need to be ashamed of it, no matter what others say or do. And O how eager we should be to  speak this gospel to believer and unbeliever alike.    
       Do You Feed on the Gospel Day by  Day?       I close with one huge  implication of what I have said. Do you feed your faith day by day with the promises of  this triumphant gospel? Do you, as a believer, go to the gospel day by day and savor its  power in verses like Romans 8:32, He who did not spare His own Son, but delivered  Him over for us all, how will He not also with Him freely give us all things? The  gospel is the good news that God gave us his Son, so as to obtain for us everything that  would be good for us. Therefore the gospel is the power that gives us victory over  temptation to despair and to pride and to greed and to lust. The gospel alone can triumph  over every obstacle and bring us to eternal joy. Whatever it costs, stand in it, hold it  fast, believe on it, feed on it, savor it, count it more precious than silver or gold. The  gospel will save you. And it alone.     I love to tell the story; for those who know it best    seem hungering and thirsting to hear it, like the rest.    And when, in scenes of glory, I sing the new, new song,    &#146;twill be the old, old story that I have loved so long.    I love to tell the story,    &#146;twill be my theme in glory    To tell the old, old story    Of Jesus and his love.      Copyright 1998 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
