 January 12, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor 
   PURIFIED TO SERVE THE LIVING GOD   (Hebrews 9:1-14) 
 Now even the first covenant had regulations of divine worship and theearthly sanctuary. 2 For there was a tabernacle prepared, the outer one,in which were the lampstand and the table and the sacred bread; this iscalled the holy place. 3 And behind the second veil, there was a tabernaclewhich is called the Holy of Holies, 4 having a golden altar of incenseand the ark of the covenant covered on all sides with gold, in which wasa golden jar holding the manna, and Aaron's rod which budded, and the tablesof the covenant. 5 And above it were the cherubim of glory overshadowingthe mercy seat; but of these things we cannot now speak in detail. 6 Nowwhen these things have been thus prepared, the priests are continuallyentering the outer tabernacle, performing the divine worship, 7 but intothe second only the high priest enters, once a year, not without takingblood, which he offers for himself and for the sins of the people committedin ignorance. 8 The Holy Spirit is signifying this, that the way into theholy place has not yet been disclosed, while the outer tabernacle is stillstanding, 9 which is a symbol for the present time. Accordingly both giftsand sacrifices are offered which cannot make the worshiper perfect in conscience,10 since they relate only to food and drink and various washings, regulationsfor the body imposed until a time of reformation. 11 But when Christ appearedas a high priest of the good things to come, He entered through the greaterand more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not ofthis creation; 12 and not through the blood of goats and calves, but throughHis own blood, He entered the holy place once for all, having obtainedeternal redemption. 13 For if the blood of goats and bulls and the ashesof a heifer sprinkling those who have been defiled, sanctify for the cleansingof the flesh, 14 how much more will the blood of Christ, who through theeternal Spirit offered Himself without blemish to God, cleanse your consciencefrom dead works to serve the living God? 
 This is Old and Strange and Foreign to Me It's almost inevitable that people who live in the modern world of computersand jets and television and antibiotics will read these verses with a senseof tremendous foreignness. That is not my world, we feel, even if we don'tsay it. What should we do about that sense? When you read about something old and strange and culturally foreignto your present world, you have three choices (at least) in how you candeal with the difference and the distance you feel from this oldness andstrangeness: 1) You can say, "The world of this text is so old and so foreign andso strange -- with its tents and altars and animal sacrifices and ceremonialdefilements and washings -- that they have no relevance for my life todayat all. So I will ignore them and deal with more contemporary things." 2) Or you can say, "Well, the truths that really matter in life arenot historical truths, but timeless truths above history, and so in everygeneration these truths get expressed in some way or another in the world.I will look for some of these timeless truths in these old strange daysof priests and ritual and sacrifice and ceremonial defilement. Perhapsmy life will be enriched in some way by connecting with the eternal realmthrough these old practices. 3) Or you can say, "I believe that God governs history and is progressivelyrevealing himself to the world by the way he guides history from one periodto the next. Yes, old periods of God's design in history are strange andforeign, but, no, they are not irrelevant. Each successive period helpsinterpret the next and sheds light on what God is doing in the present.And, yes, there are eternal truths that we can learn from old and strangeperiods of history, but, no, this is not all that God is doing. Historyis not just an unreal shadow of heaven. God himself comes into historyand does things. And we cannot just stand back and try to see symbols ofeternal truths; we have to become a part of what God is doing in historyif we would be saved and live with him forever." 
 Why it is Relevant, Though Foreign to Us Let me show you from these verses why I think option 3 is the way weshould respond to the strangeness and foreignness of this text. Verses1-7 set up what this writer wants us to see. They describe the old periodof history and the way the people of God worshipped in it. Verse 1: therewas an "earthly sanctuary." Verse 2: this sanctuary or tabernacle had anouter part, called "the holy place," with lampstand and table and bread.Verses 3-5: behind that was the Holy of Holies with an altar and chestwith sacred relics and carved cherubim above the altar. Verse 6 describesthe priests entering the outer tent continually, and verse 7 describesthe high priest entering the Holy of Holies only once a year to make atonementfor the people. In other words, in this early, strange, foreign periodof history, the way to God was very limited. His presence was sealed offbehind the outer tent. He could only be approached in atonement once ayear, and only the high priest could go, and he had to go with blood, includingblood for his own sins. Now when we get to verse 8, the writer starts his interpretation ofthis old period of history with its strange, foreign ways. He says, "TheHoly Spirit is signifying this, that the way into the holy place has notyet been disclosed, while the outer tabernacle is still standing, (9) whichis a symbol for the present time." Here comes the tremendously importantclue how he wants us to relate to this strange and distant period of history.He says that the outer tabernacle is symbolic of "the present time" (verse9a). In other words, the ritual of this tent and the way it stands betweenthe worshipper and God's presence are characteristic of "the present time."Notice: he is not saying that this old, strange, foreign ritual is irrelevant.And he is not saying that history is unimportant and all that matters isfinding eternal truths in the symbolism of it all. He says this tent andthese furnishings and this priestly ritual have directly to do with time-- with a period of history. He calls it, "the present time." This tentis "a symbol for the present time" (verse 9a). 
 "The Present Time" But what is "the present time" that he has in mind? And what does ithave to do with us in our present time? Let's keep reading and listen to him explain what time he means andhow the times were changing, even as he wrote. Verse 9b: "Accordingly bothgifts and sacrifices are offered which cannot make the worshiper perfectin conscience, 10 since they relate only to food and drink and variouswashings, regulations for the body imposed until a time of reformation."Here is another reference to time and the movement of God in history. Let's compare the reference in verse 9a to the reference in verse 10b.In verse 9a he says that the outer tent with its furnishings and ministry,separating the people from the Holy of Holies and the presence of God wassymbolic of "the present time." Then he said in verses 9b and 10 that allthese external rituals that relate to food and drink and washings are validonly "until the time of reformation" (= "the setting straight", "the neworder"). So the question is: when does that transition happen in history?When does "the present time," in verse 9, give way to "the reformation"or the "new order" in verse 10? The whole point of this book of Hebrews is to say that the coming ofChrist, the Son of God, into the world is the ending of "the present time"of the old, strange, foreign way of relating to God, and the beginningof "the reformation" where Christ himself replaces the high priest andthe temple and the blood of the animals and the food and drink rituals.That's the point of the book of Hebrews. The way to think about the old and strange and foreign is not to sayit's irrelevant, or to say that it's just a shadow of eternal truths, butrather to say, that in that old period of history, under God's sovereigndesign, everything was pointing to a new period of history that began withJesus, and in which we live. And the old period has much light to shedon the meaning of the new period. Why did he call the old, strange, foreign period of history "this presenttime" if he lived after the death and resurrection of Jesus? The answeris given, I think, in Hebrews 8:13 which really introduces this whole section:"When He said [referring to God's voice in Jeremiah 31:31], 'A new covenant,'He has made the first obsolete. But whatever is becoming obsolete and growingold is ready to disappear." Do you see where he sees himself? He sees himselfin the time of transition from old to new. The old system of relating toGod through ritual and sacrifice and priest and tabernacle "is becomingobsolete and is ready to disappear. And the new order, the "reformation"has been inaugurated in Christ and is replacing the old. Very soon thetemple in Jerusalem would be utterly destroyed and the entire priestly,sacrificial system would be finished, to this day. So you and I live in this new period, "the reformation," as he callsit. Now why is that important? Why is that relevant to us in our computerized,jet-speed age of antibiotics and secular solutions to everything? How Can People with Stained Consciences Draw Near to God? It's relevant because there's one thing that modern life and scientificprogress and psychological therapies and medical discoveries have not madethe slightest advance in solving. And that is, What is God's work in this"time of reformation" and this text all about? It is all about how peoplewith stained consciences can draw near to God. Isn't it remarkable that when we spend an evening isolated in frontof our computer: addicted, as it were, to work or pornography or videogames, the issue, at the end of it all, is not the wonders of technology,or science; the issue is: how can I come to God when I feel so dirty, andhow can I come to my wife and children with transparent love, when my conscienceis so defiled? (And if you're not into computers, pick your own sin --TV soaps, romance novels, stock market pages, spirit-numbing music, etc.). Isn't it remarkable that the basic problems of life never change. Thecircumstances change, but the basic problems don't change. We are humans,and we have consciences that witness to our sinfulness with testimoniesof real guilt. And we know that what keeps us away from God is not dirtyhands or soiled clothes or distance from an altar or a priest. What keepsus from God is real sin echoing in a condemning conscience. 
 God Has Solved that Problem Now that is why the new time period -- where we live -- is relevant.This is what the new period is about: God has done something in history-- not in some timeless realm of ideas -- that solves the deepest problemwe have in the modern world. The old period -- the old covenant -- onlypointed to the solution, but didn't solve the problem. Watch for the differencesbetween the old "present time" and "the time of reformation" as you readverses 11-14. But when Christ appeared [that's the inauguration of the "time of thereformation" and the ending of "the present time"] as a high priest ofthe good things to come [which have now indeed come through his death andresurrection], He entered through the greater and more perfect tabernacle,not made with hands, that is to say, not of this creation; and not throughthe blood of goats and calves, but through His own blood, He entered theholy place once for all [the true tabernacle in heaven], having obtainedeternal redemption [not a yearly one]. For if the blood of goats and bullsand the ashes of a heifer sprinkling those who have been defiled, sanctifyfor the cleansing of the flesh [that is, ceremonial cleansing, but notreal moral, spiritual cleansing], how much more will the blood of Christ,who through the eternal Spirit offered Himself without blemish to God,cleanse your conscience from dead works to serve the living God? In the old period of history, the high priest went into the Holy ofHolies once a year, taking the blood of animals (verse 7). Why did he haveto do that? Because the blood stood for the death of an animal and thedeath was in the place of the death of the priest and the people. God countedthe blood of the animal as sufficient for cleansing the flesh, the ceremonialuncleanness. But what about the guilty conscience of the priest and the people? Noanimal blood could cleanse that. They knew it (see Isaiah 53 and Psalm51). And we know it. So in "the time of reformation" a new high priestcomes -- Jesus the Son of God -- with a better sacrifice, the sacrificeof himself. Verse 14 says that the whole Trinity -- Father, Son and HolySpirit -- were involved. "Through the eternal Spirit [the Holy Spirit]he offered himself [the Son] without blemish to God [the Father]." Theresult is that all the sins of his people in the Old Covenant were coveredby the blood of Jesus. The animal sacrifices foreshadowed the final sacrificeof God's Son, and the death of the Son reaches back to cover all the sinsof God's people in the old time period, and forward to cover all the sinsof God's people in the new time period. 
 The Problem is the Same for Ancient People and Modern People So here we are in the modern age, the age of science, space travel --E-mail, heart transplants, instant replays, beepers, 911 -- and our problemis fundamentally the same as always: our consciences condemn us and makeus feel unacceptable to God. We are alienated from God. We don't feel goodenough to come to him. And no matter how distorted our consciences are,that much is true: we are not good enough to come to him. We can cut ourselves, or throw our children in the sacred river, orgive a million dollars to the United Way, or serve in a soup kitchen atThanksgiving, or a hundred forms of penance and self-injury, and the resultwill be the same: the stain remains and death terrifies. We know that ourconscience is defiled -- not with external things like touching a corpse,a dirty diaper, or a piece of pork. Jesus said it is what comes out ofa man that defiles, not what goes in (Mark 7:15-23). We are defiled byattitudes like pride and self-pity and bitterness and lust and envy andjealousy and covetousness and apathy and fear. Verse 14 says that theseare "dead works" -- that is, they have no spiritual life in them. Theydon't come from new life; they come from death and they lead to death.That is why they make us feel hopeless in our consciences. 
 The Only Answer The only answer in this modern age, as in every other age is the bloodof Christ. When your conscience rises up and condemns you, where will youturn? Hebrew 9:14 gives you the answer: turn to Christ. Turn to the bloodof Christ. Turn to the only cleansing agent in the universe that can giveyou relief in life and peace in death. How much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spiritoffered Himself without blemish to God, cleanse your conscience from deadworks to serve the living God? I urge you this morning, turn to Christ, turn right now to Christ andreceive the free gift that he bought at infinite price: the gift of perfectforgiveness and cleansing. 
 Copyright 1997 John Piper  Returnt to Piper's NotesFront Page  
 
 
