  We are going to spend two weeks on this text.  Nextweek we will focus on the curse of careless worship, and ponderwhat the priests were doing here that so offended God and whatwe can do today to avoid that same curse.  But today we focuson what I think is the main point of the text.  I would stateit like this:  Those who know God as father should honor their majestic father.  This is the main burden of the text.  The attitudeand the actions of the priests in their ministry is a dishonorto God.  Verse 6:  A son honors his father, and a servant hismaster.  If then I am a father, where is my honor?  And if I ama master, where is my fear?  says the Lord of hosts to you, Opriests, who despise my name.  And so this morning God aims in this text to brandthis truth into our minds so that it stays with us and marks usoff from the other herds of the world.  Those who know God asfather should honor their majestic father.  If I am a father,where is my honor? says the Lord of hosts.  When God reveals himself to us as Father, when hecalls us to himself and adopts us into his family through faithin Christ, and gives us the Spirit of adoption, what does he intendfor us to feel?  What kind of response to his fatherhood doeshe want us to have?    I think the answer is that there are two kinds ofresponses that must always be kept together.      He means for us to have a childlike reverencefor his age and strength and wisdom and authority, and for simplybeing the source from which we came and on which we depend minuteby minute.  We should revere him and honor him as our Father.    He means for us to have a childlike securityand peace in his pity and his provision and care for us.    I think that probably the emphasis today is verydifferent than it was 200 years ago.  If you ask a typical evangelicalChristian today what the fatherhood of God means to them, theywould probably almost all say, It means that he loves me,that he will take care of me and guide me and forgive me and takeme home to live with him forever some day.  And this wouldbe true -- wonderfully true!  And nothing that I say this morning is intended tolessen the preciousness of that truth.  In fact everything I sayis intended to deepen and sweeten and secure that truth.  But is it not striking that the most famous of allBiblical commands relating to child and father is surely the fifthcommandment, Exodus 20:12, Honor your father and your mother;and yet very few people today would say that the fatherhood ofGod implies to them that God is to be honored and revered andvenerated and held in sacred respect.  I wonder why this is the case.  I suspect that partof the reason is that for some decades now the ideal of humanfatherhood in our society has not been a godly man whose leadershipand authority and wisdom and strength wins the respect and reverenceof his children?  Rather it seems that we have been so intenton correcting the specter of authoritarianism, and aloofness,and abusiveness that we have lost the central Biblical dimensionof fatherhood, implied in the fifth commandment, Honor yourfather!  Which also implies, Fathers, be worthy ofthe honor of your children!  Be the kind of father who calls forthfrom your children not only a playful affection, but also a deferentialrespect and honor.  The other side of this coin is that the ideal ofchild likeness in relation to a father has not included a veryheavy emphasis on reverence and respect in our era.  Three hundredyears ago when Thomas Watson wrote his  commentary on the WestminsterCatechism things were very different.  He asked, How arechildren to show honor to their parents?  And he answered,with a wealth of Biblical texts, By a reverential esteemof their persons. . . Inwardly, by fear mixed with love. . . Outwardly,both in word and gesture.  This is not the atmosphere that we breathe today. Reverential esteem is not typically demanded by parentsor given by children.  Whether this is the cause or the resultof our lopsided view of the fatherhood of God, I'm not sure. I suspect that it works both ways: the less we emphasize the needfor children to reverence their human fathers, the less God'sfatherhood will trigger our reverence; and the less God's fatherhoodwakens our reverence and honor, the less we will make that partof the human ideal of fatherhood.  However you perceive the present state of thingswith regard to children and fathers today, I hope that you willrecognize with me that this text in Malachi 1:6 is a balancingcorrective for those who see the fatherhood of God merely in termsof his approachability and care and condescension.  The fatherhoodof God is brought in to humble the priests, to frighten the priestsbecause they are despising their father's name.  They are treatinghis altar as something trivial and contemptible.  The fatherhoodof God in this text is not for comfort or security.  If I am a father, where is my honor!  The clear teaching of a verse like this is that themajestic fatherhood of God implies a sacred duty -- that his childrenshould honor him and respect him and pay to him reverential esteem.  I want to show you three of the ways that Malachihelps us feel the majesty of our heavenly Father in this passageof Scripture.  He begins the paragraph in verse 6 by showing usthat God is our Father, and then devotes the rest of the textto showing the utter inconsistency between having God as Fatherand treating him the way the priests were treating him.    But, notice: the inconsistency that Malachi pointsout is not that they should show more gratitude to a Father whocares for them.  That is certainly true.  But Malachi's pointis that they should show more honor to a Father who is so majesticin authority and self-sufficiency and universality.  Let's lookat those three things.  The first thing Malachi does to help us feel theMajesty of our Father in this text is to use a special name forhim again and again.  Eight times in these nine verses (24 timesin the whole book) God is called the LORD of hosts.  Verse 6, And if I am a master, where is myfear? says the LORD of hosts. Verse 8, Will he be pleased with you or showyou favor? says the LORD of hosts. Verse 9, Will he show favor to any of you?says the LORD of hosts. Verse 10, I have no pleasure in you, says theLORD of hosts. Verse 11, My name is great among the nations,says the LORD of hosts. Verse 13, `What a weariness this is,' you say,and you sniff at it, says the LORD of hosts. Verse 13, Shall I accept that from your hand?says the LORD of hosts. Verse 14, I am a great King, says the LORDof hosts.  Hosts means great numbers of armies orangels or stars.  So what Malachi wants us to see and feel isthat our Father in heaven has infinite authority in the universe. He can wield any and all armies on the earth to accomplish hispurposes among the nations whether they know it or not.  He hasmyriads of unstoppable angels who do his bidding flawlessly andnever fail in their errands.  And he has appointed every starin the universe its position.  He holds them in place -- all trilliontrillion of them -- and calls them all by name.  And on the altar of this Father the priests are offeringanimals with mange and broken legs!!  Second, Malachi, helps us feel the majesty of ourFather by showing that he does not need these mangy sacrifices,or any others!  Our ancient Father is not dependent on the Social-Securitypayments of the priests.    This comes out in verse 10: Oh, that therewere one among you who would shut the doors, that you might notkindle fire upon my altar in vain!  In other words.  Closethe temple.  I don't want the smell of your sacrifices.  I don'tneed the food of your sacrifices.  This is the majesty ofGod's universal ownership of all things and his freedom and independencefrom all creation.  Psalm 50:9-12 puts it like this:   I will accept no bull from your house, nor he-goat from your folds. For every beast of the forest is mine,  the cattle on a thousand hills. I know all the birds of the air, and all that moves in the field is mine. If I were hungry, I would not tell you; for the world and all that is in it is mine.   Or as Paul says in Acts 17:25, He is not servedby human hands as though he needed anything, for he himself givesto all men life and breath and everything.  Our majestic Father owns every square foot of Minneapolis. He has creator rights to every lake shore lot in Minnesota. This land is his land.  From California to the New York Island. From the Red Wood forests to the Gulf Steam waters, this landwas made for God and for his Name.   And on the altar of this majestic Father the priestsare offering animals with mange and broken legs!!  Finally, Malachi helps us feel the majesty of ourFather by showing us that some day his authority and his ownershipwill be honored among every people and in every place.    Verse 11 is one of the most amazing and excitingpromises in the Old Testament.  The RSV uses present tense verbs. But in the Hebrew there aren't any verbs except one participlethat can be either present or future.  Surely the KJV and NASBand NIV are right to see a prophecy here and to use the futuretense, since God's NAME is not yet great among the nations.  From the rising of the sun to its setting my namewill be great among the nations, and in every place incense willbe offered to my name, and a pure offering; for my name is greatamong the nations, says the LORD of hosts.  In other words Malachi says to the priests: the nameof your Father which you dishonor with sick sheep and mangy goats-- that name is one day going to be reverenced and held in highestesteem by every nation of the world and in every place on theearth.  Should you not then honor your majestic Father?  Now let me close by applying this lesson in threeways.  First, there is an application to us as human fathers,namely, that we should represent,. along side our wives, a standardof truth and righteousness and authority and trustworthiness andtenderness and condescension that will demand and win from ourchildren both reverential esteem and tender affection.  When I have the chance to sit with Noel and my foursons on Sunday night in one of these pews there are two kindsof things that I want to happen.  I want my littlest ones to clamberto sit in my lap.  I like a four-year-old head against my chestwith a chubby ink-stained hand reaching up to rub my cheek.  Withoutthat tender affection between me and my sons I would by a failureas a Biblical Father.  But the other thing I want as we sit there in thepew is this.  If if one of my sons is misbehaving (I wish it didn'thappen, but we all know better), I want one severe glance frommy face to strike fear into their heart and bring them under control.  The happiest and holiest children in the world arethe children whose Fathers succeed in winning both their tenderaffection and their reverential and loving fear.  And they arethe children who will come to understand most easily the mysteryof the fatherhood of God.  Which leads me to the second application, namely,that in our relationship to God we should always mingle feelingsof reverence and fear and awe on the hand with feelings of securityand tenderness and friendship on the other hand.  One of the most remarkable things that I have beendiscovering recently is that these two dimensions of our relationshipto God are not only kept together in Scripture; but in fact theproper experience of the one is made dependent on the other.  For example, Psalm 25:14 says, The friendshipof the LORD is for those who fear him.  But doesn't friendshipcast out fear?  Yes.  It casts out cowering fear.  Paralyzingfear.  Hate-engendering fear.  Guilt-laden fear.  But not reverentialfear.  The friendship of the LORD is for those who fear him.  Another example is Isaiah 66:2, This is theman to whom I will look, he that is humble and contrite in spirit,and trembles at my word.  Do we want the face of the Lordto shine upon us?  Do we want him to lift up his countenance uponus and smile with warmth and tenderness?  The Lord says in thisverse, This is the person upon whom I will smile, the one whotrembles at my word.  His friendship is for those who fear, andhis countenance is for those who tremble.  One last illustration from Psalm 103:13, Asa father pities his children, so the LORD pities those who fearhim.    Who will discover and know the pity of God?  Whowill rest in his mercy -- and I would go so far as to ask, Whowill frolic in the ocean of God's compassion?  Those who bow withreverential fear, and honor their majestic Father.  There is no contradiction here -- unless it be thecontradiction of our own hearts, rebelling against the mercy orthe majesty of our heavenly Father.  May that rebellion be overcomein all our hearts.  For surely the experience that God holds outto us this morning the deepest, most satisfying relationship inthe world.  That we not be cowering or dumbfounded or paralyzedin the presence of our merciful Father; nor that we be flippantor careless or trifling or presumptuous in the presence of ourmajestic Father.  But rather that we discover in the power ofthe Holy Spirit the mystery of godliness:  a bold brokenness, a reverential relaxation, a fearing familiarity, a trembling tenderness,  an affectionate awe.   Almighty God, and Heavenly Father,  How the world needs Christians like this! How our children need parents like this! How your fullness would be glorified in a churchlike this! Make us a people like this! For you are the LORD of hosts,  the owner of all things,  a great King for all the nations, through Jesus Christ,  Amen. 
