  December 28, l986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchJohn Piper, PastorCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper    A CAUSE TO LIVE FOR  Acts 20:24  "I do not count my life of any value nor as precious to myself, if only I may accomplish my course and the ministry which I received from the Lord Jesus, to testify to the gospel of the grace of God."  This morning I want to tell you why I feel hopeful and optimistic in themidst of an American culture that seems to be collapsing under the weightof its unprincipled and God-ignoring ways of thought and life. Christmas morning, the lead editorial in the Minneapolis Tribune went likethis: It's drab in Minnesota this Christmas -- as is fitting, perhaps. Peace andgoodwill? Washington is paralyzed by scandal. The Libyans use napalm on Chad.The Iranians and Iraqis continue their bloodbath. Eugene Hasenfus is outof Nicaragua but the contras aren't. Soviet troops remain in Afghanistan.SALT II is a memory, and the promise of the Iceland summit grows stale. TheAir Force announces that the first 10 MX missiles are operational. News pagesare filled with stories of hunger. The night isn't silent in the soup kitchensand sleeping rooms for the homeless. Toys for Tots, Santa Anonymous and foodshelves accent the gulf between haves and have-nots. (James Boyd, AssociateEditor, Editorial Page.) And they could have gone on to tell of the scourge of AIDS and the millionteenagers who got pregnant this year, 40% of whom tried to solve the problemby getting rid of the babies through abortion. They could have told how over40% of the high schoolers in the suburbs of Minneapolis binged on alcoholin the past two weeks -- that means had five or more drinks in a row. Theycould give middle- and upper-class statistics on the multi-million dollarbusiness of marijuana and cocaine and crack. They could talk about a yearof increases of serious crimes in Minneapolis. And they would perhaps justbe scratching the surface of the deterioration in our American society. Now why am I optimistic and hopeful in the midst of all this? I could saythat I am going to kiss it all good by some day and go to a better placewhen I die. That would be true. But it probably wouldn't be helpful if thatis all I said. The kind of optimism I am talking about this morning is the kind that says:There are signs that even here on this earth in Minneapolis God may yet havea saving and reforming work to do, not just in a few scattered individuallives, but in the larger social fabric of this city and beyond. I still have ringing in my ears from the fall of 1985 the words of RalphWinter as he looked out over the city from my kitchen window late one night:"After all, John, maybe the most important thing you could do for missionswould be to remake Minneapolis." In other words, how much more authenticit would be for Americans to carry a life-changing gospel message to othercultures if they came from a place that was not committing social suicideby its own undisciplined and God-ignoring ways of life! But don't get me wrong. I am not about to resurrect the naive, idealistic,social dogmas of the 19th century that prophesied continual evolutionaryascent until we attain utopia. Marxism is a social failure around the world.And America is perhaps within a generation or two of proving that secular,God-ignoring capitalism is a social failure as well. I have no social theoryto propose this morning. But what I know is that God has taken decadent, self-destroying societiesand remade them by the power of his Holy Spirit through the preaching ofthe gospel of the grace God, and through the social impact of thousands ofremade men and women. Just think of 16th century Scotland under the influenceof John Knox, and 18th century England under the influence of Whitefieldand Wesley and Wilberforce, and Wales at the beginning of this century underthe influence of Evan Roberts, and the Dani and Sawi and Yali peoples ofIrian Jaya in more recent decades. Anyone who is willing to read the story that God has written in history knowswhat God could do with Minneapolis if in his sovereign freedom he chose tosend revival and reformation to this place. Ultimately all realistic optimism for this world and the next is rooted inthe sovereign freedom and grace of God. But the signs of hope may turn upeven in the newspaper, even in the midst of the most depressingly bad news.For example: One of the most remarkable things of the month of December in Minneapolisis how the secular press has unwittingly served the gospel of Jesus Christ.Consider these four facts about the Minneapolis Tribune as a support forthat statement: 1. It has publicly analyzed several extraordinarily difficult social problems(especially teen pregnancy and teen drug abuse). 2. It has documented, sometimes explicitly, sometimes by implication, theinadequacy of educational and governmental solutions to these problems. 3. It has in several instances openly admitted a sense of helplessness. 4. It has even hinted at the desperate and confused vacuum of the human heartapart from God, but then backed off from the full implications of such avacuum. Let me illustrate a couple of these points and then turn with you to a wordof scripture that is so desperately needed at this hour. From December 14 through 19 the Tribune ran a major analysis of teen drugabuse in the Twin Cities. What were the conclusions? The final article observesthat Minnesota will get $2.7 million of the new federal drug bill and thensays, The trouble with trying to attack the problem through education is that itnever has proven successful. Drug education, counselling and treatment. Law enforcement, border interdictionand urine testing. All of them put together won't eradicate teen-age druguse. They may not even make much of a dent. What will solve the problem? Probably nothing. Why do the researchers end up so pessimistic? Here's their answer: The fundamental problem with [these efforts] is that they don't do anythingabout the reason a kid is using drugs. The question is not how to keep kids from getting drugs, but why do theywant to use them? Then they summarize the why's that they could discover. The two most penetratingquotes from teenagers were these: First from an 18 year old woman: "It's what makes everything fun ... andnot boring." Life without drugs didn't "have an edge. It's not thrillingand it's not different, it's not daring." Then from an unidentified teen: "it is a prestige thing. A lot of 'in' peopletalk about drugs.... It's cool." There are two deep cravings behind these two quotes: One is the craving not to be bored. Or to put it positively, the cravingfor adventure, and challenge and thrill of doing something daring. The samething turned up in the analyses of the teen pregnancy problem. One sentencewent like this: "Teenagers are far more likely to have babies when theirlives begin to seem pointless and when the doors to the future seem closed."There is a very close connection between saying "life has no point" and saying"life has no edge". The other craving is the craving for significance. If we put these two deep longings together I think what the young peopleare saying is: I want my life to have a significance that is thrilling. Iwant my life to have a point that is admirable. I don't want my days to bedull; I want my life to have an edge to it. I want something that is worthwalking along a precipice for. And the whole upshot of the analyses in the media is that the effort to findthis life in drugs and premarital sex is backfiring on the teenagers andon our society. The young people and the culture are being ruined. Why? Becausethe vacuum of significance and thrilling point and edge in life was not intendedto be filled by drugs and illicit sex. Not intended by whom? O, there's the question. THE question! For those whohave eyes to see and ears to hear, the whole month of media attention hasbeen a preparation for that question. And if you think God isn't mercifullyat work in all this, serving the gospel, preparing thoughtful people allover this city to hear your witness, listen to the lead editorial of theTribune from Christmas morning. The writer says that Malcolm Muggeridge,the Christian British journalist, has an answer for our world. Then listento this paragraph: "Looking for God," Muggeridge says, means understanding that power in allof its forms -- wealth, fame, political or social position -- is a dangerousfantasy. It makes us brutal and blind, in his words to "our Creator's purposesfor his creation," purposes that are "loving and not malign, creative andnot destructive, universal and not particular." There it is, for the first time after weeks of God-ignoring social analysis-- the central question. What is God's purpose for his creation of sexuality?What is God's purpose for his creation of the longing for thrill and pointand edge and significance? That is the central issue that we must keep atthe center of all social discussion. And by the grace of God it was put atthe center by the secular media on Christmas morning. Not only that, they went on to say, Perhaps we think so much about peace between nations that we think too littleabout peace within selves and families and neighborhoods. Perhaps the comityof nations cannot be bestowed top-down on fractious peoples by negotiatorsmeeting in Geneva, but must percolate up from the power of individual,peace-filled lives. Perhaps the world is hard because we are hard, becausewe have made a Faustian bargain to purchase the fantasy of power. Are you as an evangelical Christian guilty of putting your head in the sandwhen you say to a colleague or neighbor or friend that what this world needsis for individuals to seek and discover God's purposes for their lives --for their money and job and family and sexuality and longing for significance? No, you are not guilty of putting your head in the sand when you call peopleto center in on God and to give attention to his purposes for all of life.Instead you are beginning where the secular press, after months of dead endstreets, has ended, in a pensive and very penetrating Christmas editorial. Let me simply take it to its Biblical conclusion and encourage you to makeit known all over this city in 1987. Could it be that God is preparing thiscity for a mighty and humble upsurge of confident penetrating Christian witnessand reformation? What the teenagers of our city need, and what everyone of us needs, is acause to live for that accords with the purposes of our Creator. And becauseour Creator is breathtaking in Himself and gracious toward his creatures,we can know beyond any doubt that his cause will satisfy our deepest longingsfor a life with thrilling significance. Where do we find that cause? We look to the word of God, and particularlyto the testimony of one who had found such a cause himself, the apostle Paul.Acts 20:24 is a testimony of a life that is not boring, a life with an "edge"and with daring and with enormous significance. I do not account my life of any value nor as precious to myself, if onlyI may accomplish my course and the ministry which I received from the LordJesus, to testify to the gospel of the grace of God. Consider for just a few minutes what Paul was living for and what effectit had on his life. We can see this best if we simply read the text backwards,and notice four immense realities. First, notice the immense reality of God. The verse ends with that greatreality: "to testify to the gospel of the grace of God." Since we come fromGod and are made for God you can mark it down as absolutely certain: Anyconstellation of goals that you choose to live for will leave a craving vacuumin your soul if GOD is not the pole star in that constellation guiding andshaping all your choices. God was the lodestar of Paul's life, and the gloryof God was the light of that immense and blazing star, and all the otheraims of his life were like moons whose only light and attraction were thelight they reflected of that star. Second, notice the immense reality of God's grace. The verse ends, "to testifyto the gospel of the grace of God." The power of God's holiness and justiceare like a great, violent hurricane, and the grace of God is like the eyeof the hurricane where all is peace and calm. Grace is the center of God'sreality. Grace, or love, is the essential calm at the center of the vortexof his infinite perfections. Paul had felt himself swept into the terrorof that hurricane one day on the Damascus road. And then to his utter amazementhe was drawn through it into the peace and beauty of the eye of grace eventhough he was the "chief of sinners" (1 Timothy 1:12-16). Third, notice the immense reality of the gospel. The verse ends, "to testifyto the gospel of the grace of God." First there is the immense reality ofGod himself, breathtaking in all his glory. Then there is the immense realityof God's grace, rescuing sinners from the hurricane of his holy wrath andgiving them a place next to his heart for ever in the eye of the storm. Thenthere is the immense message to all the world that these things are so. Anawesome and holy God exists. And there is a way to safety and fellowshipthrough the death and resurrection of his Son. All who submit to him andtrust his grace, will be rescued and drawn into the place of peace and wonderat the eye of his storm. This is the gospel. Fourth, notice the immense reality of the cause Paul lived for. ". . . totestify to the gospel of the grace of God." I say that the cause of testifyingto the grace of God is immense for two reasons. First, because a cause isas big as its source and goal. And the source and goal of Paul's cause isGod himself. He owes his life to God and he gives his life to God. And thesecond reason I call Paul's cause immense is that a cause is as big as theeffects it has on its devotees. This is what I want to close with. The great cause of embodying and testifyingto the enormous grace of a breathtaking God will have revolutionizing effectson teenagers and adults. Look at the effect it had on Paul. First it made him utterly indifferent to earthly gain. The verse begins,"I do not count my life of any value nor as precious to myself." In otherwords he had found a cause to live for that was so profoundly satisfyingthat it was more valuable than life itself. And of course life is the basisof all sex, all drugs, all prestige, all coolness, all wealth. And so, ifthe lure of the cause surpasses the lure of life itself, then it surpassesall the things that this life sustains. Or to put it another way Paul's Creator had given him a cause to live forthat freed him for a kind of reckless abandon toward danger. Life for Paulwas not dull. It had all the "edge" and "thrill" and "daring" and "differentness"that any 18 year old girl in Minneapolis could ever dream of bearing. The second effect that Paul's cause to live for had on him was to give himan incredible discipline to stay on the assigned trail. The verse says thathe valued one thing more than life: "if only I may accomplish my course andthe ministry which I received from th Lord Jesus." He pictures himself asan athlete running a race. His coach, trainer, audience, and award is JesusChrist. One thing matters: finishing the course the way he has been taught. On the right he passes the temptation of extra-marital sex. He was a singleman his whole ministry through! On the left he passes the temporary cheapthrill of drugs. But he is not a child any more. He reasons: My cause isthe cause of God. My thrill is the power of grace. My "edge" is the riskof my life. My "point" is the honor of Christ. My "daring" is the measureof my love. And thus he fights his way along the narrow trail in the powerand the glory of a disciplined and God-centered life. What Minneapolis needs today is a cause to live for that comes from God.Teenagers, newspaper editors, housewives, businessmen, teachers, doctors,nurses, lawyers, salesmen, engineers, computer specialists, wage-earnersof every level must ask the question posed in the Christmas editorial: Whatare the Creator's purposes for his creation? What is the cause that God wantsme to live for? So there are at least four reasons I feel optimistic as this year closes: 1. In God's providence even the secular media have been driven to the brinkof this insight -- that God's purposes for sex and drugs and the human heartmust be taken into account. 2. The Bible offers an profound and compelling answer to the question ofGod's purposes for these and all dimensions of life. 3. God is gracious and does not delight in the destruction of individualsor society; he may yet be pleased in his sovereign mercy to grant a day revivaland reformation even in this secular city. 4. Finally, here in this church, not to mention hundreds of other churches,there are a thousand people who may, by God's grace, come out of the closetin 1987 and with clarity and boldness testify to the gospel of the graceof God, and make public the potential connections between the dead end streetsof secularism and the truth of God. I received a letter from John Jenstad on Christmas Eve from Suriname wherehe is supporting the missionary enterprise of Wycliffe by teaching high schoolstudents. He said in his first paragraph, I can't think of any greater movement to be involved in than bringing God'struth to the nations. It makes the UN, the environmentalist movement andMADD look like nursery school. It's like comparing Beethoven's Fifth Symphonyto a TV commercial. Given a real choice, why would someone want to dedicatehis or her life to something with only temporary value when he or she couldbe involved with a cause with eternal significance? Amen!  Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
