  February 2, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor  
   WHAT CHRIST DID AT THE END OF THE AGE   (Hebrews 9:23-26)  
  Therefore [referring back to verses 19-20 where the book of thecovenant and  the people’s bodies and the tabernacle and the vessels weresprinkled with  blood, in view of that God-ordained practice, he says] it wasnecessary for  the copies of the things in the heavens to be cleansed with these[i.e.,  these sprinklings from these animal sacrifices], but the heavenlythings  themselves with better sacrifices than these. 24 For Christ didnot enter a  holy place made with hands, a mere copy of the true one, but intoheaven  itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us; 25 nor was itthat He  should offer Himself often, as the high priest enters the holyplace year by  year with blood not his own. 26 Otherwise, He would have needed tosuffer  often since the foundation of the world; but now once at theconsummation of  the ages He has been manifested to put away sin by the sacrificeof Himself.  
  
  Star Wars and Hebrews  
  I want to make sure as we begin this message that you know thedifference  between Star Wars and the book of Hebrews.  For many today thereis no  significant difference.  That is, both are myths.  And a myth is astory (it  need not be true in the sense that it really happened), a storythat  provides symbols for interpreting the world.  You don’t needTruth, with a  capital T.  You only need a symbolic system to help you order yourworld.   Now this may sound like fancy academic talk that comes from aphilosophy  class or a class in advanced linguistic anthropology.  But it’snot.  It’s  straight out of yesterday’s newspaper about the new release ofStar Wars and  the meaning it has for kids.  
  Here’s a key sentence: "For some pradolescent boys, Star Wars . .. functions  as a kind of religion, giving them spiritual nourishment andopening the door  to questions of redemption, forgiveness and morality, sometimesmore  potently than their formal religious upbringing ever has.  They’refinding  their myths in an unexpected place"  (StarTribune, 2/1/97, p. B5). Now what  interests me in this sentence is not that Star Wars is a kind ofreligion for  some kids.  Nor even that for some it seems more exciting thanwhat they  learned in Sunday School.  (That can easily be accounted for bythe  difference between computer-enhanced cinematography andflannelgraph.)    
  
  Myth or Truth?  
  What interests me is the assumption of the writer that findingyour religion  is like choosing among many myths.  "They are finding their mythsin an  unexpected place."  And the question is not one of ultimate Truth,but rather  of what story or symbolic system works for you.   You can findyour myth in  the Biblical story of creation by a sovereign God, incarnation ofa real  personal Son of God, redemption by the real shed blood of Christand by his  resurrection, and faith in this Truth.  Or you can find your mythin the  story of Star Wars.  The issue today, inside the philosophy classand inside  the movie theater, is not usually Truth, but rather finding asatisfying  myth, a story that helps you interpret the world, to make itlivable and, if  possible, enjoyable.  So the article quotes one professor whocompares not  only Star Wars, but TV in general, to religion and says,  "It doeswhat  religion does: provides a symbolic system through which youinterpret the  world."  That’s all religion is for many people: "a symbolicsystem" a  cluster of metaphors and narratives and experiences that touch youdeeply and  help you make some sense of your life.  Truth is simply anon-issue.  
  If that kind of thinking were confined to a few scholarly books ora few  advanced classes, I would not bring it in here.  But since I knowit is  simply in the air we breathe, I think you need to put it beforeyou and  realize that as you read this text, and as I preach this message,neither the  writer of this book not the preacher of this sermon thinks thatway. We are  not offering you another possible myth you can choose from to helpyour life  go better.  The writer of this book and the preacher of thismessage aim to  describe real persons and historical events and divine intentionsthat really  happened in history.  And we aim to reveal an unseen heavenlyrealm above  history that is more real than all we see and touch in this life. This story  is more real and more exciting and more terrifying and morelife-changing  than Star Wars will ever be, no matter how many enhancements theymake.  And  I urge you, in the name of God, to hear the strangeness of thistext as the  strangeness of Reality, not as the strangeness of an unreal truth.   
  For 1,400 years or so, God willed that the death of his Son, JesusChrist, be  foreshadowed and anticipated in history among the Jewish peoplethrough their  animal sacrifices and their tabernacle and temple worship.  Thewriter says  in verse 23 that these things the tabernacle and vessels andrelics -- were  all "copies" of an even greater reality in heaven.  As copies theycould be  ceremonially cleansed by blood from the sacrifices of calves andgoats.   That’s the way God ordained it.  
  But then he says that these kinds of sacrifices are utterlyinadequate to  deal with what ultimately matters not the copies, but the"heavenly things  themselves" (verse 23).  To deal with the heavenly thingsthemselves and to  cleanse them, there will have to be "better sacrifices."  These"better  sacrifices" are what Christ offered once for all in his own death. And with  this one great offering, verse 24 says, Christ "did not enter aholy place  made with hands, a mere copy of the true one, but into heavenitself, now to  appear in the presence of God for us."  
  
  Why Does the Heavenly Holy Place Need Cleansing?  
  This is troubling at first and then tremendously comforting.  It’stroubling  because it raises the question why the heavenly holy place wouldneed to be  cleansed  You see verse 23 says that the copies of heaven must becleansed  with the blood of animals, but "the heavenly things themselves[have to be  cleansed] with better sacrifices."  Why is that?  Is heavendefiled?  Is  there sin in heaven?  Some have suggested that it’s because Satanhas been  there.  Others have suggested that it’s because there are"spiritual hosts of  wickedness in the heavenly places" (Ephesians 6:12).    
  Maybe.  But I think the most important thing to see is what verse24 focuses  on.  Why did Christ enter [that heavenly] holy place with hisbetter  sacrifice the sacrifice of himself?  It was "now to appear in thepresence  of God for us."  The words "for us" give the key to why there hasto be  cleansing in heaven.  We are going to be there.   
  Here is a great comfort and encouragement to us.  It is notcomplimentary.   But it is wonderfully hope-giving.  If you want to be made muchof, rather  than having the mercy of God made much of, you will not want tolisten to  this.  But if you love the mercy of God and admit the misery ofyour own  condition, you will love this.  
  Verse 24 says that Christ enters the holy place of heaven with hisbetter  sacrifice "to appear in the presence of God for us."  This meansthat he will  cleanse us there.  We are what needs cleansing.  And to the degreethat we  might defile heaven, Christ in that sense cleanses heaven.  
  Now listen to this.  He is speaking to those of you (all of us, inour clear  moments) who feel so dirty and so deeply bad that you would onlypollute  heaven if you got there.  O how many people are kept away fromChrist because  of this!  I pray that you will see what an invitation this is. This is God’s  way of saying: "Come, you dirty ones.  Come, you defiled, youdeeply evil  ones.  Come, you who have soiled yourselves and who have beenstained by  others.  Come to my heaven!  For my Son is there. And he has notdied in  vain.  He stands guard over my holy place, not to keep you out,but to make  you clean so that you can be with me in perfect holiness forever. Come.   This is why he died.  I did not send him to call the righteous to  repentance, but sinners (Luke 5:32).  Come."  Underline thosewords at the  end of verse 24 "for us."  "Now to appear in the presence of Godfor us."    
  
  How Can Sinners Be a Welcome in Heaven?  
  Then in verses 25-26 comes the description of how Christ achievedthis great  welcome for defiled sinners in heaven.  You see it isn’t to betaken for  granted that there should be a welcome for sinners in heaven.  Godis holy  and pure and perfectly just and righteous.  He hates sin and livesin  absolute perfection.  Yet the whole story of the Bible and of thebook of  Hebrews is how such a great and holy God can and does welcomedirty people  like you and me into his presence.  How can this be?  Answeringthis question  is what history is all about.  
  Verse 25 says that Christ’s sacrifice for sin was not like thesacrifices of  the Jewish high priests. They came into the holy place yearly withanimal  sacrifices to atone for the sins of the people.  But these versessay Christ  did not enter heaven "that he should offer Himself often, as thehigh priest  enters the holy place year by year with blood not his own. Otherwise, He  would have needed to suffer often since the foundation of theworld."  If  Christ followed the pattern of the priests, then he would have todie yearly.   And since the sins to be covered include the sins of Adam andEve, he would  have had to begin his yearly dying at the foundation of the world.  
  But the writer treats this as unthinkable  Why is thisunthinkable?  Because  it would make the death of the Son of God look weak andineffective.  If it  has to be repeated year after year for centuries where would bethe triumph?   Where would be the glory?  Where would we see the infinite valueof the  sacrifice of the Son?  It would vanish in the shamefulness of ayearly  suffering and death.  There was shame in the cross (Hebrews 12:2),but it was  triumphant shame.  "He despised the shame and sat down at theright hand of  the throne of God."  One shameful death and then enthronement!  
  
  Christ’s Sacrifice Shows His Glory  
  So the passage (verse 26) ends with a description of how Christreally did it  how he really made a sacrifice great enough to cleanse all thedefiled  sinners who hear the call to enter the fellowship of God inheaven.  And the  writer mentions four aspects of this sacrifice that show the gloryof Christ.   He says, "But now once at the consummation of the ages He hasbeen  manifested to put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself."  
  1. He says that Christ did this great work "ONCE" not repeatedlybut once  and once only.  And the point is that this sacrifice is so great,that it  need not be repeated not for all the redeemed in the past from the  foundation of the world nor for all the redeemed in the future. It is  enough.  That’s how great it is.  Unlike Star Wars, the death ofJesus will  never do a rerun, because it is so great that it cannot beimproved on.   There are no special effects lacking.  It’s effect is so hugethat it goes  on year after year, century after century doing what it wasdesigned to do,  save sinners and present them faultless to God.     2. Verse 26 says that he was manifested "at the consummation [orthe end] of  the ages."  The death of Jesus is not just one event in a line ofsimilar  historical events.  When it happened, history came to a climax. The first  coming of the Messiah and the second coming (that we will look atnext week)  are seen in the Bible as one great closing act at the end ofhistory.  The  time between the two comings is seen as a kind of extension of theend a  great mercy, gathering people from all the nations before the endis  completed in the judgment of the second coming.  So the glory ofChrist is  seen in the fact that his coming and death is the decisive act toend  history.  It is not just another merely human event.  It is theconsummation  of history.     3. Verse 26 says Christ sacrificed himself, not the blood ofanother.  This  underlines the glory of Christ again. Not only was his sacrificeonce for  all.  Not only did it mark the consummation of the ages.  But itwas a  sacrifice of the most valuable person in the universe the Christ,the Son  of God.  If you ever doubt that you as a sinner could be madeclean before  God, ask yourself, "Which is greater, the evil of my sinfulnessand  defilement, or the value and virtue of the blood of the Son ofGod?"  Then  beware lest you blaspheme.     4. Finally, verse 26 says that Christ gave himself once at theconsummation  of the ages "to put away sin." The glory of Christ is seen inthis: that the  problem of sin is dealt with as a whole.  The whole sin issue istaken care  of.  It is put away.  Meditate on this for your joy and for theliberty of  your soul and for your assurance in the face of death, and foryour struggle  over particular bad habits.  In one act -- the sacrifice ofhimself, the  consummation of history -- the Son of God put away sin.  All thesins of  those who believe (Hebrews 4:2; 10:38), those who are called(Hebrews 9:15),  are "put away." They are cancelled, nullified, covered.  
  This is the gospel of the glory of Christ, the image of God (2Corinthians  4:4).  I pray that, no matter how dirty with sin you are, you willsee the  light of this glory and believe.  Come.  
  
  COPYRIGHT 1997 JOHN PIPER   Return toPiper's Notes - The 1996-1997 Index.    Returnt to Piper'sNotes Front Page   
   
