  March 17, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor   
       A Sermon Preached on the Commitment Sunday of "Freeing the Future"      (Psalm 40:16)    Let all who seek Thee rejoice and be glad in Thee;    Let those who love Thy salvation say continually,    "The LORD be magnified!"   
  
      How Do You Magnify the Lord?    
What is the main thing that we are   Freeing theFuture   for? One way to say it is that we are freeing thefuture for another generation of theological astronomy. What I havein mind comes from this text, Psalm 40:16, but the language comesfrom thinking about the Comet Hyakutake that will be roaring over theNorth Pole this week. The comet was discovered January 30 by aJapanese astronomer named Hyakutake. On Friday the comet was30,000,000 miles away from us. At its nearest this week, it will beabout 10,000,000 miles away. You will be able to see it with thenaked eye all week and it may at times be as big as the moon, but itwill be smudgy instead of crisp. One estimate said that CometHyakutake may be on a 10,000-20,000 year orbit.  Now what does this have to do with freeing the future of BethlehemBaptist Church? Well, notice in Psalm 40:16 that those who love thesalvation of God have a God-appointed mission: they are to saycontinually, "The Lord be magnified!" Now "magnify" is an ambiguousword. You can magnify with microscopes and you can magnify withtelescopes. If you magnify with microscopes you try to make somethingsmall look large. But if you magnify with a telescope you try to makesomething large stop looking small and look more like it really is.  That's why Comet Hyakutake relates to this text. To the naked eyeHyakutake will look somewhat like a fuzzy softball in the sky. Buthow big is it really? Well, they are not sure yet. You've got tounderstand that comets are strange things: they are small at thecenter and huge at the edge. Hyakutake probably has a nucleus ofincredibly dense, solid ice and dust about six miles across. Then"subliming" off from that, more and more as it approaches the sun, isthe coma, the atmosphere -- about 30,000 miles thick, they estimate,for Hyakutake. Then there is the dust tail that may reach 6,000,000miles long and an ion tail that extends even longer.  Now the point is this. The night sky is full of wonders. Just likeGod is full of wonders. Look at Psalm 40:5:  Many, O Lord my God, are the wonders which Thou hast done, and Thythoughts toward us; there is none to compare with Thee; if I woulddeclare and speak of them, they would be too numerous to count.  But the problem is that in the night sky the wonders of theheavens do not appear as they really are. They seem small and notvery bright or awesome. So we must magnify them. That's what atelescope is for. Not to make them look bigger than they are. But tohelp us, in our weakness, to stop thinking of them as small and showus how great they really are.  If you can magnify Hyakutake, and show me that a smudgy soft ballis really 30,000 miles across (four times the size of the earth) Iwill be more amazed. Or if you can magnify the tail and show me thata dim cloudy trail of light a few handbreadths in width is really6,000,000 miles long, then I will feel differently about this amazingthing called a comet.  Well, that is what the Bible (Psalm 40:16) says we are to do inresponse to God. We are to magnify him. For most people God is aboutas important as Hyakutake's Comet. He is a distant smudgy softball oflight in the sky, barely visible because of all the manmade lights inthe city. But that means most people do not respond to God in a waythat honors him for who he is. He is not as important, practicallyspeaking, as the television. His book, the Bible, is not ascompelling as the news weekly. His company is not as stimulating asan NCAA basketball team. Most people say he exists -- the way cometsexist. He's out there doing his thing and shows up in our sky everynow and then (most often to be criticized for not showing up sooner),but practically he is simply not in the top ten influences of lifefrom day to day.  Now this is tragic and dangerous. It is tragic because all humanbeings were created to enjoy fellowship with God and be satisfied byhis greatness. It is tragic to see a person be more amazed at astreet light than a comet because the street light looks brighter andbigger. It is dangerous because the wrath of God rests on everyonewho treats him so disrespectfully. The reason we need a Savior isbecause we have "fallen short of the glory of God." We have offendedhim so grievously that our only hope is in salvation through his Son,Jesus Christ.    
      The Church as Observatory    What then is needed? What is needed in a world like ours is achurch (many churches!) who do for God what the 200-inch Haletelescope at the Palomar Observatory does for comets and stars. Whatis needed is a church -- a people -- which magnifies God like atelescope. A church which causes others to stop thinking of God assmall, but to think about him and see him as great as he really is.  That is what we are freeing the future for. Our mission atBethlehem is  to spread a passion for the supremacy of God in allthings for the joy of all peoples. Spreading  a passion for thesupremacy of God is what David is talking about in the last half ofverse 16: "Let those who love Thy salvation say continually, 'TheLord be magnified!'" If you say continually, "The Lord be magnified,"or "The Lord is great," then you are spreading a passion for thesupremacy of God.  The reason I have poured myself with joy into this campaigncalled   Freeing the Future   -- the reason I would like tosee us eliminate the entire debt on this building this year -- isbecause I dream of Bethlehem thriving and growing as  a collectivetelescope for the greatness of God  -- making God look as great ashe really is, and helping people wake up to what he is really like.Our mission is  theological astronomy      -- seeinginto the vast glories of God in Christ and magnifying them for ourcity and for the joy of all peoples.  I see Bethlehem as a kind of Christian Kitt Peak NationalObservatory. Kitt Peak is located 50 miles southwest of Tucson and isa major astronomical observation center -- in solar, planetary,stellar, galactic, and extragalactic astronomy. It has 15 majortelescopes including a 36-foot diameter radio telescope. Perhaps morethan in any other place on earth, Kitt's Peak astronomers magnify theheavens to show the greatness that they really have, and to spreadthat truth all around the world.  Now that's what I think we are freeing the future for at Bethlehem-- to be a Christian Kitt Peak Observatory. To see into the gloriesof God with the telescope of his Word, and to handle thishigh-powered revelation with the voltage of the Holy Spirit, and todo what David says we should in Psalm 40:16: "Let those who love Thysalvation say continually, 'The Lord be magnified!'"  God has given us a focused and clear and simple mission. If wehold fast to it, the impact of our church as a Christian Kitt PeakObservatory, magnifying the glory God will be more than anyone canimagine. A clear and simple vision is a powerful thing. We exist tosay continually -- to live continually, to show continually -- "TheLord be magnified." David says, "Continually"! Say it" continually ." Make it the theme of your life, Bethlehem. Makeit the melody of your songs. Make it the banner over all youractivity. Make it the rallying cry of your gatherings. Make it themeaning of your homes, the aim of your parenting, the design of yourmarriage, and the goal of your vocation. Make it the mission of yourChurch. Say continually, "The Lord be magnified." "Great is theLord!"  Be a church where the city lights of this world are giving way tothe stunning night-skylights of the glory of God. Be a church whereGod is not "twinkle, twinkle little star, how I wonder where youare," but rather God is the is one whose first baby step in stridingacross the universe is from here to the limit of our scope, 20million parsecs away (each of which is equal to 19 trillion miles).Bethlehem, free your future for this: to be a Christian Kitt PeakObservatory in the middle of Minneapolis and to magnify the Lordcontinually. To say continually to the church and the city and thenations: "The Lord be magnified!" See that the Lord is not small likea dot in the sky. He is great -- the one who made billions ofgalaxies by the word of his power, and holds them all in being andguides every electron in every molecule in every substance in theuniverse unfailingly for his sovereign purposes.    
      "Let All Who Seek Thee Rejoice"    But that is not yet the heart of our distinctive calling as achurch. Because that is not yet the heart of Psalm 40:16. The heartof our calling and our mission is to demonstrate the truth that Godis most magnified in us when we are most satisfied in him. Whichmeans simply that joy in God is a powerful mirror in the observatoryof God's glories. Joy in God -- especially joy in the midst ofsuffering and loss -- reveals the magnitude of God's greatness andlove.  This is why Psalm 40:16 says, "Let all who seek Thee rejoice andbe glad in Thee," just before it says, "Let those who love Thysalvation say continually, 'The Lord be magnified!'" Let's look atthis carefully. This is right at the heart of why I am making mypledge this morning to   Freeing the Future  . I believewith all my heart that we stand for something of infinite value andthat God has called us to say it and live it in a distinctive way atBethlehem.  David says, "Let all who seek Thee rejoice and be glad in Thee."What this means is that if you seek the Lord, you should rejoice andbe glad in the Lord. The Lord is like a treasure. You seek treasure.If you find it, you rejoice and are glad. If you are not, you showthat the treasure is a disappointment. It is not what you'd hoped. Ifyou rejoice and are glad you reveal more of the worth of thetreasure. So if your mission is to "Magnify the Lord," -- to showthat he not a smudgy softball in the sky but a magnificent power andglory, then you rejoice in him. He is magnified in you when you aresatisfied in him. That's our message. That's our life.  David says, "All who  seek  the Lord . . ." Seeking the Lordis what we do at Bethlehem. We put our eyes to the telescope againand again. What are we looking for? David tells us in Psalm 27:4,"One thing I have asked from the Lord, that I shall  seek  : that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all thedays of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to meditate inHis temple."  We seek to behold his beauty, to be with him, to meditate on him.This is our central business in the church -- to see the beauty ofGod. To get our heads into the heavens. To know him for who he is. Heis the main reality -- not buildings, not Christians, not missions,not heaven. God himself is what we seek. And David says, when you doseek him, "rejoice and be glad in him."  Do not dishonor this beauty by saying, "Ho hum." Do not dishonorthis galaxy by saying, "Big deal." No. This is your mission: rejoiceand be glad in him. He is supreme and his supremacy is your passion.That is what you are freeing the future for -- that this message andthis life go on for generations to come.  Look at the word "love" in the second half of Psalm 40:16: "Letthose who  love      thy salvation say continually,'The Lord be magnified!'" This is passion and gladness. This is ourmission at Bethlehem. We are called to say to the church and theworld:  Love  salvation! Love it. Love it. That is, bepassionate about it. Cherish it. Treasure it. Embrace it. Don't becasual or cavalier about your salvation. Don't treat it like old fireextinguisher forgotten in the garage. Love it! Love your salvation!    
      Love our Salvation or Love God?    But wait a minute. Is this consistent with what we have seen aboutmagnifying  God    and rejoicing in  God ? Are we tolove our  salvation  or love  God ? And what about thenations and the city dwellers who don't know God? The key to boththese questions is found in the first three verses of the Psalm 40.  I waited patiently for the Lord; And he inclined to me, and heardmy cry. He brought me up out of the pit of destruction, out of themiry clay; And he set my feet upon a rock making my footsteps firm.And he put a new song in my mouth, a song of praise to our God; Manywill see and fear, And will trust in the Lord.  Here is salvation. If you are a Christian, God rescued you fromthe quicksand of sin by the death of his Son and through faith inhim. And he has rescued you again and again from various threats toyour faith. He has saved you, he is saving you now, and he will go onsaving you forever.  But notice what happens when God saves a desperate sinner (verse12) from the miry clay. Verse 3: "he put a new song in my mouth, asong of praise  to our God   .  " God saves so thatyou will sing a song of praise to God. God puts in your mouth a songto God. The effect of salvation from miry clay is not to make youforget God and love firm ground. It is to fill you with a song toGod. God is the center of salvation. You are rescued for God.  So when it says in verse 16 that we "love salvation," it meansthat we love it when this happens to us. We love it when we arerescued from the miry clay for God's sake. We love it when he puts anew song of praise in our hearts -- to God! So we are not idolizingour salvation. Salvation does not take the place of God. It hasbrought us home to God.  This is why in verse 16b it does  not  say, "Let those wholove thy salvation say continually, 'Salvation be magnified,'" butsays, "Let those who love thy salvation say continually, 'The Lord  be magnified.'" We love our salvation because it shows usthe love and power and wisdom of God and brings us home to him.    
      Our Song is Our Evangelism    And finally, what about the secular city, the nations, the peoplewho do not rejoice in God and do not know his salvation throughChrist? Does our mission free the future for them? The answer isfound in verse 3: "He put a new song in my mouth, a song of praise toour God; many will see and fear, and will trust in the Lord." Therethey are. Our joy, our gladness in God is the great mirror in thetelescope for the nations and for the neighbors.  God saves me from the miry clay. He makes me secure. He puts a newsong in my mouth. He makes himself the feast of my joy. And whathappens: "many will see and fear, and will trust in the Lord." Oursong is our evangelism. Our passion for God is our persuasion for thenations. When we are satisfied in God, he will be magnified inothers. That's exactly what David says. We will sing and many willsee and fear and put their trust in the Lord.  So our joy in God is both our worship and our evangelism. Ourmission is to be a Christian Kitt Peak Observatory at the center ofthe city. We are called to seek God -- to see him in the telescope ofhis Word. And we are called to rejoice and be glad in what we see --to have a new song of praise to our God -- that's worship. And out ofthat worship flow missions and evangelism as we show the power andlove and wisdom of God, and welcome the nations and the neighbors tojoin us in our joy.  This is why I am excited about   Freeing the Future  . Ibelieve in this mission with all my heart (and my money) -- that weexist to spread a passion for the supremacy of God in all things forthe joy of all peoples.  Copyright 1996 John Piper  
  
