  The point of this morning's message was that Godtakes pleasure in his name.  Specifically, he chose a people forhimself in order that they might be for him a people and a nameand a praise and a glory (Jeremiah 13:11).  One text that we didn'trefer to this morning is Isaiah 43:21.  Here God refers to hischosen people as   the people whom I formed for myself that they might declare my praise.   In other words God formed a people for himself thatthey might make a name for him -- that they might spread his reputationand increase his fame and promote his renown.  Now we come tonight to see how this relates to thechurch, the New Testament people of God.  1 Peter 2:9 gives theanswer.  It describes the God's formation of the church in termstaken straight from the Old Testament, and the purpose of thechurch is stated in just the way we would expect if God continuesto act for the sake of his name:  But you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, aholy nation, God's own people, that you may declare the wonderfuldeeds of him who called you out of darkness into his marvelouslight.  Why has God chosen us and made us a possession forhimself?  The answer is the same as this morning's: to make aname for himself.  The way Peter says it is that you were chosento declare God's excellencies, his wonders, specifically his savingwork in bringing you from darkness into light.    God has given us the joy of spiritual sight so thatwe might spread the reputation of our eye doctor.  Or you couldsay that we were caught in a deep mine shaft and it was cavingin on us, and Jesus came down into the collapsing shaft of oursin and guilt and fear, and he put us on his back, and at thecost of his own life got us out.  Why?  So that we would spreadthe reputation of his courage and strength and kindness.    That is the point of verse 9: You are a chosenrace. . . that you may declare the wonderful deeds of him whocalled you out of darkness into his marvelous light.  Godhas chosen us and brought us from darkness to light so that wewould spread his reputation and be for him a name and a praiseand a glory.  Now the question arises: How are we to make a namefor God?  Verses 11-12 get at the heart of this matter.  Togetherthe verses say that we have two battles to fight in order to makeknown the glorious name of God: one on the inside in relationto our passions, and one on the outside in relation to our deeds. Let's look briefly at each.  Verse 11 describes the internal battle to be foughtif we are going to make the glories of God known in our society.   Beloved, I beseech you as aliens and exiles to abstainfrom the passions of the flesh that wage war against your soul.   This is probably the most crucial battleground ofall -- the internal battle for our desires.  In this week's ChristianityToday there is a report of a gathering of 50 evangelical leadersto plan a meeting called Leadership '88.  They discussedthe resources and legacy that a generation of older leaders couldleave a new generation.  I found it amazing that at the top oftheir list was the cultivation of the inner life with Christ.  And these were people very sensitive to the culturaland social issues of our day.  Nevertheless, they said the numberone resource to pass on the next generation of leaders is thecultivation of the inner life with Christ.  I think the reason is simply that this is the motorthat drives everything else.  If the motor dies it doesn't reallymatter which way the car is pointing.    And so let us fight first of all to be aliens andexiles in the world of the passions and desires.  This means makingGod your passion.  Fill your mind with things that exhibit thegreatness and value and beauty and truth of God.  And shun allthe things that stimulate desires that compete with God.  Regulateyour life in order to cultivate a passion for God and the thingsof God.  Be ruthless in cutting out of your life everything thatstirs up desires displeasing to God.  Remember Proverbs 4:23: Keep your heart withall vigilance; for from it flow the springs of life.  And so let us turn to that outer life that flowsfrom the alien heart of love for God.  If the marvelous worksof God are going to be made known, and the reputation of God isgoing to spread, we WILL have to get beyond desires, to deedsthat people can see and hear.  Verse 12:    Maintain good conduct among the Gentiles, so thatin case they speak against you as wrongdoers, they may see yourgood deeds and glorify God on the day of visitation.   This is Peter's clearest statement as to how we canmake a name for God.  It is a paraphrase of Jesus' words in Matthew5:16: Let your light so shine before men that they may seeyour good deeds and give glory to your father in heaven.  Here is the lesson I would stress tonight from thisverse: DOING GOOD DEEDS BEFORE AN ONLOOKING WORLD IS A NECESSARYPART OF DECLARING GOD'S MARVELOUS WORKS AND MAKING HIM A NAMEON THE EARTH.  Paul made the same point when he said in Titus 3:14,   Christ gave himself for us to redeem us from alliniquity and to purify for himself a people of his own who arezealous for good deeds.   Similarly in Galatians 6:10,   As we have opportunity, let us do good to all men,and especially those who are of the household of faith.   James teaches the same thing, that our religion isjust not real if it only results in thoughts and feelings andnot in practical good deeds.  In James 1:27 he says,    Religion that is pure and undefiled before God andthe Father is this: to visit orphans and widows in their affliction,and to keep oneself unstained from the world.   Now Peter spells out for us in verse 12 some of thedynamics of making a name for God.  He describes three steps thatthe world may go through in response to us as Christians.  First he says that there may well be a hostile atmospherein which we have to live.  Verse 12 says that Christians werebeing spoken against as wrongdoers. Maintain good conductamong the Gentiles so that in case they speak against you as wrongdoers.. .  In the early days of the church Christians were sometimesthe scapegoats for other problems in the society and were blamedas wrongdoers.  They were spoken against.  Second, Peter says that if we maintain good conductand don't grow weary in well doing, our good deeds will eventuallybe inescapable.  Men will see and some at least will have to ownup to them. Maintain good conduct among the Gentiles, sothat in case they speak against you as wrongdoers, they may seeyour good deeds     . . .   They want to believe that Christianity has no powerto change lives and and to create loving people out of selfishpeople, and so they begin by calling Christians wrongdoers andthey seek ways to justify this.  But Peter believes that the gooddeeds will win out over this prejudice.    He says it again in verse 15: For it is God'swill that by doing right you should put to silence the ignoranceof foolish men.  Doing good for others, Peter says, is theway to silence the unwarranted criticism of the church and ofChrist.  So that is the second step.  First people try tocriticize the church and say that they are no better or even worsethan others in their behavior.  But then, as they go on seeingthe good deeds of Christians, they are hard put to hold this positionand they may be silenced.  That brings us to the third step Peter mentions. These good deeds that Christians keep on doing may cause someto give up their opposition and be won over and give glory toGod. Maintain good conduct among the Gentiles, so that incase they speak against you as wrongdoers, they may see your gooddeeds and glorify God on the day of visitation.  The day of visitation here could be theday of Christ's coming or it could be the day of their conversionwhen they are visited with the converting power of the Spirit. In either case, the overarching point is that God gets glorywhen his people persevere in good deeds.  So what we have here is a clear statement of howat Bethlehem we can fulfill our purpose as a church.  Our purposeaccording to this morning's message is to make a name for Godin this city and to spread the reputation of his greatness aroundthe world.  According to 1 Peter 2:9 our purpose is to declarethe glorious deeds of him who called us from darkness into hismarvelous light.  These are really the same purpose and 1 Peter2:12 tells us how to fulfill it.  Be a people zealous for good deeds.  Be a peoplewho are not enslaved to worldly comforts, but who consider itmore blessed to give than to receive.  Be a people who dream notabout the comforts of bigger salaries or days of vacation andretirement, but who dream about how many different and creativeways we can make a name for the glory of the grace of God in thiscity and around the world.    This is why I am so happy that the church has madethis decision to call David Michael as Associate for Urban andSocial Ministries.  He shares this great vision of adorning thegospel of God with deeds of love and justice that the ignoranceof foolish men may be silenced and the many might see and be drawnto a Savior who can so fully satisfy the hearts of his peoplethat they overflow in goodness to others.  
