  April 4, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church Maundy Thursday John Piper, Pastor      HE MADE PURIFICATION FOR SINS   (Hebrews 1:1-4)    In eternity we're going to sing on and on and on and it will benever-ending joy, ever-deepening joy. On a dark night like thisMaundy Thursday we want to remember how it is that we got such apromise, sinners like us. So let's turn to Hebrews 1:1-4. We'll lookagain at those verses we saw on Sunday morning. We'll take one phrasetonight and focus on it.  God, after he spoke long ago to the fathers in the prophets inmany portions and in many ways, in these last days has spoken to usin His Son, whom He appointed heir of all things, through whom alsoHe made the world. He is the radiance of His glory and the exactrepresentation of his nature and upholds all things by the word ofhis power. When he had made purification of sins, He sat down at theright hand of the Majesty on high; having become as much better thanangels, as He has inherited a more excellent name than they.    
      "When He Had Made Purification ofSins"    Let's consider that phrase in verse 3 for just a few minutesbefore we eat together the Lord's Supper --  "when he had madepurification of sins."  And let's break it into three parts. (1)" He"  -- there's a person here. (2)  "Of sins"  -- theproblem that he had to deal with. (3)  "Had made purification. We'll simply dwell on each of these and then we'll go to the tabletogether.    
      "He"    Let's start with the  "He" . Never forget that there's aperson here. There's a person who's alive, who laid down his life --he loves, he thinks, he feels, he wills, and even today he has abody. That body came down from that cross and when it rose from thetomb, though it had special qualities about it, it was recognized byhis followers. They could touch it. It could eat fish to prove thatit was not a ghost. So there is a whole person who we're going torelate to forever and ever. He's alive today. He's at the Father'sright hand. He is personal. He promised never to leave us or forsakeus. He promised to be with us. He is here in this room right now byhis spirit listening to me. He is as close to you as the person nextto you. He is real. He is a person. He is a he. He is there.  He is real -- don't ever forget that. Cultivate a relationshipwith this person. Put Jesus at the center of your life. Relate toJesus. Some of us became Christians through a form of evangelism thatwas exactly right. It said, "Do you have a personal relationship withJesus?" That's the right question. Sometimes we take it very lightly,but here's a person and he's alive and he's here and he's in heaven.He can do that. And he's glorious. Let's see how glorious he isbecause it's the gloriousness of the glory of the person that makesthe laying down of his life so spectacularly valuable and assuring.  There are at least seven things said about him in these verses.  (1) He's the heir of all things .  (2) He created  -- through him all things were made.  (3 )He is the radiance of the Father's glory  --so if youwant to know the glory, the moral beauty of the glory of the father,read the gospel and behold the person of Jesus because he's theradiance (the streaming out, the effulgence) of the glory of God.  (4)  He is the exact character or representation of the father'sdivine nature . If you've seen me, you've seen the father.  (5)  He upholds the universe  --all things -- by the word ofhis power. So today this person is infinitely powerful. He isspeaking all the solar system, and all the Milky Way, and all theother galaxies into being , as well as all the molecules and all thewood and brick of this building. He's holding our flesh and hair andskin and lungs and tissue and fingernails in being right now. If hewere to stop thinking you into being you would cease to be. That'show dependent you are on this person.  (6)  He sat down at the right hand of the Majesty  and theseating is an enthronement. He is the king of the universe. He's atthe right hand of God the Father and he reigns over all government.He reigns over the devil. He reigns over weather. He reigns overheart attacks and cancer and Parkinson's disease. He reigns tonight.  (7)  Therefore he is greater than the angels . Sort of soundslike an anti-climax. But the rest of the chapter is devoted to this-- to the utter superiority of this person over all other heavenlypersons save the Father.  So that's number one -- we are dealing tonight with a person. He'salive. He's real and all seven of those facts are true about him.That's the person who made purification.    
      "Of Sins"    Let's pick up the sin factor first. It's at the end of the phrase--  "made purification of sins."  Sin is a reality. It's a powerin the world. When you read the book of Romans you have to come toterms with the fact that sin is not just a little isolated thing wedo here and there. It's not just deeds, it's a power. It moves in theheart. It moves in the will. It moves in the world. It takes hold.It's got a grip on every human being. It's an awful thing. Everybodyin this room is infected with it.  Some have a remedy at work in their lives that will bring them toglory. Perhaps some tonight don't. But we're all infected, like adisease. And it's lethal. We will all die physically. He has notwilled to remove that aspect of the curse. We will all pass throughdeath unless Jesus returns first. So sin is a universal thing, ahorrid thing, a disease thing. Hebrews 3:14-19 defines it for us --What is it? How bad is it?  We have become partakers of Christ, if we hold fast the beginningof our assurance firm until the end; while it is said, "Today if youhear his voice, do not harden your hearts, as when they provoked me."For who provoked Him when they had heard? Indeed, did not all thosewho came out of Egypt led by Moses? And with whom was He angry forforty years?  Was it not with those who sinned , whose bodiesfell in the wilderness? And to whom did he swear that they should notenter his rest , but to those who were disobedient ? And so wesee that they were not able to enter because of unbelief.  There are three things I want you to see here about sin so thatyou can really come to terms with this.  (1)  Sin is rooted in unbelief . I want you to feel what sinis. All sin flows from a lack of trust in God. If we had perfecttrust in the wisdom and love and power of God we would not go againsthim so freely and so often as we do. So there's root unbelief behindsin.  I spoke over at the university last night to a group of 250-300students. There were some unbelievers there, and one young woman cameup afterwards and described her situation to me. She asked me if Ithought she were guilty. I told here what I tell almost everybody whoasks me that: "probably you were, at least in part". And I said, "Thereason I say that to you, rather than making you feel good by sayingit was probably all their fault, is because the gospel is not amessage that tells us we are not guilty for what we've done. Thegospel is a message that tells us there is a guilt remover." If wetry to make ourselves feel good by saying, "I wasn't guilty for that.I didn't do anything or I'm not the problem in this relationship," weshort-circuit the gospel. The gospel is for people who know how badthey are, who feel bad about it, who know that they had a hand in themessed-up relationship, who know they're making choices that arewrong. And the sane thing is to say to God, "Yes, I'm guilty ofthat." And to have God answer back, "I have made a provision."  (2)  There's disobedience . You see that in verse 18 --"those who were disobedient." There's a will of God and we've goneagainst the will of God and we've disobeyed.   (3) God is angry with sin.  We are very quick in the 20thcentury to say that God is a loving God. They were very quick in the18th century to say that God is an angry God. Sinners in the hands ofan angry God. And both of these things are absolutely true. Dependingon where you are between the 18th and 20th centuries you need to hearone of those messages or the other. My guess is that most of us livein the 20th century and we have heard very often that God is love,God is love, God is love, and we have not dwelt very long on factthat God is against sin. He is angry at sin. God is angry every day,Psalm 2 says. He is angry every day at sin. I read a very goodarticle that helped me understand this. It argued that the cross isthe outflow of the anger of God -- not just of the love of God, butof the anger of God. The cross is the fruit of the wrath of Godagainst sin. Why is that true? The anger that he feels against sin iswhat brought his Son to suffering and death; but if he had hadanother way to deal with sin, he would have done it another way. Thecross is an expression of two things, not just one thing. A justanger, and an incredible mercy towards sinners. So let's notshort-circuit the gospel tonight. Let's reckon with the truth --we're sinners and God is angry at sin. Sin is a great offense againsthim.    
      "Had Made Purification"    And now finally we see the gospel in this word "purification."  Verse 3, "when he had made purification ofsins." I want you to see something in the words "had made" and I wantyou to see something in the word "purification". The main thing in"had made" is that from the perspective of this writer, and fromChrist's having taken his seat at the right hand of God, the work ofpurifying your sins is totally finished. It is so important tounderstand this -- "had made." Not "is making". Not "will make". Not"at the Lord's table when you eat this he makes purification"--no! He had made  it and then he sat down. That's one thing and it'sover. The enthronement of Christ is an honor and a tribute to thework and finishedness of that work. I want you to feel that tonight.  The purification that was made was made once for all. Don't think,"I sinned a long time in my life and then I found Christ and Ibelieved and he interposed his blood and he cleaned up the first halfof my life. Now I'm living a little bit by faith and still sinning."Don't think that way! The interposition of the blood was 2000 yearsago, never repeated, finished, for  all  your sins -- for thesin that you will commit on your dying day a year from now or 40, 50,60 years from now. The purification of that sin happened 2000 yearsago. So this is an awesome gospel. Yes it is open to great abuses.Paul had to deal with those abuses, "Oh well, let's sin that gracemay abound!" But he was willing to risk it. So was the writer to theHebrews. Jesus has made purification for sin. It's finished. Adecisive thing happened to all your sins at Calvary. It doesn't getrepeated at this table.  Let's walk through several texts to see that I'm not just pickingout something that I like to emphasize. I'm picking out something toemphasize which this writer to the Hebrews loves with all his heart.I want you to see that. (See also Hebrews 7:26-27, 9:11-12, 9:25-26.)   (I'm going to insert a little parenthesis here that'stheologically controversial. I want you to consider it -- not tosettle it tonight, but to consider. One of the points of Reformedtheology is definite atonement. Definite atonement means that whenChrist died -- the decisive putting away of sin -- he did for his ownpeople and not for everybody. It does not mean that he didn't die foreverybody in one sense, that is, of making the atonement available toall who believe. But what I'm reading here will simply not make senseif you try to apply it to everybody. Sin has not been put away foreverybody. There's not an eternal redemption for everybody.Purification has not been finished for everybody. There is a sweetcovenant bond between the bride and the bridegroom by which aneffectual work was wrought on Calvary for the bride that is effectualand finished so that the bride is wholly clean.. It's a controversialissue I know and I don't insist that you understand or embrace itentirely. But you'll know where I am and why I love these texts --because I am the bride of Christ -- because the covenant he made withme (and not with the world) at the cost of his own blood to make mehis bride, is very precious. The love that he has for you and me as acovenant people is so precious and it is rooted in a finished,effectual, full and complete putting away of our sins once for all onthe cross, which has not been done for the world. It has been donefor the bride. We need to feel the preciousness of that. Otherwisewe're going to feel like, "Well, I am forgivable tonight like theworld is forgivable, but maybe not much more." Now that is the end ofthe parenthesis, and I commend your study of it for years tocome)   Inasmuch as it is appointed for men to die once and after thiscomes judgment, so Christ also, having been offered once to bear thesins of  many  shall appear a second time for salvation withoutreference to sin for those who are eagerly waiting for him. (Hebrews9:27-28)  You know who I think the "many" are -- the bride, you and me,believers.  By this we have been sanctified through the offering of the bodyof Jesus Christ once for all. (Hebrews 10:10)  Your sanctification was purchased fully in the offering of Christ once for all .  And every priest stands daily ministering and offering time aftertime the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins; but Hehaving offered one sacrifice for sins for all time, sat down at theright hand of God . . . (Hebrews 10:11-12)  One offering. Once for all. For all sin. And it is finished.  By one offering he has perfected for all time those who aresanctified. (Hebrews 10:14)  The tenses of the verbs are so important. He  has  perfected.That's a perfect -- he did it, it is finished, and the fruits abide.The next one is a present tense. Those who  are  beingsanctified. So this is the marvel of Hebrews 10:14: all those who byfaith have been united to Christ, who have had the holy spiritindwell them, and who are progressively having their sins defeatedare perfect people before God now because of the blood of Jesus.Finished. If you are progressively being perfected you  are perfected before the Father. If you are progressively beingsanctified and overcoming sins, though not yet perfect in moral formhere, that is the evidence of union with Christ. All he achieved isnow made over to you by covenant. The Father looks upon you as whollyaccepted and perfected in the Beloved. If you can grasp that, if youcan live in that triumph, what a life you will live! I commend it toyou tonight.  Copyright 1996 John Piper  
  
