  March 23, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor  
  LET US DRAW NEAR TO GOD  (Hebrews 10:19-22)  
  A Zeal for God, but Lost  
  One of the passages of scripture from my own personal meditationsthat has  had the greatest impact on me in recent weeks is Romans 10:1-2where Paul  says about his kinsmen, the Jewish people:  
  My heart's desire and prayer to God for them is that they may besaved. For,  I bear them witness that they have a zeal for God, but it is notaccording to  knowledge.  
  What struck me here is that it is possible to have a zeal for Godand be  lost. A zeal for God and lost - perishing! "My heart’s desire isthat they  be saved," he says. So they are not saved. Why? They have zeal forGod.  They are, in fact, part of the chosen Jewish people. But he praysthat they  would be saved. What’s wrong? What’s wrong with their zeal? AndPaul  answers: It is not according to knowledge. True knowledge isnecessary for  salvation. They have zeal. But it is not rooted in knowledge.  
  Now zeal - the passion of the heart for God - is important. Jesussaid to  love God with all your heart, and all your soul, and all your mind(Matthew  22:37). He said that lukewarm people will be spewed out of hismouth  (Revelation 3:16). And just two chapters later, in Romans 12:11,Paul will  say, "Never flag in zeal, be aglow with the Spirit, serve theLord."  Literally: "Boil in the spirit." Zeal is important.  
  Draw Near!  
  But without knowledge it does not lead to salvation. Now here isthe  relevance of this thought when we come to this passage in Hebrews10:19-22.  In these verses there is one main, straightforward command,namely, "Draw  near!" That is what this writer wants you to do. Draw near. Lookat these  verses: there is only one exhortation, once you pull away all thedefining  and qualifying phrases and clauses.  
  Since therefore, brethren, we have confidence to enter the holyplace by the  blood of Jesus, by the new and living way which He inaugurated forus through  the veil, that is, His flesh, and since we have a great priestover the house  of God, let us draw near with a sincere heart in full assurance offaith,  having our hearts sprinkled clean from an evil conscience and ourbody washed  with pure water.  
  He has one simple, deep, high, holy, happy, seemingly impossiblegoal for us,  his readers. Draw near. To what? Well, it is not hard to find out,since  this is a favorite word for this writer. Take just three of itsseven  occurrences:  
  Hebrews 4:16 - Let us draw near with confidence to the throne ofgrace, that  we may receive mercy and may find grace to help in time of need.  
  Hebrews 7:25 - He is able to save forever those who draw near toGod through  Him, since He always lives to make intercession for them.  
  Hebrews 11:6 - Without faith it is impossible to please Him, forhe who draws  near to God must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder ofthose who  seek Him.  
  The great passion of this writer is that we draw near to God. Thatwe come  to his throne to find all the help we need. That we come to himconfident  that he will reward us with all that he is for us in Jesus. Andthis is  clearly what he means here in Hebrews 10:22, because verse 19 saysthat we  have confidence "to enter the holy place," that is, the newheavenly "holy of  holies" like that inner room in the old tabernacle of the OldTestament where  the high priest met with God once a year, and where his glorydescended on  the ark of the covenant.  
  So the one command, the one exhortation, that we are given inHebrews  10:19-22 is to draw near to God. The great aim of this writer isthat we get  near God, that we have fellowship with him, that we not settle fora  Christian life at a distance from God, that God not be a distantthought, but  a near and present reality, that we experience what the oldPuritans called  communion with God.  
  This drawing near is not a physical act. It’s not building a towerof Babel,  by your achievements, to get to heaven. It’s not necessarily goingto a  church building. Or walking to an altar at the front. It is aninvisible  act of the heart. You can do it while standing absolutely still,or while  lying in a hospital bed, or while sitting in a pew listening to asermon.  Drawing near is not moving from one place to another. It is adirecting of  the heart into the presence of God who is as distant as the holyof holies in  heaven, and yet as near as the door of faith. He is commanding usto come.  To approach him. To draw near to him.  
  The Center of the Gospel  
  In fact, this is the very heart of the entire New Testamentgospel, isn’t it?  That Christ came into the world to make a way for us to come toGod without  being consumed in our sin by his holiness.  
  1 Peter 3:18 - For Christ also died for sins once for all, thejust for the  unjust, in order that He might bring us to God.  
  Ephesians 2:18 - [Through Christ] we . . . have our access in oneSpirit to  the Father.  
  Romans 5:11 - We exult in God through our Lord Jesus Christ,through whom we  have now received the reconciliation.  
  This is the center of the gospel - this is what the Garden ofGethsemane and  Good Friday are all about - that God has done astonishing andcostly things  to draw us near. He has sent his Son to suffer and to die so thatthrough  him we might draw near. It’s all so that we might draw near. Andall of  this is for our joy and for his glory. He does not need us. If westay away  he is not impoverished. He does not need us in order to be happyin the  fellowship of the Trinity. But he magnifies his mercy by giving usfree  access through his Son, in spite of our sin, to the one Realitythat can  satisfy us completely and forever, namely, himself. "In thypresence is  fullness of joy, at thy right hand are pleasures forever more"(Psalm 16:11).  
  That is God’s will for you, even as I preach - that you will drawnear to  God. That you will speak like the psalmist in Psalm 42:2, "My soulthirsts  for God, for the living God; when shall I come and appear beforeGod?"  Answer that question like this: "Now. I will come now, while Johnis  preaching. I am praying. Father, I come, I come. I draw near."  
  But we must go back and pick up the thread of thought. I wastrying to show  you the relevance of Romans 10: 2 for this passage: there is azeal that is  not according to knowledge, and there is a zeal that is accordingto  knowledge. This zeal is important. Most fundamentally this is azeal to  draw near to God. To be right with God. To enjoy a relationshipwith God.  
  In other words, the central point of this text is that we have azeal for  nearness to God. That we have a zeal for drawing near to God. Weshould not  draw near lukewarmly, or indifferently. Even when we feel dull andlifeless,  we should say, "O God, I am dull and lifeless, and there is onlyone hope for  me, nearness to you. I come. Have mercy on me and touch me withyour flame  and set me on fire again. Give me life in your presence. Open myeyes to  your glory and make me live again."  
  This text is calling for zeal - a zeal for nearness to God.  
  Zeal With Knowledge  
  Now if that is true, look how the text illustrates Romans 10:2,that a zeal  without knowledge is worthless and leads to destruction.Everything in these  verses (Hebrews 10:19-22) is meant to help us draw near to God bygiving us  knowledge. You could say that it is all written so that yourdrawing near to  God will be "according to knowledge." So that it will not be said,"This  people zealously tries to draw near to God, but their coming isnot according  to knowledge." These verses are packed with knowledge aboutdrawing near to  God. They are like hot coals packed around the exhortation, "Letus draw  near to God," to keep it warm and earnest. They are also rock-hardcoals  with a shape that holds the exhortation in place and keep itstraight.  
  That’s what knowledge is for: it is for life and warmth of zealand firmness  of conviction. It’s to keep the heart burning with true zeal. "Didnot our  hearts burn within us while he talked to us on the road, while heopened to  us the scriptures?" (Luke 24:32). While he packed our hearts withthe coals  of knowledge!  
  We don’t have time to look at each of these coals but let me showyou at  least how they are packed. And my hope is that you will see theimportance  of taking the coals of truth in God’s word and packing them aroundthe  prayers and purposes of your life to draw near to God. And, O, maythey make  your pursuit of God burn with true zeal.  
  First notice the word "therefore" at the beginning of verse 19."Therefore .  . . let us draw near to God." This directs our minds back to truththat has  gone before. Verse 14 has said, "[God] has perfected for all timethose who  are being sanctified." Therefore draw near. In Christ, you who arebeing  sanctified by the Spirit, day by day, you are now, already, beforeGod  perfected. Therefore, because of this truth, draw near to God! Letyour  zeal for drawing near accord with this truth.  
  Then he quotes the new covenant promise from Jeremiah 31:33-34.Verse 17: "I  will remember their lawless deeds no more." Therefore, draw nearto God.  Are you staying away because of sins in your past? He says, "Iwill not  call them to mind against you ever. I virtually forget them as faras  punitive effects are concerned. They are gone. Therefore, becauseof this  truth draw near." So the "therefore" in verse 19 points to coalsof  knowledge and truth packed behind this zeal for drawing near toGod.  
  Then, in verse 19, the main exhortation, "Let us draw near," ispreceded by  two other clauses that begin with "since." Since this is true . ..  therefore, draw near to God. So the command to draw near is beingpacked as  densely as possible, it seems, with coals of truth. The first"since" clause  (verses 19-20) says, "Since we have confidence to enter the holyplace by the  blood of Jesus, by the new and living way which he inaugurated forus through  the veil, that is, his flesh" . . . since things are true (and youhave this  knowledge) therefore draw near!  
  You are entering a holy place when you draw near to God. That is atruth.  So don’t come carelessly or flippantly. But here is another truth:the  blood of Jesus, the Son of God has been shed for you, so that yoursins are  forgiven and the holiness of God will not consume you but thrillyou. And  here is another truth: the way to God is new: it is not the oldcovenant way  with dead animals and priests who die and have to be replaced. Itis a  living way, with one sacrifice and one priest: Jesus. And he isalive and he  intercedes for you. Since this is true, draw near to God.  
  In fact. it says in verse 21 - this is the second "since clause" -he is a  great high priest over the house of God. He has made a way for youby the  spilling of his blood and the tearing of his flesh - like thecurtain in the  temple - and he is alive as your priest today who will alwayscover you and  advocate for you and be your mediator in the presence of God.Since this is  true, draw near. Draw near according to this knowledge.  
  Draw Near with a Sincere Heart  
  Then comes the command itself in verse 22: "Let us draw near toGod." But he  is not finished packing coals of truth around this exhortation. Hesays to  do it "with a sincere heart, in full assurance of faith." This isthe zeal  he wants us to have: as we come to God, come with full assuranceof faith,  or, as verse 19 says, come with "confidence" or "boldness."  
  But the heart wavers. It begins to grow cold. It trembles withuncertainty  and a sense of utter inadequacy. And so he packs in this lasttruth at the  end of verse 22; your heart is sprinkled clean from an evilconscience, and  your baptism was the sign of it. "Having our hearts sprinkledclean from an  evil conscience and our body washed with pure water . . ." Theblood of  Christ so completely covers our sin and removes our guilt that theconscience  can rest at peace - not because we are sinless, and not becausethe  conscience doesn’t sometimes accuse us, but because when it does,we by faith  speak to it and say, "I know I have sinned. It grieves me. I hatemy sin.  But I have a Savior, Jesus Christ, who shed his priceless bloodfor me, to  bear my sins and cover my transgressions. Therefore be silent, Oconscience.  Be at peace in Jesus."  
  And because that is true, let us draw near.  
  This is a zeal for nearness to God that according to truth.  
  The Example of John Owen, a Puritan  
  I mentioned earlier that the old Puritans called this drawing near"common  with God." We need to learn from them. J.I. Packer says that thePuritans  differ from evangelicals today because, with them:  
  communion with God was a great thing; to evangelicals today it isa  comparatively small thing. The Puritans were concerned aboutcommunion with  God in a way we are not. The measure of our unconcern is thelittle that we  say about it. When Christians meet, they talk to each other abouttheir  Christian work and Christian interests, their Christianacquaintances, the  state of the churches, and the problems of theology - but rarelyof their  daily experience of God.  
  According to Packer the greatest of the Puritans was John Owen.Owen’s  experience of communion with God is a great example for us. Godsaw to it  that Owen and the suffering Puritans of his day lived closer toGod and  sought after communion with God more earnestly than we. Writing aletter  during an illness in 1674 he said to a friend, "Christ is our bestfriend,  and ere long will be our only friend. I pray God with all my heartthat I  may be weary of everything else but converse and communion withHim." God  used illness and all the other pressures of Owen's life to drivehim into  communion with God and not away from it.  
  But Owen was also very intentional about his communion with God.He said,  "Friendship is most maintained and kept up by visits; and these,the more  free and less occasioned by urgent business . . ." In other words,in the  midst of all his academic and political and ecclesiastical labors,he made  many visits to God.  
  And when he went, he did not just go with petitions for things oreven for  deliverance in his many hardships. He went to see his gloriousfriend and to  contemplate his greatness. The last book he wrote - he wasfinishing it as  he died - is called Meditations on the Glory of Christ. That saysa great  deal about the focus and outcome of Owen's life. In it he said,  
  The revelation . . . of Christ . . . deserves the severest of ourthoughts,  the best of our meditations and our utmost diligence in them. . .. What  better preparation can there be for [our future enjoyment of theglory of  Christ] than in a constant previous contemplation of that glory inthe  revelation that is made in the Gospel.  
  The contemplation Owen has in mind is made up of at least twothings: on the  one hand there is what he called his "severest thoughts" and "best  meditations" or in another place "assiduous meditations," and onthe other  hand relentless prayer. The two are illustrated in his work onHebrews.  
  One of his greatest achievements was his seven-volume commentaryon Hebrews.  When he finished it near the end of his life, he said, "Now mywork is done:  it is time for me to die." How did he do it? We get a glimpse fromthe  preface:  
  I must now say, that, after all my searching and reading, prayerand  assiduous meditation have been my only resort, and by far the mostuseful  means of light and assistance. By these have my thoughts beenfreed from  many an entanglement."  
  Thus Owen drew near to God by prayer and assiduous meditation andfound light  and freedom. In this way his was a zeal to draw near that accordswith  knowledge. This is the kind of zeal that we want. This is thesweet  personal knowledge that keeps the zeal in bounds and makes it burnthe more  brightly. With this knowledge and zeal let us draw near day by dayand hour  by hour.  
  Copyright 1997 John Piper  Return to Piper's Notes - The 1997Index  Return to Piper's Notes - Front Page   
  
  
  
