  November 10, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor Copyright 1996 John Piper      When Does God Swear?  (Hebrews 6:13-18)    For when God made the promise to Abraham, since He could swear byno one greater, He swore by Himself, 14 saying, "I will surely blessyou, and I will surely multiply you." 15 And thus, having patientlywaited, he [Abraham] obtained the promise. 16 For men swear by onegreater than themselves, and with them an oath given as confirmationis an end of every dispute. 17 In the same way God, desiring evenmore to show to the heirs of the promise the unchangeableness of Hispurpose, interposed with an oath, 18 in order that by twounchangeable things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, we mayhave strong encouragement, we who have fled for refuge in laying holdof the hope set before us.  God's purpose in this text is to press upon our minds and heartsthis morning his desire and purpose for us to have "strongencouragement" to hold on to our hope in him and not to drift intofalse hopes offered by the world. Look at verses 17 and 18:  In the same way God, desiring [ Notice this! What is God'sdesire for you ?] -- desiring even more to show to the heirs ofthe promise the unchangeableness of His purpose, interposed with anoath, 18 in order that by two unchangeable things, in which it isimpossible for God to lie, we may have strong encouragement [ Thisis his desire for you. This is what God wants to work in your heartthis morning through his word ], we who have fled for refuge inlaying hold of the hope set before us.  God is here this morning and by his word he is working to bringthis about -- "strong encouragement" to hold on to our hope in him sothat we are not deceived and lured away into the fleeting andsuicidal hopes offered by the world.  Notice that the paragraph (verse 13) begins with "for" or"because." The writer is giving support for what went just before,namely, verses 11-12. Let's remind ourselves what he said there:  We desire that each one of you show the came diligence so as torealize the full assurance of hope until the end, 12 that you may notbe sluggish, but imitators of those who through faith and patienceinherit the promises.  So the aim of verses 11-12 was the same as it is here: God wantsyou to have the full assurance of hope -- no weak and flimsy hope,but a strong, full, confident hope -- lest you become "sluggish" or"dull" and begin to think that the Christian hope is not as real asthe hopes offered by the world. That's the danger this book warnsagainst over and over. Don't be sluggish in the way you fight to keepyour hope strong and vivid and compelling and alluring.  Why? Because, as verse 12 says, it's only "through faith andpatience that we inherit the promises." "Faith is the assurance ofthings hoped for" (Hebrews 11:1). And we maintain that assurance --that faith -- through "diligence" (6:11). Drifting in the Christianlife is deadly. Little by little the Christian hope of glory, thegreatness of eternal life with God, the preciousness of rescue fromhell, the forgiveness of sins, and the pleasures at God's right hand-- little by little all this can begin to fade, and suddenly you mayfind yourself like Esau (12:16-17), so callous to spiritual realitythat all you can do is cry about the  penalty , but not aboutthe  precious beauty  of what you have lost. He could no longertruly repent.  God is working to keep that from happening for the heirs of thepromise. That's what verses 13-20 talk about. It's all about the"strong encouragement" he wants us to have this morning to lay holdon hope and not grow sluggish.  So let's look at what God has done to give you strongencouragement this morning. And let's pray that our hearts wouldreceive this great work of God to give us the soul-preservingencouragement that we need.  The writer begins on common ground with his readers: the authorityof the Old Testament. And I think this ought to be common ground withus since, as we have seen on Wednesday nights, Jesus sanctioned thetruth and authority of the Old Testament. In verse 13 the writer ofHebrews refers to a promise and an oath that God made to Abraham. Letme read this for you from Genesis 22:16-17.  By Myself I have  sworn , declares the LORD, because you[Abraham] have done this thing, and have not withheld your son, youronly son, 17 indeed I will greatly bless you, and I will greatlymultiply your seed as the stars of the heavens, and as the sand whichis on the seashore; and your seed shall possess the gate of theirenemies.  The writer of Hebrews saw two things in this Old Testament text:he saw a promise and he saw an oath. The promise was that Abrahamwould be blessed and that his descendants would multiply and thatthey would be triumphant over their enemies. And the oath was in thewords, "By myself I have sworn, declares the Lord." So God promisesand he takes an oath. Now this sets the writer to thinking about allthe encouragement for hope there is in this Old Testament text.  The first thing for us to figure out is why we Gentile believersshould be encouraged by this promise and oath made to Abraham and hisdescendants. Let me give you several reasons.  1. Genesis teaches that Abraham is going to become the father ofmany nations (Gentiles). In Genesis 17:4, God says, "Behold, Mycovenant is with you [Abraham], and you shall be the father of amultitude of nations." So already in Genesis there was the concept ofdescendants of Abraham that were not Jews.  2. Hebrews 3:19 shows that many physical descendants are not  in fact heirs of the promises made to Abraham and hisdescendants. It says that they "were not able to enter [God's rest]because of unbelief." In other words, being a physical descendantdoes not guarantee anything if faith is missing. This suggests thatwhat it takes to qualify as a descendant of Abraham and an heir ofthe promise is not the ethnicity of Abraham but the faith of Abraham.  3. Which is supported by the context of Genesis 22 where thepromise and the oath were made. They were made in direct response toAbraham's obedience of faith in offering Isaac (Hebrews 11:17). "Because you have done this,  I will bless you." In otherwords, the essence of the qualification for this promise and oath inGenesis 22:16-17 is not Abraham's Jewishness but Abraham's faith.  Which is exactly what the present context of Hebrews 6:12 implies.It is by "faith and patience" that we inherit the promises, notethnic Jewishness. And then in verse 18b, what qualifies us toinherit the promises of God's blessing is "fleeing [to God] forrefuge." "That we may have strong encouragement  who have fled forrefuge ." Abraham had only one hope in offering up his son -- thatGod would graciously and miraculously raise him from the dead andfulfill his promise. That was Abraham's faith, and that is why Godconfirmed the covenant and promise with him, and why he is the fatherof a multitude of nations. The promise of Abraham is inherited byfaith. That's how he inherited it (6:15), and that is how we Gentilesinherit it. As Romans 4:16 says, "The promise is certain . . . tothose [Gentiles and Jews] who are of the faith of Abraham, who is thefather of us all [Jew and Gentile]."  So it doesn't matter this morning whether you are Jew or Gentile.It doesn't matter what ethnic background you have. What inherits thepromise of Abraham is humble, desperate fleeing to God for refuge(verse 18) and holding fast to the hope that God freely gives to allwho trust in him.  Now back to the promise and the oath. The writer of Hebrews sawtwo things in Genesis 22:16-17. He saw a promise and an oath. Thepromise is not just to Abraham. You can see that in Hebrews 6:17. Thewriter speaks of "the heirs of the promise." These are the ones whotake refuge in God. These are the spiritual descendants of Abraham.This is you and I, if we trust him. And the promise is that we willbe blessed. "I will surely bless you" (6:14). And he means ultimateblessing, forever and ever with God in eternity, forgiven, accepted,purified, glorified, capable of unspeakable joy, triumphant over allour enemies: sin and guilt and shame and death and hell and Satan.This is God's promise.  That is great for our encouragement -- that by faith we inheritthis kind of future. But what caught the writer's eye mainly inGenesis 22:16 was not the  content  of the promise, but the oath  that backs it up. "By Myself I have  sworn ,declares the LORD." So when God says, "I will surely bless you," itis not just a promise; but a promise and an oath. Two things, notjust one thing.  He asks himself, Why did God do this? Why did he add an oath to apromise? He certainly did not have to in order to establish his word.Why, then? His answer is given in verses 17b-18, "He interposed withan oath, in order that by two unchangeable things, in which it isimpossible for God to lie, we may have strong encouragement" -- theencouragement of unshakable hope. He did it to show how muchencouragement of hope he wants us to have.  As Barnabas and I were driving to Pizza Hut yesterday, I said, "Itis an amazing thing that God is so passionate about our being peoplewho have unshakable hope. Not many kings have this kind of passionfor their people." It would not be hard to imagine -- many people doimagine! -- that God were the kind of God who said, "Get out thereand do what I tell you to do, and stop thinking about whether youhave hope or not. Do what's right because it's right, and stopdwelling on the future. Do what you're supposed to do and stopwondering about how it's going to turn out in the end." It is so easyto imagine a God like that, that we should be astonished that God is not  like that. He is utterly committed to working for ourhope. He insists that we be people of confident hope, not of worryand uncertainty. He wants us to think about the future, and to betotally confident and assured about how it will turn out. That's whatthis text is about.  So he adds an oath to a promise. "By myself I have sworn" (Genesis22:16). And that sends this author into orbit. He does what we shoulddo when we read the Bible. He starts thinking and meditating. Inverse 16 he says, "For men swear by one greater than themselves, andwith them an oath given as confirmation is an end of every dispute."In other words, when you want to stress the validity of your promiseyou pick out some great value (the Bible, your Mother's grave, God)and you swear by it. "On my mother's grave, I swear it did not stealyour purse."  Why do you swear on something great and valuable? Because what youare saying in an oath is this: If I prove false -- if I am lying --then let my dead mother be a liar. Or: Let God be false. Or: Let theBible be condemned. So the degree that you value and esteem the basisof your oath, to that degree your word can be trusted.  Then the writer looks at the way God took his oath in verse 13. Hesays, "For when God made the promise to Abraham, since He could swearby no one greater, He swore by Himself." Do you see what God wasdoing here? He was saying: Now I want to give my people strongencouragement (when John Piper preaches to them on November 10,1996). So I will add an oath to my promise to show them how much Iwant to undergird their hope. So what shall I swear by? I could swearby the sun and the moon. They are great. Or I could swear by theworld, or by my people Israel whom I love, the apple of my eye. Or Icould swear by all the angels of heaven -- by Gabriel and Michael.But no, none of these is great enough to give the level ofencouragement and hope I want my people to have.  These are all valuable to God. But there is one thing he valuesand esteems above all. There is one Reality that he is less likely todishonor and to shame than any other. There is one Person whose worthand honor and dignity and preciousness and greatness and beauty andreputation is more than all other values combined -- ten thousandtimes more, namely, God himself. So God swears by himself. "Since Hecould swear by no one greater, He swore by Himself." If he could have gone higher, he would have gone higher. Why? To giveyou strong encouragement in your hope. In verse 18, the writer saysthat God has spoken "by two unchangeable things, in which it isimpossible for God to lie." The reason God cannot lie is that Godcannot hate God. God can no more lie than he can stop being God.  What God is saying in swearing by himself is that it is asunlikely that he will break his word of promise to bless us as it isthat he will despise himself. God is the greatest value in theuniverse. There is nothing more valuable or wonderful than God. SoGod swears by God. And in doing that he says:  I mean for you tohave as much confidence in me as it is possible to have . For ifmore were possible, it says in verse 13, he would have given us that.  Now this is our God. The God who is reaching as high as he canreach to inspire your unshakable hope.  So I close with this appeal rooted in verse 18: flee to God forrefuge. Turn from all the fleeting, superficial, self-defeating hopesof the world and put your hope in God. There is nothing and no onelike God as a Refuge and a Rock of hope. Just think of it! GodAlmighty desires for you to have unshakable hope and confidence aboutyour future -- a hope that is as strong as it can possibly be. Fleeto him and he will give it to you.    Copyright 1997 JohnPiper     
