 Today's text is intended for two kinds of people.   On the one hand it is for people who doubt that Godis just, or who have already made up their minds that he is not,and who scorn him for ignoring their claims.  For these peoplethe text is a warning, to humble themselves, to give the matterdeeper consideration, and to stand in awe of God's freedom tovindicate the righteous when and where and how he pleases.   On the other hand the text is for people who alreadyfear the Lord and hold his name in highest regard and serve himas a son serves a Father, even when God postpones the settlingof accounts.  For these people the text is a comfort and encouragementto press on in trust and obedience until the Lord comes to vindicatetheir cause.  My prayer this morning is that if you belong to thefirst group this morning by the time I am through preaching youwill belong to the second because God has worked in your heart. And if you belong to the first already, my prayer is that yourconfidence in the justice and care of God will be made strongfor the battles before you this week.  Let me try then to unfold first verses 13-15 in orderto illustrate the kind of people we should not be, and then verses16-18 to illustrate the kind of people we should be, because ofthe four promises God gives in these verses.  Verses 13-15.  In verse 13 God says, Your words have beenstout against me, says the Lord.  Yet you say, `How have we spokenagainst thee?'  God has been listening to what they havebeen saying to each other about him.  It doesn't say they spokethese stout things to God.  It says they spoke them about God. The were talking to each other.  That's implied in the Hebrewverb, and you can see it verses 14 and 15 where they talk abouthim not you.  This is a warning to us.  All of our life is a theaterand we are the actors.  Every kitchen, every car, every den, everyoffice, every bedroom, every bar is on stage!  And God is in thefront row of the theater and doesn't a single line in the dramaof our life -- not one!  No matter where or when or with whomwe speak, God hears our conversations, and he interprets perfectlywhat they imply about him.  In fact that is all that really matters about ourconversations -- what they imply about God.    When God listened in on these people in verses 13-15he heard two things: He heard them say that it is pointless toserve God and it is profitable not to.  First, verse 14: You have said, `It is vainto serve God.  What is the good of our keeping his charge or ofwalking as in mourning before the Lord of hosts?'  There are two problems with what they are sayinghere. One is that these are the words of lifeless formalism. They were indeed going about in black, fasting and mourning. They were coming to the temple often with their sacrifices.  Theyhad some of the forms of worship down pat.  But God was displeased. His ear was closed.  His blessing was withdrawn.  Why?  Look at 2:13.  This again you do. You coverthe Lord's altar with tears, with weeping and groaning becausehe no longer regards the offering or accepts it with favor atyour hand.  This is what they were complaining about in3:14 -- they were mourning and it was doing no good.  Why?  One answer was given in 2:14, Because the Lordwas witness to the covenant between you and the wife of your youth,to whom you have been faithless.  In other words the formsof worship on Sunday contradicted by faithlessness on Monday isunacceptable to God.  It is lifeless formalism.  And God willnot accept it even when it is full of emotion.  They were reallyweeping at the altar, and God was not moved to pity!  Why?  Becausethe form of worship on Sunday was replaced by fornication on Monday.  That means that the test of the authenticity of ourSunday morning and evening worship is not merely the intensityof emotion (as indispensable as that is for genuine worship) butwhether we leave the service and walk into a life of sinning.  That's the first thing wrong with what these peoplesay in verse 14 -- these are the words of lifeless formalism. They are not as pious as they think they are.  The other thing wrong with these words is that theyseem to assume that God must bless the righteous in some immediateand material way, or else righteousness is in vain.  In otherwords even though they are not truly righteous, even the way theythink righteousness should be rewarded is skewed.  This is mostobvious if we bring verse 15 into the picture.  They are not only saying that it is pointless toserve God (v. 14).  They are also saying that it is profitablenot to (v. 15): Henceforth we deem the arrogant blessed;evildoers not only prosper but when they put God to the test theyescape.  So these people who are talking in verses 14 and15, when they get together in the restaurant to discuss currentaffairs and religion, they say that so and so, who never comesto church has a thriving business; and so and so who's an atheisthas never had a sick day in his life and he took all his profiton Wall Street the day before the crash.  And here's an athletewho oozes arrogance, and he makes $400,000 a year and scoffs atreligion.  So these people conclude that the arrogant are thetruly blessed and the corporate swindlers know where real prosperityis to be found.  It is profitable not to serve God.  Now what's wrong with this?  Not only does experienceseem to teach this sort of thing, but didn't last week's textset us up for this kind of disillusionment?  Malachi 3:10-12 said that if the people would beginto bring the full tithes into the storehouse, God would open heavenand pour down blessings.  So isn't the point that if you do whatyou are supposed to do you get blessed in this life and if youdon't you won't?  And so if we look around and see wrongdoersprospering, then shouldn't we conclude that they must be the realtithers -- the ones God is really pleased with?    No.  Notice from last week's text that the basisof tithing in verse 10 is the personal relationship in verse 7b:Return to me, and I will return to you, says the Lord ofhosts.  And tithing is given as one way this personal returnto God takes shape. God never meant that the mere outward formof tithing would bring down his blessing, any more than sacrificesor weeping at the altar.  And notice that in last week's text it does not saythat no evildoers will prosper.  God can bring blight to chastiseand warn his people of their evil ways.  But this does not meanthat blight is what always comes upon disobedience.  And the third thing to notice is that though Godpromises great blessing to those whose heart leads toward tithingand beyond, he does not tie himself down to any definite timeframe for the blessing, nor to any definite proportion of materialgoods.    The essence of the promise is that when you becomea gracious channel of God's riches rather than a cul-de-sac, Godwill take care of your needs.  It is a practical instance of Jesus'teaching in Matthew 6: Seek first the kingdom and all thesethings will be yours as well.  Or in Matthew 19: there willbe rewards 100-fold for everything you give up in the serviceof Christ.  But you can't press the promise to mean that X amountof material prosperity must follow obedience in X amount of time. Paul said, I have learned to be content with abundanceand want, with plenty and hunger.  This didn't mean thathe had given up on the promise that God blesses obedience.  Infact the gift of contentment in the midst hardship was a blessinghe cherished very highly.  But what it did mean was that Paulwas willing to leave to God the timing and the proportion of materialblessing.  Well that is the second problem with what these peoplein verses 14 and 15 are saying.  The first problem was that theythought they were righteous just because of certain religiousforms they practiced.  The second problem is that they read thatsame formalism into God.  His blessings must be material and theymust be now.  Otherwise he is not worth serving.  That then is the kind of people we are not supposedto be.  Verses 16-18.  The second half of the text tells us what kind ofpeople we are supposed to be and gives four promises to encourageus in this way.  What we are supposed to be is described in threeways.   1. We are to fear the Lord.   Verse 16: Then those who feared the Lord spokewith one another; the Lord heeded and heard them, and a book ofremembrance was written before him of those who feared the Lord.. .  To fear the Lord is to tremble at the thought ofoffending him by unbelief and disobedience.  It is the feelingthat God is not to be trifled with.  It is the very opposite ofthe attitude of the people in verses 13-15 who speak with an incredible swagger: It doesn't pay to serve God. Those who fear God shudder at the thought of speaking that wayabout their Majestic Father.  Anything that dishonors God is anathemato those who fear God.   2. We are to esteem or honor or regard his name.   Verse 16 ends, . . . a book of remembrancewas written before him of those who feared the Lord and (RSV)thought on his name.  This is weak.  The NASB (esteem hisname) and the NIV (honor his name) are better.  It's what we arepraying for when we say, Hallowed be thy name.  We are to be the kind of people who hold the nameof God in such high regard that we would not presume to trot ourout little notions against his infinite wisdom.  The thought ofstanding in judgment over his timing or his method of dispensingblessing is unthinkable to those who hallow his name.     3.  We are to be the kind of people who serve Godthe way a son serves a father.   Verse 17: They shall be mine, says theLord of hosts, my special possession on the day when I act, andI will spare them as a man spares his son who serves him.  Contrast verse 14 with this promise.  You havesaid, `It is vain to serve God.'  Verse 14 says it is pointlessto serve God.  And verse 17 says God will count them his possessionand spare them who serve him.  What is the difference?  It is the difference between the service of a sonand the service of a slave.  It's the difference between the youngerbrother and the elder brother in the parable of the the ProdigalSon.  The younger brother broken and humbled wanted to serve becausehe knew that to be at home with the Father was the greatest blessingin the world -- all his needs would be met.  The elder brotherhad the mindset of a slave -- if anybody around here deservesa party I do.  Who has worked harder than anybody to earn sucha blessing!  There is a formal, slavish service of God that thinksin terms of what it is contributing to the plantation and whatthe slave owner owes me.  That service is indeed in vain.  Butthere is another kind of service that thinks like a son in thehouse of his father -- here is total security, here is food onthe table, here is rest and recreation and love and educationand inheritance and the fame and glory of my Father!  Why wouldI want to work anywhere else but here!  That is the mindset ofthe true servant of God.  Fear God. Hallow his name above all names. And serve him like a son serves a Majestic Father.   That is the kind of people we are supposed to be.  But what about the problem of justice -- the factthat evildoers prosper in this life and those who fear God arenot rewarded for the good they do?  The answer is that those who fear God and hallowhis name and serve him as their father believe the four promisesof verse 16-18 -- that God will act to vindicate them and to distinguishright from wrong in his time in the future.  Let me just mention the four promises.    God will hearken and hear the good things thatthose who fear God say to each other for the glory of God andthe good of man.  Verse 16: Then those who feared the Lordspoke with one another; the Lord heeded and heard them.  In other words he not only overhears the foolishand arrogant talk of the evildoers, he also hears every good wordyou have ever spoken and ever will speak.  He promises that notone tiny word of goodness will fall to the ground without God'snotice.  He is just!   God will not only hear them he will rememberthem.  Verse 16 goes on: . . . the Lord heeded and heardthem, and  book of remembrance was written before him of thosewho feared the Lord. . .  This means that God will neverforget the good that we have done in his power and for his glory. It may look forgotten and unrewarded now.  But God is not unjust(Hebrews 6:10), and every lesson faithfully prepared for thosekids, every courtesy on the highway, every smile on the street,every thank you note you every wrote, every I'm sorry. Willyou forgive me? -- every fragment of grace in your lifeis being written in the book of remembrance and will redound toyour joy and God's glory forever when the books are opened.  Godis just.   God will spare those who fear him and live forhis glory as a father spares a son who serves him.  Verse 17:They (i.e. those who fear and honor God) shall be mine,says the Lord of hosts, my special possession on the day whenI act and I will spare them as a man spares his son who serveshim.  The good news here is that sons don't have to beperfect to be spared, they just have to serve like sons insteadof slaves.  They have to enjoy the castle instead of hankeringfor the bawdy barracks where the slaves live.  Here's where Jesus comes in.  How can a holy Godspare a sinful son even if the son has repented and come home? The answer: Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners!(1 Timothy 1:15).  God is just.  He will spare sinful sons, preciselybecause he did not spare his only sinless Son.   Finally God promises that all ambiguity betweenthe righteous and the wicked will one day be cleared up.  Thefuture judgment holds the key.  Verse 18: Then once moreyou shall distinguish (literally: see) between the righteous andthe wicked, between one who serves God and one who does not servehim.     And so I close where I began.  Which group are youin?  Are you among those who hold back from commitment to Godbecause of suspicion or doubt or even anger?  If so consider thepromises of God this morning.  He will vindicate his people. All wrongs will be righted.  And if you come to him in humblerepentance and faith he will spare you as a man spares his son. 
