  May 25, l986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchJohn Piper, PastorCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper    OUR HOPE: THE REDEMPTION OF OUR BODIES  (Romans 8:18-25) I consider that the sufferings of this present time are not worth comparingwith the glory that is to be revealed to us. For the creation waits witheager longing for the revealing of the sons of God; for the creation wassubjected to futility, not of its own will but by the will of him who subjectedit in hope; because the creation itself will be set free from its bondageto decay and obtain the glorious liberty of the children of God. We knowthat the whole creation has been groaning in travail together until now;and not only the creation, but we ourselves, who have the first fruits ofthe Spirit, groan inwardly as we wait for adoption as sons, the redemptionof our bodies. For in this hope we were saved. Now hope that is seen is nothope. For who hopes for what he sees? But if we hope for what we do not see,we wait for it with patience. In this series of messages on hope we began to ask last week, "What is thecontent of our hope? As Christians what are we hoping for?" We answered, first of all, that we are hoping for "the appearing of the gloryof our great God and Savior Jesus Christ" (Titus 2:13). This week we answer by saying, "Our hope is the redemption of our bodies."Romans 8:23 -- "We ourselves, who have the first fruits of the Spirit, groaninwardly as we wait for adoption as sons, the redemption of our bodies." Let's look at the context of this verse. The first thing Paul says in this paragraph (8:18ff) is that whatever sufferingor pain or frustration or disappointment a child of God endures now in thispresent age, it will seem as nothing when compared with the glory that thechild of God will experience in the age to come. "The sufferings of thispresent time are not worth comparing with the glory that is to be revealedto us." If we did not know the sufferings of Paul we might think that was a cheapconsolation -- a kind of ivory tower effort to comfort the saints. But wedo know Paul's sufferings: Five times I have received at the hands of the Jews the forty lashes lessone. Three times I have been beaten with rods; once I was stoned. Three timesI have been shipwrecked; a night and a day I have been adrift at sea; onfrequent journeys, in danger from rivers, danger from robbers, danger frommy own people, danger from Gentiles, danger in the city, danger in thewilderness, danger at sea, danger from false brethren; in toil and hardship,through many a sleepless night, in hunger and thirst, often without food,in cold and exposure. (2 Corinthians 11:24-28) It doesn't take much imagination to know what tremendous toll that kind oflife would take on Paul's body. We hear an echo of his misery when he says,"Our outer nature is wasting away." He means his body is wasting away. Theword for "wasting away" is used for rust eating through iron, of moths eatingthrough cloth, of starvation emaciating the body. "Our outer nature is wastingaway." But in this very context (2 Corinthians 4:16-18) he makes the same pointas here in our text (Romans 8:18): "This slight, momentary affliction (anincredible understatement!) is preparing for us an eternal weight of glorybeyond all comparison." A weight of glory beyond all comparison is what Paulmeans in Romans 8:18 when he says that "the sufferings of this present timeare not worth comparing with the glory that is to be revealed to us." Then from this initial point that the hope of glory makes suffering tolerablehe goes backward to explain why he is so sure that such a glory is reallyon the way. Verse 19: "For the creation waits with eager longing for the revealing ofthe sons of God." Notice two things in this verse: One is that the sons of God have not yet been revealed. Creation waits forthe revealing of the sons of God. I think this means that what we shall bewhen we share the glory of God is now hidden. We look weak and imperfectlike all the rest of humanity. We suffer like the rest. The day of gloryhas not yet come. The other thing to notice in verse 19 is that creation -- trees and grassand clouds and lakes and sheep and cows and horses and lions and monkeysand the moon and stars -- all creation is eagerly awaiting the day when thechildren of God will appear for what they really are in glory. Creation islike a little child sitting in the audience before the play begins and askingagain and again, "When is going to start, mommy? "Is it starting now!" Why does Paul have the right to speak of creation as though it could feela longing, or an eager expectation, like that? He gives the answer in verse20: "For the creation was subjected to futility, not of its own will butby the will of him who subjected it in hope." Two things have been built into creation. One is futility. "The whole creation was subjected to futility." There isfrustration and pain and imperfection all through creation. The other thing is hope. The futility is there "by the will of him who subjectedit in hope." The frustration and pain and imperfection were not intendedto be the last word. They are temporary. God subjected creation to futility, but he did it "in hope"! That is, Godbrought creation under the curse of futility with a hopeful purpose. So Paulcan speak of creation as having an eager longing, in the sense that its futilitycontains the purpose of God which is full of hope. It's as though I looked out my kitchen window a few weeks ago onto the barebranches of the catalpa tree and said, "That poor, bare catalpa tree waitswith eager longing for the warmth and brightness of spring." God subjectedit to the futility of gnarled, naked leaflessness, but he did it in hope,the hope of spring. And I believe springtime is a yearly reminder not tolose heart, because an eternal spring will come some day. Then verse 21 tells us what the hope of creation is: "The creation itselfwill be set free from its bondage to decay and obtain the glorious libertyof the children of God (or, literally: "the liberty of the glory of the childrenof God"). In other words, the hope that God has in store for the creation,is to let creation participate or share in the freedom of the glory of thechildren of God. When the children inherit their glory, the whole creationwill inherit its glory. "Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth." And God intendsthat the inheritance of his children be a glorious inheritance not a futileone. Therefore the whole earth will be glorified when the day comes for thechildren of God to receive their inheritance. Now let's sum up verses l8-2l by tracing the thought backward. Verse 2l:All creation is going to share in the glory of the children of God some day.Therefore, verse 20: The futility we see in creation is not a dead end street;it is full of hope. Therefore, verse l9: Creation is like a little childstanding on tip toe beside the street leaning over the rope eagerly waitingfor the parade to start. Therefore, verse l8: We can take heart that thesufferings of the present time are not worth comparing with the glory coming. Now with this knowledge we are prepared to hear the sober truth about thepresent age in which we live. In verses 22-23 Paul says, We know that the whole creation has been groaning in travail together untilnow; and not only the creation, but we ourselves, who have the first fruitsof the Spirit, groan inwardly as we wait for adoption as sons, the redemptionof our bodies. The sober truth about this age is that as long as it lasts all creation includingChristians will be groaning under the burden of unredeemed bodies. Let'ssay it again: the redemption of our bodies (v. 23) is not yet a present reality.We must WAIT for it. Until then we groan. We get tired and sick and discouraged. All the futility of creation attacks not only the unbelieving world, butus too who are indwelt by the Holy Spirit. "We ourselves who have the firstfruits of the Holy Spirit groan inwardly as we wait for adoption as sons,the redemption of our bodies ..." This means that the Holy Spirit in thisage does not completely take away the groaning of unredeemed bodies. He isthe first fruits, the seal and the downpayment of redemption. But he doesnot in this age take away all pain and suffering and frustration. On the contrary, he is the Spirit of hope. Verse 24: "For in this hope wewere saved. Now hope that is seen is not hope. For who hopes for what hesees? But if we hope for what we do not see, we wait for it with patience." We know that patience is the fruit of the Spirit. And we know that patienceis the fruit of hope. Therefore we know that the work of the Spirit is toinspire us with hope again and again IN our groaning. He gives us the patienceto endure to the end by reminding us and causing us to feel that the sufferingof this present time is not worth comparing to the glory that will be revealedto the children of God. So today I want us to think about this one aspect of our hope -- namely,that there is coming a day when our bodies are going to be redeemed and therewill be no more groaning. When I began to meditate on this aspect of our hope as Christians I saw veryquickly that a danger lurked in the bushes. If we set our hope on our ownredeemed bodies that will be free from pain and suffering and disabilityand groaning, do we not run the risk of making ourselves the center of ourhope? Are we not in danger of exalting physical comfort as the center ofour hope when God himself should be our hope? The danger is very real. For there are many people who embrace the Christianreligion (at least in its externals) because they are afraid of the physicalpain of hell and want the physical comforts of heaven, but who do not havea heart for God. If God were not there in heaven, that would be all right,as long as they were physically fit and could have fun. God is not the centerof their hope. And they are deceiving themselves that they will ever seethe Kingdom. Should we then set our hope on a redeemed body, or is that too physical?Can you hope for a redeemed body and still be God-centered in your hope? As I pondered this question a more basic one occurred to me, namely, Whydo we have bodies in the first place? Why didn't God just create spirits?Why did he create a physical, material world, and then create humans withphysical bodies to live in it? If we can answer this question, then we maybe able to know why he intends to redeem these bodies, and in turn, why weshould hope that he do so. So let's ask, Is there New Testament teaching that answers the question whywe have bodies? What was God's purpose in creating us with physical bodies?Consider several texts and see if you don't think that the New Testamentdoes indeed give an answer. 1 Corinthians 6:13b, The body is not meant for immorality but for the Lord. We may begin then by saying that, whatever the reason is that we have beengiven bodies, it is FOR THE LORD! We exist not only in our souls but alsoin our bodies FOR GOD. In what sense? 1 Corinthians 6:19-20, Do you not know that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit within you,which you have from God? You are not your own; you were bought with a price.So glorify God in your body. How then is the body "for the Lord"? In this sense: our bodies were createdin the beginning, and have now been bought back from sin in order to be aunique habitation of the Spirit and in order to display the glory of God? Paul gives us a specific illustration of this from his own experience inPhilippians 1:20. He faces the prospect of torture and death and says, It is my eager expectation and hope that I shall not be at all ashamed, butthat with full courage now as always Christ will be magnified in my body,whether by life or by death. So the reason we have bodies is that Christ might be magnified and God mightbe glorified in them. In a sense our bodies are like musical instrumentsintended to play songs of worship for God. Or like tools intended to workfor God's purposes. Or like weapons intended to fight for God's cause. Consider the familiar text of Romans 12:1. I appeal to you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God to present yourbodies as a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, which is your spiritualworship. Here our bodies are pictured as sacrifices which we offer to God in an actof worship. So the reason we have bodies is that we might have a way to worshipGod that we would not have if we were disembodied spirits. Or consider Romans 6:13. Do not yield your members (i.e. the parts of your body) to sin as instrumentsof wickedness, but yield yourselves to God as men who have been brought fromdeath to life, and your members to God as instruments of righteousness. Here the reason we have bodies is to provide ways to engage in obedienceto God which we would not have if we were disembodied spirits. Our bodiescreate the possibility of making obedience and worship visible and touchable. If we were only spirits without bodies we could still worship and we couldobey like the angels do in heaven. But God is so zealous for the displayof his glory that He conceived of a dimension of reality that didn't existbefore, namely, the physical, material universe; and he created it and puthumans in it with physical bodies in order to create added possibilitiesfor the ways in which the inexhaustible wealth of his glory could be shownforth and enjoyed by his creatures. So he says that our bodies give us ways to magnify him in worship and obediencethat we would not have had if we had no bodies. This is the answer therefore, to the question we raised earlier, namely,Why do we have bodies in the first place? Why didn't God just create spirits?The answer is that we have bodies for the Lord's sake. "The body is for theLord!" We have bodies because God is passionately and creatively committedto displaying the glory of his righteousness in as many ways as possible. Now we return to our text in Romans 8:23 and to our original question, whetherwe should set our hope on redeemed bodies. We ourselves, who have the first fruits of the Spirit, groan inwardly aswe wait for adoption as sons, the redemption of our bodies. For in this hopewe were saved. Paul teaches us to hope for the redemption of our bodies. He says that itis all right not to want to hurt. It is all right to want to be out of thewheelchair and off the crutches and cortisone and Tylenol. It's all rightto want to see and hear like you could when your were twenty. It's all rightto want to be pretty and handsome and energetic and strong. This is the promise of a redeemed body when glory replaces groaning. Thepromise has at least three parts: 1. All pain and disease and deformity and disability will be gone. 2. All sin, which so often takes the body for its base of operations, willbe gone. 3. And this is not because we will be rid of our bodies but because in amysterious and wonderfully spiritual way we will have new and glorious bodieswhich are capable of touch and smell and taste and hearing and seeing. Should we then set our hope on a redeemed body, or is that too physical?Can you hope for a redeemed body and still be God-centered in your hope? The Biblical answer is Yes, we should set our hope on a redeemed body. "Inthis hope we were saved." Let us wait for it with patience. And Yes, we can hope for a redeemed body and still be God-centered; becausewe have seen that the reason God created us with bodies is to provide uswith new and unexpected sacrifices of worship and instruments of obedience. Let me close by speaking to the children, and those who still feel like children.When I was a child, I had a hard time getting excited about heaven. It seemedto me that heaven meant leaving a wonderful world of excitement and enteringa drab world of boredom. I'm sure that this was largely my fault. I probably didn't love Jesus enoughto want to be with him at any cost. But it would have helped me to know betterwhat the Bible says about the resurrection. So let me make sure you all knowwhat to expect. God's final purpose for you is not to have your soul or your spirit floatingaround without your body in some ghost-like mansion in the sky. His purposefor you is to raise your body from the dead, make it new and beautiful andhealthy and strong. His final purpose is not to take you away from the earthto spend eternity in heaven, but to make a new heaven and a new earth whereyou will live in happiness for ever and ever. And if this new earth where we will live for ever and ever were going tobe completely different from our present earth, then why would God botherto raise our bodies from the dead? Why not just start over with completelydifferent bodies if he were going to start over with a completely differentworld? Well the answer is that the world will not be completely different.It is our old bodies that will be made new in the resurrection, and it isour old earth that will be made new when Jesus comes. Therefore, I can say with great confidence that if you trust in Jesus Christas your Savior and follow him as your Lord, there is nothing good and happyin your life on this earth that will ever be lost. Whatever is bad will betaken away, but all the good and happy experiences will be kept in the newearth for ever. You will have the best body imaginable, and there will be playing and climbingand swimming and running and jumping and swinging and skiing and roller-skatingand skate-boarding and biking and hiking and bouncing and tumbling and hopping-- and whatever else you do when your are very very happy. So whenever you think about the future and what you will be doing for everand ever after you die and after Jesus comes back, think about these things.But just remember this: the reason these things are going to make you reallyhappy, and the reason you will never be sad again, is that in all your playingand climbing and swimming and running and jumping and biking and hiking andbouncing and tumbling and hopping, you are going to be using your bodiesto obey God and praise his great and wonderful name. God will be at the centerof your life, and that is why you will never be sad again. And doesn't it make sense then that even now we should start getting readyfor that great time by using our bodies as living sacrifices of worship andinstruments of righteousness for the glory of God?   Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes    
