  August 3, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor    LIBERATED FOR LOVE BY LOOKING TO THE REWARD (Hebrews 11:23-28)   Faith Makes the Difference When we Walk Through Crisis  As we look at four more instances of what faith produces, keep inmind the definition from Hebrews 11:1: "Now faith is the assurance ofthings hoped for, the conviction of things not seen." So each of thefour acts in this text is produced by faith, that is, by theassurance of something hoped for, namely, God's promise to be allthat the believer needs. So watch for that. Watch for the way hope inGod produces a new kind of behavior (which I think we should calllove). And notice too that these four acts of faith cover a period ofeighty years from Moses' birth to the time he led the people out ofEgypt. And finally notice, as we read, that in these four moments ofMoses' life the stress is tremendous. Each of them is a life anddeath situation that would cause you to be knotted up inside andscarcely able to sleep at night - like Dane and Mirjam Hansonexperienced when they had to evacuate Albania and like Steve, Julieand Luke Anderson experienced when they had to evacuate Congo, andthe Deckers when they had to leave Liberia - and like some of you maybe experiencing right now because of threats looming in your life. Sowatch now what faith produces.  Hebrews 11:23-28  V 23) By faith Moses, when he was born, was hidden for threemonths by his parents, because they saw he was a beautiful child; andthey were not afraid of the king's edict.  V 24) By faith Moses, when he had grown up, refused to be calledthe son of Pharaoh's daughter; 25 choosing rather to endureill-treatment with the people of God, than to enjoy the passingpleasures of sin; 26 considering the reproach of Christ greaterriches than the treasures of Egypt; for he was looking to the reward.  V 27) By faith he left Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king;for he endured, as seeing Him who is unseen.  V 28) By faith he kept the Passover and the sprinkling of theblood, so that he who destroyed the first-born might not touch them.  These are four crisis points in Moses' life. And the point ofthese verses is that faith - the assurance of things hoped for -makes all the difference at those points in our lives. Let's look atthem and ask God to teach us how to walk through crises by faith.  Crisis #1 in Moses' Life - Were his Parents Afraid?  The first has to do with the faith of Moses' parents when he wasborn. You recall that the king of Egypt was fearful of the growingnumber of Jewish males. So he ordered them to be killed at birth:Exodus 1:22, "Then Pharaoh commanded all his people, saying, 'Every[Jewish] son who is born you are to cast into the Nile, and everydaughter you are to keep alive.'"  Notice that there are two threats in that edict from the king: oneis explicit, that Jewish baby boys are to be killed; the other isimplicit, that if you disobey this command and keep a Jewish baby boyalive, you will be disobedient to the king's law and risk your ownlife. In other words, parents had two choices: they could kill theirsons and save themselves, or they could try to save their sons andrisk their own lives. There was no middle way.  Now that's important to see, because Hebrews 11:23 doesn't makesense if you don't see it. It says, "By faith Moses, when he wasborn, was hidden for three months by his parents, because they saw hewas a beautiful child; and they were not afraid of the king's edict."Someone might respond to that and say, "Of course, they were afraidof the king's edict; otherwise they would not have been hiding thebaby. They would have been showing him off to the neighbors if theyweren't afraid of the king's command that baby boys be killed."  So what does verse 23 mean, that they hid their baby son "because. . . they were not afraid of the king's edict." You would expect,"They hid their son because they were afraid," not ". . . becausethey weren't afraid." And surely that's right: if they had not beenafraid for their son's life, they would have carried him around inpublic.  The answer is that there are two threats in the king's edict, notjust one. One against the babies and one against those who don't killthe babies. If you kill the baby you save your life. If you don'tkill your baby, you risk your life. So when Moses' parents decidethey are not going to drown Moses in the Nile River but hide him,they are risking their lives. In other words, they look the fear ofdeath and perhaps torture in the face and say: we will not give in toyou. We will not kill our son out of fear for our own lives. Fear ofdeath will not control us.  And the point of this text is: that act of courage against theking, and that act of love toward their son comes from faith. "Byfaith Moses . . . was hidden by his parents . . . because they werenot afraid of the king's edict."  How does faith produce that kind of courage and love? Thedefinition from Hebrews 11:1 gives the answer. "Faith is theassurance of things hoped for." Faith frees us for this kind ofradical courage and risk-taking and love because it is the assurancethat what God promises to those who die in the path of love is betterthan what the world promises those who shun risk and save themselves.More simply, faith in God's promises frees us from the fear of deathand makes us brave in the risks of love.  Human Ingenuity or Faith in God?  There's a minor point here as well as this main one. It'simportant for all of us who want our lives to be on the cutting edgewhere there are risks and dangers and great crises and great needs.It's a point of realism and balance. Notice. Moses' parents riskedtheir lives by not killing their baby. But they did hide the baby.Some people's minds - immature minds with little real-life experienceand out of touch with the complexities of the soul - might say, "IfMoses' parents really had faith, they would have entrusted thechild's care to God and just walked around the community with theirnew baby. That would have been real faith."  How would you respond to somebody like that? - people who say,"They don't trust God; they're using human ingenuity to protect theirbaby instead of entrusting him to God"? Perhaps the best way torespond is simply to tell them to read their Bibles and read themcarefully. Because the Bible says, in Hebrews 11:23, that Moses'parents did indeed have faith, and they hid their baby. Not killingthe baby put their lives at risk and was a great act of faith andlove. Hiding their baby was a act of human, but God-given, wisdom(and no less from faith); and to do otherwise would probably havebeen presumption - like the idea of Jesus jumping off the roof of thetemple to see if God would catch him (Luke 4:9-12).  So how shall we apply this today? One way would be to say thatfollowing God's call to work with AIDS patients is an act ofrisk-taking faith; and wearing rubber gloves during treatments is anact of faithful wisdom. Following God's call to live in a roughneighborhood is an act of risk-taking faith; and buying deadbolts isan act of faithful wisdom. Following God's call to Guinea or Tanzaniaor Khazakstan or Uzbekistan with your children is an act ofrisk-taking faith, and giving your children vaccinations and malariatreatments is probably an act of faithful wisdom.  In other words, living by faith is often perplexing - which iswhy, I think, Paul prays incessantly that his converts would have"spiritual wisdom . . . and bear fruit in every good work"(Colossians 1:9-11). Which risky, inconvenient, dangerous,inopportune "good works" we should do will seldom be written in thesky or spoken in a dream. (That is why Paul prays for spiritualwisdom.) They will be wrestled into by agonizing prayer and Biblicalsaturation and self-mortification and - above all - faith, theassurance of things hoped for. Radical confidence in God's promise totake care of us is the main key to unlock the power and path ofrisk-taking love.  Crisis #3 in Moses' Life - Was Moses Afraid?  Now jump with me over the second act of faith in Hebrews 11:24-26to the third act in verse 27. I make this move because what we seehere in verse 27, forty years later, is a situation that Moses facedwhich is a lot like the one his parents faced at his birth. We willunderstand it better if we see it in connection with what we saw inverse 23.  According to Exodus 2:11-12, Moses began to identify himself withhis Jewish kinsmen and be indignant at their slavery. He found anEgyptian beating a Jew and intervened and killed him. He thought hisact had been done secretly, but the next day he discovers the wordhas gotten around. Exodus 2:14 says, "Then Moses was afraid, andsaid, 'Surely the matter has become known.'" Then the next versesays, "When Pharaoh heard of this matter, he tried to kill Moses. ButMoses fled from the presence of Pharaoh and settled in the land ofMidian."  Now here is a problem like the one we saw in verse 23: is Mosesafraid when he leaves Egypt or isn't he? Were his parents afraid whenthey hid their baby or weren't they? In verse 23 it says that hisparents hid their baby because "they were not afraid of the king'sedict." Here in verse 27 it says, "By faith [Moses] left Egypt, notfearing the wrath of the king." Yet we saw that Moses' parents wereat least afraid enough to hide their baby. And here we read in Exodus2:14 that Moses was afraid when he heard that his violence was known.  So you see the similarity between these two crises.  So did Moses leave Egypt out of fear or didn't he? It's likeasking: did his parents hide Moses from Pharaoh out of fear or didn'tthey? The answer for his parents is that they did fear for thechild's life; but they did not act out of fear for themselves; theyrisked their lives, and they did it by faith in future grace.  It's a little different with Moses, but not basically different.He probably did save his life by leaving Egypt. But was fearfulself-preservation his motive in leaving? When verse 27 says, "Byfaith he left Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king," did thewriter forget about Exodus 2:14 and the fear Moses felt, or is hepointing us to something very crucial and very deep in Moses' heartso that we won't misconstrue Exodus 2:14?  The key is found in the word "endured" in verse 27 - or yourversion may have the word "persevered." Verse 27: "By faith he leftEgypt, not fearing the wrath of the king, for he endured - hepersevered - as seeing Him who is unseen." In other words, it wasn'tbasically fear that caused Moses to leave Egypt, it was "endurance."Endurance?  In what? Endurance implies a chosen path of difficulty that youare tempted to forsake but you hang in there and "endure." What isthe writer referring to when he says in verse 27 that Moses "leftEgypt . . . for he endured . . ."? What path had Moses chosen thatrequired endurance to stay on and even led him out of Egypt for 40years before he came back to rescue his people?  Crisis #2 in Moses' Life - He Endured  The answer was given in verses 24-26. Now we can go back and pickup the second act of faith that we passed over. These verses describea radically dangerous and costly path that Moses had chosen before(mark this!) he felt threatened by the Pharaoh. What was this path?Verses 24-26:  By faith Moses, when he had grown up, refused to be called the sonof Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather [there's the chosen path] toendure ill-treatment with the people of God, than to enjoy thepassing pleasures of sin; considering the reproach of Christ greaterriches than the treasures of Egypt; for he was looking to the reward.  The writer expresses the dangerous, painful path Moses had chosenin two ways: First (in verse 25) it is the choosing of ill-treatmentwith the people of God over the passing pleasures of sin. Second (inverse 26) it is the choosing of reproach for Christ (the Messiah)over the treasures of Egypt. Now don't miss this! The choice was madebefore the threat of Pharaoh. The bridges had already been burnedbetween Moses and Egypt. It had happened in his heart. Not yetgeographically, but spiritually and morally he was gone already. Doyou see that?  Now the question was, would he endure in this chosen path ofsuffering for the people of God and the glory of the Messiah? Orwould he cave in - like so many cave in today to the Egypt - thepassing pleasures - of this world?  Was Moses' flight from Egypt a capitulation to a self-serving,fearful, pursuit of ease and comfort and safety? Verse 27 says, No."By faith he left Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king" - fearwas not his basic mindset. What was? Next phrase: "For he endured."In what? In the same deep motive that caused him to chooseill-treatment with the people of God and reproach for the sake of theMessiah, namely, "he endured as seeing Him who is unseen" (verse27b). In other words, "by faith." By looking to God's promise, notPharaoh's threat.  This is the same motive that drove his radical choices in verses24-26. You can see it at the end of verse 26: he chose ill-treatmentwith God's people and he chose reproach for the Christ "because hewas looking to the reward." "Looking to the reward" in verse 26corresponds to "seeing him who is unseen" in verse 27. He had, byfaith, burned the bridges in his mind (by "the assurance of thingshoped for"), and then, by faith, he burned them in his flight (by"the conviction of things unseen").  Yes, he experienced fear when the word spread that he had killedan Egyptian while saving a Jew - just as his parents had experiencedfear when they saved their baby boy and risked their own lives. Buthiding their baby was not an act of fearful, self-serving unbelief,and Moses' leaving Egypt was not an act of fearful, self-servingunbelief either. It was a persevering, an enduring, in spite of fear,in the obedience of faith. He wasn't driven merely or mainly by fear;he looked to the unseen God to work out some purpose for his people,and forty years later he would discover what that purpose was, and hewould be back.  Burning our Bridges by Faith  The bridges were burned between Moses and Egypt well before he wasthreatened by Pharaoh - they were burned in his heart and they wereburned by faith. That's what faith does all through this chapter.Faith is a hunger for God that triumphs over our hunger for thepleasures of this world. And so faith unleashes radicallyGod-centered, risk-taking, people-loving behavior.  Let's be like Moses this morning. Let's look to the reward ofGod's promises, as it says in verse 26. And let's look to the God whois unseen, as it says in verse 27. And let's be so hungry for thesuperior worth of our glorious God that the bridges are burned to ahundred sins and a hundred fears.   Copyright 1987 John Piper   
