  June 2, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor   
       OUR CAPTAIN MADE PERFECT THROUGH SUFFERING  Hebrews 2:9-13    
  But we do see Him who has been made for a little while lower thanthe angels, namely, Jesus, because of the suffering of death crownedwith glory and honor, that by the grace of God He might taste deathfor everyone. 10 For it was fitting for Him, for whom are all things,and through whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, toperfect the author of their salvation through sufferings. 11 For bothHe who sanctifies and those who are sanctified are all from oneFather; for which reason He is not ashamed to call them brethren, 12saying, "I WILL PROCLAIM THY NAME TO MY BRETHREN. IN THE MIDST OF THECONGREGATION I WILL SING THY PRAISE." 13 And again, "I WILL PUT MYTRUST IN HIM." And again, "BEHOLD, I AND THE CHILDREN WHOM GOD HASGIVEN ME."    
      Jesus Is Not an Angel    Let me try to bring you into the sequence of thought in chaptersone and two of Hebrews. The writer wants us to realize that JesusChrist is not an angel. He is worshipped by angels (1:6) because heis himself God (1:8). He is God's final decisive word to the world inthese last days. God has spoken to us in these last days by a Son(1:2). And this writer wants us to join the angels in worshippingthis great God-revealing, God-expressing Son. So he piles up gloriesin 1:2-4: he is the heir of all things; through him all things weremade; he is the radiance of God's glory and the exact representationof God's nature; he upholds the universe by the word of his power; hemade purification for sins once for all time and then sat down at theright hand of the Majesty of God in heaven where he reigns todayuntil all his enemies are put under his feet (1:13).    
      Do Not Neglect Such a GreatSalvation    Now on the basis of that tremendous celebration of the greatnessof Christ, the writer in chapter two warns us about the uttercraziness of not paying attention to this final Word of God (1:1-2),and of neglecting our great salvation (1:3). "How shall we escape ifwe neglect so great a salvation?" He says it is suicidal to hearabout such a great Savior and such a great salvation and then toneglect it while we busy ourselves with other things and prove by ourneglect that we do not think it is great, and therefore have neverreally seen it and tasted it in truth.  Then he goes on to talk in 2:5 ff about the greatness of what oursalvation really is. And what he focuses on is the purpose of God forus humans to one day have a magnificent position of glory and honorunder God and over the creation he has made. In 2:6-8 he quotes Psalm8 about how man is crowned with glory and honor and has all things insubjection under his feet. But he is not naive. He knows that thisgreat destiny appointed for man is not now a reality. So he says atthe end of verse 8: "But now we do not yet see all things subjectedto him." Instead of gloriously ruling over creation, man suffers anddies. We may be able to get to the moon and wipe out polio and splitthe atom, but we cannot stop aging and death. Psalm 8 has afulfillment that is not yet seen.    
      Jesus Is the Forerunner of a NewHumanity    What then is the answer to our hopeless subjection to death? Howare we going to attain the destiny that Psalm 8 holds out to us? Theanswer the writer gives is that Jesus Christ came into the world as ahuman being so that he could be the forerunner of a new humanity thatwill burst the bonds of sin and futility and death and enter theglory and honor promised by God.  This is what he says in verse 9. We don't see all things yetsubject to man, but what do we see now?  But we do see Him who has been made for a little while lower thanthe angels, namely, Jesus, because of the suffering of death crownedwith glory and honor, that by the grace of God He might taste deathfor everyone.  In other words, even though you and I do not yet have the gloryand honor promised in Psalm 8 because we suffer and die, neverthelessJesus has come into the world as a human being and has broken throughthe futility and death and risen into the glory and honor promised tous so that he is our "Captain" or "Forerunner."    
      He Is Bringing Many Sons to Glory    The reason I call him a Captain and Forerunner is because verse 10makes clear that what the Son of God was doing when he became a humanbeing was "leading many sons to glory." Look at verse 10: "For it wasfitting for Him [i.e. God the Father] , for whom are all things, andthrough whom are all things, in  bringing many sons to glory ,to perfect the author of their salvation through sufferings." Nowthere are a lot of important things to see in that verse, but noticefirst just this: what God is doing in sending his Son into the worldto suffer is  bringing many sons to glory.   What glory is he talking about? It's the same glory promised inPsalm 8 in Hebrews 2:7, "You have crowned him with glory and honorand appointed him over the works of your hands." This is the glory wehave fallen from in our sin and rebellion against God. But now God isundertaking a "great salvation." He sends his Son to taste death forus, deliver us from the futility and defeat and misery andcondemnation of sin and death, and lead us to glory. To do this hehas suffered and entered before us into that very glory, as verse 9says: "Jesus, because of the suffering of death [is] crowned withglory and honor."  So he is our Forerunner. He becomes a human being. He suffers andhe dies in our place; He rises from the dead victorious, and heenters into glory. Why? So that he might "lead many sons to glory."  So what we need to see here is that the writer is still talkingabout the Great Salvation mentioned in verse 3. Our great salvationis that we are destined for glory through the incarnation, suffering,death, resurrection and glorification of Jesus Christ our Forerunner.The promise of Psalm 8 will be fulfilled for us because it hasalready been fulfilled in Jesus, our Forerunner. He "tasted death forus" so that he could "lead us to glory."  This is a  great salvation      because the destinywe are saved for is great: we will one day break free from cancer andparalysis and arthritis and blindness and depression and corruptionand futility and inherit the glory of the risen Son of God. He hasbeen crowned with glory and honor (2:9); and that is where he isleading us. And it is a  great salvation      becausethe Savior is great: This is the  Son of God  who came, not  an angel,  not  a mere human being, but the Son ofGod, who is God -- worshipped and revered forever. No one less thanGod has come to lead us to glory. So this is a great salvationbecause the Forerunner is great and because the goal is great. TheForerunner is the Son of God and the goal is glory of God.    
      What Is the Opposite of Neglecting Our GreatSalvation?    So don't neglect your great salvation. Do you neglect yoursalvation? Do you take the greatness of it for granted? One of thereasons for weakness in the Christian church is that so many neglectthe greatness of their salvation. What is the opposite of neglectingyour great salvation? Hebrews 2:1 says it's "paying close attentionto what we have heard." Hebrews 3:1 says it's to "consider Jesus, theApostle and High Priest of our confession." Hebrews 3:12-13 says itis, "taking care lest there should be in any one of you an evil,unbelieving heart . . . but encouraging one another day after day . .. lest any one of you be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin."Hebrews 4:16 says it is "drawing near to the throne of grace forhelp." Hebrews 10:23 says it is "holding fast our confession withoutwavering." Hebrews 10:35 says it is "not throwing away yourconfidence which has great reward." Hebrews 12:1-2 says it is"running the race set before us by looking to Jesus the pioneer andperfecter of our faith." Hebrews 12:25 says it is "not refusing himwho is speaking from heaven."  Not neglecting your great salvation means applying yourself tothink about your salvation; and to meditate on why it is great; andto focus on the greatness of Jesus Christ the Forerunner, Captain,Pioneer and Perfecter of our salvation; and to pray for help in allof this at the throne of grace. Not neglecting is the opposite ofcoasting and then dabbling and then forgetting.  My father and I collected coins zealously for several of mygrowing up years. We had dozens of those fold-out blue books that hadeach coin ordered by year and place of minting. Daddy would bring newcoins home from his travels and we would study them and look up theirworth in the manual. Then something happened. We began to neglect it.Other things started to draw us away. We stopped focusing andplanning and thinking, and began to drift. For a few years there werelittle spurts of recovered interest, but it didn't last. Today, Ihave no idea where all those blue books are. They were worththousands of dollars, but today I have no interest and there is noconnection. Maybe with you it was dolls, or baseball cards, or modelairplanes. Once there was intense interest, and then neglect anddrifting and forgetting.  That is the way many treat the great salvation of Jesus Christ,which is millions of times more valuable and more important than acoin collection. A short spurt of intense interest and attention.Then, as Jesus said, the "the worries of the world, and thedeceitfulness of riches, and the desires for other things enter inand choke the word." First there is a kind of hit-and-miss dabblingwith the things of God, and then drifting and then finally aforgetting and cold indifference.  The book of Hebrews is one extended God-given help not to let thathappen. This book is itself a "not neglecting" of our greatsalvation. Hebrews is a long meditation on the greatness of oursalvation. This book models for us what we can do with our greatsalvation. We can ponder its greatness, and probe into why it is theway it is, and dig to the very bottom of why our salvation took placethis way and not that way. That's what this writer does. And he isdoing it to help us do it. This is God's Word to help us and teach us not  to neglect our great salvation.    
      How Hebrews Encourages us to Value ourSalvation    Let's look at how it does this in verse 10. This is the writer'smeditation on part of the greatness of our salvation, namely, howfitting it was that the Son of God, who is very God, should suffer asa human being. Verse 9 ends by saying he tasted death for us. Thenverse 10 explains why this was fitting, or appropriate: "For it wasfitting for Him [God], for whom are all things, and through whom areall things, in bringing many sons to glory, to perfect the author oftheir salvation through sufferings." So the writer is doing what weneed to do often: he is meditating on the way God accomplishedsalvation. And he is pondering why Christ suffered. He is probinginto why it was "fitting."  This is a remarkable thing. Think about it. You might think, WellGod is God and he can save any way he pleases. If he does somethingit is good and right. He is God. So don't try to probe into whetherhis way of salvation is "fitting" or not. Just accept it.  But that is not the way out writer thinks about God and aboutsalvation. He thinks that if God does it there must be somethingdeeply "fitting" about it. There must be something coherent orsymmetrical or beautiful about it. He thinks that not neglecting ourgreat salvation involves thinking about this. It involves asking whyGod did it the way he did it and coming to conclusions that cause usto worship and rejoice and obey.  So let me mention at least three things that I see in this text(not the only things) that account for the fittingness of Christ'ssufferings. That's what verse 10 says is fitting: that God shouldperfect his Son through sufferings as a way of bringing many sons toglory.    
      It Was Fitting that the Son of God ShouldSuffer    1. First notice that these sufferings are seen as the means bywhich God "perfects" his Son. What does that mean? Does it mean thatJesus was sinfully imperfect and had to suffer in order to ridhimself of sin? No, because this book more than any other letter isinsistent that Christ was free from sin (4:15; 7:26; 9:14). Whatthen? Hebrews 5:8-9 gives the answer:  Although He was a Son, He learned obedience from the things whichHe suffered. 9 And having been made perfect, He became to all thosewho obey Him the source of eternal salvation."  Here being "made perfect" means "learning obedience" throughsuffering. This does not mean that he was once disobedient and thenbecame obedient. It means that Jesus moved from untested obedienceinto suffering and then through suffering into tested and provenobedience. And this proving himself obedient through suffering washis "being perfected."  Now the writer says (in Hebrews 2:10) that it was fitting forChrist to attain this proven perfection through sufferings. Why?Because Christ is leading many sons to glory and so he must succeedwhere we failed. We have all suffered and failed to be perfected byit. Instead we murmur and complain and get angry at God and hisprovidence. In this way we will never attain the glory of God. Psalm8 will never be true for us. Someone must come and rescue us and leadus to glory. And if Christ is going to lead us to glory then he mustsucceed in sufferings where we failed. And that he did. He wasperfected in them. He always obeyed when tested, even when testedwith the most horrible sufferings. So he is a fitting Captain andForerunner and Leader to glory. And the salvation he accomplished isthe greater for this fittingness.  2. Here is a second reason that it is "fitting" that Christ leadmany sons to glory through sufferings. One great aim of God insalvation is that he have a great unified family of children withJesus Christ being essentially different from and yet deeply unitedto his other human brothers and sisters. But if all the brothers andsisters in a family have experienced suffering except one, the unityis jeopardized. And so for the sake of a common spirit of unity andsympathy and camaraderie, even in suffering, Christ takes on humannature and leads many sons to glory through suffering and death.  I get this from the connection between verses 10 and 11. Verse 10says that it's fitting for God to bring many sons to glory throughthe sufferings of his Son. And then verse 11 gives a reason for whyit is fitting:  For both He who sanctifies [Jesus, cf. 13:12] and those who aresanctified [the brothers he is leading to glory] are all from one[Father, or human nature]; for which reason He is not ashamed to callthem brethren, saying [in Psalm 22:22] "I will proclaim thy name tomy brethren . . ."  In other words, the reason it is fitting for Christ to suffer tolead many sons to glory is that this suffering expresses his being agood brother. Let yourself think on this. Give some time to ponderingthis truth: that Christ suffered -- his Father willed that he suffer(really suffer horrendous pain!) -- because God aims to create afamily that is so unified and so deeply interwoven and empatheticthat the family would be jeopardized if the perfect oldest brotherdoes not go through all the pain of the rest of the children. Thistoo is part of what makes our salvation great.  3. Finally here's a third reason why it is fitting for God tobring many sons to glory through the sufferings of his Son. Godcreated all things and governs all things to magnify his own glory --his own freedom and self-sufficiency and all-satisfying worth. Andthe willingness of the Son of God to suffer in obedience to theFather shows the infinite greatness of the Father's worth and theinfinite value of the Father's glory.  I get this from the key phrases in verse 10:  For it was fitting for Him [God, the father],  for whom are allthings, and through whom are all things , in bringing many sons toglory, to perfect the author of their salvation through sufferings.  Notice the crucial words, "for whom are all things." It wasfitting for this God to lead sons to glory through suffering. WhichGod? The God " for whom are all things ." In other words, theGod who creates and sustains and governs all things to magnify hisglory. All things exist for the glory of God -- to show howall-sufficient and all-satisfying God is in himself.  And the writer says that it is fitting for  this God  to leadmany sons to glory through suffering. Why? Evidently because thewillingness of his Son to suffer is the brightest display of theFather's glory in all the universe. In the book of Hebrewswillingness to suffer loss is evidence of great confidence in God tobring us through to glory (10:32-4; 11:24-26; 13:5-6, 12-13). So withJesus. Hebrews 12:2 says that Jesus "endured the cross and despisedthe shame  for the joy that was set before him ." What joy? Thejoy of sitting down at the right hand of God's majesty surrounded bya countless company of worshipping brothers and sisters.  So the depths of Christ's suffering was the measure of hisconfidence in all-satisfying joy of God's glory.  This is the ultimate reason that it was fitting for such a greatand glorious God to lead many sons to glory through the suffering ofhis Son. It is fitting because it magnifies the glory of God most.This is finally why our salvation is so great. It is a salvation thathas God at the beginning and God at the end. How can it not be anunspeakably great salvation? O do not neglect this great salvation!  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
