  September 8, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor      
        The Word of God: Living, Active,Sharp   (Hebrews 4:12-13)    For the word of God is living and active and sharperthan any two-edged sword, and piercing as far as the division of souland spirit, of both joints and marrow, and able to judge the thoughtsand intentions of the heart. 13 And there is no creature hidden fromHis sight, but all things are open and laid bare to the eyes of Himwith whom we have to do.     
      Failure to Trust - - Failure to Enter God'sRest    Last week we ended with Hebrews 4:11, "Let us therefore bediligent to enter that rest [God's restful salvation of forgivenessand hope now, and heaven when we die], lest anyone fall throughfollowing   the same example of disobedience." So it's an urgentplea to be earnest and careful so that you don't throw away the offerof God's rest.  The verse says that if we are not diligent to enter God's restthen we are following an example of disobedience. Whose example? Theexample of Israel in the wilderness. Hebrews 3:19 says, "And so wesee that they were not able to enter because of unbelief." Thedisobedience that 4:11 is talking about is the disobedience ofunbelief -- a failure to trust. Don't be like them, the writer says,because their failure to trust kept them out of God's rest. And itwill keep you out of God's rest.    
      Be Diligent to Hear God's Word    Failure to trust what? We saw the answer in Hebrews 4:2, "We havehad good news preached to us, just as they also [had good newspreached to them]; but  the word they heard    did notprofit them, because it was not united by faith in those who heard."What they failed to trust was the good news, the Word of God, thatwas preached to them in the wilderness -- the promises of God that hewould care for them and give them victory and forgive them and bemerciful to them. They didn't believe God. They murmured in theirtroubles and wanted to turn back to Egypt rather than follow God.This is their unbelief and their disobedience.  Now this is extremely important to see if we are going tounderstand the link between Hebrews 4:11 and Hebrews 4:12. Let's makesure we have 4:11 clear before us before we make the connection withverse 12. Verse 11 urges us to be diligent to enter God's rest sothat we don't fall through the same sort of disobedience theIsraelites showed in the wilderness. That disobedience is describedin verse 2 -- they were unbelieving. But let's be very specific.Verse 2 indicates that what they disbelieved was "the good news thatwas preached to them," or the middle of the verse says: "the word  they heard did not profit them, because it did not meetwith faith." Mark carefully this focus on the  word . The worddid not profit them, because they did not believe it.  What verse 11 urges therefore, when it says, "Be diligent to enterthat rest," is, "Be diligent to hear the  word,  the good news,and be diligent  to believe in it, to trust the good news, toembrace it and hold to it and be satisfied by it , so that youdon't murmur and want to forsake God and go back to the Egypt of sin.  Now we are prepared to see the connection between this verse 11and verse 12. Be diligent with this  word  of good news (fromverse 2), to hear it and believe it, (verse 12:) " For  the wordof God is living and active. . . ."  Let's stop here just to make the connection between these twoverses plain. Then we will see what verses 12 and 13 say. Verse 12 isgiving a reason or a support or a ground for the call to diligence inverse 11. Verse 11 says in essence: Be sure that you know and trustthe  word  of God referred to in verse 2 -- the good news ofGod's promises and forgiveness. Then verse 12 says: Yes, and onereason to do this is because this  word  (the good news referredto in verse 2) is living and active, etc. So today's text is anargument for why we should be so diligent to enter God's rest byhearing and believing God's word.    
      The Big Picture    Now let's step back a minute and get the big picture. Some of youare  analyzing  people and you like to analyze the parts of atext. And some of you are  synthesizing  people and you like tosee the synthesis -- the big picture, when it is all put backtogether again. So listen up, all you synthesizers who like the bigpicture. There are four stages.   Stage #1.  The aim of life, according to this chapter of thebook of Hebrews, is to enter God's rest -- to be saved from our sinand spend eternity joyfully in God's restful presence. That's thegreat goal of life -- and to lovingly take as many people there withus as we can (which is why this author wrote the letter!).   Stage #2.  To enter this great and joyful rest we must trustGod. Verse 3: "We who have  believed  enter that rest." So theutterly indispensable means of getting to heaven is believing God.Trusting him.   Stage #3.  To believe God, to trust him, we must hear hisWord. We must hear the good news. We must know the promises that hemakes for us to believe. That's why verse 2 is so definite about thismatter: "For indeed we have had good news preached to us, just asthey also." If they, or if we, didn't have the good news preached tous, then we would not be able to believe the Word of God. So thisstage is utterly crucial. The word of God, the good news, thepromises of God, have been preached to us. This is what makes faithpossible.   Stage #4.  Finally, we must now be diligent lest we give wayto unbelief. This is the front-burner issue for the book of Hebrews.  Hebrews 2:1, "Pay much close attention to what [you] have heard"-- the  Word.   Hebrews 3:1, "Consider Jesus, the Apostle . . . of our confession"-- Apostle = the one who speaks the  Word.    Hebrews 2:12, "Take care, brethren, lest there should be in anyone of you an evil, unbelieving heart" -- a heart not hearing andbelieving the  Word.   Hebrews 3:15, "Today if you hear his voice [his  Word ], donot harden your hearts."  So now we can see the burden of this book in the light of the bigpicture. 1) The great aim is that we will enter into God's rest andenjoy his restful fellowship. 2) The great means to get there istrusting him. 3) The focus of our trust is his Word, his promises,his good news (as it's called in 4:2). 4) To keep on believing thepromises of God we must be diligent, pay attention, consider, takecare, and not harden our hearts. In other words the pathway to heavenis a path of unremitting focus and earnestness and vigilance towardthe word of God.    
      About The Word    Now the point of today's text (Hebrews 4:12-13) is to help us dothat by telling us about this Word. Be diligent, verse 11 says,because (verse 12 says) the word of God is . . . And then it tells usabout this word.  So let's read again what it says about this word. Verse 12:  For the word of God is living and active and sharper than anytwo-edged sword, and piercing as far as the division of soul andspirit, of both joints and marrow, and able to judge the thoughts andintentions of the heart.  Now I am tempted to take every word here and probe into why it isused. Like, why mention joints and bone marrow? And what's thedifference between spirit and soul? And what precisely is thedifference between thoughts and intentions? And do the words "livingand active" perhaps correspond to any of these other pairs:spirit-soul, joints-marrow, thoughts-intentions? Is the "heart"(mentioned at the end of the verse) different from the soul andspirit? And so on. These are good questions and they are worthmeditating on for hours.  But this morning I don't want to lose the forest for the trees. Iwonder if we couldn't all agree on this much from verse 12: one ofthe functions of the word of God when it comes into us is that  itpenetrates very deep -- like a sword through tough, hard layers --and makes judgments about what's there.    The word "judge" in verse 12 ("to judge the thoughts andintentions of the heart") does not mean "condemn." It means "assess."When we show somebody a painting and say, "What's your judgment?" Wedon't mean, "What's your condemnation?" We mean, "What's yourassessment of the quality? Is it good or bad." So the word of Godpenetrates to the deepest place in our lives and assesses what'sthere. Is it good or bad?    
      Eternity is at Stake    But now let's be more specific. What's really at stake in thesechapters? What's at stake is entering into God's rest. Eternity is atstake. And the way to enter that rest is faith, or belief,or trust inGod's promises. The great danger in these chapters is not just badthoughts. The great danger is  unbelieving  thoughts. Hebrews3:19: "They could not enter  because of unbelief ."  So what we need is protection from unbelief. Day in and day out weneed to fight unbelief in the promises of God. It's unbelief thatwill keep us out of the God's rest. That's what's at stake in thecall for diligence in verse 11 and that's why the word of God inverse 12 is so critical for us. The word of God penetrates to thebottom of all our defenses and deceptions and exposes belief orunbelief. It assess our thoughts and intentions as to whether theyare believing thoughts and intentions or unbelieving. Are we trustingthe promises of God or aren't we?    
      Are We Trusting God's Promises?    This is what I need help with. This is what I am desperate for inmy life. For example, this week, I had two or three very difficulttelephone calls to make -- the kind I do not like to make. Theyinvolved disagreement. They were the kind of calls that feel like ano-win situation. If you go one way, you will compromise yourintegrity or the truth. If you go another way you will almost surelybe misunderstood and disapproved. So you struggle and agonize overwhether to call and what to say and which way to go.  And in those moments  the  most important thing is this: am Itrusting God? Or am I subtly beginning to put my faith in compromise,or half-truths, or expediency? And all the while I know that I amutterly fallible and prone to self-justification and liable todeception, so that I may think I am walking by faith when I am,perhaps, in fact becoming callous to the truth and slipping intounbelief in the promises of God.  So what should I do? At least two things. One is to immerse myselfin the word of God with prayer. The other is to E-mail my smallgroup. So I read my Bible. I prayed. And I sent out a plea forcounsel to Tom Steller and David Michael and Brad Nelson and ErvMickelberg and Chuck Morris. Within 24 hours I had four brotherlyexhortations, rooted in God's Word. With those, and the encouragementof my wife, and the effect of the Word I made the calls and I believeI acted by faith in future grace.  Now what was really happening here? Look at Hebrews 3:12-13.  Take care, brethren, lest there should be in any one of you anevil, unbelieving heart, in falling away from the living God. 13 Butencourage one another day after day, as long as it is still called"Today," lest any one of you be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin.    
      The Deceiving Power of Sin    Notice three things here. 1) In verse 12 the danger day in and dayout is that an evil  unbelieving  heart would lead us away fromGod.  Unbelief      is the issue. The issue is failureto trust God's promises. 2) Then (in verse 13) notice that somethinglike small groups is essential: "Encourage  one another  dayafter day." So you get your small group involved. You need theirhelp. Why? 3) That's the third thing: the way our hearts becomeunbelieving (verse 12) is by being "hardened by the deceitfulness  of sin" (verse 13). We need help to keep frombeing deceived by sin. How are we going to be rescued from thedeceiving power of sin? How can small groups help? How can we help?  That's what today's text in Hebrews 4:12 is meant to answer. Theword of God is living and active and penetrates to the bottom of ourlives and rips the pleasant mask off the ugly face of sin. The onlyreason anybody sins is because at some level they are (culpably)deceived. They start believing the lies of sin instead of thepromises of God.  Sin whispers through the desires of the flesh and therationalizations of the mind, your only hope of future happiness isto have an abortion. It whispers that you will not have a chance inthe future if you don't cheat on this test. It says that you won't benoticed and liked if you don't dress provocatively. It says, you willlose the one person who seems to care for you if you don't compromiseyour sexual standards. It says you won't have job security if youspeak up about the dishonest practices at work. It says your lifewill be wasted in this relationship if you don't get a divorce. Itsays that only a fool would go on looking weak instead of gettingsome kind of revenge.  Every one of those statements is a lie. It's what Hebrews 3:13calls "the deceitfulness of sin." Now those lies sometimes lodgethemselves very deep in the heart as thoughts and intentions thatseem unshakably true because of the hardness of deception thatencloses them like a dark, sealed casket. In that condition unbeliefhas the upper hand. We are not believing in the promises of God, weare trusting in the promises of sin. And we are in mortal danger ofbecoming so hard that repentance will become impossible (Hebrews6:6), and heaven will have been thrown away for the sake of a fewfleeting pleasures, like an inheritance sold for a bowl of stew(Hebrews 12:16).    
      How Will We Escape the Deceit ofSin?    What is our only hope? Our only hope is that there is somethingsharp enough and powerful enough to penetrate through all thedeception and shed light on my thoughts and intentions. And that'swhat our text is about in Hebrews 4:12. The word of God is our onlyhope. The good news of God's promises and the warnings of hisjudgment are sharp enough and living enough and active enough topenetrate to the bottom of my heart and show me that the lies of sinare indeed lies.  Abortion will not create a wonderful future for me. Neither willcheating or dressing provocatively, or throwing away my sexualpurity, or keeping quiet about dishonesty at work, or divorce, orvengeance. And what rescues me from this deception is the word ofGod. The word of God's promise is like throwing open a great windowof bright morning sun on the shiny-back roaches of sin masqueradingas satisfying pleasures in our hearts.  In other words, I see Hebrews 4:12 as a tremendous encouragementcoming after verse 11. Be diligent to enter God's rest by fightingoff the disobedience of unbelief. Why? Because (verse 12) God hasgiven you his good news (verse 2), his promises, his word to protectyou from the deep deceptions of sin that try to harden the heart andlure it away from God and lead it to destruction. Be of good cheer inyour battle to believe. Because the word of God is living and activeand sharper than any two-edged sword and it will penetrate deeperthan any deception of sin has ever gone and reveal the what is trulyvaluable and what is truly worth trusting.  And so we end this message at a point of crisis. You have heardthe word of God. Much has been exposed to your own conscience thismorning. And now as verse 13 says, "no one is hidden from God'ssight; but all things are open and laid bare before his eyes." Hisgaze is upon you. What will you do with what he has exposed, and whathe now is watching?  I hope the answer is: turn from the deceptive promises of sin, andtrust in the all-satisfying promises of God.  Copyright 1996 John Piper  
  
