  November 9, 1986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchMorningPastor John PiperCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper   LET ALL THE PEOPLES PRAISE THEE  Psalm 67 May God be gracious to us and bless us and make his face to shine upon us,2) that thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving power among all nations.3) Let the peoples praise thee, O God; let all the peoples praise thee! 4)Let the nations be glad and sing for joy, for thou dost judge the peopleswith equity and guide the nations upon earth. 5) Let the peoples praise thee,O God; let all the peoples praise thee! 6) The earth has yielded its increase;God, our God, has blessed us. 7) God has blessed us; let all the ends ofthe earth fear him! The first missionary endeavor of the Protestants in England burst forth fromthe soil of Puritan hope. The Puritans, you remember, were those pastorsand teachers in England (and then New England), roughly between the years1560 and 1660, who wanted to purify the church of England and bring it intotheological and practical alignment with the teachings of the Reformation. They had a view of Biblical authority and divine sovereignty that producedan undaunted hope in the victory of God over all the world. They were deeplystirred by a passion for the coming of God's kingdom over all the nations.Their hearts really believed the truth of Psalm 86:8-9. There is none like thee among the gods, O Lord, nor are there any works like thine. All the nations thou hast made shall come and bow down before thee, O Lord, and shall glorify thy name. This tremendous confidence that Christ would one day conquer the hearts ofall the nations and be glorified by every people on earth, gave birth tothe first Protestant missionary endeavor in the English-speaking world, andit happened 150 years before the modern missionary movement began with WilliamCarey in 1793. Between 1627 and 1640 15,000 people emigrated from England to America, mostof them Puritans, carring this great confidence in the worldwide reign ofChrist. In fact, the seal of the colonists of Massachusetts Bay had on ita North American Indian with these words coming out of his mouth: "Come overinto Macedonia and help us" taken from Acts 16:9. What this shows is thatin general the Puritans saw their emigration to America as part of God'smissionary strategy to extend his kingdom among the nations. One of those hope-filled Puritans who crossed the Atlantic in 1631 was JohnEliot. He was 27 years old and a year later became the pastor of a new churchin Roxbury, Massachusetts about a mile from Boston. But something happenedthat made him much more than a pastor. According to Cotton Mather, there were twenty tribes of Indians in that vicinity.He specifically calls them "nations" to emphasize the missionary significance.Well, John Eliot could not avoid the practical implications of his theology:if the infallible Scriptures promise that all nations will one day bow downto Christ, and if Christ is sovereign and able by his Spirit to subdue allopposition to his promised reign, then there is good hope that a person whogoes as an ambassador of Christ to one of these nations will be the choseninstrument of God to open the eyes of the blind and set up an outpost ofthe kingdom of Christ. And so when he was slightly over 40 years old Eliot set himself to studyAlgonquin. He deciphered the vocabulary and grammar and syntax and eventuallytranslated the entire Bible as well as books that he valued like RichardBaxter's Call to the Unconverted. By the time Eliot was 84 years old, therewere numerous Indian churches, some with their own Indian pastors. It isan amazing story of a man who once said, "Prayers and pains through faithin Christ Jesus will do any thing!" (Mather, Great Works, I, 562). The reason I tell you the story is to highlight the tremendous importanceof solid Biblical hope in the missionary enterprise. God has promised andGod is sovereign: All the nations. . . shall come and bow down before thee, O Lord, and shall glorify thy name. This is what gripped the Puritan mind and eventually gave birth to the modernmissionary movement in 1793. For William Carey was nourished on this tradition,as was David Brainerd and Adoniram Judson and Alexander Duff and David Livingstonand a host of others who gave their lives to reach the hidden peoples ofthe world. The modern missionary movement did not arise in a theologicalvacuum. It grew out of a great reformation tradition that put the promisesof God and the sovereignty of God square in the center of human life. And I long for us to recover that Biblical tradition -- not for its own sake,but because I am so deeply convinced from Scripture that it is the root ofradical obedience, and the root intense worship, and the root of a durable,persevering, fruitful, commitment to world missions. Our text this morning is an expression of how a person prays when he is inspiredby the Holy Spirit and is filled with this Puritan hope for the worldwidevictory of God. Let us read it again, May God be gracious to us and bless us and make his face to shine upon us, that thy way may be know upon earth, thy saving power (literally: salvation) among all nations.  Let the peoples praise thee, O God; let all the peoples praise thee! Let the nations be glad and sing for joy, for thou dost judge the peoples with equity and guide the nations upon earth. Let the peoples praise thee, O God; let all the peoples praise thee! The earth has yielded its increase; God, our God, has blessed us. God has blessed us; let all the ends of the earth fear him! I am going to pass over one of the main ideas of the Psalm expressed in thefirst two verses, namely, that all blessing is given to the people of Godin order that they might be a blessing to the world. I assume that this willbe the heart of Don Richardson's seminar on Saturday. So I am happy to leaveit for him to take up. Instead I want to focus on two other ideas in the text. I will put them inthe form of questions and take them one at a time. 1. The first question is: What is the great purpose of God revealed in thisprayer? The answer is plain from the Psalm: God's purpose is to be known and praisedand enjoyed and feared among all the nations of the earth. Look at the verses where this comes out. First his purpose is to be known among all the nations. Verse 2: ". . . thatthy way may be known upon the earth, thy saving power among all nations." Second, his purpose is to be praised among all the nations. Verse 3: "Letall the peoples praise thee, O God; let all the peoples praise thee! Verse5: "Let the peoples praise thee, O God; let all the peoples praise thee!" Third, God's purpose is to be enjoyed among all the peoples. Verse 4: "Letthe nations be glad and sing for joy." Fourth, his purpose is to be feared, or reverence, among all the nations.Verse 7: "Let all the ends of the earth fear him!" So if we believe that the inspired psalmist is praying in accord with thewill of God, then the purpose of God is indeed to be known and praised andenjoyed and reverence among all the peoples of the earth. That is why theworld exists. That is why the church exists. That is why you exist. Most of you don't know who J. Campbell White was. Before I tell you, letme read you something he said that is very deep and perceptive. He said, Most men are not satisfied with the permanent output of their lives. Nothingcan wholly satisfy the life of Christ within His followers except the adoptionof Christ's purpose toward the world He came to redeem. Fame, pleasure andriches are but husks and ashes in contrast with the boundless and abidingjoy of working with God for the fulfillment of His eternal plans. The menwho are putting everything into Christ's undertaking are getting out of lifeits sweetest and most priceless rewards. (Perspectives, p. 225) I believe this is implied in our text. If we are the children of God thenthe only thing that will bring true and lasting satisfaction to our livesis when we throw all our lives into the purposes of our Father. And the purposeof our Father is to be known and praised and enjoyed and reverence amongall the peoples of the earth. Now if I were you I would respond to this by asking, "Are you saying thatthe only people who can have deep and lasting satisfaction in life aremissionaries?" And I will answer the question by simply telling you who J.Campbell White was. He was not a missionary. He was the leader of a organizationcalled the Laymen's Missionary Movement founded in 1906 by businessmen whocould not resist getting involved in what they saw God doing in the riseof the Student Volunteer Movement. One young businessman in Washington thoughtto himself, "If the laymen of North America could see the world as thesestudents are seeing it, they would rise up in their strength and provideall the funds needed for the enterprise." And so a movement was formed, and the goals were described in three words, "investigation, agitation and organization; the investigation by laymen ofmissionary conditions: the agitation of laymen for an adequate missionarypolicy, and the organization of laymen to co-operate with the ministers andMissionary Boards in enlisting the whole Church in its supreme work of savingthe world." (Perspectives, p. 224) So the answer is no, you don't have to be a missionary in order to make yourlife serve the great purposes of God to be known and praised and enjoyedand feared among all the peoples. But if you want to be satisfied with thelasting output of your life, you can't just go on with business as usual,doing your work, making your money, giving your tithe, eating, sleeping,playing and serving at church. Instead you are going to have to stop andgo away for a few days with Bible and notepad; and pray and think about howyour particular time and place in life fits into the great purpose of Godto be known and praised and enjoyed and feared among all the peoples of theearth. Most of you should stay right where you are in your present job, and simplyponder how you can fit your particular skills and relationships and resourcesmore strategically to the purpose of your heavenly Father expressed in thisPsalm. But for others this week is going to be different. Many of you are simplynot satisfied with what you are doing. As Campbell White said, the outputof your lives is not satisfying your deepest spiritual ambitions. We mustbe careful here. Every job has its discouragements and its seasons of darkness.We must not interpret such experiences automatically as a call to leave ourpost. But if the discontentment with your work is deep recurrent and lasting, andif your heart longs more than anything to be holy and to walk pleasing tothe Lord, then God may indeed be loosening your roots in order to transplantyou to a place and a work where the deep spiritual ambitions of your soulcan be satisfied. Every year as Missions Week rolls around I reexamine my life and work hereat Bethlehem in the light of God's global purpose and in view of the incrediblespiritual darkness and misery of the unreached peoples of this earth. AndI ask, is this the most strategic investment of my little life for the sakeof God's purpose to be known and praised among all the peoples of the earth?When the Lord calls me to give an account of my ministry, will I be ableto say, "I stayed at Bethlehem, Master, because I believed that there I couldbe most instrumental in accomplishing your purpose to gather your sheep fromall the peoples of the earth"? When I can no longer say yes to that question,then my leadership here will be finished. And so it is with many of you in this week. Big issues are in the offingthese days. May God help you. May God free you. May God give you a new visionfor your life. And may that vision get its meaning from God's great purposeto be known and praised and enjoyed and feared among all the peoples of theearth. So the first question we have asked of the text is, what is the great purposeof God revealed in this prayer? 2. Now the second question is based on the first one: What is it that Godaims to make known about himself among all the nations? If his purpose isto be known, we should ask, known for what? The Psalm give four answers. And we only have time to mention them ratherthan make extended comments about them. First, God aims to be known as the one and only true and living God. I gatherthis from the fact that an inspired Israelite poet is praying that his Godwill be known and praised instead of all the gods of all the other peoplesof the earth. When he says, "Let all the peoples praise thee, O God," he means: let allthe peoples know that there is one true and living God, and let them stopserving and praising all other gods. If this were not true, if this were not the purpose of God, then missionswould be the most audacious and presumptions enterprise in the world. Butif it is true, then missions is the humble response of a people who lovethe lost. Second, God aims to make known that he is a God of justice, that he doeswhat is right. I see this in verse 4: "Let the nations be glad an sing forjoy, for thou dost judge the peoples with equity." When it comes the judgmentof the nations, God will not be partial. No one will be condemned for thecolor of his skin, or the size of his brain, or the place of his birth. No bribes will be considered, no sophisticated plea-bargaining. All willproceed on the basis of God's unimpeachable righteousness. Let this be knownto all the peoples of the earth. They will stand on an equal footing withIsrael when it comes to judgment. The standard of justice will be the samefor both. Third, God aims to make known that he is a God of sovereign power. I getthis from the last part of verse 4: "Let the nations be glad and sing forjoy, for thou dost judge the peoples with equity and guide the nations uponearth." Many nations boast of their power and their independence as sovereign states.And when they do the Lord laughs. Because he made the nations, he determinedtheir allotted periods of time and the boundaries of their habitation (Acts17:26). "The king's heart is a stream of water in the hand of the Lord, heturns it wherever he wills" (Proverbs 21:1). "He removes kings and he setsup kings" (Daniel 2:21); "he does according to his will in the host of heavenand among the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand, or sayto him, What doest thou?" (Daniel 4:35). God aims to make known among all the nations that he runs the world. He isthe guide of the nations. They are not sovereign. Only One is sovereign.And he sets the destiny of every nation. Finally God aims to be known as a gracious God. The only true God, who isjust in all his judgment and sovereign in all his rule is a God of grace.I get this from verse 1: "May God be gracious to us and bless us and makehis face to shine upon us, that thy way may be known upon the earth and thysalvation among all nations." He wants to be known as a God who is gracious and who saves. And this doesn'tmean: who is gracious only to Israel. Because verse 4 says, "Let the nationsbe glad." If the grace of God were only for Israel there would be no gladnessamong the nations. Perhaps you have noticed that what we have seen here in the four truths abouthimself that God wills to make known is simply the great old Puritan hopeof John Eliot. There is one true and living God. He is infinitely just and holy in all his ways. He is sovereign over all the affairs of men and nations. And he is gracious to all who believe. Because he is gracious he aims to be known among all the peoples. And becausehe is sovereign he WILL be known among all the peoples. This is the great hope and confidence that once created a deep and lastingmissionary movement among the Puritans and their heirs. This is the greathope and confidence that will sustain the missions movement at Bethlehemand beyond. And this is the hope that keeps me at my post in this place andmay take you from yours. In 1648 twelve English Puritans wrote to Parliament about the spread of thegospel among the Indians in New England: The utmost ends of the earth are designed and promised to be in time thepossessions of Christ. . . The ends of the earth shall see his glory, andthe kingdoms of the world shall become the kingdoms of the Lord and of hisChrist. . . And if the dawn of the morning be so delightful, what will theclear day be? . . . If some beginnings be so full of joy, what will it bewhen God shall perform his whole work, when the whole earth shall be fullof the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea, and east and westshall sing together the song of the Lamb?   Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
