     August 9, 1998    Bethlehem Baptist Church   John Piper, Pastor      
       How Does the Gospel Save  Believers?      Part 1      (Romans 1:16-17)      
           For I am not ashamed of the gospel,    for it is the power of God for salvation to everyone who believes, to the Jew first and    also to the Greek. For in it  the  righteousness of God is revealed from faith to    faith; as it is written, BUT THE RIGHTEOUS  man  SHALL LIVE BY FAITH.        
       Verse 16 says that the gospel is the power of God for salvation  to everyone who believes. Back on June 21 I argued that what this means is not that  the gospel is God&#146;s power to convert people to faith (although that is indeed true!),  but that it means the gospel is God&#146;s power to bring those who keep on believing to  everlasting safety and joy in the presence of God.     
       Our Ultimate Problem: The Wrath  of God       One of the things we did not  make plain in that message was why we need salvation. Salvation from what? What&#146;s the  problem? The answer in the book of Romans is resoundingly this: We need to be saved from  the wrath of God. Look at Romans 1:18, For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven  against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men who suppress the truth in  unrighteousness. This is given as the reason why we need saving. God is very angry  at our unrighteousness and the way we suppress and distort the truth to justify ourselves.    Or look in the next chapter, Romans 2:8, to see another glimpse of  this. Paul says that to those who are selfishly ambitious and do not obey the truth,  but obey unrighteousness (notice those two words again, as in 1:18 &#150;  truth rejected and unrighteousness embraced), [God will render]  wrath and indignation. This is our problem. God is indignant and wrathful toward us  in our unrighteousness and our untruthfulness.     Or back up just three verses to Romans 2:5, Because of your  stubbornness and unrepentant heart you are storing up wrath for yourself in  the day of  wrath  and revelation of the  righteous judgment of God . God&#146;s wrath  is a righteous judgment. When  we  are unrighteous,  God&#146;s  righteousness  blazes out with wrath and indignation. He is not to be trifled with.    This is what we need saving from in the end. This is our ultimate  problem: God&#146;s final wrath that separates us from himself and casts us into hell. If  you ask the book of Romans, what do we need to be saved from, the answer comes back &#150;  yes, from sin; and yes, from guilt; and yes, from disunity and bad relationships; and yes,  from destructive habits and harmful ways; but mainly the answer is: We need to be saved  from God&#146;s wrath. Our ultimate problem, though very few in the 1990s see the problem,  is that we are sinners in the hands of an infinite, omnipotent, angry God.     
       Gospel: God Has Rescued Us from  the Wrath of God       The gospel is mainly the good  news that God himself has rescued us from the wrath of God. Not mainly from ourselves and  the mess we make of our lives; but from his own anger and his own righteous judgment. The  gospel is the power of God for salvation from the wrath of God &#150; the power that  brings us to eternal safety and joy in the presence of God.    You see it perhaps most clearly of all in Romans 5:9. Much more  then, having now been justified by His [that is, Jesus&#146;] blood, we shall be  saved  from the wrath of God through Him . In the end, it&#146;s all about escaping the  wrath of God, or, having the wrath of God turned away from us, so that he becomes a  friendly King and not an enemy.    So when verse 16 says, The gospel is the power of God for  salvation, it means that the gospel is God&#146;s power to rescue believers from the  wrath of God, or from the righteous judgment of God (2:5)    
       How Does the Gospel Save  Believers?       Now the question in today&#146;s  sermon is,  How  does the gospel save believers? How is the gospel God&#146;s power  for salvation? And the answer is given in verse 17. Maybe we can feel the force of this  verse by translating it incorrectly and making it say what we might expect it to say, but  what it does not say, and then go back and do it correctly. Let&#146;s read it  incorrectly. Starting at verse 16, For I am not ashamed of the gospel, for it is the  power of God for salvation to everyone who believes, to the Jew first and also to the  Greek. For in it [the love]   of God is revealed from faith to faith.    Now that is not what it says. But that is where the emphasis for many  of us falls, when we think about the gospel. The gospel is the good news, we say, because  in it  the love of God  is revealed. And indeed it  is . Romans 5:8 says,  God demonstrates his own love for us in this: While we were still sinners, Christ  died for us. That too is the gospel. The gospel of Jesus is a demonstration and  revelation of the love of God for sinners. But that is not what verse 17 says.    Now there are two simple reasons that I put it this way &#150; why I  start with a wrong translation. One is to make plain that the love of God could not just  sweep the unrighteousness of man and the wrath of God under the rug and pretend all is  well. The love of God had to deal with man&#146;s unrighteousness and had to deal with  God&#146;s wrath. The love of God is not a sentimental thing that can just say, I  feel nice to you, and so I will now be nice to you. If that were true, the book of  Romans would have been a lot shorter than it is. Indeed the Bible would have been a lot  shorter, and we could have skipped the gruesome story of the death of the Son of God.     The love of God is a love full of wisdom and a love full of justice and  a love full of truth. It is a love that upholds all the other attributes of God, rather  than blotting them out. The love of God is worked out wisely and legally and justly and  truthfully &#150; nothing hidden, nothing suppressed. It takes our  un righteousness  and God&#146;s righteousness into account, and deals with them in the death and  resurrection of Jesus. How it does that is what this book is mainly about.    The other reason I begin by mentioning what Paul does  not  say is  to stress that Paul must want Christians to understand how they will be saved from the  wrath of God. He must want us to know more than just that God loves us and sent Jesus to  die for us. Think about this! It is so simple and so plain. Evidently it matters to Christ  and to his inspired apostle, Paul, that Christians learn  how  the gospel is the  power of God for salvation. Because he tells us how &#150; in verse 17, and then for  sixteen chapters he tells us how!     
       A Strong Understanding of the  Gospel       Why do I stress this? I stress  it because it is simply unbiblical that so many Christians today have such a weak grasp  &#150; a weak understanding &#150; of what our human condition is without grace, how God  planned our redemption, what God did in Christ to save us, how the Holy Spirit worked in  us to convert us, and how God goes on working (by the gospel!) to keep us and purify us  and fit us for heaven. These are the things that the New Testament (especially Romans) is  at pains to teach Christians, and it is stunning how many Christians simply do not care to  know these things and therefore do not know them.    So I am stressing that in verse 17, instead of saying, God saved  us by his love and that&#146;s all you need to know, Paul begins to explain for us  how   the gospel saves believers. He does not just say, It shows the love of God.  Paul gets  inside  the love of God and shows  how  God deals with the real  problems of the universe. We begin to learn what the real issues of the universe are. And  they are deeper than we think they are &#150; not the bombing of embassies in Nairobi and  Dar es Salaam &#150; but far deeper than that. There is an enmity against God and a  suppression of truth and a deep unrighteousness of soul and the almighty wrath of God  behind such things that only one power in the universe can overcome &#150; the gospel of  Jesus Christ.     Starting at verse 17 Paul moves inside the love of God and inside the  gospel to show us how the gospel is that kind of power. And he writes this way because we  Christians need to know these things. I&#146;m not asking you to take a course in  theology. I&#146;m asking you to read and care about the inspired word of God in Romans  1:17. Christ sent his apostle to teach us how the gospel saves believers and brings them  safe to heaven.     This is what you are going to want to know when the doctor says,  We&#146;ve done all we can do. And you say, How long do I have?  And he says, A week? Maybe two &#150; and then face to face with the Maker and  Judge of all the universe, infinite in holiness and unswerving in justice. O my beloved  Bethlehem, this is what you are going to want to know. How can I persuade you and win you  to care about the most important things in the world?    
       The Comfort and Privilege of  Understanding How God Works       I plead with you to get serious  about growing in the knowledge of God (Colossians 1:10) and how he saves the unrighteous.  If God inspired Paul to tell us, we ought to want to know. And what a privilege to know!  And a comfort to know! What a joy to know! This series on Romans is a golden opportunity  &#150; a precious window of time. We are moving slowly so that you can think and study and  read and discuss and review and check things out and pray over what you hear. This series  has the potential of taking you deep into the heart and mind of God &#150; if you want to  go there. I plead with you: Do not be passive, don&#146;t coast. Make the thought of this  letter the thought of your mind. Build your whole way of thinking and feeling out of the  building blocks in this great letter.    So this morning, would you ask with me this question: How does the  gospel save believers? How does the gospel powerfully bring us to eternal safety and joy  in the presence of God when what we really deserve is God&#146;s wrath, which verse 18  says is already being revealed from heaven? How will the gospel triumph in those last two  weeks of your life to rescue you from despair and terror, and bring you home to God?    The answer of verse 17 is this: the gospel is the power of God for  salvation to everyone who believes  because  in it [that is, in the gospel] the  righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith.    Now here is the puzzle. How can this be good news when the  righteousness  of God  is our problem? The fact that God is righteous and I am unrighteous is the  problem. His wrath is being revealed against the unrighteousness of man, verse 18 says.  Martin Luther said he hated Romans 1:17 before he figured this out. He wrote,            I had . . . been captivated with an    extraordinary ardor for understanding Paul in the Epistle to the Romans. But . . . a    single word in Chapter 1 [verse 17], &#145;In it the righteousness of God is    revealed,&#146; stood in my way. For I hated that word &#145;righteousness of God,&#146;    which . . . I had been taught to understand . . . is the righteousness [with which God]    punishes the unrighteous sinner. (John Dillenberger, ed.  Martin Luther: Selections from    His Writings , [Garden City, New York: Doubleday and Co., 1961], p. 11)        
          God Gives to Us What He Demands  from Us       So how is this good news &#150;  that the righteousness of God is revealed in the gospel? Here&#146;s the answer: God  demands righteousness and we don&#146;t have it, so the only hope for us is that God  himself would give the righteousness that he demands. That would be good news. That would  be gospel. And that is what he does. What is revealed in the gospel is the righteousness  of God  for us  that he demands  from us . The reason the gospel is the power of  God for salvation &#150; the way that the gospel saves believers is that in it God reveals  a righteousness  for us  that God demands  from us . What we had to have, but  could not create or supply or perform, God gives us freely, namely, his own righteousness,  the righteousness of God.    This is how the gospel saves us from the wrath of God. You see in verse  18 that the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and  unrighteousness of men. So what is our rescue? What is our hope to escape this wrath  when we are ungodly and unrighteous? The answer is that God would intervene and supply us  with a righteousness that is not our own. That he would give to us the righteousness he  demands from us. If God would do that, then his wrath would be averted and we could be  reconciled to him. And that is, in fact, what he did. And that is the gospel. That is the  way it saves us.     The gospel is the power of God for salvation to everyone who  believes, because in it God offers to us what he demands from us, namely, his own  righteousness. He reveals as a gift in Christ Jesus what was once only a demand. This is  how he saves: in the gospel of Jesus&#146; death and resurrection God gives to us the  righteousness that he demands from us.    Now there is two more Sunday&#146;s worth of good news in this verse.  Next Sunday we need to ask, What is this gift of God&#146;s righteousness? 1) Is it the  vindication of his own justice in the punishment of our substitute, Jesus? 2) Or is it our  right standing with God as forgiven and acquitted sinners without guilt in his presence?  3) Or is it the moral transformation in us that actually changes our nature into obedient,  righteous children of God? Or is it all three?    And the Sunday after that, we must ask how faith figures into this  saving revelation of the righteousness of God. What does the phrase from faith to  faith (verse 17) mean? And how does the quote there from Habakkuk 2:4 help us  embrace all this great truth by faith?    But to close today I want to go back to Martin Luther. Maybe God will  use his testimony to bring some of you from mere hearers this morning to those who love  and live on this gospel reality of God&#146;s gift of righteousness. You remember he said  he hated Romans 1:17. But he goes on explaining his struggle with his own guilt and fear  before the righteousness of God.           Thus I raged with a fierce and    troubled conscience. Nevertheless, I beat importunately upon Paul at [Romans 1:17], most    ardently desiring to know what St. Paul wanted. At last, by the mercy of God, meditating    day and night, I gave heed to the context of the words, namely, In it the    righteousness of God is revealed, as it is written, &#145;He who through faith is    righteous shall live.&#146; There I began to understand [that] the righteousness of    God is . . . righteousness with which [the] merciful God justifies us by faith. . . . Here    I felt that I was altogether born again and had entered paradise itself through open    gates. ( Martin Luther:   Selections,  pp. 11-12)             O how I pray that many of you will find this verse a pathway into  paradise.      Copyright 1998 John Piper    Piper's Notes       
   
