  September 29, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor   
       By This Time You Ought To BeTeachers   (Hebrews 5:11-14)     Concerning him [Melchizedek, as a type of Christ] we have much tosay, and it is hard to explain, since you have become dull ofhearing. 12 For though by this time you ought to be teachers, youhave need again for someone to teach you the elementary principles ofthe oracles of God, and you have come to need milk and not solidfood. 13 For everyone who partakes only of milk is not accustomed tothe word of righteousness, for he is a babe. 14 But solid food is forthe mature, who because of practice have their senses trained todiscern good and evil.   
  
      Something Is Wrong -- The Disease CalledDullness of Hearing    The writer of Hebrews hasn't come right out and said it until now.But he has implied it. There is something wrong with the Christianshe is writing to.  In 2:1 he said, Pay close attention to the message you've heardlest you drift away.  In 3:1 he said, Consider Jesus.  In 3:8 he said, Don't harden your hearts like Israel did in thewilderness.  In 3:12 he said, Take care, lest you have an evil heart ofunbelief.  In 4:1 he said, Fear, lest you fail to enter God's rest.  In 4:11 he said, Be diligent to enter God's rest lest you fall bydisobedience.  And in 4:14 he said, Hold fast to your confession.  In all of these urgent admonitions you begin to get theimpression: this writer is really concerned about some situation inthe churches of his day. But until now he has only given the cure,not the diagnosis. Now he tells us what's wrong.  He comes to the end of last week's text in 5:9-10 and says thatChrist has been perfected through suffering and that he has beendesignated a High Priest according to the order of Melchizedek. Andhe takes a breath -- you can almost hear him sigh -- and says, in5:11, "Concerning him (or concerning this -- what I've just beentalking about briefly) we have much to say, and it is   hard toexplain, since  you have become dull of hearing ." And there isour first explicit diagnosis. Here's the disease he is working on inthis letter: dullness of hearing.  This is what's behind all those exhortations: Pay close attention!Consider! Don't harden your heart! Fear! Be diligent! Hold fast!These are all doctor's prescriptions for the disease of  dullnessof hearing .  The most urgent question this morning is: Do you have thisdisease, and if so how can you get well?  But first we need to make sure we know what he's talking about.What is the disease of dullness of hearing? Let's let this writerexplain his own terms for us; let's take the two words one at a timeand look at the one other place in Hebrews where each is used.    
      "Dullness"    Take first the word "dull" -- or slow or sluggish. It's used oneother time in the New Testament, namely, in Hebrews 6:12. Let's readthe 6:11-12 and you'll see what the opposite of dullness is,  We desire that each one of you show the same  diligence so as torealize the full assurance of hope  until the end, that you may not be sluggish  [there's the word for "dull" in our text], butimitators of those who through faith and patience inherit thepromises.  The opposite of dullness is diligence or earnestness to turn themessage of hope into the assurance of hope; its the imitation ofpeople who hear the promises of God and then respond with faith andpatience. So dull hearing doesn't mean there is anything wrong withyour physical ears. It means there is something wrong with yourheart. The heart is not eager and diligent to embrace the promisesand turn them into faith and patience. Instead, the word comes intothe ears and goes down to the heart and hits something hard or tough-- or starting to get hard. That's dullness of hearing. The promisescome to the ear, but there is no passion for them, no lover'sembrace, no cherishing or treasuring; and so no faith and no patienceand -- if things don't change -- no inheritance of eternal life.Which is why he wrote this book. And why I preach this sermon. It isan incredibly dangerous disease, this dullness of hearing.    
      "Hearing"    The other word we can track down is the word "hearing." It's usedone other time in Hebrews, just like "dullness" is, namely in 4:2.  For indeed we have had good news preached to us, just as theyalso; but the word they heard [literally: "the word of hearing" --same word as in 5:11, "dull of  hearing "] -- the word ofhearing -- did not profit them, because it was not united by faith inthose who heard.  So here is the same problem again: a word of good news -- a wordof God's promise, and a hearing, but no faith. This is "dullness ofhearing." The word goes in the ears, and comes to the heart, andmeets dullness and slowness and hardness. The opposite of dullness ofhearing is hearing with faith which produces obedience.  You can see this three verses earlier in Hebrews 3:18-19, "And towhom did He [God] swear that they should not enter His rest, but tothose who were  disobedient      [note the word!]? And so  we see that they were not able to enter because of unbelief ." Notice the switch from "disobedient" to "unbelief."I think this means that the root of all disobedience is unbelief --lack of trust in the promises of God.  So you can see what dullness of hearing is and why it is soimportant. It is a kind of hearing with the ears that is unresponsivein the heart. It doesn't embrace the word of God with faith. Andtherefore, it doesn't produce the fruit of patience and obedience.So, whichever way you go -- looking at the word "dullness" in 6:12,or looking at the word "hearing" in the context of 4:2 the answer isthe same.  "Dullness of hearing" is hearing without faith and without themoral fruit of faith. It's hearing the Bible or the preaching of theBible the way you hear the freeway noise on I-94, or the way you hearMuzak in the dentist's office or the way you hear recorded warningsat the airport that this is a smoke-free facility. You do but youdon't. You have grown dull to the sound. It does not awaken orproduce anything.  A word of Jesus from Luke 8:18 is very important here. When he hadfinished telling the parable of the four soils where the seed is theword he says, "Therefore  take care how you hear ; for whoeverhas, to him shall  more  be given; and whoever does not have,even what he thinks he has shall be taken away from him." In otherwords, if you have the grace to hear (with faith and fruit), you willget more grace; but if you do not, even what you think you have willbe taken away -- namely, the Word.  Now I plead with you even now at this point in the message to bediligent and earnest in how you hear. Lazy, drifting, passive -- dull-- listening is incredibly dangerous, even now, at this very minute.  Now Jesus' point is the same point the writer to the Hebrews istrying to make: the one who has grace to hear will receive moregrace, and the one who does not (in other words, is dull or hard inhis hearing) even what he thinks he has will be taken away. Hebrews5:11 says that there is so much more that the writer wants to givehis readers: "Concerning him  we have much to say  . . . but youhave become dull of hearing." If they had more grace to hear, theywould receive more that the writer has to give. But they are becominghard and dull, and in danger of throwing away the little they have.    
      What Is the Remedy?    That's the disease. Now what about the remedy? How do you getwell? Somebody might object that I am using the term "disease" whenthe text uses the terms "babe" and "mature'. A person who is dull ofhearing is compared to a babe (in verse 13b) that has to drink milk.There is nothing diseased about a baby's dependence on milk. So whydo I use the image of disease? My answer to this objection is that ifa person is still a baby when he is old enough to be a teenager, hehas a disease. And the disease in this text is called "dullness ofhearing."  So my question remains: what's the remedy? Why are some Christiansstuck at the baby stage of development with the disease of "dullnessof hearing" and what is the cure?  Now keep in mind what dullness of hearing is. It's not a physicalproblem. Deaf people can be the sharpest hearers and blind people canbe the sharpest see-errs. It's not physical. Dullness of hearing, youremember from 6:12 and 3:18, is the failure to make use of the wordheard to nurture faith and bear the fruit of obedience. Dull hearingis passive and lazy and does not reach out and grasp the promises ofGod and embrace them. Passivity produces perpetual babies, who maydiscover that they are doll-Christians and not living Christians atall. That's the disease.  
    Become Mature with Milk    The key verse to describe the remedy is verse 14: "Solid food isfor the mature, who because of practice have their senses trained todiscern good and evil." Now ask yourself this question: If solid foodis only palatable -- digestible -- for the mature, with what food doyou become mature so that you can then eat the solid food? The answeris: milk. You become mature with milk.  The problem with these Christians is not that milk is weak or thatbabes can't eat steak. The problem is that babes are not exercisingwith the milk they have. You see the key word there in verse 14: youbecome mature by "practice" or exercise or habitual responses to themilk. The problem is that the milk of the Word is not producingmuscle of faith. And the muscle of faith is not producing acts ofrighteousness. This is how you grow from a baby Christian to a matureChristian: from the milk of the Word to the muscle of faith to actsof righteousness.  But as soon as I wrote that down I noticed that it's not quiteright. It's true, I think, but it's not exactly what this text says.Verse 14 does not say that the milk of the Word should produce newmuscle; it says, in effect, that milk should produce a  new mind -- the mind that can discern between good and evil. "Because ofpractice [the mature] have their senses (internal, moral -- spiritualsenses) trained to discern good and evil."  Now this is amazing. Don't miss it. It could save you years ofwasted living. What verse 14 is saying is that if you want to becomemature and understand the more solid teachings of the word, then therich, nutritional, precious milk of God's gospel promises musttransform your moral senses -- your spiritual mind -- so that you candiscern between good and evil. Or let me put it another way. Gettingready to feast on all God's word is not first an intellectualchallenge; it is first a moral challenge. If you want to eat thesolid food of the Word you must exercise your spiritual senses so asto develop a mind that discerns between good and evil.  The startling truth is that, if you stumble over Melchizedek, itmay be because you watch questionable TV programs. If you stumbleover the doctrine of election, it may be because you still use someshady business practices. If you stumble over the God-centered workof Christ in the cross, it may be because you love money and spendtoo much and give too little. The pathway to maturity and to solidBiblical food is not first becoming an intelligent person, butbecoming an obedient person. What you do with alcohol and sex andmoney and leisure and food and computer have more to do with yourcapacity for solid food than with where you go to school or whatbooks you read.  
    The Way You Drink the Milk    What this means is that if you want to grow up and feast on thefullness of God's revelation, you don't do it by jumping from milk tomeat. You do it by the way you drink the milk. The milk has to makeyou a certain kind of discerning person before you can digest themeat. This is so important because in our highly technologicalsociety we are prone to think that education -- especiallyintellectual development -- is the key to maturity. This text makesclear that it isn't. There are many Ph.D.'s who choke in theirspiritual immaturity on the things of God. And there are manyless-educated saints who are deeply mature and can feed with pleasureand profit on the deepest things of God's Word.  So the key to maturity (and the remedy for dullness of hearing) isnot jumping from milk to meat. The key is the way you drink the milk-- what you do with the milk of the word. So let me close with threesteps in how to grow with milk to maturity.   1. First you drink in the milk.  That is, you listen to themilk of the word -- the message of God's promises in the gospel. Youread them your self in the Bible and you sit under the preaching andteaching of God's word. And you give heed. You are earnest anddiligent to apply your heart and mind to what is being said. You arenot passive and cavalier and indifferent -- babes long for milk, andare incredibly focused when they are thirsty.   2. Savor and swallow and digest and be satisfied.  This iscrucial. If this doesn't happen, the next stage of discernment willnot happen. Here is the miraculous spiritual event of loving whatonce you hated. You love the taste of the milk: "Taste and see thatthe Lord is good" (Psalm 34:8). And when the promises of God and theGod of the promises are tasted, the milk satisfies. And when itsatisfies, it transforms your values and priorities, which leads toStep 3.   3. With a heart satisfied with God now, discern good andevil.  There are hundreds of decisions that you must make day inand day out which are not spelled out explicitly in the Bible. Whatto watch on TV, political positions to take, investment strategies,vocation, insurance, retirement, business tactics, where to live,what to drive, whether to own a gun, how to discipline your children,what to wear, where to volunteer, how much to give, etc. etc.  It doesn't take discernment to know what's wrong if you have alist from God. Knowing when to murder and when to steal and when tocommit adultery take no discernment if you believe God gave the tencommandments. So verse 14 is talking about decisions that are notlaid down specifically in a list.  And it says that there is such a thing as discernment between goodand evil. How does this discernment come? It comes from habitually(by regular practice) nourishing and shaping your spiritual senses(the word in verse 14 doesn't mean physical senses) by the word ofGod until that word becomes a "word of righteousness" -- a discerningpower, a word producing righteousness in the mature. Discernment iswhat you do naturally when the milk of God's promises is so savoredand so satisfying that it gives you the mind of Christ.  This is the remedy for "dullness of hearing."   Drink withdelight until the desires of your heart are so transformed as tobecome the discernment of good and evil.  Then you will be matureand ready for meat.  Copyright 1996 John Piper  
  
