   How blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, Whose sin is covered! How blessed is the man to whom the Lord does not impute iniquity, And in whose spirit there is no deceit!      When I kept silent about my sin, my body wasted away Through my groaning all day long. For day and night Thy hand was heavy upon me; My vitality was drained away as with the fever-heat of summer. I acknowledged my sin to Thee, And my iniquity I did not hide; I said, 'I will confess my transgressions to the Lord';  And Thou didst forgive the guilt of my sin.       Therefore, let everyone who is godly pray to Thee in a time when Thou mayest be found; Surely in a flood of great waters they shall not reach him. Thou art my hiding place; Thou dost preserve me from trouble; Thou dost surround me with songs of deliverance.       I will instruct you and teach you in the way which you should go; I will counsel you with My eye upon you. Do not be as the horse or as the mule which have no understanding, Whose trappings include bit and bridle to hold them in check. Otherwise they will not come near to you. Many are the sorrows of the wicked; But he who trusts in the Lord, lovingkindness shall surround him. Be glad in the Lord and rejoice you righteous ones, And shout for joy all you who are upright in heart.       Last week we only looked at two verses of Psalm 127. This week I want to look at all of Psalm 32 to see if we can understand the Psalm as a whole. Let's move through it together in a summary fashion and then we will conclude by looking at verses 1-5 in more detail.     Verses 1-5 are clearly one unit which deals with confession and forgiveness. The main point is in verses 1 and 2, namely, to be forgiven is a very happy condition. Verses 3-5 tell us how to attain that happy state: first, negatively, don't try to conceal your sin from God (verses 3 and 4), then, positively, acknowledge your sin and confess it to God (verse 5). So the point of verses 1-5 is: the person who does not conceal his sins but confesses them to God will find the tremendous happiness of a clean conscience and peace with God.     Then the first half of verse 6 draws an inference from verses 1-5: if this is the case, therefore, "Let everyone who is godly pray to You in time when You may be found." If such great blessedness follows the prayer of confession, then, for goodness sake, let's all pray!     Then in the second half of verse 6 and all of verse 7 there seems to be a shift of concern away from confession and forgiveness to the protection of God in the troubles of life.       Surely in a flood of great waters they shall not reach him  (i.e., the godly).  You are my hiding place; you preserve me from trouble; You surround me with songs of deliverance.     
