  Last week we turned a corner in our series on thepleasures of God.  Up until that time we focused on the pleasuresof God in his own perfections and his own works of creation andprovidence.  We stressed his self-sufficiency and his overflowingfullness of joy and his sovereign freedom from coercion or constraintor bribery or blackmail.    Then last week we turned to consider what kind ofhuman responses would give God pleasure.  From a practical standpointthis seems to be the most important question of all: How can,I as a sinner, please God?  What can I do or what can I be thatGod might delight in?    I assume that even if God would allow me into heavenas a person totally displeasing to him, it would not be heavenbut hell.  How could we bear living in the presence of God ifhe only turned from us in disgust and found nothing at all todelight in when he looked at us?  Paul said in 2 Corinthians 5:9 that whether he wasin heaven or on earth he would make it his aim to please God.  It would be an eternity of misery if there were no way thatwe could respond to a holy God that would please him or delighthim.  So someone may ask, If this is the most importantpractical question, why did you spend seven weeks talking aboutGod's delight in himself instead of getting right to the practicalmatter of how we can delight the heart of God?     The answer is that the vision of God developed inthose seven messages is the foundation of my hope that I -- sinnerthough I am -- may yet be able to please God.  And a hope likethat needs a deep foundation!  How you view God will determineyour idea of how you can please God.  And how a person decidesto try to please God is the most fateful decision a person canmake.    What if you discovered (like the Pharisees discovered),that you had devoted your whole life to trying to please God,but all the while had been doing things that in God's sight wereabominations?   Someone may say, I don't think that's possible;God wouldn't reject a person like that.  Do you see what thatperson has done?  He has based his conviction about what God wouldbe pleased by on his idea of what God is like.  That is preciselywhy we must begin with the character of God.  That is why we hadto begin with the pleasures of God in himself.  What we saw in those messages was that God has noneeds that I could ever be required to satisfy.  God has no deficienciesthat I might be required to supply.  He is complete in himself. He is overflowing with happiness in the fellowship of the Trinity. The upshot of this is that God is a mountain spring, not a wateringtrough.  A mountain spring is self-replenishing.  It constantlyoverflows and supplies.  A watering trough needs to be filledwith a pump or bucket brigade.  So you glorify a spring by drinkingnot by hauling water up the hill and dumping it in the spring. And since that is the way God is we're not surprised to learnfrom scripture -- and our faith is strengthened to hold fast --that the way to please God is to come to him to get and not togive, to drink and not to water.  My hope as a desperate sinner who lives in a desertof unrighteousness hangs on this Biblical truth: that God is thekind of God who will be pleased with the one thing I have to offer-- my thirst.  That is why the sovereign freedom and self-sufficiencyof God are so precious to me: they are the foundation of my hopethat God is delighted not by the resourcefulness of bucket brigades,but by the bending down of broken sinners to drink at the fountainof grace.    Or as we said last week,   His delight is not in the strength of the horse, nor his pleasure in the legs of a man; but the LORD takes pleasure in those who fear him, in those who hope in his steadfast love.   In other words, this unspeakably good news for helplesssinners -- that God delights not when we offer him our strengthbut when we hope in his -- this good news that I need to hearso badly again and again, is based firmly on a vision of God assovereign, self-sufficient and free.  The reason we didn't jumpstraight to the practical question of how can I please God, istwofold: l) our efforts to please God would almost surely becomeself-exalting and legalistic if we did not see this vision ofGod; and 2) our hope in the overflowing grace of God simply willnot stand without a deep foundation in the doctrine of God.    Today we look at a text that expands the good newsof what human responses God delights in.  You could say that today'stext is a specific application or outworking of last week's. The text is Proverbs 15:8,   The sacrifice of the wicked  is an abomination to the Lord, but the prayer of the upright  is his delight.   My hope is that the effect of this message will notonly be that you feel encouraged to pray, but mainly that thenature of God as a fountain of free grace will be reaffirmed --that God is the kind of God who delights most deeply not in makingdemands but in meeting needs.   Prayer is his delight becauseprayer shows the reaches of our poverty and the riches of hisgrace.  Prayer is that wonderful transaction where the wealthof God's glory is magnified and the wants of our soul are satisfied. Therefore God delights in the prayers of the upright.  Now let's meditate on Proverbs 15:8 by asking somequestions and probing why it is that God abominates the sacrificesof the wicked and enjoys the prayers of the upright.  My first question is this: How can something as goodas a sacrifice to God, which God ordained in the book of Leviticus,become an abomination to the Lord?  The first half of our textsays, The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to theLORD.  The answer seems to be that an act that is good initself can become ugly to God when it is done with the wrong innerdisposition.  An outward act that looks pious to us can look horriblein God's eyes because it comes from a heart that is wrong.  Thereseems to be a principle implied here that would go something likethis: the beauty of an act is the outworking of inward beauty,and the ugliness of an act is the outworking of an inward ugliness.  Since God always looks on the heart (1 Sam. 16:7),he always sees our outward acts not as man sees them but as extensionsof what he sees on the inside.  Whether our acts are immoral,like stealing and adultery, or whether our acts are moral likechurch attendance and community service, both will be abominablein God's eyes if the heart is not right.  Paul teaches the same thing when he says in Romans14:23, Whatever is not from faith is sin.   And Hebrews11:6 teaches this when it says, Without faith it is impossibleto please God.  In fact, in Hebrews 11:4 the very issueof sacrifices is addressed that we have here in Proverbs 15:8,namely, why Abel's sacrifice was accepted by God and Cain's wasn't. The reason is that Abel's sacrifice was offered by faith butCain's wasn't; and without faith a sacrifice is not pleasing toGod; it is an abomination.  So I answer our first question by saying that thereason a good act (like a sacrifice) can be an abomination toGod is that an act is viewed by God as an outworking or an extensionof the condition of the heart.  If the heart is wicked, the actsit performs, no matter how pious or moral, are an abominationto God.  There is a possible objection to this.  Someone mightsay that when you read the prophets like Isaiah and Amos the reasonGod despises the sacrifices and the prayers of the wicked is nottheir inner disposition but their outer behavior when they arenot in the temple.  For example, in Isaiah 1:13 the prophet says, Bringno more vain offerings; incense is an abomination to me.  Newmoon and Sabbath and the calling of assemblies -- I cannot endureiniquity and solemn assembly.  Then in verse 15 (at theend) and verse 16 Isaiah tells why God is so displeased with theworship of his people: Your hands are full of blood.  Washyourselves; make yourselves clean; remove the evil of your doingsfrom before my eyes; cease to do evil, learn to do good; seekjustice, correct oppression, defend the fatherless, plead forthe widow.  So is not the reason that God abominates the sacrificesof the wicked simply because he hates the inconsistency of someonebeing a shyster during the week and pious on Sunday?  The problem with this objection is that it does notgo to the heart of the matter.  Yes, God hates that inconsistency. But when a wicked person comes to God and makes a sacrifice witha heart of penitence his sacrifice is accepted.  That is the wholepurpose of the guilt offering.  A person who has been sinful duringthe week can be accepted through the sacrifice when it is accompaniedby a repentant heart.  So what Isaiah is really saying is that the reasonGod abominates the sacrifices of the unjust is that they comebefore the Lord with hearts that are not broken for their sinand with no true intention of forsaking it.  And this heart conditionof stubbornness and impenitence is why their sacrifices are anabomination to God.    So I think our conclusion stands: the sacrificesof the wicked are an abomination because God sees all our actsas extensions or outworking of the heart, and where the heartis bad the deed is bad whether secular or religious.    So my second question is: what is the essence ofthe badness of this heart?  Or more importantly, what is the oppositeof this heart?  What makes a person upright instead of wickedin heart so that his prayers will delight God instead of beingan abomination to him?  I'll mention just two characteristicsof the upright heart.  The first mark of the upright heart is that it tremblesat the word of the Lord.  I get this from Isaiah 66, which dealswith this very same problem of some who worship in a way thatpleases God and some who worship in a way that doesn't.  Verse3 describes the wicked who bring their sacrifices.  It says, Hewho slaughters an ox is like him who kills a man; and he who sacrificesa lamb, like him who breaks a dog's neck.  In other words,their sacrifices are an abomination.    Why?  Verse 4 says, When I called, no one answered,when I spoke they did not listen.  Their sacrifices wereabominations to God because the people were deaf to his voice.  But what about those whose prayers God heard?  Verse2 says, This is the man to whom I will look, he that ishumble and contrite in spirit, and trembles at my word. So I conclude from this that the first mark of the upright, whoseprayers are a delight to God, is that they tremble at God's word. These are the people to whom the Lord will look.  So the prayer of the upright that delights God comesfrom a heart that at first feels precarious in the presence ofa God.  It trembles like Josiah when he heard the reading of thelaw of God, because it feels so far from God's ideal and so vulnerableto his judgment and so helpless and so sorry for its failings.  This is just what David said in Psalm 51:17, Thesacrifice acceptable to God is a broken spirit; a broken and contriteheart, O God, thou wilt not despise.  This is what the Lord said (to Solomon in 2 Chronicles7:14) is the first thing that makes a prayer acceptable to God:If my people who are called by my name humble themselvesand pray. . . I will hear from heaven.  So the first mark of the upright heart whose prayersplease the Lord is brokenness, contrition, humility, trembling. In other words, what makes a heart upright and what makes prayerspleasing to God is a felt awareness of our tremendous need formercy.  The other thing that marks the upright heart is trustin the willingness and power of God to show mercy.  Psalm 4:5says, Offer right sacrifices, and put your trust in theLord.  I take that to mean that an essential part of theupright heart whose sacrifices are not an abomination is trust.  We could easily make the mistake of thinking thatwhen the Old Testament speaks of the upright or therighteous it cannot mean us because we are still sinners. But the righteous and the upright are not perfect.  They arepersons who confess their sin, hate it and trust God for forgivenessand help.  One of the best places to see this is Psalm 32. It begins, Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven,whose sin is covered.  So the psalm is about forgiven sinnersnot about perfect people.  Then at the end it distinguishes thewicked from the righteous and upright.  What is the difference? Verses 10-11:   Many are the pangs of the wicked; but steadfast love surrounds him  who trusts in the Lord. Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, O righteous, and shout for joy, all you upright in heart!   Verse 10 contrasts the wicked with those who TRUSTin the Lord.  Then verse 11 calls them righteous and upright inheart.  And the word for upright is the same wordused in Proverbs 15:8.  So I conclude that there are at least these two essentialmarks of the upright heart.  First, it trembles at the word ofGod.  It feels precarious and helpless and in tremendous needof mercy.  Then, second, it trusts the mercy of God to forgiveand help and save.  Why then does God delight in the prayers of the upright? He delights in their prayers for the same reason that he abominatesthe sacrifices of the wicked -- because the prayers of the uprightare the extension and out working of the heart; but, unlike theheart of the wicked, the heart of the upright magnifies the powerand grace of God.  The prayer of the upright is a delight to God becauseit expresses those affections of the  heart which call attentionto the all-sufficiency of God.   So this week's text takes us a step beyond last week's. Last week we saw from Psalm 147:11 that The Lord takespleasure in those who hope in his love.  Today we see thatthe Lord takes pleasure in prayers that give expression to thathope.  The reason our hope is pleasing to God is because it showsthat all our joy comes from the bounty of his grace.  And thereason our prayers are pleasing to God is because they expressthis God-exalting hope.    It is a precious thing beyond all words -- especiallyin the hour of death -- that we have a God whose nature is suchthat what pleases him is not our work for him but our need ofhim.    I close with this gospel appeal: glorify the Godwho made you!  Delight the heart of the God who loves you!  How? Draw near in prayer to the throne of grace, bow down before itsmajestic authority and on your knees drink from the river of thewater of life that flows from the throne of God (Revelation 22:1).  The Spirit and the Bride say, Come! And let him who hears say, Come!  And let him whois thirsty come, let him who desires to take the water of lifewithout price.  
