 December 17, 1989    Bethlehem Baptist Church    John Piper, Pastor    
    
    How to Become a Child of God    (John 1:9-13)    
    The true light that enlightens every man was coming into the   world. He was in the world, and the world was made through him,   yet the world knew him not. He came to his own home, and his own   people received him not. But to all who received him, who believed   in his name, he gave power to become children of God; who were   born, not of blood nor of the will of the flesh nor of the will of   man, but of God.    
    
    The true light, that sheds a revealing light on everyone, came   into the world &#151; the world that he had made. As it says in   verse 10: "He was in the world and the world was made through   him." Minneapolis and St. Paul and all the suburbs and everyone in   them - including you and me &#151; were made through him. As verse   3 says, "All things were made through him and without him was not   anything made that was made."    
    Therefore when he came to the world he came to "his own" .That's   what verse 11 says, "He came to his own." He came to what belongs   to him by right of creation. He came to his own possession, his   own domain, the house of humanity that he had built for a dwelling   place.    
    But verse 11 goes on, "But his own received him not." He came to   Minneapolis and St. Paul and they received him not. They rejected   him in their department stores with "Seasons' Greetings" instead   of "CHRISTmas" .They rejected him in their restaurants with "Happy   Holidays" instead of "CHRISTmas" .They rejected him in their   hospital foyers with "Noel" instead of "CHRISTmas" .They rejected   him in their secular marketing exploitation of his birthday. They   rejected him with a thousand knickknacks and baubles instead of a   baby in a manger. They rejected him in their stripped down carols   and wordless tunes. They rejected him in their public schools with   Christless plays. And they rejected him in their public speeches,   pleasing all by saying nothing.    
    He came to his own and his own received him not. As John 3:19-20   says, "This is the judgment, that the light has come into the   world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their   deeds were evil. For everyone who is evil hates the light, and   does not come to the light, lest his deeds should be exposed." The   light came to his own and his own were in love with the dark. And   so they did not receive the light.    
    "But," verse 12 says, "to all who received him, who believe in his   name, he gave authority to become children of God." This means   that those who reject the light are not the children of God. God   is not everybody's Father. He created everybody, and they are his.   But Jesus says in John 8:42, "If God were your Father you would   love me." God is not everyone's Father. And the test of who your   Father is, is whether you love his Son.    
    Verses 12 and 13 are so important because they tell us how we may   become children of God. O how I want you to fix in your minds this   question: "Not everyone is a child of God; am I?" Ask it to   yourself right now, "Not everyone is a child of God. Am I?" The   difference it makes to you is this: Jesus said in John 8:34-36,   "Truly, truly, I say to you, every one who commits sin is a slave   to sin. The slave does not continue in the house for ever; the son   continues for ever. So if the Son makes you free, you will be free   indeed."    
    In other words, if we will not be children, we will be slaves. And   the slave does not remain in the house for ever. The children do.   What is at stake in becoming a child of God is eternal life. So we   ask ourselves that question again: "Not everyone is a child of   God; am I?" And now add: "Not everyone will have eternal life;   will I?    
    Paul says in Romans 8:16-17, "The Spirit himself bears witness   with our Spirit that we are the children of God, and if children,   then heirs, heirs of God and fellow heirs with Christ, provided we   suffer with him in order that we may also be glorified with   him."    
    In other words, if you become a child of God you become an heir of   all that God owns. All that belongs to God is your inheritance. In   the resurrection everything that exists will be yours. And God   will care for you for ever and make you infinitely happy in his   presence.    
    But if you do not become a child of God then there will be only   judgment. There will be no slaves in the age to come, only   children. The slaves do not remain in the house for ever (8:35).   They experience what Jesus calls "the resurrection of judgment"   (5:29), and it will be too late for any adoption proceedings.    
    So we turn to verses 12 and 13 for the all important answer to the   question: How do you become a child of God? What would have to   happen this morning to make you a child of God? And if you are a   child of God do you understand how you became one? Can you lead   another person into the Father's family?    
    Verse 12 sets two conditions: receiving Jesus and believing Jesus:   "But to all who received him, who BELIEVE in his name, he gave   authority to become children of God."    
    Receiving Jesus means that when Jesus offers himself to you, you   welcome him into your life for what he is.    
    If he comes to you as Savior, you welcome his salvation.    If he comes to you as Leader, you welcome his leadership.    If he comes to you as Provider, you welcome his provision.    If he comes to you as Counsellor, you welcome his counsel.    If he comes to you as Protector you welcome his protection.    If he comes to you as Authority, you welcome his authority.    If he comes to you as King, you welcome his rule.    
    Receiving Jesus means taking Jesus into your life for what he is.   It does not mean a kind of peaceful co-existence with a Christ who   makes no claims &#151; as though he can stay in the house as long   as he doesn't play his music so loud.    
    When Jesus preached in Nazareth in Luke 4:16ff., the people   received him gladly. It says in Luke 4:22, "All spoke well of him,   and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his   mouth." But a few verses later it says in Luke 4:28 they were   "filled with wrath" and tried to throw him down from a cliff. They   were happy to receive him while his words were pleasing. But when   their pride and fingered they rejected him. Receiving Jesus does   not mean a kind of peaceful co-existence with a Christ who makes   no claims. Receiving Jesus means taking him into your life (your   home, your school, your work, your marriage, your dreams) for who   he really is.    
    That's the first condition in verse 12: receiving Jesus, the Light   of the world. The second condition is believing on his name: "But   all who received him, who believe (present tense!) in his name, he   gave authority to become children of God."    
    What does believing in the name of Jesus mean? Let's do a little   tour of this Gospel to find out. First look at John 3:18 to see   that believing in the NAME of Jesus is virtually the same as   believing in Jesus. "He who believes in him is not condemned; he   who does not believe is condemned already, because he has not   believed in the name of the only Son of God." Here believing "in   him" and believing "in his name" are used interchangeably. The   "name" simply emphasizes the full stature and dignity and   authority of the person.    
    Next look at John 5:43-44, where "receive" and believe" are used   again in close connection the way they are in 1:12. "I have come   in my Father's name, and you do not receive me; if another comes   in his own name, him you will receive. How can you believe, who   receive glory from one another and do not seek the glory that   comes from the only God?"    
    Do you see what verse 44 implies about believing? It implies that   you can't believe in Jesus if you love the praise and glory of   men. This means that believing is so contrary to pride and   self-exaltation that it involves a deep humbling. It means   abandoning the craving for human praise, and caring more about the   praise of God. Believing is not merely intellectual assent to the   truth that Jesus is the Son of God.    
    Next look at John 6:35. "Jesus said to them, 'I am the bread of   life; he who comes to me shall not hunger, and he who believes in   me shall never thirst." This verse teaches that believing in Jesus   means being satisfied with Jesus. It means that Jesus is the food   that feeds the hunger of your soul. Believing is not merely   intellectual assent to the truth that Jesus is the Son of God.    
    We could go on to John 8:42 and 12:36 and 12:46-49. All these   texts, plus the ones we have seen show that believing is a deep   work in our heart, not a mere agreement with doctrinal facts. It   includes breaking free from the craving for human praise and it   includes being satisfied with Jesus as the bread of life.    
    So I would paraphrase verse 12 like this: "But all who received   Jesus into their lives for who he really is, and who feed upon him   as the all-satisfying bread of life, to them he gave authority to   become the children of God."    
    Now notice two very important differences between verses 12 and   13. Verse 13 says of the children of God, "&#91;they&#93; were   born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will   of a man, but of God." Notice: in verse 12 Jesus, the Light, is   the person acting &#151; "To all who received him, HE (Jesus) gave   authority." But in verse 13 God is the person acting &#151; "Who   were born . . . of God."    
    The other difference is that in verse 13 God begets or brings into   being children, and so they are his children by virtue of his   being the begetting Father. But in verse 12 John speaks of people   needing to get authority to become children of God. But why do   children who are born of God need authority from Jesus to be   children of God? What is this authorization or this empowerment in   verse 12? If we are born of God are we not God's children? What   need of authority from Jesus?    
    Here's the answer as I see it. Before God causes any of us to be   born again, all of us are mere flesh. There is no spiritual life   in us. John 3:6 says, "That which is born of the flesh is flesh,   and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit." In other words we   are spiritually dead before new birth. We are sinners, all of us.   And that means that we need two things if we are to inherit   eternal life as the children of God.    
    We need to be born. We need to have spiritual life. That is what   God does according to John 1:13 without any help from us &#151;   "not of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of a man, but of   God." We are born of God by a free act of sovereign grace. He   chooses us before we choose him.    
    But when God does that, what we now have is a new-born sinner. The   spiritual life is present, but so is sin, and a whole history of   sin! In this condition we would have no right to take our place in   the house of God &#151; no authority, no empowerment. Except for   one thing. God not only provided the regeneration by which we are   born again, but also the authorization by which we can lay claim   to our inheritance as children, even though we are sinners.    
    And that is precisely where Jesus comes in. The moment you believe   in Jesus, the moment you receive him for who he really is, in that   moment he gives you not new birth, but the right and authority, as   a sinner, to lay claim to your inheritance as a child of God   &#151; to become legally, as it were (with due authority), what   you are by virtue of new birth &#151; because you were "born of   God."    
    Between us and eternal life there are two great obstacles. One is   that we are spiritually lifeless and dead. The other is that we   are sinfully corrupt and guilty. We cannot inherit life as   children of God if we are dead and if we are guilty. But God so   loved us that he did two things.    
    He sent his Spirit to cause us to be born again, to quicken us and   make us pass from death to life. And so he overcomes the first   obstacle.    
    But in perfect harmony with the work of his Spirit God sent his   Son to die for our sin (John 1:29) and remove the guilt of all who   believe in him. So the moment we believe in him, even though we   are sinners, we are authorized in him to lay hold on the   inheritance of the children of God. And so the second obstacle is   removed.    
    This is a great salvation for sinners like you and me. It is full   and free and corresponds to our exact need and condition. I offer   it to you this morning in the name of Jesus. Receive him as he   really is. Believe in him as the all-satisfying end of your search   for peace.    
    End    * * * * * *    
    Further notes on this text.    
    &#151; Verse 9: the enlightenment of every man is probably not   universal reason or intellect or the common grace of knowledge   because 1)the next verse shows people unknowing and blind to the   light; 2)light in this Gospel comes as judgment into the world and   causes people either to approach or reject; 3)the meaning of   photizo 1 Corinthians 4:5 and 2 Timothy 1:10 means shed light on   so as to bring out the true quality of. This is probably the   meaning here. See the use in Revelation too.    
    &#151; Further confirmation that God's begetting precedes faith   (though Christ's authorization doesn't): John 3:6-8; 8:42; 10:27;   15:16; 17:6; 18:37; 1 John 5:1-2; Ephesians 2:1-10; Acts 13:48.       
        Copyright 1989, 1998 John Piper      Piper's   Notes            
