  June 8, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor    WITHOUT FAITH IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO PLEASE GOD Hebrews 11:4-6  By faith Abel offered to God a better sacrifice than Cain, throughwhich he obtained the testimony that he was righteous, God testifyingabout his gifts, and through faith, though he is dead, he stillspeaks. 5 By faith Enoch was taken up so that he should not seedeath; and he was not found because God took him up; for he obtainedthe witness that before his being taken up he was pleasing to God. 6And without faith it is impossible to please Him, for he who comes toGod must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of those whoseek Him.  Becoming Radically Free  Last week we began our exposition of Hebrews 11 by asking why itis here and what it has to do with our lives today. The answer I gavewas that it is here to help us become the kind of people describedsix verses earlier in Hebrews 10:34. These were Christians who"joyfully accepted the confiscation of their property" in the serviceof Christ and the cause of love. In other words, they were radicallyfree from the love of this world and the values that drive most ofwhat passes for success in America. They were free from this bondagebecause, verse 34 says, "they knew that they had a better possessionand an abiding one."  That's where chapter 11 picks up. "Now faith is the assurance (orthe substance) of things hoped for, the conviction (or the evidence)of things not seen." In other words the "knowledge" or assurance of10:34 ("they knew they had a better possession and an abiding one")is now called "faith." And a whole chapter of living examples of thisradicalizing faith is about to be given. So the point of chapter 11is to flesh out and demonstrate more stories of faith so that wewould imitate the faith and inherit the promises of God.  Imitation and Inheritance  You can know we are on the right track here by remembering Hebrews6:11-12, which described exactly the same pattern of imitation andinheritance: "We desire that each one of you show the same diligenceso as to realize the full assurance of hope until the end, that youmay not be sluggish, but imitators of those who through faith andpatience inherit the promises." That's the point of Hebrews 11 - togive more examples of "those who through faith and patience inheritthe promises" so that we can imitate their faith and join them in theinheritance.  And if you wonder whether you should only look at Old Testamentsaints in this way for encouragement and imitation, Hebrews 13:7 saysno, you should also look at those who taught you the word and beinspired by their faith too. "Remember those who led you, who spokethe word of God to you; and considering the result of their conduct,imitate their faith." So this is a big issue in the book of Hebrews.Have heroes. Know some church history. Know some missionarybiography. Know some great Christian businessmen. Know some greatwomen who poured their lives into family and church and community forthe sake of Christ. Know their faith and be encouraged by them andimitate them. That's the point of Hebrews 11.  Enduring, Doing and Receiving  Or we could take verses 35-36 in chapter 10 and say that thisexpresses what is at stake as we read chapter 11. The writer pleadswith us: "Do not throw away your confidence, which has a greatreward. For you have need of endurance, so that when you have donethe will of God, you may receive what was promised." Notice thethree-step pattern: 1) enduring confidence in God; 2) doing the willof God in the power of that confidence; and 3) receiving what ispromised.  What I feel impelled to stress as we take another step in Hebrews11 this morning is the need for our endurance, as verse 36 says: "Youhave need of endurance." Day before yesterday I was in Charlotte atthe Christian and Missionary Alliance annual meeting. David Wells wasone of the speakers, and we had a chance for a brief conversation. Wetalked about the perils of doctrinal weakness spreading in anevangelicalism that defines itself increasingly in terms of methodsand relationships rather than truth. At one point in the conversationhe said something very crucial, and then later repeated it in hismessage. He said that many people don't realize how vulnerable andhow perilous is the life of faith.  What he meant was that we dare not take for granted thefaithfulness of our churches or our denominations or our schools orour families - or even of our own hearts, as if vigilance andconscious endurance were not continually necessary. Without earnestattention to truth and faith, everything decays, including our ownpersonal walk with God.  So with renewed concern for my own faith, and the faith of ourchurch and the faith of your soul and your family I say this morningin the words of Hebrews 10:36, "We have need of endurance." We haveneed of endurance! Oh, how clearly I saw this in the lives of pastorsthat I spoke to in Charlotte, some with tears, who had lost their joyand their passion and didn't know if they could press on in theministry. The issue of endurance, and perseverance for the long haul,and staying alive, and thriving and being renewed day after day, andfinding the pace to finish the race - It is a huge issue for us all.And there is no resting on past experiences. There is no casualcoasting. Today's zeal can become tomorrow's doubt and boredom. Andtoday's sense of spiritual numbness can become tomorrow's ecstasy andpower.  Men of Old Gained Approval  That is why God gave us Hebrews 11. Example after example of truefaith so that we will be "imitators of those who through faith andpatience (longsuffering, endurance) inherit the promises."  Now to make the connection between last week's text and today's,you may remember that I did not say a word about Hebrews 11:2 lastweek. I was saving it for today. It makes a perfect bridge to today'stext. Let's read verses 1-2, "Now faith is the assurance (orsubstance) of things hoped for, the conviction (or evidence) ofthings not seen. (2) For by it the men of old gained approval."  Let me paraphrase this to bring out its meaning: We see that faithis two things, as verse one says. 1) It's being sure of God'spromises - that they are worth putting our hope in ("the substance ofthings hoped for"). 2) It's being sure that the invisible God and hishand in creation do in fact exist ("the evidence of things unseen")which we saw illustrated in verse 3. And then he says in verse 2: wesee this because it's played out in the lives of the Old Testamentsaints: "For by it (=by this kind of faith) the men of old gainedapproval (= were attested by God, or pleased God)."  So the lives of the Old Testament saints are illustrations of thiskind of faith. They don't prove that faith is what verse 1 says itis. They illustrate it. In fact the writer doesn't try to prove thatthis is what faith is at all. He sees this as one of the most basicassumptions of the nature of reality. His whole interpretation of theOld Testament hangs on it. Let me show you simply what I mean.  The first two Old Testament illustrations he gives of the truth ofverse 2 (that the men of old gained approval by faith) are Abel, thesecond son of Adam and Eve, and Enoch, the seventh generation afterAdam, mentioned in Genesis 5. So he says in verse 4, "By faith Abeloffered to God a better sacrifice than Cain, through which heobtained the testimony that he was righteous (there's God's approval,or attestation - the same word as in verse 2), God testifying (sameword again) about his gifts, and through faith, though he is dead, hestill speaks." So what the writer focuses on with Abel is that Godapproved his offering and in that counted Abel righteous or just. Andhe says that the key to Abel's being approved was that he made theoffering by faith. It is not just what we do that matters, but how wedo it. Do our actions express "the assurance of things hoped for"?  Then in verse 5 he gives Enoch as an example of the principle ofverse 2 (that men of old gain approval by faith): "By faith Enoch wastaken up so that he should not see death; and he was not foundbecause God took him up; for he obtained the witness (there's thesame word from verse 2 - gained approval or was attested) that beforehis being taken up he was pleasing to God." Two times in Genesis 5(verses 22 and 24) Moses says that Enoch "walked with God." This iswhy the writer of Hebrews says he pleased God. So he concludes that"by faith" Enoch was blessed by God with translation into heaven.  By Faith?  Now the writer is fully aware of the problem he has created. Hehas chosen two Old Testament saints to illustrate his principle inverse 2 - that by faith the men of old gained approval - when in factin neither of these Old Testament stories is faith ever mentioned.This is no slip-up. He knows exactly what he is doing. And if we arewilling to follow him, we will see how profound his insight is.  He is not arguing for the nature of faith from these Old Testamenttexts. He is not saying: because I find faith mentioned in thesestories, therefore faith must be the way they pleased God. Hisargument is just the opposite, in fact. He sees faith in the stories,not because it is mentioned, but because these men did, in fact,please God, and there is no other way to please him than by faith.  Look at verse 6. That's what it says. Catch the flow of verse 5again. It ends by saying that Enoch "obtained the witness that beforehis being taken up he was pleasing to God" - that is, he walked withGod. Then verse six picks up this fact of Enoch's pleasing God andargues like this: "And without faith it is impossible to please Him."Now that is why he sees faith in the lives of Abel and Enoch. TheBible says that both of them pleased God - Abel in his "betteroffering" and Enoch in "walking with God." And then the writerconcludes that this offering and this fellowship with God must havebeen by faith, because "without faith it is impossible to pleaseGod."  Now this is very basic reasoning. And Oh, how I pray that you willall respect, and cultivate in your own God-given minds, the reasoningof Scripture. If someone had shown me as a youth that the Biblereasons rather than just asserting, it would not have taken till Iwas 22 to begin to discover so many of the riches of God's word. Thisis basic reasoning. I would say that an average 8 or 9 year old canget this.  Two statements lead to a conclusion:  &#183; Statement #1: "Without faith it is impossible to pleaseGod" - or positively, "Only with faith will our obedience be pleasingto God." &#183; Statement #2: Enoch pleased God. Now what's theconclusion? &#183; Conclusion: Enoch had faith. Or: it was by faiththat Enoch walked with God and was taken up to heaven. This is howthe writer arrives at the statement of verse 2: "By [faith] the menof old gained approval."  Why Faith Pleases God  But we are not at the bottom of things yet. The argument is notresting yet on the deepest truth about God. Yes, Enoch pleased God.Yes, without faith we cannot please God. Yes, Enoch (and Abel),therefore, had faith, and acted by faith - illustrating the principleof verse 2. But where does this premise - this statement - come fromthat "without faith it is impossible to please God"? What's the basisfor that claim? What's the bottom of it? The foundation?  He gives his answer in the last part of verse 6. First he makesthe claim: "Without faith it is impossible to please [God]." Then hegives the foundation. Here's the bottom of it all: You can't pleaseGod without faith, "For (= because) he who comes to God must believethat He is, and that He is a rewarder of those who seek Him." Becauseof this, only by faith can we please God.  There are two parts to faith in this verse which show why itpleases God. Beyond this the writer doesn't go. He rests his casehere. This is the bottom of it all. First, he says that faithbelieves that God exists. Second, he says that faith believes thatGod is the rewarder of those who seek him. Because faith is these twothings: it pleases God.  Now ponder this with me for a moment and you will get to know yourGod more deeply, perhaps, than you have ever known him. That's whythis verse is here; so that we will know God. He does not say why Godis pleased by these two aspects of faith. He just says that he is.There is something about the nature of God that makes this obvious.It does not need an argument. It belongs to the very essence of whatit means to be God that God should be pleased by these two things.  He is Real and He is a Rewarder  Let's put them into our own words. God is pleased by us when twothings about him are reflected in our relation to him. One: that heis real; and the other: that he is rewarding.  Behind these two assertions about God are two great facts:  1. God exists absolutely. He did not come into being and willnever go out of being. He is not becoming or growing or changing. Hesaid, "I am who I am" (Exodus 3:14). That is his name. He absolutelyis. Therefore, he is pleased when this absolute existence is knownand embraced. He is pleased when what he is is reflected in ourlives.  2. Behind the assertion that God is rewarding is the fact that Godis so full and so completely self-sufficient that he overflows.Rather than needing our service, he is like a never-ending Spring oflife and energy and joy and beauty and goodness and power. Thereforeit pleases God when we come to him in a way that affirms this anddelights in it - when we come to him as a Rewarder.  Now the writer of Hebrews simply asserts that this is what faithdoes: faith comes to God with the confidence that he is, and faithcomes with the confidence that God will be a generous Giver. He isnot arguing that faith is this way because he finds it defined in theOld Testament stories. He is saying: given the absolute reality ofGod's being and God's fullness, this is what faith has to be. This isthe end of the argument. This is the bottom of the reasoning.  We could say it like this: what pleases God is that our hearts andminds display God's being and God's beauty. That we display God'sexistence and his excellence. That we display how real he is and howrewarding he is. This is what pleases God, and this is faith.  Faith Depends on What God is Like, not on What we are Like  Which brings us back to verse 1. Notice how the two parts of verse6 correspond to the two parts of verse 1. "Faith is the assurance ofthings hoped for, the conviction of things not seen." That's verse 1.The "conviction of things not seen" corresponds to faith's beliefthat God exists (verse 6a). And the "assurance of things hoped for"corresponds to faith's belief that God is the rewarder of those whoseek him (verse 6b). Faith has at least these two components: one isthe conviction that there is a great unseen God who exists absolutelyand does not depend on us in the least. And the other is theassurance that this great unseen God is a God of love and bounty andfree and sovereign grace for all who seek him in truth.  I began by saying that in our day the life of faith is vulnerableand perilous. Schools, denominations, churches, families, and soulsare vulnerable to the subtle encroachments of the world and sin anderror and Satan. Vigilance and endurance are crucial for your souland your family and our church and our Christian schools.  What we have seen in Hebrews now is that the nature of faith andthe vitality of faith is rooted in what God is like, not what we arelike. You don't find out what Christian faith is by consulting yourfelt needs. You find out by consulting the nature of God. Therefore,if you would have your faith be strong, and your soul be strong andyour family be strong and your church be strong and your denominationand schools be strong, know your God. Know your God!  The more you know what God is like, the more conformed to hisgreatness will be your faith. You will be more and more assured ofthings hoped for and more and more convinced of things unseen. AndGod's existence and fullness will be wonderfully displayed in yourlife.  
  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
