 June 4, 1989    Bethlehem Baptist Church    John Piper, Pastor    
    
    JESUS, WOMEN, AND MEN    (Luke 13:10-17)    
    And he laid his hands upon her, and immediately she was made   straight, and she praised God. But the ruler of the synagogue,   indignant because Jesus had healed on the sabbath, said to the   people, "There are six days on which work ought to be done; come   on those days and be healed, and not on the sabbath day." Then the   Lord answered him, "You hypocrites! Does not each of you on the   sabbath untie his ox or his ass from the manger, and lead it away   to water it? And ought not this woman, a daughter of Abraham whom   Satan bound for eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the   sabbath day?" As he said this, all his adversaries were put to   shame; and all the people rejoiced at all the glorious things that   were done by him.    
    
    Jesus has done more than anyone has ever done to bring purity and   harmony between men and women. I want to illustrate this truth   beginning with our text and then showing the same thing from other   parts of his teaching as well.    
    A woman was in the synagogue on the Sabbath day. She was bent over   and could not stand up. She had been this way for 18 years. Jesus   was in the synagogue too. He was the teacher that day. Now what   happens here is quite amazing. Jesus does not ask her about her   disease. She does not ask Jesus to heal her. Verses 12-13 simply   say, "And when Jesus saw her, he called her and said to her,   'Woman, you are freed from your infirmity.' And he laid hands on   her, and immediately she was made straight, and praised God."    
    She asked for nothing. She promised nothing. She had not cornered   Jesus. She had not forced his hand. He could have finished his   lesson and gone home and no one would have even thought about this   woman. But he stopped. He called her. He took the initiative and   made an issue of this woman.    
    So Jesus is on the offensive here. He has something he wants to   say. He wants to say something about the Sabbath day and what it   means to keep it holy. He has something he wants to say about the   hypocrisy of the synagogue leaders who water their oxen on the   Sabbath but get ticked at Jesus' healing. And he has something he   wants to say about women and men.    
    It's the last one we are concerned with today. Verse 16 is the key   verse on this point: "And ought not this woman, a daughter of   Abraham, whom Satan bound for eighteen years, be loosed from this   bond on the Sabbath day?" If the only point Jesus wanted to make   was the point about doing good on the Sabbath or the point about   the hypocrisy of the leaders, he could have simply said, "Ought   not this woman whom Satan bound for eighteen years be loosed from   this bond on the Sabbath day?" But that is not all he said. He   called her a "daughter of Abraham." "Ought not this woman, a   daughter of Abraham . . . be loosed from this bond?"    
    Those words, "daughter of Abraham" are intended to carry a message   to the synagogue leaders. The message goes something like this: On   top of all the other reasons why you should care more about a   suffering person than a thirsty ox, is the fact that this woman is   a fellow heir of the blessing promised to Abraham. You pride   yourselves in saying, "We are the children of Abraham." Well, she   too is a child of Abraham. You hide from the warnings of John the   Baptist by saying, "We have Abraham as our father." Well, she too   has Abraham as her father.    
    And so the message of Jesus to the synagogue leaders was a message   not only about their Sabbath keeping, and not only about their   hypocrisy, but also about how men and women ought to relate to   each other as fellow heirs of God's promises. He was saying to men   in the synagogue then, and he is saying to men in the church   today, "The believing women in your midst are heirs of the   promises of God. They too are the meek who will inherit the earth   (Matt. 5:5). They too are the righteous who will shine like the   sun in the kingdom of their Father" (Matt. 13:43).    
    Do you see what this means for us men and women today? Husbands   and wives. Brothers and sisters. Boy friends and girl friends. All   of us as we relate to each other as men and women. It means we   should learn to look at each other through the lens of God's word.   Here's what I mean.    
    This woman in the synagogue has been bent over for 18 years.   What's that like? It's horrible. That's what it's like. People   stare. People think you've committed some terrible sin. Kids laugh   and make jokes. You can't look anyone in the eye. People don't   know how to make conversation. You can't have normal sexual   relations with your husband. You feel like you're an embarrassment   to everyone you're with.    
    So what do you see when you look at this woman? If you were her   husband what would you see? Husbands (let's just bring it right up   to date), what do you see when you look at your wife? The answer   to that, of course, depends on what lens you're using. What you   see will be very different depending on whether you look through   the lens of Playboy magazine or the lens of the Word of God. If   you look through the lens of God's Word you will see a daughter of   Abraham. If we learn to see Christian women the way Jesus saw this   woman in the synagogue we will see them as heirs of the King of   glory. And that will have a deep effect on our relationships.    
    Of course this cuts both ways. Women are just as likely to be   disappointed with their husbands as men are to be disappointed   with their wives. Women are just as prone to speak negatively of   their husbands. Women are just as prone to try to get their   husbands to be all the things that they dreamed they would be. And   therefore it probably needs to be said that women too must learn   to look at him through the lens of the Word of God. He is a son of   Abraham as a believer in Christ. He will one day shine like the   sun in the kingdom of his Father. With all his imperfections he   will be changed in the twinkling of an eye: every sin will be gone   for ever; and he will receive a body like Christ's glorious   body.    
    We will, I think, in the age to come be dumbfounded as we look   back at how poorly we were able to treat each other on the way to   glory. There is an honor and respect and even reverence that we   should show to each other as men and women. How much happier would   be our homes if they were filled with expressions of this honor!   And they WILL be filled with these expressions to the degree that   we learn to look at each other through the lens of God's word   &#151; as daughters and sons of Abraham; heirs of all God's   promises; destined together for unspeakable glory.    
    Now that is the sort of thing Jesus did to help us recover what   God created us to be as male and female in the image of God. And   he did it again and again. So what I want to do in the time that   remains is to give a few more illustrations of how Jesus helps us   recover the purity and harmony of how men and women relate to each   other. There is much more that could be said than can fit   here.    
    1. In Matthew 5:28-29 Jesus says, "Every one who looks at a woman   lustfully has already committed adultery with her in his heart. If   your right eye causes you to sin, pluck it out and throw it away;   it is better that you lose one of your members than that your   whole body be thrown into hell."    
    With that one word Jesus condemned in the most forceful way   possible (the threat of hell) all forms of pornography and the   entire enterprise of commercializing the female body in   advertising and entertainment. Can you imagine how much wrath is   being stored up in heaven against the billion dollar business of   doing precisely what the Son of God prohibits &#151; namely,   enticing men to look upon women with sexual desire &#151; not as   persons, mind you, but as objects of sexual pleasure alone! And   what is clear from Matthew 5:28f is that Jesus Christ means to   rescue women from this attack on their personhood. Men who follow   Jesus guard their eyes for the good of women and for the glory of   God. And women who follow Jesus look to Jesus for how to use their   bodies, not to the world.    
    2. In Matthew 7:12 Jesus said, "Whatever you wish that people   would do to you, do so to them; for this is the law and the   prophets." You don't think, do you, that Jesus meant for the   relationships between men and women to be excluded here do you   &#151; as though men and women should not treat each other   according to the golden rule? No. We ought to treat each other the   way we'd want to be treated in somebody else's shoes.    
    It's hard to say something more radical than this. Relationships   are revolutionized when two people live by the golden rule. The   reason it is so revolutionary is because you and I by nature have   an all consuming desire to be treated well by other people. Nobody   in this room likes to be made fun of. Nobody here wants to be   ignored and treated like a useless person. Nobody wants to be   exploited or taken advantage of. That means that if everybody in   this room lived by the golden rule of Jesus nobody would make fun   of any other person here. Nobody here would treat another like he   or she were useless. Nobody here would take advantage of someone   else. The measure of our love for our own happiness would be the   measure of how eagerly we pursued the happiness of each other. It   would be utterly revolutionary, especially in marriages and   relationships between men and women in general. And that is just   what Jesus commands.    
    3. The most devastating thing Jesus ever said against   characteristic male and female sins was the word in Matthew 18:3,   "Unless you turn and become like children, you will never enter   the kingdom of heaven. Whoever humbles himself like this child is   the greatest in the kingdom of heaven." Men who act like backyard   bullies and women who play the helpless coquette are not   child-like. They are childish. Genuine childlikeness and humility,   like everything else Jesus taught, is revolutionary for the   relationships between men and women.    
    Now how does this relate to our conclusion last week &#151; that   God has called men to bear the primary responsibility for   leadership in relationship to women? &#151; that men are held   accountable first by God for taking the initiative to do what can   be done to make things the way they should be in the   relationship?    
    The answer is: Jesus purges Christian leadership of everything   that makes it ugly and builds into Christian leadership what makes   it beautiful. He purges it of self-exaltation; and he builds into   it the reality of servanthood. He says, "Whoever exalts himself   will be humbled" (Matt. 23:12). That's the end of arrogance and   self-exaltation in Christian leadership. And he says, "Whoever   would be great among you must be your servant" (Matt. 20:26).   That's the key to beautiful leadership that builds up others.    
    But what a mistake it would be to say that because Jesus elevated   the concept of servanthood he cancelled out the concept of   leadership. We know from what he said and what he did that this is   not true.    
    What he said was this: "Let the leader become as one who serves"   (Luke 22:26), But He never said, "Let the leader stop being   leader." Nor did he say, "Serving makes leaders less than   leaders." He simply said, "When leadership is appropriate, let it   be a servant leadership."    
    And what he did was to give himself as an example of what he said:   at his lowest point of servanthood, with the towel wrapped around   him washing his disciples' feet like a slave, no one in that room   doubted who the leader was. He was the one they would follow. On   his knees &#151; and, if they understood, they would be on theirs!   Servanthood does not nullify or cancel out leadership; it   transforms leadership. When Jesus hung on the cross seemingly weak   and utterly helpless he was leading a great host into glory.    
    So what Jesus does for us is this: he shows us and he teaches us   that if a man takes up the mantle of leadership according to   Genesis 2, he must not seize it as a right for himself; he must   accept it as a responsibility given by God. The language of   leadership is the language of responsibilities not the language of   rights. It's the responsibility of servant leadership, not the   right of lordly domination.    
    This is exactly where Paul takes us in Ephesians five when he   speaks of husbands loving and leading like Christ. And that is   where we will turn next week.       
        Copyright 1989, 1998 John Piper      Piper's   Notes            
