  I begin this morning with three questions for youto answer silently in your own mind.      First, do you want to be happy?    Second, do you want your happiness to be partialor full?   Third, do you want your happiness to stop or to lastas long as you last?     The reason I count these questions worthy of EasterSunday morning is not just because I think every person in thisroom cares about them, but also because these questions are therock bottom concerns of the Bible.    Wherever the Bible has had its profoundest effectin people's lives it hasn't been because of the demands of a newduty but because of the power of a new pleasure. Let me illustratewhat I mean.  John G. Paton was born on May 24, 1824 in DumfriesCounty, Scotland.  His father was a weaver and had his stockingframes in a room of the house.  And his father was godly.  Paton'sbiographer says that the churchgoing and Bible stories and ShorterCatechism were not tasks but pleasures in the Patonhome.    The boy had to quit school when he was 12 to helphis father support the  family of eleven children, and when he was 17 hehad a deep experience of conversion that brought all his parentslove for Christ home to his own heart.  The call to Christian service became irresistibleand Paton worked for ten years works as a city missionary in Glasgowamong the poor children of the slums.  At 32 he accepted the call to missionary servicein the New Hebrides in the South Pacific.  In March of 1858 hemarried Mary Ann Robson, and on April 16 they sailed togetherfor the cannibal island of Tanna.  In less than a year they had built a little homeand Mary had given birth to a son.  But on March 3 of 1859, oneyear after their marriage, Mary died of the fever, and in threeweeks the infant son died.  John Paton buried them alone, andwrote, But for Jesus. . . I must have gone mad and diedbeside that lonely grave.    One of the gifts that Jesus had given him to sustainhim in those days were the words his wife spoke shortly beforehere death.  And right here is where we see the profoundest effectof Biblical Christianity.  She did not murmur against God, orresent her husband bringing her there.  Rather she spoke theseincredible words -- and you find them again and again where theBible has sunk into the heart -- I do not regret leavinghome and friends.  If I had it to do over, I would do it withmore pleasure, yes, with all my heart. (FIFTY MISSIONARYHEROES, by Julia Johnston, 1913, p. 153).  Among those who know the Bible best and who haveexperienced it most deeply, it has never diverted people fromthe quest for happiness and pleasure.  Instead, it has causedpeople to get really serious about the quest.  It has caused themto ask, Do I really want to be happy?  Do I want the fullesthappiness possible?  Do I want my happiness to last for ever? In other words, the Bible makes us stop playing games with ourhappiness.  It makes us serious, even desperate, in our pursuit.   It makes a harried and overworked businessman goaway for a few days and sit by the lake, and look at the sunsetand the stars, and ask: Have I found it?  Is this what Iam really after?  Does it satisfy?  Will it last?  Jesus Christ never once condemned the quest for happiness. But often he has rebuked us for taking it so lightly.   Now what does all this have to do with Easter Sunday? Back in January when I first conceived of this message I sawthe connection in a new way, and I want to try to show it to you.  In Acts 1:3 Luke tells us that Jesus presentedhimself alive after his passion by many proofs, appearing to hisapostles during forty days, and speaking of the kingdom of God. For forty days he sought to prove to his followers that he reallywas alive,     that his body was new and indestructible,  that his death for sinners was validated,  that his teaching was true,  that his fellowship would be permanent,  and that his cause would triumph in the world.     Then Jesus ascended into heaven and sat down at theright hand of God the Father.  And there he will reign until hisransomed people are gathered in from every people and tongue andtribe and nation.  Then the Lord will come a second time in powerand great glory and the dead in Christ will be raised to reignwith him for ever and ever.  Then the Book of Acts goes on to show us that forten days after Jesus had ascended to heaven the apostles and Jesus'mother and his brothers devoted themselves to prayer in Jerusalem. During these ten days Peter and the others must have combed theOld Testament for predictions and explanations of what was happeningin these incredible days, because when the Holy Spirit finallycomes upon them with power at the end of those ten days the apostlesare full of Scripture.  They explain everything in terms of thefulfillment of Scripture.  One of the Psalms that Peter evidently pondered deeplygoes like this:   Preserve me, O God, for in thee I take refuge. I say to the LORD, Thou art my Lord; I have no good apart from thee. As for the saints in the land,  they are the noble, in whom is all my delight.  Those who choose another god multiply their sorrows; their libations of blood I will not pour out, or take their names upon my lips.  The LORD is my chosen portion and my cup; thou holdest my lot. The lines have fallen for me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage.  I bless the LORD who gives me counsel; in the night also my heart instructs me. I keep the LORD always before me;  because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved.   Therefore my heart is glad, and my soul rejoices; my body also dwells secure. For thou dost not give me up to Sheol, or let thy godly one see the Pit.  Thou dost show me the path of life; in thy presence there is fullness of joy, in thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.  Psalm l6   The reason we know that Peter had given thought tothis Psalm is that he quotes from it in Acts 2:25-28. It was aPsalm of David and Peter's mind seemed to go something like thiswhen he pondered this Psalm.  We know that God gave David a promise (in 2 Samuel7:12-16) that one of his own posterity would be the everlastingking of Israel -- the Son of David, the Messiah (Isaiah 9:6-7). David must have often thought of this wonderful thing -- thatin his own body, as it were, there was a King whose reign wouldnever end.  And Peter noticed in reading the psalms of Davidthat sometimes, as David expressed his own hope in God, he wouldbe caught up by the Holy Spirit to say things about himself thatwent far beyond what his own experience would be.  It was as thoughDavid were sometimes transported into the future of his son theMessiah and would say things that only the Son of David wouldexperience sometime in the future.  This is what Peter saw as he meditated on Psalm 16. He read, The LORD is at my right hand that I might notbe shaken. (You can see this Acts 2:25.)  And he asked perhaps,In what sense will David not be shaken?  So he reads on for the answer.  Acts 2:26 -- Thereforemy heart was glad, and my tongue rejoiced; moreover my flesh willdwell in hope.  And Peter ponders and answers his question:The sense in which David will not be shaken is that hisheart and his flesh are secure in God.  He will be protected --soul and body.  Then Peter asks, How will they be protected? How safe is David really?  Will he not die?  Did he not die? Peter reads on (Acts 2:27), For thou wilt not abandon mysoul to Hades, nor let thy Holy One see corruption.  Peterlooks at this for a long time.  He ponders, Will David'sflesh really never see corruption?  Will David really never seethe decaying effects of the Pit?  Does he really expect this muchprotection for himself?  And suddenly (or gradually?) it dawns on Peter thatthese words go beyond anything that David experienced.  Daviddid die!  David was buried!  David's flesh did see corruption. So Peter recognizes that David is no longer speaking merely forhimself.  The Spirit has lifted him up to see the destiny of thesecond David.  And the voice of the Messiah is heard propheticallyin the voice of his father David.  And then the connection with Jesus hits home.  Thisis what happened to Jesus!  Peter makes the connection for usin Acts 2:31 -- David foresaw and spoke of the resurrectionof the Christ, that he was not abandoned to Hades, nor did hisflesh see corruption.  This Jesus God raised up, and of that weall are witnesses.    Now right here we begin to make the connection withthat longing for happiness that I referred to back at the beginning. In Acts 2:28 Peter goes on to quote from the last verse of Psalm16.  But now we know that it is really Jesus, the Son of David,speaking through the voice of the prophet David:    Thou hast made known to me the ways of life;  thou wilt make me full of gladness with thy presence.   And the Psalm ends (though Peter doesn't finish it),In thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.  In other words, what we see from this text is thatGod's goal for Jesus Christ beyond the grave was that he mightfill him with gladness.  So he didn't abandon his soul to Hadesor let his flesh see corruption.  He raised him from the deadto make him full of happiness for ever and ever.  And what is the essence of this happiness?    Verse 28 says, Thou wilt make me full of gladnesswith thy presence.  Which means that we end this l3-weekseries on the pleasures of God where we began -- with  God theSon and God the Father delighting in each other's presence.  Thouwilt make me full of gladness with thy presence.   But what does Jesus experience in the presence ofGod?  What are the pleasures in God's right hand?    The first thing that comes to mind is glory.  Jesushad prayed in John 17:5, Father, glorify me in your ownpresence with the glory which I had with you before the worldwas made.  Jesus had laid down his glory in order to sufferfor us.  Now he is eager to take it up again.    And the Father was eager to give it.  That's whatPaul means when he says (in Philippians 2:8-ll), God hashighly exalted him and given him a name which is above every namethat at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven andon earth and under the earth, and every tongue confess that JesusChrist is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.  Now what does the gladness of the risen God haveto do with us?    Jesus didn't just happen upon this gladness beyondthe grave; he pursued it with all his might.  Hebrews 12:2 says,For the joy that was set before him he endured the cross,despising the shame, and is seated at the right hand of God.   In other words, Jesus was able to endure the crossbecause he knew it was leading to the Father's presence wherethere is fullness of joy and to the Father's righthand where there are pleasures for evermore.  This means that, if you are here this morning witha deep longing for happiness, you will not be told by Jesus Christthat this longing is bad, or that it must be denied or that youshould have nobler goals on Easter than happiness.  Jesus livedfor the joy that was set before him.  He is the pioneer and perfecterof our faith.  And therefore he sanctioned the thirst of our soulsby the thirst of his own.  But there's more that has to do with us.  If allJesus wanted was the glory and gladness that he had with his Fatherbefore the world was, why did he come into the world in the firstplace?  The Bible says, Jesus Christ came into the world to savesinners like you and me (1 Tim. 1:15).  But someone might say, I thought you said he waspursuing his own joy.  You said he wanted to be glorified by theFather.  Which is it?  Does he want his own glory and his owngladness or does he want ours?  This has been the key questionof this whole series on the pleasures of God.  Is he for us orfor himself?  Listen to his own answer one last time from John17:24, Father, I desire that they also, whom you have givenme, may be with me where I am, to behold my glory which you havegiven me. . . before the foundation of the world.    Yes he is for himself because he longs for the gloryand the gladness of his Father's presence.  And yes he is forus, because he wants us with him there.  The message of Easter is doubly wonderful.    It is wonderful to see the suffering Son coming hometo the Father.  What a reunion that must have been when Creatorembraced Creator and said, Well done Son.  Welcome home. What a wonderful thing to see the bloody Passover Lamb of GoodFriday crowned with glory and honor, and handed the scepter ofthe universe!  But it is also wonderful to hear Jesus say, Iwant others to be with me, Father.  I want others to share myglory.  I want my gladness in your glory to overflow like a mountainspring and become the gladness of others.  I want my joy in youto be in them and their joy to be full for ever and ever.  On Easter Sunday morning Jesus blew the lock offthe prison of death and gloom and returned to the gladness ofGod.  With that he put his sanction on the pursuit of happiness. And he opened the way for sinners to find never-ending satisfactionat the fountain of the glory of his grace.  From the right hand of God he speaks to everyoneof us today and invites us to the never-ending banquet: Iam the bread of life; he who comes to me shall not hunger, andhe who believes in me shall never thirst (John 6:35). . .  I amthe resurrection and the life; he who believes in me, though hedie, yet shall he live, and whoever lives and believes in me shallnever die.  Do you believe this? (John 11:25-26).   
