 November 5, 1989    Bethlehem Baptist Church    John Piper, Pastor    
    
    MERCY TO THE NATIONS    (Romans 15:8-9)    
    
    I tell you that Christ became a servant to the circumcised to show   God's truthfulness, in order to confirm the promises given to the   patriarches, and in order that the Gentiles might glorify God for   his mercy.    
    
    Missions week is the most exciting time of the year for me. Even   more exciting than Christmas or Easter or my birthday. The reason   is that every year as Missions Week rolls around I get serious   about investigating what God is doing in the world to advance the   kingdom and finish the Great Commission. And what I find is   usually mind-boggling and full of hope and encouragement. O how I   wish all of you would track down the amazing works of God. How we   need to see that what's happening in our little corner is an   infinitesimal fraction of God's remarkable work in the world.    
    Did you know that    
    ** not only did the Soviet Union officially celebrate last year   the 1,000th birthday of the Church in the USSR,    ** and not only has the Soviet Union released virtually all of its   religious prisoners,    ** and not only have permits been granted for importing six   million Bibles in 1989-90,    ** and not only will about six new seminaries open in the USSR   this year,    ** but I heard the report at the EFMA meeting last month that in   one large Siberian city earlier this year they baptized people for   24 hours round the clock.    
    
    Did you know that God is bringing the unreached peoples out of   hiding and putting them in Western cities? For example, ten   million Kazakhs may be hard to get to in the Soviet Union. But   10,000 of them live in Munich, Germany. And what a great   missionary event took place here last Sunday as we recognized the   Laotian Church of Peace of Minneapolis which is THE most important   work of God for reaching 6,000 Laotians in our city. (God glories   in using obscure mustard-seed size ministries!)    
    Did you know that in 1900 there were only about 50,000 Protestants   in Latin America. Today there are 35 million. And by all estimates   there will be over 100 million by the year 2,000. That's a growth   rate 20,000% faster than the population growth. Ralph Winter says,   "The galloping gains of the evangelicals in turbulent Central   America are positively legendary!"    
    Did you know that just 100 years ago there were no Christian   churches in Korea. Today there are 6,000 churches in the city of   Seoul alone.    
    Did you know that in 1900 for every evangelical believer there   were 27 persons who did not regard themselves as Christians, but   today there are only seven such non-Christians in the world for   every evangelical. Or even more amazing, the same percentage gain   in this comparison was made in the last nine years as was made in   the first 900 years of church history! (See Ralph Winter,   "Momentum Building in Global Mission," p. 11)    
    Did you know that in 1980 there were about 160 evangelical   congregations in the world for every people that is left to be   reached; but today, nine years later there are over 400   congregations for every unreached people. If only ten percent of   the Bible-believing churches were to team up in a cooperative way,   all the remaining unreached peoples could be "adopted" by the end   of 1991; and "engaged" with missionary teams by the end of 1994;   and, with the blessing of God, an evangelizing church movement   could be planted by the year 2000. (For the meaning of the terms   "adopt" and "engage" see Winter, ibid. p. 14.)    
    Dr. Ralph Winter said a month ago, "One of the most difficult   tasks is to try to keep up with things which God is apparently   doing without asking us. Our task is only to fit in with His   plans, not to engineer Him to fill out ours. He is doing amazing   things. We need to let what God is doing come home to our hearts!   The end of the job is in sight!" (Winter, ibid. p. 16)    
    But lest we be naive and become euphoric and self-satisfied,   consider this: 800,000,000 people in our world (about 15%) live in   absolute poverty; 70,000,000 of these are on the threshold of   starvation. Half the children of these absolute poor do not live   to be 5 years old. There are 125,000,000 infant deaths a week,   most preventable by simple preventive health care.    
    Among the 40 least developed countries, the life expectancy is an   average of 46 years. 45% of the population of these countries is   under 15 years old. Only 33% of their adults can read. Half of   these countries are the least evangelized. The rest have very few   Christians.    
    So we can generalize and say that vast numbers of the lost and   many unreached peoples are also the poorest. Reaching these   peoples with an understandable message of the gospel will mean   more identification &#151; more radical incarnation and   simplification than we at Bethlehem have ever experienced.    
    Those in the world who claim to be Christian earn 68% of the   world's income. And we give only 3% of it to any church, and of   that 3% only about 5% is invested in any international ministry at   all. We must continually test our inoculation &#151; our   desensitization &#151; to massive world need.    
    If there ever was a reason for hope in the triumph of the gospel,   it is today. And if there every was a cry for mercy from the   nations, it is today.    
    This morning's text is an utterly important word for us from the   greatest missionary that ever lived, the apostle Paul. And not   just from Paul but from God who inspired him to write it.    
    The text is wonderfully plain and simple. And I hope that as I   draw out four great truths from the text God will kindle in you a   new zeal for doing whatever you possibly can to help finish the   great commission.    
    Truth #1 - Zeal for the glory of God is the primary motive for   world missions &#151; for pouring all the money and effort we can   into finishing the great commission.    
    I see this in three phrases in Romans 15:8-9 &#151; three phrases   that show the ultimate reason why Christ came into the world on   that first great missionary journey, the incarnation. First the   text says in verse 8, "Christ became a servant to the circumcised   (that is to the Jewish people) to show God's truthfulness. . ."   Second, continuing on in verse 8, " . . . in order to confirm the   promises (God's promises)." Third, in verse 9, " . . . and in   order that the gentiles might glorify God for his mercy."    
    Why then did Christ come? He came to show that God is truthful. He   came to show that God is a promise-keeper. And he came to show   that God is glorious. Or to put it another way, Jesus came into   the world for God's sake. He came to certify God's integrity. He   came to vindicate God's word. He came to magnify God's glory. The   primary motive of the first great mission to unreached peoples   &#151; the mission of Jesus from heaven &#151; was his zeal for   the glory of God. And that ought to be our primary motive too.    
    This summer in Manila at Lausanne II John Stott preached from   Romans. In his first message he sounded this note loud and clear   from Romans 1:5 that the glory of Christ, and through him the   glory of God, is our primary motive in missions. There Paul said,   "Through &#91;Christ&#93; we have received grace and apostleship   to bring about the obedience of faith for the sake of his name   among all the nations." Missionaries who go in the spirit of Paul   go primarily for the sake of the name of Jesus to the glory of his   Father.    
    That means simply that it grieves us that Christ is dishonored   through unbelief. And what thrills us is the prospect that Jesus   could be loved and honored and praised and obeyed among the   nations.. Seeing Christ and God the Father exalted among the   nations is the dream that drives the missionary who has the heart   of Jesus and the heart of Paul.    
    That's the first truth from our text: Zeal for the glory of God is   the primary motive for world missions.    
    Truth #2: A servant spirit and a heart of mercy motivate a   Christ-like missionary.    
    This is plain in the text as well from the very same phrases we   just looked at. Verse 8: "Christ became a servant to the   circumcision (the Jews) to show God's truthfulness. . ." And verse   9: " . . . in order that the Gentiles might glorify God for his   mercy." Christ became a servant . . . and Christ brought   mercy.    
    Notice the connection between compassion and missions in Matthew   9:36-38, "When Jesus saw the crowds, he had compassion for them,   because they were harassed and helpless, like sheep without a   shepherd. Then he said to his disciples, 'The harvest is   plentiful, but the laborers are few; pray therefore the Lord of   the harvest to send out laborers into his harvest'."    
    Why are they being sent out? Because Jesus had compassion on the   crowds &#151; which is the same as saying, a heart of mercy   motivates a Christ-like missionary.    
    Christian missions is the most merciful enterprise in all the   world. Without Christ the nations cannot know who they are or why   they exist. Without Christ they can't receive the forgiveness of   their sins. Without Christ they can't enjoy a clean conscience.   Without Christ they can't rest in the acceptance of God. Without   Christ they can't be free from deception and bondage to fear and   lies. Without Christ they can't have eternal life. But Christian   missions brings Christ to the nations and therefore it brings   meaning and forgiveness and a clean conscience and acceptance with   God and freedom and eternal life to all who believe. Not to   mention all the personal and social benefits that come when a   group of people &#151; a society &#151; is gripped by the Spirit   of Jesus. Therefore missions is the most merciful enterprise in   the world. And a person who has no heart of mercy cannot be a   Christ-like missionary.    
    That's truth #2: A servant spirit and a heart of mercy motivates a   Christ-like missionary.    
    Truth #3 - Truth #1 and Truth #2 are one truth. Zeal for the glory   of the Lord and a heart of mercy for the lost are one, and cannot   be separated.    
    We can see this from the wording of verse 9. It says that Christ   came, (and therefore we should go), "in order that the Gentiles   might glorify God . . ." Yes! That was the passion of Christ, and   it should be our passion &#151; that the nations might love and   praise the glory of God.    
    But the verse goes on: " .. . that the Gentiles might glorify God   for his mercy." If our passion is for people to glorify God for   his mercy, then we must be merciful and feel compassion for the   lost. Our zeal for the glory of the Lord must be a zeal for the   glory of the mercy of the Lord.    
    So zeal for the glory of the Lord on the one hand and a heart of   mercy on the other are not two disconnected motives in the heart   of Christ-like missionaries as though they were somehow in tension   or competition. They are united into one. And the reason they are   is that mercy is the capstone of God's glory. All God's sovereign   power and all God's infinite wisdom break forth in their most   lavish and colorful displays in the rivers of mercy. Zeal for the   glory of the Lord is zeal for the glory of his mercy or it isn't   missionary zeal &#151; and it isn't holy zeal. For Romans 15:9   says the goal of missions is that the nations might glorify God   for his mercy.    
    Zeal for the Lord's glory and a heart of mercy make a Christ-like   missionary. These must be kept together. If we have no zeal for   the glory of God our mercy becomes superficial social welfare with   no eternal significance. And if in our hearts we feel no mercy our   so-called zeal for the glory of the Lord is hypocrisy (Matthew   9:13). Because the capstone of his glory is immensity of his mercy   to lost sinners among all the nations.    
    Truth #4 - The glory of God's mercy is for all the peoples of the   world.    
    At the end of verse 9 Paul quotes four Old Testament passages to   prove this truth. He wants to establish beyond any doubt that the   mercy of God is for the nations, not just Jews, not just Romans,   but all the peoples. This is most clearly stated in verse 11. He   quotes Psalm 117:    
    Praise the Lord, all Gentiles,    and let all the peoples praise him.    
    The key phrase here is "all the peoples" .The point is not just   individuals. The point is that there are tribes, languages,   peoples and nations (Revelation 5:9) who must praise the Lord for   the glory of his mercy. Twelve thousand remain to be reached. They   are more identifiable today than they have ever been in the   history of the world. Here are a list of 150 of the largest   unreached peoples. You can get it in the office file cabinet.    
    Remember there are over 400 evangelical churches for every one of   these 12,000 people groups. It is a finishable task. Remember what   Dr. Winter said, " We need to let what God is doing come home to   our hearts! The end of the job is in sight!" How could it be   otherwise when God's great purpose is to be glorified among the   nations for his MERCY!       
        Copyright 1998 Sound of Grace      Sound of   Grace    
