Is $ God? 
March 10, 2013 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 Gathering, Welcoming, Centering, Kindling, Opening:
  
We are here, 

after a week of wet snow and warm sun, 

to celebrate life together;  

to go deeper than we imagined;  

soar higher than we expected, and step by step, 

journey farther than we thought possible. So 

 
 Grounded in gratitude for the cosmos that is our ho
me, claiming deepening wisdom as our 
authority, and daring to engage joy, burden, loss a
nd insight in a deliberate community of 
many ways and ages, the flame summons us to 
awaken
: to listen with our whole lives, to 
open, to serve.
   

  

 
Singing:  14 The Sun At High Noon  

 
Ingathering:  The Cricket 

 (synopsis of story)  Two friends are in a city toge
ther. The noise is terrible, honking horns, 
sirens, the roar of trucks and shouts of taxi drive
rs. One of the friends complains about all the 
noise. The other says, "What I hear is a cricket ch
irping."  "A cricket?" says the other. "How can 
you hear the music of a cricket in the midst of all
 this noise. I can hardly hear myself think, let 
alone a cricket chirping."  The friend smiles, take
s her across the street to a planter, and points. 
There in the dirt of the planter is a cricket, chir
ping. "I still don't see how itôs possible to 
distinguish this cricket chirping from all the hars
h noise."  The friend says, "This is how..." and 
then flings a handful of coins onto the sidewalk. I
mmediately, all the people within a block come 
running toward the sound of the coins clattering on
 the sidewalk. "People hear what's important 
for them to hear." 

 
Greeting 

 
Affirming  
( last lines of the inauguration poem by Richard Bl
anco)  
 
We head home: through the gloss of rain or weight o
f snow, or the plum blush of dusk, but 
always -- home, always under one sky, our sky. And 
always one moon å all of us å facing 
the stars...hope å a new constellation, waiting for
 us to map it, waiting for us to name it å 
together
   
                          Richard Blanco 2013
  
Singing: 277 When We Wend Homeward 

 
Communing 

 
So let me be clear 

I want to live 
as if
 the pearly morning sunlight 
was a far greater gift than a handful of pearls. 

I want to live 
as if
 the first crocus announcing 
the coming spring thrills me like the embrace of my
 closest friend. 
I want to live 
as if
 a single moment of my life 
has the beauty of a great song. 

I want to live 
as if
 each heartbeat  
is a pulse of what can only be called eternal life,
 as if
 each breath I take a revelation 
greater than any on a printed page. 

I want live 
as if
 I could cooperate, 
not compete in order to defeat others. 

I want to live 
as if
 I can be aware instead of scared. 
I want to live 
as if
 the earth was a Home, 
not an unlikely rock falling through the abyss, 

as if
 I was a citizen of the whole history of humankind 
as well as the citizen of a place. 
I want to live 
as if
 the silence of the cosmos 
was my silence too, a yes to the very next moment..
.   
 
silence 

 
As if
 we were alone; but were not. 
Crowded with grief and joys, 

filled with memories and hopes, 

alive with loves and losses, 

we gather in community in gratitude 

that we are not alone. 

Here we are free to name and claim 

our interdependence with our 
own
 lives 
as well as our interdependence with  

all who live on earth. 

Whispered aloud, or in deep silence within,  

we are free to name the names of those we  

love, miss, struggle with, memorializeñ.for thus  

we establish our communion with life. 

 
naming 

 
As if treasure was buried. It's not. 

As if wealth was a pile of coinsñitôs not.  

Both treasure and wealth are blazed  

into the heavens by the stars, sun and moon; 

both are distributed fairly and beautifully 

to all who gather in this room 

in the form of gorgeous music. 

 
The First Reading
 is excerpted in three parts from a much longer arti
cle published in Atlantic 
Magazine 15 years ago. Before 9/11. Before the seve
re economic downturn or call it what you 
will. Harvey Cox is the author, a theologian out of
 Harvard, whose book, the Secular City, was 
famous back in the 60s. He is also quite famous for
 an article he published in, of all places, 
Playboy Magazine, about Jesus of Galilee, accompani
ed by an illustration of the teacher 
laughing his head off. Nonetheless, Harvey Cox is a
 respected theologian of the modern era, and 
has had more impact than most of his generation. Co
mplete copies of this article will be 
available outside for those who want to read it. 

 
In days of old, seers entered a trance state, and t
hen informed anxious seekers what kind of mood 
the gods were in, and whether this was an auspiciou
s time to begin a journey, get married, or 
start a war. The prophets of Israel went to the des
ert and then returned to announce whether G-d 
was feeling benevolent or wrathful. Today, The Mark
et's fickle will is clarified by daily reports 
from Wall Street. Thus we can learn on a day-to-day
 basis that The Market is... "apprehensive," 
"relieved," "nervous," or even at times "jubilant."
 On the basis of this revelation, awed adepts 
make critical decisions about whether to buy, or se
ll. Like one of the devouring gods of old, The 
Marketäaptly embodied in a bull or a bearämust be f
ed and kept happy 
under all 
circumstances
. True, at times its appetite may seem excessiveäa 
$35 billion bailout here, a $50 
billion one thereäbut the alternative to not bowing
 to its hunger is too terrible to contemplate. 
 
The diviners and seers of The Market's moods are th
e high priests of its mysteries. To act against 
them is to risk excommunication and possibly damnat
ion. Today, for example, if government 
policy vexes The Market, those responsible for the 
irreverence will be made to suffer. That The 
Market is not at all displeased by downsizing, or a
 growing income gap,   should not cause 
anyone to question its ultimate omniscience.       
       
bell
 One sometimes wonders, in this era of Market religi
on, where the skeptics and freethinkers have 
gone. What has happened to the Voltaires who once e
xposed bogus miracles, and the H. L. 
Menckens who blew shrill whistles on pious humbugge
ry? Such is the grip of current orthodoxy 
that to question the omniscience of The Market is t
o question the inscrutable wisdom of 
Providence. The metaphysical principle is obvious: 
If you say it's the real thing, then it must be 
the real thing.   
bell
 It used to be thoughtämistakenly, as it turns outät
hat at least the innermost, or "spiritual," 
dimension of life was resistant to The Market. But 
as the markets for material goods become 
increasingly glutted, such previously unmarketable 
states of grace as 
serenity 
and 
tranquility
 are 
now appearing in the catalogues.   Furthermore, ecs
tasy and spirituality are now offered in a 
convenient generic form. Thus The Market makes avai
lable the religious benefits....without the 
awkwardness of denominational commitment...   All c
an now handily be bought without an 

unrealistic demand on one's time, in a weekend work
shop at a Caribbean resort with a sensitive 
psychological consultant replacing the crotchety re
treat master. 
bell 

On October 26, 1996, the German government ran an a
d offering the entire village of 
Liebenberg, in what used to be East Germany, for sa
leäwith no previous notice to its some 350 
residents. Liebenberg's citizens, many of them elde
rly or unemployed, stared at the notice in 
disbelief. They had certainly loathed communism, bu
t when they opted for the market economy 
that reunification promised, they hardly expected t
his. Liebenberg includes a thirteenth-century 
church, a Baroque castle, a lake, a hunting lodge, 
two restaurants, and 3,000 acres of meadow 
and forest. Overnight Liebenberg became a living pa
rable, providing an invaluable glimpse of 
the Kingdom in which The Market's will is indeed do
ne. But the outraged burghers of the town 
did not feel particularly blessed. They complained 
loudly, and the sale was finally postponed. 
Everyone in town realized, however, that it was not
 really a victory. The Market, like G-d, may 
lose a skirmish, but in a war of attrition it will 
always win in the end. 
There was a time when people spoke, at least occasi
onally, of "inherent worth"äif not of things, 
then at least of persons. The Liebenberg principle 
changes all that. One wonders what would 
become of a modern Luther who tried to post his the
ses on the church door, only to find that the 
whole edifice had been bought by an American billio
naire who reckoned it might look nicer on 
his estate.  

 
The Second Reading 
is from Naomi Shihab Nye, the San Antonio poet. She
 is taking about a 
baby she watched in his crib. The title, intriguing
ly, is How Far Is It To the Land We Left? 
 
On the first day of his life,  

the baby opens his eyes, 

and gets tired even doing that. 

He cries when they place a cap on his head 

Too much! Too much! 

Later, the whole world will touch him, 

and he won't even flinch. 

 
Preaching 

 
Home. Home
. Sounds a little bit like the famous syllable from
 the religions of India, OM....that 
many people have chanted, or heard chanted. 

 
Home
 was something 
I 
was chanting like crazy last Tuesday, I'll tell you
 that much. I wasn't 
alone either. I was chanting with a woman I didn't 
even know, named Coleen. From Bend, 
Oregon. 

 
Here's the story. I was coming back from my sabbati
cal after six weeks away. I had been out in 
California the last two weeks, and was returning th
rough Phoenix. After spending some time 
with my friend Marco Antonio who came out to the ai
rport to do just that, I set off on the last leg 
of my journey. When we got to the Columbus airport,
 the snow was falling heavy and fast, and 

after circling the airport for 45 minutes, the pilo
t told us that we were going to have to go to 
Cleveland instead, since we were out fuel, and the 
storm had closed Port Columbus. We landed 
in a totally snow-free Cleveland around midnight, t
hen sat out on the tarmac for almost three 
hours, listing to announcements every fifteen minut
es as to what the authorities in Southwest 
Airlines Dallas headquarters were saying we should 
do next. Finally at 3:00 a.m. they told us the 
flight was cancelled, and they would rebook us on a
nother flight. Of course, the airport was 
closed, no one was there, and they woke up two slee
py folks to attend to the needs of 188 
passengers who had not slept in almost 24 hours. As
 we stood in line for over an hour, we over-
heard what the folks at the desk were saying, "We c
an get you home tomorrow afternoon through 
Baltimore, since there are no flights directly from
 Cleveland to Columbus on Southwest. Or 
through Nashville." People in my part of the line g
roaned in despair. So this woman I don't 
know, Coleen, and I, started talking. We decided to
 rent a car to come back, even though we 
knew Southwest wasn't going to cover that. We staye
d awake until 6:00 a.m. when the rent-a-car 
place opened, got our luggage, took the jitney over
 to the center, rented a car at considerable 
expense since it was a one-way rental, and then mad
e our way to the airport here in Columbus. 
The whole time, we spoke these ritual words to each
 other: 
 
As we made a reservation, we said:
 The next step toward Home
.  As we picked up our luggage, 
we said
: The next step toward Home
.  
The next step toward Home.
 Waiting for the rent-a-car 
place to open. 
The next step toward Home
. Waiting for the jitney bus to arrive. 
The next step 
toward Home
. Renting the car, finding the right credit card, f
inding the car in the cold lot, 
finding highway 71. All the way to Columbus, Coleen
 and I kept saying this sentence each other, 
"The next step toward Home."
 We said it when we saw the Delaware sign on the fr
eeway. 
When we passed Morse Rd. When we saw the airport. W
hen we paid for the car. When we took 
the bus to the lot where I had left my car. When I 
took her to her daughter's house near OSU. 
Step after step after step. Each time we said that 
word 
Home
, it gave us hope and strength and 
focus. Something we wanted more than anything else.
..Home. Home. Home.... 
 
Finally, by noon Wednesday, I arrived at that Home.
 With a bed just as comfortable as I 
imagined. Nourishment in the refrigerator as delici
ous as I had remembered. Mail in my mailbox 
as hilariously pointless as always. Cheery notes fr
om friends who had stopped by to check on my 
place while I was gone. Home. Home....OM...... 

 
I was so tired when I got home I couldn't sleep...o
r maybe it was the coffee I drank so I could 
drive two and a half hours on no sleep. But I was h
ome. 
 
But I am here to say that my journey home was easie
r because I wasn't alone. We shared the 
cost, we shared the emotions of the event, we share
d the driving and navigation, we shared 
stories of our lives, we shared the rituals of mutu
al comfort....the repeated chant...
one more step 
toward Home. One more step toward Home
. 
 
Both Coleen and I were, I have to say, surprisingly
 patient and good humored about it all. There 
would have been a time in my life when this kind of
 event would have upset me to the point of 
paralysis, like the baby in Naomi Shihab Nye's poem
 who starts to cry "too much! Too much!" 
just because some silly adult put a hat on his head
. I've grown up. I am not as easily knocked flat 
as I used to be. More on this poem at the end of th
is sermon....For there is more to unpack in her 

words... 

 
I am sharing the story of my journey home with you 
this Sunday because it struck me as a fitting 
image for this congregation as we plan and gather o
ur fiscal resources for the coming year. Some 
of you have already spoken with folks about this, s
ome of you have yet to hear about it, some of 
you are just visiting for the first time today. To 
you last folks, especially, I say: Don't worry. Itô
s 
not that kind of talk. I do, however, want to bring
 up some of the observations of Harvey Cox 
about the finances and the Market, which you may fi
nd helpful even if you are just church 
shopping today. 

 
Thirteen years ago I gave a talk titled "A Hidden D
iversity" where I spoke of one of the 
significant differentiations in our community which
 doesn't have much to do with what we 
believe or don't believe; or the shape of our faces
, the colors of our skins, the age of our bodies, 
the physiology of our genders. It had to do with ou
r experiences and attitudes toward the symbol 
we call money, especially in regard to religion and
 spirituality. I talked about my Roman 
Catholic background in the fifties, where there wer
e no such things as pledge campaigns and 
strict budgets, just weekly offering baskets filled
 to overflowing by the 5000 families that came 
to weekly worship. I spoke of my time faithfully at
tending a radical Jewish synagogue in San 
Francisco, where the rabbi and I had a conversation
 in which she told me exactly what I might 
offer to the common good. I told the story of visit
ing Ephesian's Church of God in Christ, an 
African American Pentecostal church in Oakland famo
us for its gospel music. They kept on 
having offerings during the 
four hour
 church service until they got what they needed, an
d this, 
only after the bishop gave a full half-hour offerto
ry invitation with the emotional drama that 
reminded me of grand opera. I also spoke of people 
who had no religious upbringing, and had no 
idea that churches even had budgets or strategic pl
ans or capital campaigns or bank accounts.  
 
Now obviously, since that sermon, a lot has changed
 in our nation. 
And
, in my personal 
experience. The generations have risen and fallen, 
as usual in the USA, and we are now talking 
about generations X,Y and Z instead of the Baby Boo
m generation. 9/11 happened, of course. 
And the economic downturn. Joblessness and bailouts
. Contested elections and hard-to-believe 
debates about finances on the floors of Congress wh
ich would have made many earlier 
generations clutch at their hearts. And, personally
,  I've visited other religious groups so I could 
learn about even more varieties of religious approa
ches to fiscal integrity. The local mosque I 
visited doesn't even have a membership list, the id
ea 
completely foreign
 to the imam there. He 
has 
no idea
 who goes in and out of the prayer rooms. When I as
ked him how the 
undeniably
 beautiful new building in which we were standing ha
d been built...clearly the triumph of an 
expensive
 architect... he answered, "Oh, we just put out the
 word that something needed to be 
done..." Ah. Just like that. 

 
And, since that last sermon on fiscal diversity so 
long ago, a new religious approach to money, 
one that I find both distasteful and upsetting, has
 taken prominence in many of the larger, and 
more pop American congregations. Itôs a little humb
ug called "Prosperity Theology."  Prosperity 
theology basically says, "Jesus wants you all to be
 rich with 20,000 square foot mansions and 
Jaguars. If you are poor and struggling, itôs becau
se you are not giving enough to the church. If 
you give sacrificially, Jesus will send you checks 
in the mail and heal your illnesses. If you are 
stingy, you will stay poor and sick."  

 
Look, I am not making this up. It sickens me that s
o many have bought into this nonsense. No 
wonder strong atheism and anti-religious fervor is 
growing in leaps and bounds....it needs to! 
Remember what Harvey Cox said in the reading? 
One sometimes wonders, in this era of Market 
religion, where the skeptics and freethinkers have 
gone. What has happened to the Voltaires who 
once exposed bogus miracles, and the H. L. Menckens
 who blew shrill whistles on pious 
humbuggery? 

 
Yes. Cox speaks of the Market as God. The tradition
al God who is all-powerful, knows every-
thing, and is omnipresent. Cox makes a very good ca
se that every single proclamation made 
about the God in traditional theologies can now be 
made about the Market.  He was stunned 
when he first realized this, and as he studied more
, he knew he was really on to something... 
Since he published his article in the Atlantic Mont
hly, many have come to agree. I am blown 
away by his theory myself. 

 
Our religious movement has a principled theology of
 money too, and it is in place as we figure 
out our budget and plans for next year, and how to 
finance our visions for a safer and more just 
world. Did you know we have a theology? It's very c
lear too. Oh, itôs not based on prosperity 
theology, giving to "God" (in reality, a manipulati
ve preacher) to get something financial back. 
Itôs not based on shame, either. 
In any way
. Itôs not based on the stark, austere and mere 
practicality of "this is what we need, so pay up." 
Our theology IS clearly stated, however, in our 
very first principle. The one where we unashamedly 
claim and proclaim 
"the inherent worth
 .... 
of every person." 
 Inherent 
worth. Not 
bought
 worth. Not worth 
granted
 by the omnipotent 
Market God. Not 
debated
 worth (i.e. you get to marry; and you over there, 
you don't). Not 
symbolic
 worth. Not 
earned
 worth. INHERENT WORTH.  You come with it. It canno
t be 
reneged, although of course, people do try and conv
ince you otherwise. But there is no reason to 
yield your worth to anyone. The worth is yours. And
 it is inherent in everyone else too. The 
homeless on street corners, the farm workers pickin
g tomatoes, the jobless, the immigrants newly 
arrived, the prisoner, the difficult, those who bel
ieve, doubt, struggle, reject, pray, bow, love the 
Sermon on the Mount, prefer Buddha's flower or H.L.
 Menken's fury. 
 
This place is a Home for me because the inherent wo
rth is the bottom line here. Not for just this 
congregation, of course, but the whole religious mo
vement of which it is a part. Itôs a home I 
have been journeying toward all my life, even when 
I doubted I was worth anything. 
Especially 
then
, perhaps.  I know I am not there yet. I am always 
arriving. I never find finality, but I do 
walk in its direction. This is a place, to quote th
e story this morning, where I don't have to let the
 
glaring noises of the Market God drown out the song
 of the tiniest cricket. This is a place where I 
don't have to become 
completely 
insensitive to the world, to get back to Nye's poem
. I can have 
balance here. I can still have a child in me, a sen
sitive child, who cries, "Too much! Too much!"  
Here I can draw limits, engage in comfort, not comp
etition; all the while welcoming the joys of 
cooperation, and journeying together. 

 
I don't know about you, but I don't always understa
nd financial jargon, and sometimes I feel 
embarrassed by that. That's where shame seeps in fo
r me, and I have to push it aside consciously 
in order to go forward on the journey. Maybe someda
y we can offer classes in financial 
understanding here so that others who are confused 
and silenced by the Market God can at least 

understand what's necessary, to resist being comple
tely taken in by the unconsciousness of it all. 
 
I learned at a meeting in California that younger g
enerations have other patterns than my own... 
many don't carry cash at all, so someday, we may ha
ve to reinterpret the simple ritual of the 
offering, let alone the way we raise money to suppo
rt our vision of inherent worth. Me, I'll be 
pledging five percent of my income as usual to this
, my spiritual home, until we begin to address 
those generational changes and maybe do something d
ifferently. I don't know. We'll see. Others 
will deal with differing expectations of themselves
 in regard to our lives together. Step by step, 
we'll figure everything out in the coming years. To
gether. I've talked to my colleagues and 
learned that every other UU congregation is facing 
these same issues, so again, we are not alone. 
Never are. 

 
But once again, we are journeying toward a Home for
 our spirit with everything we do here, by 
everything we offer here. Home. And I assure you, w
hen I was driving home from Cleveland, 
and passed sign after sign on the highway leading m
e closer and closer, that word 
Home
 itself 
was enough to keep me going. It kept the noise of t
he world out of my heart, and gave me focus 
and direction. Step after step. Each step enough. A
nd more than enough. Let's go. 
 
Offering 

To invest in our future, to secure the strength of 
the presence of this congregation in the lives of 
its members and in the life of the community it emb
races, to offer practical expression of our 
stated mission of generosity of spirit, we offer th
is time of offering.   
 
Returning: Gradual (Step Prayer) 

Step One: Say  I do not stay still or hide. I journ
ey. 
Step Two: Say I do not journey through life alone. 

Step Three: Say I do not journey through life towar
d my goal of home without first imagining 
why that home is a beautiful destination. 

Step Four. I do not journey through life toward the
 destination of a beautiful home by magic, or 
by wishing, or by thinking that I am on a conveyer 
belt someone else is in charge of starting and 
stopping; no, I journey with others, step by step, 
increment by increment, day by day, moment by 
moment, decision by decision, love by love. Call it
 a march, call it a pilgrimage, call it a path, 
call it whatever you want, but step by step, we wil
l get there. 
 
Singing  #157 

 
Blessing 

 
