Sunday, March 13, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ,  who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and  his kingdom, Preach the word; be instant in season, out of  season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and  doctrine. 2 Tim. 4:1,2. (WHY THE URGENCY?) For the time  will come WHEN THEY WILL NOT ENDURE SOUND  DOCTRINE;" 2 Tim. 4:3.  I.e., the time is hastening on in which sound doctrine simply will not be tolerated, or, endured (Strong #430: endure here means PUT UP WITH; to wit: the masses of mankind will simply NOT PUT UP WITH the true doctrines of the Christian faith). Beloved. Is this not our experience all over the world? Is not our faithful preaching the reason we are branded as THE MOST HATED FAMILY IN AMERICA AND THE WORLD?  Some two-legged jackass named Richard wrote asking for a copy of the Mission Statement of Westboro Baptist Church. He said: "I am interested in knowing what your mission statement is for your church. I looked around on your website for a while, but I was unable to find it. What is your mission statement?" Our job, as related in 2 Tim. 4:1, is to "PREACH THE WORD" ­ which is all Little Lazy Richard is entitled to know ­ but which is severely elliptical, which means it would take many, many words more or less to flesh out a full meaning of such a short declaration as this; to wit: "PREACH THE WORD." Insincere Idiot Richard says he looked around on our website for a while, but was unable to find it. Well now, Check-Your-Brains-At-The-Door Richard; maybe you ought to try a little harder; like the Jews in Berea, of whom the Holy Ghost relates; to wit: "And the brethren immediately sent away Paul and Silas by night unto Berea; who coming thither went into the synagogue of the Jews. These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and SEARCHED THE SCRIPTURES DAILY, whether those things were so." (Acts 17:10,11) It is doubtful that Looney Little Richard invested five minutes "looking around our website for a while" looking for our so-called missions statement. The title to WBC's blog responding to Little Richard's latest stupidity is: To wit: "Mission Statement?!? We Don't Need No Stinkin Mission Statement!"  "Richard - The church of the Lord Jesus Christ does NOT do mission statements. What we do is search the scriptures daily to learn what God requires of us and then we do it. Here is an excerpt from the front page of www.godhatesfags.com Established in 1955 by Pastor Fred Phelps, the Westboro Baptist Church (WBC) of Topeka, Kansas still exists today as an Old School (or, Primitive) Baptist Church. We adhere to the teachings of the Bible, preach against all forms of sin (e.g., fornication, adultery [including divorce and remarriage], sodomy), and insist that the sovereignty of God and the doctrines of grace be taught and expounded publicly to all men. These doctrines of grace were well summed up by John Calvin in his 5 points of Calvinism: Total Depravity, Unconditional Election, Limited Atonement, Irresistible Grace, and Perseverance of the Saints. Although these doctrines are almost universally hated today, they were once loved and believed. The rest of this passage can be found at the following link: http://www.godhatesfags.com/wbcinfo/aboutwbc. I urge you to get serious, get a Bible, read it again and again, as well as, all of our sites for so many more words, sermons, videos and songs to see if these things be so. Your life depends on it! Thanks for asking!"  Sunday, March 13, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  PREACH THE WORD. It's elliptical ­ requiring the above words, and all the thousands of words on our website referred to above entitled www.godhatesfags.com, and all the words of the great confessions of faith by gatherings of mighty ministers of grace through the centuries; e.g., The London Confession, Philadelphia Confession, Savoy Confession, WBC's Declaration of Faith, etc., and, the 66 books of the 1611 AD translation of the King James Bible.  Bob Schuller, former pastor of the multimillion dollar ­ now bankrupt ­ Crystal Cathedral of Orange County, Calif., repeatedly declared as a foundation stone of his ministry as well as his personal philosophy of life ­ that his sermons and his ministry would never contain any unkind words of criticism about any person that may tend to demean that person in his own eyes or the eyes of others. Well, now, Beloved, that sounds like a false prophet, a deceitful worker, and a minister of Satan; to wit:  "For such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ. And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light. Therefore it is no great thing if his ministers also be transformed as the ministers of righteousness; whose end shall be according to their works." (2 Cor. 11:13-15)  Bob Schuller is an old man now (85). His multimillion dollar Crystal Cathedral is bankrupt. His son, whom he has groomed for many years to succeed him as pastor is a terrible disappointment. He did not hold fast the faithful Word as he was taught. While pastor for some fifty years, he was an unruly and vain talker and deceiver whose mouth must be stopped. He did subvert whole houses, teaching things which he ought not have, for filthy lucre's sake. Titus 1:9-11.  Bob Schuller was an unfaithful servant with itching ears, who turned away his ears from hearing the Truth of God, and was thereupon turned by God unto Satan's fables. (Fables, like, God loves everyone, like, It's OK to be gay, and like, God has called him from an Iowa farm to preach nothing but phony, feel-good platitudes ­ palmed off as Gospel ­ which Schuller well knows was and is nothing but cheap psycho-babble, falsely, in the name of God). See, 2 Tim. 4:1-4.  Beloved. This is the stock-in-trade of every false prophet, to cry "Peace, Peace, when there is no peace." Jer. 6:14 & 8:11. Think about it. Could anything be more dangerous? ­ for time and eternity? This is not a matter of mere honest difference of religious opinion. To wit: "Mine heart within me is broken because of the prophets; all my bones shake; I am like a drunken man, and like a man whom wine hath overcome, because of the Lord, and because of the words of his holiness." Jer. 23:9. In other words, Jeremiah is staggering like a drunk man because of the Lord and His warnings of destruction, which in turn were occasioned by the sinfulness of the people, which is due to the preachers refusing to warn the people of God's pending wrath; to wit: "For the land is full of adulterers; for because of swearing the land mourneth; the pleasant places of the wilderness are dried up, and their course is evil, and their force is not right. For both prophet and priest are profane; yea, in my house" ­ (the House of God itself!) ­ "have I found their wickedness, saith the Lord...And I have seen folly in the prophets of Samaria; they prophesied in Baal, and caused my people Israel to err. I have seen also in the prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing; they commit adultery, and walk in lies; they strengthen also the hands of evildoers, that none doth return from his wickedness; they are all of them unto me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah. Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts concerning the prophets; Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the water of gall; for from the prophets of Jerusalem (America) is profaneness gone forth into all the land. Thus saith the Lord of hosts, HEARKEN NOT UNTO THE WORDS OF THE PROPHETS that prophesy unto you; they make you vain; they speak a vision of their own hearts,  Sunday, March 13, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  and not out of the mouth of the Lord. They say still unto them that despise me, The  Lord hath said, Ye shall have peace, and they say unto every one that walketh after  the imagination of his own heart, NO EVIL SHALL COME UPON YOU... Behold, a  whirlwind of the Lord is gone forth in fury, even a grievous whirlwind; it shall fall  grievously upon the head of the wicked. The anger of the Lord shall not return, until  he have executed, and till he have performed the thoughts of his heart; in the latter  days ye shall consider it perfectly. I HAVE NOT SENT THESE PROPHETS, YET THEY  RAN; I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied. But if they had stood in my  counsel, and had caused my people to hear my words, then they should have turned  them from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings." (Jer. 23:10-22)  Well now, Beloved. The duty of the Gospel preacher is illustrated in this passage ­ and in many other like passages in Scripture ­ and you may see what a far cry a genuine Gospel preacher is from the miserable likes of Bob Schuller and his Crystal Cathedral mega-church associate pastors. And, Beloved, I use Schuller merely as an illustration. It is my informed and considered opinion that the vast overwhelming majority of this world's religious leaders are just like Bob Schuller ­ or worse. And it is the primary fault of the gullible sucker in the pew.  Remember our primary text above; to wit: "Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; REPROVE, REBUKE, EXHORT WITH ALL LONGSUFFERING AND DOCTRINE." ­ (I briefly digress to show how God expects preachers to preach ­ sons of thunder, to reprove, rebuke, exhort. Schuller says his fifty-year ministry was built upon the proposition that every individual is a person of dignity and worth, and that he would never speak an unkind word so as to demean or insult any person, etc., blah, blah; but see: Mk. 3:17 - "And James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James; and he [the Lord Jesus] surnamed them Boanerges, which is, The sons of thunder;" To wit: "Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins." Isa. 58:1. To wit: "Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations." Ezek. 16:1,2.) ­ "For the time will come when they will not endure (i.e., will not put up with) sound doctrine" ­ Beloved, that time is here, in my humble opinion ­ "but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears" i.e., twitching ears to pick up the least sounds of what the lusts of the people desire for them to preach about ­ that will be the most likely and calculated to satisfy their lusts; and my, how those people do love to satisfy their lusts and heap up preachers like Schuller whose syrupy fables entertain in fancy churches on Sunday.  Pure entertainment. And they call that stuff Gospel preaching. And I tell you, Beloved, that the people of Orange County, Calif. ­ (where old Schuller preached his Satanic syrup for many years and built his multimillion dollar Crystal Cathedral) ­ must have a whole lots of lusts needing to be satisfied and placated; to wit: "For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but AFTER THEIR OWN LUSTS SHALL THEY HEAP TO THEMSELVES TEACHERS, HAVING ITCHING EARS; AND THEY SHALL TURN AWAY THEIR EARS FROM THE TRUTH, AND SHALL BE TURNED UNTO FABLES." (2 Tim. 4:3,4)  Please take notice, that the dimwits of Orange County, Calif., took the initiative to turn their ears away from the truth to follow young preacher Schuller lo ! those many years ago when he landed in Orange Co. to begin building a church that later became the world-famous Crystal Cathedral, now in bankruptcy ­ I say, please take notice from the text, that the pew-warming public took the initiative to turn their ears away from the truth. But God ­ because of the great sin of the itching ears ­ took the initiative by the imposition upon those wicked people of Orange County a kind of judicial blindness, whereby HE TURNED THEM UNTO FABLES; To wit:  Sunday, March 13, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  "AND THEY SHALL TURN AWAY THEIR EARS FROM THE TRUTH, AND SHALL BE TURNED UNTO FABLES." (2 Tim. 4:4)  Beloved, there is nothing more dangerous than a false prophet; hence our dear Lord Jesus warned, "Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves." Mat. 7:15. Their danger lies in their ability as inoffensive-appearing men of the cloth ­ (as they love to refer to themselves) ­ to deceive and seduce the simple; to wit: "Because, even because they have seduced my people, saying, Peace; and there was no peace; and one built up a wall, and, lo, others daubed it with untempered morter (i.e., wet sand, with no cement to bind the stones together) say unto them which daub it with untempered morter, that it shall fall; there shall be an overflowing shower; and ye, O great hailstones, shall fall; and a stormy wind shall rend it. Lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be said unto you, Where is the daubing wherewith ye have daubed it? Therefore thus saith the Lord God; I will even rend it with a stormy wind in my fury; and there shall be an overflowing shower in mine anger, and great hailstones in my fury to consume it. So will I break down the wall that ye have daubed with untempered morter, and bring it down to the ground, so that the foundation thereof shall be discovered, and it shall fall, and ye shall be consumed in the midst thereof; and ye shall know that I am the Lord. Thus will I accomplish my wrath upon the wall, and upon them that have daubed it with untempered morter, and will say unto you, The wall is no more, neither they that daubed it; To wit: the prophets of Israel which prophesy concerning Jerusalem, and which see visions of peace for her, and THERE IS NO PEACE SAITH THE LORD GOD." (Ezek. 13:10-16)  I have often read and studied the thirteenth chapter of Ezekiel about a deceitful, seriously defective wall erected as for defense of a city, by unfaithful builders who use wet sand rather than cement to bind the stones together ­ to the doom of those who relied upon it; all of which evoked the outpoured wrath of God upon the defective wall AND upon the careless and faithless builders who used untempered morter to daub it therewith; to wit: "THUS WILL I ACCOMPLISH MY WRATH UPON THE WALL, AND UPON THEM THAT HAVE DAUBED IT WITH UNTEMPERED MORTER, AND WILL SAY UNTO YOU, THE WALL IS NO MORE, NEITHER THEY THAT DAUBED IT." (Ezek. 13:15) What a lengthy and elaborate way to make a point ­ do you think? Maybe. But it is crystal clear that the intended target of this symbolic warning was, and is today, the false prophets; and the elegant and elaborate nature of the warning bespeaks the great seriousness and danger of the subject. Note the introduction of the chapter; to wit: "And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, son of man, PROPHESY AGAINST THE PROPHETS OF ISRAEL AND SAY UNTO THEM THAT PROPHESY OUT OF THEIR OWN HEARTS, HEAR YE THE WORD OF THE LORD: Thus saith the Lord God; woe unto the foolish prophets, that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing! They have seen vanity and lying divination, saying, The Lord saith; and the Lord hath not sent them; and they have made others to hope that they would confirm the word." (Ezek. 13:6) "For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with divers lusts." (2 Tim. 3:6)  I love you.  Amen.  
