2008-5-11 Goddess 

Mark Belletini 

 
Opening Words 

 
We are here 

after a week of silver rain  

and green, green grass, 

to worship, to approach the sublime 

with simplicity, and thanksgiving. 

The womb of the universe opens now, 

and the new day is born in peace. Thus, 

 
Mindful that a growing vision of a just world calls
 us together, that a community of commitment, 
courage and care sustains us, and that a life trans
formed by depth of spirit may illumine our way, 
we have kindled this light as the sign of our circl
e of life and love. 
 
Sequence 

 
Peace. One syllable. Easy to say in English. 

Easy to pronounce.  Old word. Rooted. Latin. 

From ?pacisci? 
to covenant
. But so hard to describe. But let me try at least.
 No harm in trying.  Maybe peace 
doesn™t look like a world without problems, with sk
ipping lambs and rainbows.  Maybe it doesn™t look l
ike a 
planet without conflict, a humanity without anger o
r hurt.  Maybe it looks a lot like this world, with
 broken 
hearts and loving hearts all braided together. Mayb
e it looks like a community where people work hard 
to face 
their conflicts. Maybe it means people who grapple 
with truth, but who have the patience not to want a
nswers 
right now. Maybe it looks like people being fair in
 their conflicts, courteous, humble, willing as it 
is said, to not 
be right in the end.  Maybe it means grieving inste
ad of drugging ourselves against it. Maybe it means
 
confessing instead of denial. Maybe it means honest
y instead of security.  Maybe it means people, who 
believe 
rather different things, sitting side by side in si
lence, people who covenant to be kind to each other
 no matter 
what–. 

 
silence 

 
Maybe peace in the heart precedes peace in the worl
d. Maybe peace is living without answers, but with 
plenty of 
honest memory, met with open hearts. Playing the ca
rds we are dealt, not wishing for other hands. Mayb
e peace 
is naming that we are not alone, even when we are s
ilent, that our loves and losses crowd our hearts, 
that our 
hopes and disappointments are part of us. Let us re
member now the names and faces attached to  these l
oves, 
loses, hopes and disappointments, so that we might 
go forward with fewer burdens toward the peace. 
 
naming 

 
Peace. Not pure silence by any means, but music 

too, high note and low, rhythm and syncopation, 

lyric and emotion, beauty and a glory equal to 

the spirit that breathes life into what is alive. 

 
The First Reading
 this morning is from Lesley Hazelton™s magnificent 
biography called Mary, A Flesh 
and Blood Biography of the Virgin Mother
, namely Maryam the mother of the teacher Yeshu, wh
om we 
know as Jesus. This is one of the most realistic po
rtrayals of an ancient woman I have ever read, and,
 despite the fact that the textual evidence is slim,
 Hazelton™s eye is sharp, her attentiveness remarka
ble.
  
She is thirteen.  Short and wiry, with dark olive s
kin.  The muscles are hard knots in her arms, solid
 lines 
in her calves. Her hair is almost black, and has be
en folded into a single braid down her back for as 
long 
as she can remember.  The weight of it raises her c
hin and makes her walk tall, as she has learned to 
do 
when carrying jars of water or bundles of kindling 
on her head.  You don™t bend under the burden.  You
 
root into the ground and grow out of it, reaching u
p and becoming taller.  The greater the weight, the
 
taller you become:  the peasant woman™s secret of m
aking the burden light. 
 
 Her thin linen shift is torn from snagging on rock
s and thorns.   Even the patches are torn, and 
the original black has long since faded into gray. 
 When there™s a village feast Œ a wedding or a 
circumcision Œ she begs a few threads of brightly c
olored wool from the old women, the ones too infirm
 
to do anything but sit and weave, passing stories a
nd shuttles back and forth in the sun-baked courtya
rds.  
Then she and her girl cousins huddle together, gigg
ling as they work the threads into each other™s bra
ids.  
They have two colors:  red from madder juice, yello
w from kaolin clay.  They™ve never seen blue wool. 
 
Only the rich can afford indigo, and in this villag
e, as in all the Galilee villages, everyone is poor
. 
 
 The shift hides the gentle bulge in her belly.  Sh
e is unmarried, and pregnant.  Sometimes, when 
she™s sure nobody else is around, she™ll fold her h
ands just below the curve, feeling how much it has 
grown.  Her grandmother once told her you could kno
w a child™s sex before it is born by where you put 
your hands:  above the belly means a girl, below th
e belly, a boy.  Or is it the other way around?  Sh
e 
can™t remember, and it doesn™t really matter.  Like
 every pregnant woman, she hopes for ten fingers, t
en 
toes, a hungry mouth, and a lusty yell Œ a healthy 
baby, despite the odds. 
 
The Second Reading
 is a brief poem by the great Portuguese poet, Ferna
ndo Pessoa,
 1933 
 
To be great, be whole; exclude 

 Nothing, exaggerate nothing that is you. 

Be whole in everything.  Put all you are 

 Into the smallest thing you do. 

The whole moon gleams in every pool, 

 It rides so high. 

 
 Sermon
   
 
Just under two decades ago, I was preaching an ordi
nation sermon in Nashville, Tennessee. The folks 
who offered me home hospitality asked me if I had e
ver seen the Parthenon. I said, ?No, sorry, I™ve no
t 
yet been to Greece.?  They said, ?No, we mean the P
arthenon here in Nashville.? I said, ?You mean, 
there is a model of it in your museum??  ?No,? they
 said. ?We have a 
life-size
 replica of it built in one of 
our parks. After all, with Vanderbilt and so many o
ther fine schools in the city, Nashville is the Ath
ens 
of the South. So naturally, the city decided to bui
ld a Parthenon to commemorate that distinction.?  
?Hey, that™s cool!? I said, ?Let™s go see it.? Well
, as we were driving up to this classic building, I
 all of a 
sudden remembered that buildings have insides as we
ll as outsides.  So I said to my hosts, ?You™re not
 

going to tell me that this temple also has an image
 of the Goddess Athena on the inside, are you? I me
an, 
wouldn™t local conservative churches have put up a 
fuss about the city of Nashville building a temple 
housing a pagan deity in all her glory?? ?Yes, some
 churches did put up a fuss,? they said. ?But the c
ity 
council prevailed in the end.? 

 
So we came to the steps of the Parthenon in Nashvil
le. I climbed the steps, entered the door, and 
WHAM! there She was. Almost 45 feet high. With helm
et and shield. A huge serpent hissing by her 
side. Gigantic. Improbable. Overwhelming. The Virgi
n. Athena. 
Athene Parthenos.
 The Great Mother of 
Wisdom. I was immediately able to viscerally unders
tand why ancient people dropped to their knees in 
awe before such a mighty image. I walked up to the 
altar on which She stood. My head barely came up 
to the top of it. I looked up. The Goddess towered 
over me, gazing out at the world. And in a flash I 
understood something of the power represented by th
e word Goddess, even though the only folks who 
use this word in our present culture are a relative
ly few neo-pagans. 
 
But my experience that day of the Goddess and Mothe
r in Nashville still makes me tingle on the inside.
 
She left me breathless. 

 
Mother. Goddess.  Great English words, those.  I™d 
like to unpack them a bit. But before I do so, I wa
nt 
to make very clear a few things I passionately and 
personally feel, or this sermon may seem more 
complicated than it really is. 

 
1. The idea of mother or mothering is itself an abs
traction. In reality, there are only flesh-and-bloo
d 
individual human beings who are mothers of some sor
t: biological, adoptive, etc. Each of them has a 
unique approach to motherhood. Phrases like ?All mo
thers feel this way? simply make no sense to me. 
There cannot 
be
 any universal understanding of motherhood, as far 
as I am concerned. Period. 
 
2.When talking about Goddess, or God, when talking 
about traditional symbolic words for Ultimacy, for 
that which underlies the wholeness of things, we ar
e also talking about an abstraction, that is, nothi
ng 
that can be named once and for all. Even calling it
 the Universe itself is just a metaphor. Some of ou
r 
Hebrew ancestors wisely called anyone who thought t
hey knew what Ultimacy is, or says, 
idolaters
–that is, people who mistake the finger pointing to
 the moon 
for 
the moon. Our Chinese 
ancestors said something quite similar, in the coll
ection of poems called the Dao Dejing: 
A way can be a 
guide, but not a fixed path. Names can be given, bu
t not permanent labels. Those who know do not say. 
Those who say they know, do not know. 
 So please don™t ask me afterward if I really think 
there IS a Goddess, or if I really think there is a
 God in 
heaven– these questions make little sense to me per
sonally, since they confuse metaphor with reality, 
guides for a fixed path.  For me, the world is what
 it is. The ground of all being can™t be something 
somewhere. But you and I, as far as I can tell, 
are
 here right now.  And that™s enough for me. 
 
Historically, many Unitarian Universalists will tel
l you that this day was originally founded as the 
Mother™s Day for Peace, by the Unitarian suffragist
, pacifist, social activist and poet, Julia Ward Ho
we. 
Most people don™t know about her pacifism, but inst
ead know her by her most famous lyric, written in 
1862: ?The Battle Hymn of the Republic.? Atlantic M
onthly paid her just 5 bucks to write it, but it ma
de 
her famous. 

 
Using her fame to good advantage, Howe proclaimed t
his day to invite the mothers of America to stand 
up for peace. Well, not this day actually, but the 
Sunday nearest June 2
nd
. And, in fairness, she did not 
really invent Mother™s Day out of whole cloth. She 
reinterpreted it, and made it later in the year. It
 
existed before her for centuries, and it was called
 Mothering Day. It was always held on the Fourth 
Sunday in Lent, that is, in late Winter or early Sp
ring, and it was originally a way of celebrating Ma
ry, 
the mother of Jesus. The English and Irish eventual
ly set this day aside so that servants and working 
class children who had to work far from home could 
visit their moms, at least one day a year.  
 
And the idea of a holiday in Spring to honor St. Ma
ry the Virgin was also not a new invention. In earl
ier 
times, the Goddess Cybele was celebrated near this 
day or earlier, and before her, the Goddess Rhea th
e 
Titan, who was called ?the mother of the gods,? cer
tainly a source of Mary being called the Mother of 
God by the later Church. 

 
The present holiday, however, rose out of another r
einterpretation of events. Julia Ward Howe™s day wa
s 
celebrated by women in only 18 cities across the co
untry, and then only for a decade. Finally Julia, w
ho 
underwrote these celebrations financially, just cou
ldn™t do it anymore, and the Mother™s Day for Peace
 
faded from every city save Boston, and a decade lat
er, from Boston too. 
 
Yet a certain Appalachian woman from West Virginia,
 Anna Jarvis, whose mother had fought for better 
sanitation during the Civil War, and for reconcilia
tion between the North and South, and who knew 
about Howe™s failed Mother™s Day for Peace, petitio
ned the president of the United States over and ove
r 
to get him to recognize the work of her mother, esp
ecially her conciliatory work. Finally, in 1914, 
President Wilson agreed, and the Mother™s Day we kn
ow today was formally created as a national 
holiday. 

 
But still, some of Julia Ward Howe™s original spiri
t has survived to this present day.  At 1 PM today,
 for 
example, many women and girls, as well as supportiv
e boys and men, will stand silently for a while, 
sometimes ringing bells into the silence. This will
 be done in many places, including this church. 
 
Apparently folks from 75 different countries are al
l doing this at around the same hour, and it™s bein
g 
done as a call for peace on earth. What does peace 
on earth look like? In the beautiful words of the 
organizers: 

 
We will be standing for the world's children and gr
andchildren, and for the seven generations
  beyond 
them. We dream of a world where all of our children
 have safe drinking water, clean air to breathe, an
d 
enough food to eat. A world where they have access 
to a basic education to develop their minds and 
healthcare to nurture their growing bodies. A world
 where they have a warm, safe and loving place to 
call home. A world where they don't live in fear of
 violence–in their home, in their neighborhood, in 
their school or in their world. This is the world o
f which we dream, the cause for which we stand. 
 
And so Julia Howe™s vision is reborn anew–in a diff
erent time and place. 
 
Just like the Goddesses Rhea, Cybele and Athena wer
e born anew in the celebration of the Mother of 
Jesus, Mary, or in her own language, Maryam. 

 
She too was to become the Mother of Wisdom, the Mot
her of God. She too was to be celebrated in the 
spring with ribbons and rites and flowers. 

She too, like Athena the Virgin, was lifted up in m
arble and wooden images, and called 
ho Parthenos
, 
the Virgin. Even though she, like Athena, actually 
had a child. 
 
But the image of the Virgin eventually lost a lot o
f the greatness ascribed to some of the Goddesses o
f 
old. Cybele was celebrated sexually, Mary was not. 
Athena was celebrated as a warrior and protector of
 
cities, Mary was not. Her whole role was to be a mo
ther, a great mother of a great man to be sure. But
 of 
the other attributes of ancient Goddesses whose tit
les she bore–very few. 
 
Of course, to be fair, that was true of many of the
 Goddesses too. It™s not fair to romanticize the an
cient 
world as many do, and make it seem as if the Goddes
s religions were terrific and whole and perfect, an
d 
that everything that followed them were sexist dist
ortions. In fact, the earliest Goddess figures we™v
e 
found 
only
 celebrate motherhood. Not wisdom. Not strength. No
t power. Not standing up for peace. But 
motherhood alone. Not even adoptive motherhood, but
 biological motherhood only. 
 
The reading you heard from Lesley Hazelton™s incred
ible biography describes a real peasant woman 
from a poor village in the ancient Galilee. She is 
tough, wiry, strong. And pregnant.  But you know th
e 
story. She loses her grown up son one day to state 
terrorism. Yet Hazelton insists that Maryam™s life 
is 
not over when she loses her son. Her greatness as a
 mother is found in her fullness, not just one sing
le 
aspect of her life, however important. 

 
Hazelton portrays the older Maryam as a woman who e
stablishes a community of mothers who have lost 
sons. She sees her like those mothers in Argentina 
and Chile, during the days of their troubles, march
ing 
around the squares solemnly, and demanding justice,
 justice, justice. Mother Mary, in other words, 
ended up saying more than 
Let it be
. She is saying as well 
Let it NOT be.
 No injustice! She is something 
of a warrior for justice, as well as a wisdom figur
e. Almost like Athena the Virgin in the Parthenon. 
 
And please don™t get caught up in trying to wed bio
logical concepts to virginity. Such things are not 
the 
point of Athena being called a Virgin any more than
 the peasant mother of Galilee being called a Virgi
n. 
That was simply a way of saying that their motherho
od consisted in more than their relationship with a
 
man. Their greatness was in their fullness, their w
holeness as human persons, their interdependence, n
ot 
their socialized dependence. 

 
This is what our poet Fernando Pessoa says so simpl
y: To be great, be whole; exclude nothing, 
exaggerate nothing that is you. Be whole in everyth
ing.  Put all you are into the smallest thing you d
o. 
 
This is why, even though biology clearly creates ce
rtain differences (of course! I am not denying that
!), 
mothering is part of the wholeness of 
every
 human being who moves toward greatness. So is fath
ering. 
Men can mother their children as well as father the
m, and many do these days. Mothers in their 
wholeness can father their children too, since ther
e are no final definitions for either of these abst
ract 
words, any more than there are final definitions fo
r Ultimacy. And people with no children of their ow
n, 
biological or adopted, can also parent, for it does
 indeed take a whole community to raise our childre
n 
unto wholeness, unto great-ness, unto the best huma
n beings they can be. 
 
Yes, I was indeed awestruck by walking into the Par
thenon and gazing up at the overwhelming image of 
the Virgin Mother Athena. Some people, I know, will
 not share my admiration for images. Some will 
clearly prefer their religion without 40 ft Goddess
es, or Virgin Mothers. They™d rather a room without
 
images, without divinity, or even talk of Ultimacy,
 just a great big beautiful room like this, full of
 human 
beings. Fine. I have no problem with that. There is
 a spirituality of relinquishment as well as a 
spirituality of imagery. But they both move toward 
the same goal, it seems to me. The place where, 
when we human beings come into each other™s presenc
e, we see each other not just as what we are in all
 
of our brokenness. But that we learn to see each ot
her for our struggle to be whole and unbroken in ou
r 
love, like the Innuit mother in the story this morn
ing; or to be whole and unbroken in our demand for 
peace, like Mother Julia Howe; or to be whole and u
nbroken in our demand for justice, like Mother 
Maryam of Galilee, or to be whole and unbroken in s
upport of wisdom, like the Goddess radiating 
before me in the Parthenon. Greatness, after all, i
s not a call for the few, but rather, for the many.
  
 
Offertory 

Knowing for sure that the responsibility for this p
lace resides with no one else but us, let us gladly
 pay 
our pledges, offer our gifts, and bless the grace a
nd work of our principled and rooted community of 
love and peace. 

 
Prayer of the Generations 

Yesterday, today, and tomorrow, let us be midwives 
of peace™s true birth. Tomorrow, yesterday and 
today, let all of our labors be for healing our ear
th. Today, tomorrow and yesterday. Let us never for
get 
we do not earn our worth. It™s ours just by being b
orn. 
 
 
