Sunday, May 10, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "The days of visitation are come, the days of recompence are come; Israel shall know it; the prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad, for the multitude of thine iniquity, and the GREAT HATRED." Hos. 9:7.  "The watchman of Ephraim was with my God; but the prophet is a snare of a fowler in all his ways, and HATRED IN THE HOUSE OF HIS GOD." Hos. 9:8.  "And Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned to his house in peace to Jerusalem. And Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him, and said to king Jehoshaphat, Shouldest thou help the ungodly, and LOVE THEM THAT HATE THE LORD? therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord. Nevertheless there are good things found in thee, in that thou hast taken away the groves out of the land, and hast prepared thine heart to seek God." 2 Chron. 19:1-3. "Thou givest thy mouth to evil, and they tongue frameth deceit. ... These things hast thou done, and I kept silence; THOU THOUGHTEST THAT I WAS ALTOGETHER SUCH AN ONE AS THYSELF; but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver." Psa. 50:19, 21, 22.  "But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed." ­ (i.e., damned in Hell forever). ­ "As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other gospel unto you than that ye have received, LET HIM BE ACCURSED." ­ (i.e., double-damned in Hell forever). ­ "For do I now persuade men, or God? or do I seek to please men? for if I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ. But I certify you, brethren, that the gospel which was preached of me is not after man." Gal. 1:8-11.  Now, Beloved, this ensemble of five passages of God's Holy Word is my text for today. An ensemble is a unit or group of complementary parts that contribute to a single effect or goal or purpose; and my goal this morning is to demonstrate the complete sodomite (i.e., Satanic) takeover of the British Empire ­ including the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) ­ and how a sovereign God has caused and is continuing to cause the United Kingdom and the BBC News ­ with all their billions of worldwide publishing resources ­ to serve the Gospel publishing purposes of Westboro Baptist Church ­ free of charge!  You remember that last February the idiot dyke fat girl, whose name is Jacqui Smith, and who is in charge of UK law and order (and who is now in trouble over padding her expense account) ­ I say, last February, Smith formally banned Shirley and me and Westboro Baptist Church from the UK, resulting in more worldwide publicity for our Gospel message than almost any single event in the 18 years since we took to the streets with God Hates Fags, etc. That is, more publicity EXCEPT FOR LAST WEEK, when, for some unknown reason, the idiot dyke fat girl, Jacqui Smith, decided to RE-PUBLISH the fact that we are banned ­ and WHY.  In addition to the worldwide facilities and news outlets of the BBC, hundreds of the largest newspapers and TV and radio stations in the world ­ literally in the whole world ­ carried our Gospel message and colorful Gospel signs ­ that God Hates Fags, the World is Doomed, God Hates America, God Hates the World, etc., etc. E.g., the Jerusalem Post; to wit:  Sunday, May 10, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  "The British government previously acknowledged that Phelps was banned. His daughter,  Shirley Phelps-Roper, also has been barred from the UK. The pair have picketed the  funerals of AIDS victims and claimed the deaths of U.S. soldiers are a PUNISHMENT FOR  TOLERANCE OF HOMOSEXUALITY. Phelps-Roper, a spokeswoman for Phelps' ANTI-  GAY WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH, claimed on Tuesday that Smith (idiot dyke fat girl  Jacqui) was helping to spread her group's message. `She (Jacqui Smith) caused the words to  just flow all over the world,' Phelps-Roper said in a telephone interview. `They're  PUBLISHING that story about us in every country in the world in languages I can't even  read.'"  We need to praise the Lord. This is the Lord's work, and He does graciously allow us to be  associated with Him; and we need to deliberate on that matter, and "From the rising of the sun  unto the going down of the same, the Lord's name is to be praised. The Lord is high above all  nations, and his glory above the heavens. Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwelleth on  high, Who humbleth himself to behold the things that are in heaven, and in the earth!" Psa.  113:3-6. I urge you, Beloved. Let us covenant together, and take this matter very seriously; to wit:  (Many times in the Psalms) "Praise ye the Lord." Psa. 104:35.  Now, turning to the substance of all the allegations by the UK against us ­ one is soon to discover, THERE IS NO SUBSTANCE whatsoever, and the whole thing is a smash-mouth, finger-in-theeye, zero-intelligence insult to God Almighty. A bizarre, asinine, frontal attack upon the fundamental attributes of God ­ (primarily, GOD'S HATRED). It is perfectly clear from all that has been written and spoken during radio and TV debates, that the fags that run the UK, are trying to lump murderers, Islamic terrorists, KKKers, and others who preach and practice physical violence to achieve political ends ­ I say the UK fags have lumped all such with WBC, the church of the Lord Jesus Christ. Which, incidentally, and without any further ado, constitutes blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which is the unforgivable sin; to wit:  "Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come." (Mat. 12:31,32)  The indolent British authorities are behaving themselves in a kind of fatal, reckless abandon. They are playing with fire and forked lightning. Better to entertain yourselves with poison snakes, even squirming nests of rattlesnakes when they awaken from hibernation by the thousands in the endless hills of the Oklahoma badlands; than to pick a fight with the church of the Lord Jesus. Surely it was Satan who possessed you ­ who entered you that day last February when you awakened and decided to abuse your powers and exceed your authority, by bullying the servants of the Lord; to wit: "For we know him that hath said, Vengeance belongeth unto me, I will recompense, saith the Lord. And again, The Lord shall avenge his people. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God." (Heb. 10:30,31)  Here is a flash for you, Mrs. Smith, It is the solemn duty of every Bible preacher to expound from the Scriptures the holy doctrine of the HATRED OF GOD. There are dozens, perhaps hundreds, of Bible verses, and Bible commentaries, and books, on the subject of the HATRED OF GOD, THE ANGER OF GOD, THE WRATH OF GOD, THE FEAR OF GOD. It is not optional whether or not a Bible preacher delivers exegetical sermons on the HATRED OF GOD, THE ANGER OF GOD, THE WRATH OF GOD, THE FEAR OF GOD. It is only "BY THE FEAR OF THE LORD MEN DEPART FROM EVIL." Prov. 16:6. Moreover, "THE FEAR OF THE  Sunday, May 10, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  LORD IS TO HATE EVIL." Prov. 8:13. In fact, "THE FEAR OF THE LORD IS THE  BEGINNING OF KNOWLEDGE." Prov. 1:7. And, "THE FEAR OF THE LORD IS THE  INSTRUCTION OF WISDOM." Prov. 15:33. And so it is, God's Word for it, that until one has  a healthy dose of the fear of God, which is to "HATE EVIL," one has not even begun to have  even one tiny drop of KNOWLEDGE, INSTRUCTION, or WISDOM.  The idiot dyke fat girl Jacqui Smith must have at least HEARD of the old English Puritans, and that she at least HEARD of such famous men as John Bunyan and his world famous book written in a British jail (for 12 years); to wit: The Pilgrim's Progress. Oliver Cromwell was a Calvinist and ordered every English soldier to pray before battle. John Owen was chancellor of Oxford, and after three centuries still holds the honor of England's greatest theological exegete. Dr. Owen was also Oliver Cromwell's chaplain, and was, of course, a strict Calvinist. Dr. Isaac Watts was (and is yet today) considered the world's greatest hymnodist or writer of hymns (750), and was also one of the greatest Calvinistic preachers of the 17th Century. And none can graduate from an American high school without at least a more than passing acquaintance with the world famous sermon by Jonathan Edwards; to wit: "Sinners in the Hands of an ANGRY GOD." A Calvinist, Dr. Edwards was also the President of Princeton University at the time of his death in 1758.  Well, I could go on and on, listing Calvinistic preachers in England and America. Among the other Calvinistic doctrines which they heartily believed and preached, they unanimously believed and vigorously preached THE HATRED OF GOD, THE WRATH OF GOD, THE ANGER OF GOD, and THE FEAR OF GOD. A fair sampling of their preaching is found in the high school text book for all Kansas classes in American literature, from a sermon by Jonathan Edwards (1703-1758), entitled "Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God," wherein an Angry God is represented from Scripture as not only hating the impenitent sinner, but abhorring him; to wit:  "The God that holds you over the pit of hell much as one holds a spider or some loathsome insect over the fire, ABHORS YOU, and is dreadfully provoked; his WRATH TOWARD YOU BURNS LIKE FIRE; he looks upon you as worthy of nothing else but to be cast into hell; he is of purer eyes than to bear to have you in his sight; you are ten thousand times so abominable in his eyes as the most hateful and venomous serpent is in ours. You have offended him infinitely more than ever a stubborn rebel did his prince; and yet it is nothing but his hand that holds you from falling into the fire every moment. `Tis ascribed to nothing else, that you did not go to hell the last night; that you were suffered to awake again in this world after you closed your eyes to sleep and there is no other reason to be given why you have not dropped into hell since you arose in the morning, but that God's hand has held you up. There is no other reason to be given why you have not gone to hell since you have set here in the house of God, provoking his pure eyes by your sinful wicked manner of attending his solemn worship. Yea, there is nothing else that is to be given as a reason why you don't this very moment drop down into hell. You hang by a slender thread, with the flames of divine wrath flashing about it, and ready every moment to singe it and burn it asunder; and you have no interest in any Mediator, and nothing to lay hold of to save yourself, nothing to keep off the flames of wrath, nothing of your own, nothing that you ever have done, nothing that you can do, to induce God to spare you one moment."  These portions of one sermon, and these verses and passages of Scripture, are a fair representation of Calvinism such as has been faithfully preached for 2000+ years, and is still preached today. The God thus described and presented, is the one and only true God; the HATRED of that God, the ANGER of that God, the WRATH of that God, and the FEAR of that God ­ are all concepts with which all mankind will have to deal sooner or later.  Sunday, May 10, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  Including the "brutish" Jacqui Smith and every other citizen of the Brutish British Empire. When  they banned me and Shirley, ­ (and the ban includes each one of you as an individual member of  the Westboro Baptist Church, and the church itself as a corporate body), ­ from the UK; I say  when they banned us, they banned the Gospel message of Westboro Baptist Church, which is the  Word of God. And when they banned the Holy Word of God, they did so at their everlasting peril,  and branded themselves as eternally lost and damned "BRUTES" ­ (henceforth to be known  among the righteous in heaven and on earth as "BRUTISH BRITS,") ­ to wit:  "Whoso loveth instruction loveth knowledge; but he that hateth reproof is  BRUTISH." (Prov. 12:1)  Think of it, Beloved. A once-great, worldwide empire ­ (did they not say, "the sun never sets on  the British Empire?") ­ I say, a once-great empire of souls has, before our very eyes, SELF-  DESTRUCTED; and this they did when they went through the silly motions of BANNING GOD  from the UK (!); to wit:  "Thou givest thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frameth deceit. ... These things  hast thou done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an  one as thyself; but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes."  (Psa. 50:19,21)  Brutish Brits, indeed; even "natural brute beasts," (2 Pet. 2:12), so-call them among the drunks  in the pubs, "BRUTISH BEAST BRITS;" to wit: "But these, as NATURAL BRUTE BEASTS,  made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things that they understand not; and shall  utterly perish in their own corruption; and shall receive the reward of unrighteousness." 2 Pet.  2:12,13. Beloved, we are in this UK banning matter, by the miraculous aid of our Father, "making  full proof of our ministry." 2 Tim. 4:5. That is, we are able to identify certain, definite items of  objective evidence (proof) that ours is a divine and supernatural ministry ­ that God Himself  planted this little vineyard known to the world as Westboro Baptist Church.  Beloved, we have had a couple of weeks of pure bliss in publishing this message of ours; which is, God Hates Fags, America is Doomed, The World is Doomed, The Lord is Coming, etc., etc. The fantastic chain of recent events proving that God is with us began with the United Kingdom banning us from the UK because we faithfully preach ­ as we have for 55 years in this humble place ­ that God does indeed hate people and send the non-elect to Hell. And because we preach pure Calvinism. Period. Amazing. Well, would you believe. That story about us being banned quickly went round the world via all news outlets. And our Gospel message went with it.  That's my idea of publication with a capital "P." And before that event ­ and all the collateral publication opps ­ had quite died out ­ God placed in the mind of the idiot fat dyke girl ­ the lawand-order chief of the doomed UK (Jacqui Smith) ­ that it would help her dying political career if she jumped on us again ­ and so, she filed the same banning charges directly with every news outlet throughout the world. So, most of those outlets ­ and then some ­ contacted us for reply, thereby publishing our Holy Message further and wider than ever before ­ and thereby generating another wave of Holy, Pure, Gospel Preaching. The BBC News (British Broadcasting Corporation) News sent live reporters to Topeka, as did the huge London Daily Mirror send two reporters to Topeka ­ all of which could well trigger another round of "great and mighty things which thou knowest not;" i.e., wonderful things we haven't even thought of; to wit:  "Thus saith the Lord the maker thereof, the Lord that formed it, to establish it; the Lord is his name; Call unto me, and I will answer thee, and show thee great and mighty things, which thou knowest not." (Jer. 33:2,3)  I love you. Amen.  "Praise ye the Lord." (Psa. 111:1)  
