

Saint Kanhopatra 
BY INDUMATI DESHMUKH, M.A., B.T. 
DURING the great war between the Pandavas and the Kauravas some person on the Kauravas side suggested the name of Karna, the great warrior for the commandership. Although he was so great a warrior that nobody except Arjuna could defeat him, he was supposed to be born of a low family and a well-known king from the same side referred to this and when the suggestion came in the meeting Karna is said to have made a very brilliant answer to the remark. He said, "To be born in a good family is not within anybody's control; but prowess is dependent upon myself." 
Similar was the case with Kanhopatra. She was the only daughter of a prostitute named Shyama. They were living in .a village named Mangalwedha. Kanhopatra was the most beautiful girl in her village. Since her childhood she was attracted towards God and used to worship the image of the Lord. Her mother also never came in the way of her devotion. She loved her so much that although this tendency of her daughter was not very promising from the point of view of her occupation in her furture life still she did not check her in her devotion. Moreover she thought that the devotion would do her good in the end; she was convinced about the impurities of the life of a prostitute though she could not take herself nor her daughter away from that life; and this was one of the reasons why she not only did not come in the way of her daughter's natural good tendencies but positively encouraged her. Kanhopatra was distinguished in singing as well as dancing and there was no rival for her in point of beauty. When she became young her mother wanted her to enter her profession, but Kanhopa showed no inclinations towards it, and at last she told her mother that she would never lead the life of a prostitute 

and that she would lead a married life if she finds a suitable match. She also said that the person who wished to marry her must excel her in point of beauty, and her mother agreed to that. This determination of Kanhopatra gave a good turn to her life. She was never able to find a suitable man with whom she could marry. Once her mother asked her about going to the king of this little kingdom and staying with him, but she reminded her of her determination and told her that she could not do so as the king was not very handsome. 
Once, some people while going on foot to Pandharpur were passing through Mangalwedha, the place where Kanhopatra lived. They were preparing their food by the riverside when she happened to come there. While working, they were singing in praise of the Lord and describing His beautiful form. When she heard that, she enquired where they were going and whom they were describing. They told her where they were going and that they were describing the Lord. Kanhopatra was very much enchanted by the Divine Beauty of which they sang and she expressed her desire to accompany them to see the Lord, and asked them if they could let her do so, as she was the daughter of a prostitute. They consented to take her with them and told her not to mind her caste, as God recognises no distinctions and anybody who loves Him can see Him. Kanhopatra was glad at this and taking the permission of her mother she went with them to Pandharpur. She was overjoyed when she saw the beautiful image of the Lord. She passed all her time in meditating and singing for the Lord. 
Once the fame of her beauty reached the ears of the Ruler of Bedar and he sent his men to fetch her. They came to Pandharpur and told Kanhopatra that she was ordered by the king to accompany them to Bedar and that if she refused to do so willingly, they would take her by force. Kanho≠patra knew about the purpose she was to be taken for; but instead of giving them her flat refusal, she told them that she was willing to go with them provided they allowed her sufficient time for singing her 

last prayers to the Lord. They agreed to that. Then she went near the Image and clasping its feet by her hands began to sing: 
''The wretch is chasing me. What shall I do now? Because you are the Mother of the world, I am clasping my hands round your feet. I request you with my hands folded that I should now leave this body. How can you help it if it is predestined? I have tried in vain for that which I cannot achieve. Lord, do not test me any more and save me from the present calamity. There is none else except You who could save me from this.'' Saying this she placed her head on the Divine Feet and became One with the Lord. 
The men who used to worship the Image were present there. They took the dead body and buried it in the premises of the temple lest the soldiers might touch it which they did not want. The soldiers waited and waited and at last they enquired why Kanhopatra did not come out for such a long time. The men therein told the royal soldiers what had happened, but they did not believe it. They accused the persons of hiding her and arrest≠ing them took them to Bedar. They then told the king what had happened. He also did not believe it at first, but went in person to Pandharpur where he was convinced of the truth of what they said. 
The life of Kanhopatra is not very eventful. She had no spiritually eminent person as her master nor was she contemporary to any of the other famous saints. Her caste also was not respected by the society. But still only out of her ardent devotion and love for the Lord, she went to Pan≠dharpur and remained there. Her good impressions or sanskaras saved her from joining her profession, and combined with strenuous efforts, devotion and love, they achieved the highest goal of human life for her. She has written some poetry, but very little of it has been preserved. It is simple and mostly expresses her own feelings towards the Lord. 

