 1 Listening to Enemies 
February 6, 2011 
Rev. Mark Belletini 
 
Welcoming, Centering, Kindling, Opening Words
  
We are here 

after days of no electrical power for many 

and days of ordinary power for others,  

to worship, to ponder past our frustrations, 

to push past the fleeting for the enduring, 

and to challenge ourselves  

that we might grow in spirit and courage. 

 
And so, we pledge to journey together along the way
s of truth and affection, as best 
as we can name them now, or may learn them in days 
to come; that we and our 
children may be fulfilled, and that we may speak to
 our world in words and lives of 
peace, justice and goodwill. 

 
 Affirmation, 
adapted from Stephen Levine 
 If prayer would do it, I™d pray.  
 If reading would do it, I™d be almost through the 
library.  
 If discourse would do it, I™d be sitting with a sa
int.  
If contemplation would do it, I™d have translated t
he Periodic Table into 
poetry. 

If fighting would do it, I™d already be a blackbelt
. 
If anything other than love could do it, I™d have d
one it already and left the 
hardest to last.   
 
Sequence 

 
It™s February. A month for Egyptians to protest bot
h the regime and each other™s 
opinions. 

It™s February. A month for Presidents™ birthdays. Y
et Lincoln connects me to Cairo, for 
he said: 
Any people anywhere being inclined and having the p
ower have the right to rise 
up and shake off the existing government, and form 
a new one that suits them better.
 (Jan. 
12, 1848, speech in House of Representatives) 

It™s February. A month of New Year and Chinese drag
ons dancing in the streets. 
It™s February. A month set aside for the much-toute
d Game of all games. 
Yet the Superbowl 
connects
 me to the Chinese New Year, each a much anticipate
d 
festivity that some love but which is lost on other
s, each a burst of energy in the drooping 
winter. 

It™s February of the mythic groundhog, a story told
 to remind us the cold is almost past 
despite the witness of our shivering. 

It™s February of the ancient rite of Candlemas, Imb
olc, Purification, lights kindled to 
remind us that the longer daylight is soon to be re
stored. 

 2 Yet the candles connect me to the groundhog, for bo
th remind me that the seasons, like 
the waters of great rivers, come and go, come and g
o, and are not controlled by my wants 
or needs.  It™s February. It™s Sunday. And together
, they connect me, and connect you, to 
the Silence. 

 
silence 

 
It™s February, and we are connected to each other b
y our will, and to our families by 
blood and choice, and to our friends by affection, 
and to our foes by reality. Knowing we 
are of a piece with all humankind, we come now to a
 time when we can mark with honor 
and respect the ties that bind us to those we love 
and remember, naming them quietly in 
our hearts or whispered aloud, all that we be not a
ccidental but deliberate in our loving. 
 
naming 

 
It™s February, which, like every other month, 

brings us to celebration and to music. 

 
The First Reading
 comes from Karen Armstrong™s latest book, Twelve St
eps to a More 
Compassionate Life, published just last month.  Kar
en Armstrong, a former Catholic nun 
who now teaches at both Jewish and Muslim academies
, describes herself as an agnostic.   
 
There is much talk of the need for dialogue as a wa
y of improving international relations. 
But are we prepared to ?make a place for the other,
? or are we determined simply to 
impose our own will? An essential part of the dialo
gue must be the effort to listen. We 
have to make a serious effort to hear one another™s
 narratives. All too often, when 
enemies start to tell their story, the other side i
nterrupts, shouts them down, objects, and 
denounces it as false and inaccurate. But a story o
ften reflects the inner meaning of an 
event rather than factual, historical accuracy. As 
any psychoanalyst knows, stories of 
pain, betrayal, and atrocity give expression to the
 emotional dimension of an episode, 
which is just as important to the speaker as what a
ctually happened. We need to listen to 
the undercurrent of pain in our enemy™s story. And 
we should be aware that our version 
of the same event is also likely to be a reflection
 upon our own situation and suffering 
rather than a dispassionate and wholly factual acco
unt. 
 
The Second Reading
 is a personal testimony from the Pentecostal Christ
ian Theologian 
Miroslav Volf, who now teaches at Yale Divinity Sch
ool. This comes from the preface to a 
book by an Evangelical Christian pastor named Brian
 Zahnd, called Unconditional, 
which is the most remarkable text on the topic of f
orgiveness that I have ever read. 
 
I grew up the son of a Croatian Pentecostal ministe
r. After my own brief stint as a 
?prodigal,? I was baptized and became a committed P
entecostal. As a young man I was 
active, but that began to change when I arrived in 
California in the fall of 1977 and 
encountered American Pentecostalism. 

 
 3 I stumbled upon over-the-top flamboyant TV evangeli
sts. I was shocked by the strange 
spectacle. Preachers were peddling a compromised go
spel of wealth, wealth and power, 
which believers had a right to claim as their own b
y a simple act of faith. That seemed to 
me a faith designed not to direct peoples striving 
toward God and neighbor, but to feed 
the hole of their self-absorption and greed.  And t
hen came the ?war against terror? and 
the obsession with security. After 9/11, America wa
s gripped by the spirit of ?kick-butt? 
culture.  Many Pentecostals, along with many evange
licals, believed the war was really a 
face-off between Yahweh of the Bible, and Allah of 
the Quran. 
 
This was not the Pentecostal faith of the Azusa Str
eet Revival, the first generation of 
Pentecostals. And this was not the faith I learned 
from my father. He never prayed that 
God would shower blessings on the poor, but that we
 would be generous to them. And he 
reminded me more than once that Jesus commanded his
 followers to love their neighbors, 
including their enemies. In his old age, he insiste
d that an Albanian Muslim, for who he 
worked when he was young, was ?the best man for who
m I have ever worked.? 
 
Sermon 

 
I think it™s best to start off with the last line o
f the affirmation, which I adapted for this 
service from a poem by Stephen Levine. 
If anything other than love could do it, I™d have 
done it already and left the hardest to last.  
I trembled when I first read that line, and realize
d its 
wisdom would rightfully challenge me. 

 
And Levine™s words are a lovely way of saying that 
wrestling with all of this, the competing 
ideas associated with the words 
love, enemy 
and
 listening
, is tremendously hard. Hard for me to 
express with unmistakable clarity. Hard, I have to 
imagine, for you, and me, to hear without 
necessary and welcome resistance, + lists of except
ions. 
That being said, let™s get going. 
 
When I announce a sermon title in the newsletter–I 
find it intriguing that I always end 
up 
hearing
 one of the key words in that title 
over and over 
the week before I step into this 
pulpit.  This week, I must have heard the word ?ene
my? in one form or another a dozen 
times. I heard, while just flipping channels late o
ne night, the talking head Glenn Beck 
call the religion of Islam, America™s ?cunning enem
y.? Moments later I heard Rachel 
Maddow on MSNBC use a variant word, ?frenemy?---a f
usion of the word friend and the 
word enemy---  while talking about certain nations 
in the Middle East. Later that day, 
over at Panera, I heard a teenager use the same wor
d ?frenemy? to describe her 
relationship to one of her cousins. In the middle o
f the night when I couldn™t sleep, I 
turned on the TV again, only to immediately hear Sa
rah Jessica Parker, on her show 
about dating in New York, refer to a former boyfrie
nd as a ?frenemy.?  Changing 
channels, I ran across the great film from the 60s,
 ?Man for All Seasons.? There sat the 
glowering Orson Wells, playing Cardinal Wolsey in t
he days of Henry VIII. Wolsey, all 
dressed in red, has just finished arguing with Sir 
Thomas More over the issue of 
obtaining a divorce for Henry. More refuses to supp
ort him. Wolsey looks at More 
ruefully and says, ?Come down to earth. Until you d
o, you and I are enemies, Thomas.?    
 
 4 Enemy. Clearly the word is just plain difficult. Th
at someone joined the two words 
?friend? and ?enemy? to make the word ?frenemy? sho
ws that very clearly. And 
remember? In our morning™s story, our hero calls hi
s new neighbor, Jeremy Ross, his 
?best enemy.?  Why? Because Jeremy laughed at him w
hen he struck out at bat, and 
Jeremy didn™t invite him to a party. There the word
 ?enemy? seems pretty shallow, since 
these are, in the scheme of things, rather petty of
fences.  Yet the boy™s father seems to 
know this when he offers to bake a pie to rectify t
he situation, an 
enemy pie
, as he calls it. 
But, ?There is one part of enemy pie I can™t do,? h
e then says to his son. ?In order for it to 
work, you need to spend a day with your enemy.  Are
 you 
sure
 you want to do this?? 
 
And of course, his son nods yes. And wouldn™t you k
now it. By getting to know this 
enemy he doesn™t like, he 
gains
 a new and very good friend. This approach to the w
ord 
enemy
 reminds me of Abraham Lincoln, who once said of a 
man he knew, ?I don™t like 
that man. I must get to know him better.? In fact, 
President Lincoln was famous for trying 
to turn enemies into friends, going so far as to pu
t some of them on his cabinet. And he 
and Stephen Douglas, in their famous Illinois debat
es, came across as bitter enemies–in 
fact, Lincoln and Douglas were good friends off the
 playing field of politics. Not just 
people sitting next to each other ?across the aisle
? as noted at our 
State of the Union
, but 
real friends, who actively looked out for the welfa
re of each other™s families. 
 
And in a book I am reading with some others in this
 congregation, I found these 
autobiographical words by Thomas Merton, the great 
Trappist monk:  ?There was this 
shadow, this double, this writer, who had followed 
me into the cloister. He is still on my 
track, he rides my shoulders, I cannot lose him. He
 still wears the name of Thomas 
Merton. Is he my enemy?? 

 
Of course, Merton became 
well-known
 for his writing over the years, even though that™s
 
not the ordinary practice for Trappist monks. It so
unds to me that Merton felt as if he had 
two opposing selves inside him. Since he identified
 with being a monk, not a writer, he 
thought of his temp-tation to write as the work of 
an enemy. But it was only, I think, just 
another part of himself. 

 
But of course the word ?enemy? doesn™t always refer
 to someone you do not like, or with 
whom you disagree, or who is your opposite, either 
out in the world or within your 
struggling soul. For example, I may disagree with s
ome historian about a certain point, 
such as whether the biblical David was a real king 
of a young nation, or just a Hebrew 
version of Robin Hood. But I can™t imagine calling 
someone who disagrees with me ?my 
enemy.?  But when the right-wing evangelical pastor
 I referred to last week, the USA 
preacher Scott Lively, says cruel and absurd things
, I wonder if 
enemy
 is not the best term 
to describe him, even though I don™t know him. For 
example, Pastor Lively rants, without 
evidence of any kind, that Adolf Hitler and the ent
ire Gestapo were gay, and that, 
therefore, he is right to try and save the nation o
f Uganda from being taken over by these 
wildly violent and sick sex-fiends. Hmm, I guess I 
really have no problem with calling 
Lively my enemy.    

 
 5 And of course, this is like the bitter enmity that 
Martin Luther King had to deal with in 
his life. The words he heard from the lynchers and 
segregationists of his day were just as 
absurd, hurtful, twisted and cruel. King heard word
s that were so foul that I admire his 
fortitude in enduring enemies around him every day.
  
Yet he preached a sermon one day at the Dexter Ave.
 Baptist Church, back in 1957, 
called 
Loving Your Enemies.
 He had a terrible cold that day, but still, it was
 a 
dynamite
 sermon. He admitted that for many, Jesus™ famous di
ctum to ?love your enemies? was 
?impractical? and worse, ?proof? as he said, that j
ust like Sir Thomas More in the movie 
Man for All Seasons
, Jesus needed to ?come down to earth? and stop all
 this idealism 
nonsense. Many people who think the word ?love? mea
ns to 
like,
 or somehow even 
excus
e someone, feel the same way. These people are aski
ng me if I could ?like? 
someone like Scott Lively? Or if you could ?like? s
omeone who speaks against you?  
How can anyone ?like? someone who is oppressing you
, lashing out at you, ridiculing 
you, and worse, mocking you, for what you stand for
 and even, for who you 
are
? King 
insists that Jesus™ words are 
not
 some sort of ?Oriental exaggeration,? but 
practical
, and 
an 
?absolute necessity for the survival of our civiliz
ation.?
  Strong words.  
 
Brian Zahnd and Miroslav Volf seem to agree. As I s
aid, Zahnd™s book is the single 
strongest case for unconditional forgiveness that I
 have ever read. Powerful, it centers on 
the same text that King lifted up. Now, frankly, Za
hnd and I disagree about many things. 
He is an evangelical Christian and I am not. He is 
against gay marriage, I am not. He 
regards the Bible as God™s word; I see it as very h
uman. We differ in a few other areas 
too. But he is not my enemy. His book is filled wit
h unwavering respect and kindness, no 
sneaky manipulation. There is no ranting, just a tr
ue reaching out for under-standing from 
within his religious perspective, taken seriously a
nd not superficially. That is why 
teaching minister, Miroslav Volf, raised in the fas
test growing religion in the world, 
Pentacostalism, loved the book as much as I did. He
 too wants to take his religious 
principles seriously. He too thinks that religion i
s about the care of human beings, not a 
rollicking circus entertainment. He too is disguste
d with what happened to the original 
Pentacostal fervor, radically multi-racial and expe
riential in practice, that erupted on 
Azusa Street in Los Angeles so many decades ago in 
1906. It all started with the great 
five-year long revival led by a certain Rev. Seymor
e. Volf knows 
that
 Pentacostalism. He 
is not at all happy with the American TV examples o
f Pentacostal fervor like Benny Hinn 
who slaps people with his suit-coat to ?heal? them 
in a theatrical frenzy, or the now 
rampant ?wealth and prosperity? Pentecostalism, inv
ented only decades ago by Oral 
Roberts of Tulsa, and now enriching preachers like 
Mike Murdock, Kenneth Copeland, 
Creflo Dollar, Marilyn Hickey, Morris Cerullo and o
ur own local Rod Parsley. Volf and 
Zahnd both are not happy with the anti-Muslim, anti
-gay rants popular among these 
preachers, and he wonders why anyone would see whol
e categories of people as 
?enemies? in the first place. Volf remembers his fa
ther, who revered his Muslim boss, 
and the Pentecostalism of his own non-American Croa
tian roots, which was not about 
demonizing others, and tearing them down, but about
 enlivening experience and real 
concern for how we might live out the values of the
 Sermon on the Mount, 
including the 
words 
?Love you enemies.? 
 
 6 But how do you do that? How do you love your enemie
s? Does loving them mean trying 
to see if what they say has any merit? King asked t
his question too, of course. But King 
does not advise finding merit in your enemy™s ideas
 if that idea is that you yourself are a 
worthless pile of manure. King was not a fool.  But
 I think Karen Armstrong translates 
King™s reflection in modern language that transcend
s any particular religion, since she 
claims none. 

 
Armstrong agrees with Levine that loving one™s enem
ies is the hardest thing it™s possible 
to do.  In her book 
Twelve Steps to a Compassionate Life,
 she places ?love of enemies? as 
the last step, #12, agreeing with Stephen Levine th
at ?love is left to last.? But she insists 
that in order to love, there has to be conversation
, that is, dialogue. Then she says this: the 
?essential part of the dialogue 
must be the effort to listen
. We have to make a serious 
effort
 to hear one another™s narratives. All too often, w
hen enemies start to tell their story, 
the other side interrupts, shouts them down, object
s, and denounces it as false and 
inaccurate. But a story often reflects the inner me
aning of an event rather than factual, 
historical accuracy. As any psychoanalyst knows, st
ories of pain, betrayal, and atrocity 
give expression to the emotional dimension of an ep
isode, which is just as important to 
the speaker as what actually happened. We need to l
isten to the undercurrent of pain in 
our enemy™s story. And we should be aware that 
our
 version of the same event is 
also
 likely to be a reflection upon our own situation an
d suffering rather than a dispassionate 
and wholly factual account.? 

 
Wow. This is powerful and difficult stuff, no quest
ion. I tried to make that clear at the 
beginning of this sermon, and composing this sermon
 has only underscored my initial 
intuition about this theme. But I think what she sa
ys is worth wrestling with.  
 
Listening, huh? Take the example I offered earlier.
 If Scott Lively was willing to talk 
with me, and not preach 
at 
me, I would try to make the effort to hear his stor
y, his life. I 
would bet that there is some tale of violation ther
e in his life. When I hear the vile things 
he says, I am hearing, I think, echoes of vile thin
gs that happened in his own life. 
Inexcusable things. Violent things. I hear tremendo
us projection on his part. For years I 
have said over and over again that I simply don™t h
ave the power to believe that someone 
like Lively reads a passage of scripture–and 
because of that alone
, musters up all of this 
cruel preaching and distorted history. I don™t have
 enough faith to believe that anyone 
reads a text, and abracadabra, becomes a spiritual 
maniac. Instead, taking Karen 
Armstrong seriously, I am hearing him say that his 
own life has been cruelly distorted by 
something. I can guess, sure, but I am not going to
 do that here. I would rather listen than 
conjecture. Now, obviously, he and I are not sittin
g across from each other, I know. It™s 
already a lot of conjecture on my part. But after 3
7 years of doing this work, I™ve noted a 
few patterns, heard a thousand parallel stories, an
d if I could get the courage, or even, I 
admit, the stomach, to talk to this man, and if he 
was willing to fairly converse instead of 
preach 
at 
me, I would guess that is what I would find. I woul
d still stand against his 
violent words in Uganda and fight against his cruel
ty if he continued it. But I would do 
so, I hope, less from a stance of vengeance and hat
red, and a bit more from a vantage of 
encountering another human being–who, like me, like
 you, has not passed through life 
unwounded himself.  

 7  
See? Levine was right. We can pray, read, talk, con
template or fight all we want. We 
could even bake an enemy pie if we had the recipe. 
But at the very end, like at the very 
beginning, we are left with the challenge of love, 
listening to our enemies to find the 
deeper answer to the basic religious question, ?Wha
t indeed does it mean to love??  
 
Offering 

During this time, we provide an opportunity for our
 generosity. We know we find other 
ways, and other times as well, but for many, this t
ime is important, grounded as it is in 
our community.  The morning offering will now be gi
ven and received.  
 
Prayer 

 
My prayer is no magic trick, 

an abracadabra to get something for myself. 

I ask for no showers of blessings on those I love, 

nor do I plead with Power for power. 

My prayer is that I might be open to you 

and to strangers and people whose opinions 

irk me to the bone. Open to them,  

not filled with myself. Not naïve, but open. 

My prayer is that my hand might be open, 

without gun or sword or text in it,  

that I might shake another hand. 

My prayer is that my ears may be open to hear past 
words and deep into experience. 
My prayer is that my mind might be open to wonder p
ast the certainties I cling to, open to 
spirit. Love, my light and life, open my eyes 

that I might see, my ears that I might hear, 

and my heart, that I might live in the world–
 with you. 

 
