
  We are here
on a weekend of both rain and sun
  memory of war and hope for peace
to spend a while in worship 
  that we might quench our thirsts for a time
from deeper wellsprings of the spirit.
  Knowing that we have come far, 
but still have far to go, we pray

may our reason and our passion keep us true
  to ourselves, true to each other,
  and true to those shared visions of what we can together become

  Packed and whirling days as students and families prepare for significant
  graduations.
  Noisy days as lawnmowers hum roughly through
  the neighborhood, clipping the rain-soaked grass.
  Solemn days as the news papers warn of stealth
  attacks and new, explosive expressions of hatred.
  Relaxing days as holiday folks attend long put off blockbusters and find
  ways to picnic despite the clouds and rain.
  
  Tender days as flowers are left by graves and
  tombs and on hillsides where ashes were scattered.
  
  Celebratory days as the savory smoke from Asian and Native American festivals
  rises on the humid breeze to tantalize.
  
  Musical days, as birds chirp trills and calls in the
  green canopy of the trees.
  
  Beautiful days, when people gather at the Meeting House to set aside the
  flurry,
  the noise, the solemnity, the picnics, the festivals, and all the wonders
  that attend the end of the month of May
  to sit together in silence for a time, breathing, in and out, knowing that
  this world is ours together?
  
(silence)

  Let our complex lives be blessed with the soothing memories of good friendship.
  On this particular day, may we allow ourselves to recall those friends of
  ours who have brought us safely to this day? we name aloud or silently
  those who have been our companions through thick and thin, those who have
  known who we are all the way down to the bottom and loved us anyway, those
  who find their delight in us, and in whom we have taken delight. Friends
  from school, from work, from families, from church, from trips and teams
  and performances?friends. Friends alive, or friends long gone?
  
  We name them with thanksgiving.
  
(naming)

  Blest is the complex world of our lives, the May wine and May poles, the
  packed schedules and easy holidays, the buzzing flies and buzzing lawnmowers,
  the names of friends which are music in our ears. Like those who have won
  the race, we take our pleasure in such music, and are at peace.

  In thought and sympathy we were one, and in the division of labor we exactly
  complemented each other. In writing we did better work than either could
  do alone. While she is slow and analytical in composition, I am rapid and
  synthetic. I am the better writer, she the better critic. She supplied the
  facts and statistics, I the philosophy and rhetoric, and together, we have
  made arguments that have stood unshaken through the storms of long years?So
  closely interwoven have been our lives, our purposes and experiences that,
  separated, we have a feeling of incompleteness - united, such strength of
  self-assertion that no ordinary obstacles, difficulties, or dangers ever
  appear to us insurmountable.

  I hate the prostitution of the name of friendship to signify modish and worldly
  alliances. I much prefer the company of plough-boys and tin-peddlers, to
  the silken and perfumed amity which only celebrates its days of encounter
  by a frivolous display, by rides in a fancy carriage, or dinners at the best
  taverns.
  
  Friendship is for aid and comfort through all the relations and passages
  of life and death. It is fit for serene days, and graceful gifts, and country
  rambles, but also for rough roads and hard fare, shipwreck, poverty, and
  persecution. It keeps company with the sallies of wit and the trances of
  religion. We are to dignify to each other the daily needs and offices of
  each human life, and embellish it by courage, wisdom and unity. It should
  never fall into something usual and settled, but should be alert and inventive,
  and add rhyme and reason to what was drudgery.

  Remembering on this day, oh Love Most High,
  all those who knew you while living on this earth
  but who now sleep under green meadows,
  we grieve for our human follies
  and return the images of peace to our hearts.
  Those who have died in wars
  were soldiers and civilians, the high and the low,
  the privileged and the unprivileged.
  They saw you reflected in the eyes of lovers
  and families and friends while here on this earth,
  but now their eyes are melted into the clay,
  and our eyes are open.
  And being open, may they behold clearly
  the stubbornness, the fear, 
  the want, the inability to control, and the
  unshakable belief systems 
  that so often pave the high
  road to war in the world.
  May we also, however, oh Love,
  see you shimmering in the eyes of
  our lovers and families and friends,
  in the opening of peonies,
  and the light of the moon on the backs
  of sleeping birds.
  Let the images of lions and lambs
  reclining together gather themselves
  again and plant themselves in the bloodied
  meadows of our exhausted imaginations,
  and let us dare to open our mouths on
  this Memorial Weekend and sing for
  all the possibilities of peace on earth. Amen.
