 Edges 
May 23, 2010 
Rev. Mark Belletini 
  
Opening Words
  
We are here 

after a week of storm and rain and a bit of sun 

to worship, to once again claim for ourselves 

both deeper challenges and redemptive blessings 

which strengthen us, and renew our call 

to lives of service and deeper community. 

 
So,
 Mindful that we share a common world, but approach
 that world in different ways, we 
begin our celebration together by kindling our prom
ise of mutual honesty, attentiveness, 
and deep courtesy. May we become more proficient at
 gratitude and awareness, that we 
might more deeply embody the kind of justice and pe
ace which embraces everyone on earth. 
 Sequence 
(based on a prayer I wrote for my friend Doug) 
 
It™s morning. Grey or sunny, no matter. It™s mornin
g. 
Wet or dry, no matter. It™s today.  

The only today that is 
this
 very day. The only one that I will have in my whol
e life. 
Events will happen. Conversations will happen. 

Aggravations will transpire. Joys will knock me ove
r. Stresses will ignite my vulnerability. 
Uncertainties will knock at my door. 

It™s the way the world is. Expecting something else
 is to cultivate vain fantasies & spiritual entitlem
ents. 
I want neither.  

Instead, I will respond to each event today  

with my best me. 

Or if I am not feeling my best,  

then I will respond with whatever me who is there, 

because that is the reality that is real, 

and there is no shame in that. 

I am loved, and I love. 

In the midst of it all, I love and am loved. 

Nothing is really more important than that for me. 

It™s the center, the sun, around which everything e
lse whirls.  
It™s my center. My inner light and brightness. 

A gift I both receive and give at the same moment. 

So now I bow to the day. I bow to who I am and to w
ho you are for we are real, just as is. I bow 
to the world which is just on the other side of my 
skin, but lives inside that skin in another, but 
equally real way. I bow to the day. I bow to the da
y. I bow to the day. 

 silence 

 
I bow to the day, to all the people with whom you a
nd I share the day. All those who inhabit my 
heart and your hearts because we love them, remembe
r them, or struggle with them. They too are 
part of me, and part of this celebration–because we
 are here.  So may we bring them to the fore 
now, by seeing them in the quiet of our hearts, or 
naming the sound that is their names aloud 
softly, that our worship may be honest and full. 

 
naming 

 
I bow to the music. I bow to the presence of such a
 miracle: note and rest and word and vibration 
and tone and rhythm and harmony woven together into
 a moment of wonder. I bow to the 
wonder.
   
 
Readings 

 
The First Reading
 is from Carolyn Karcher™s editorial comments on an 
article by Unitarian 
Lydia Maria Child™s astonishing essay called ?The I
ntermingling of Religions,? in Atlantic 
Monthly, 1871. Maybe you don™t know this Unitarian 
genius, but you have sung her famous 
song: 
Over the river and through the woods–?
  
 
Child™s emphasis on the commonalities that link Bud
dhism to Christianity, and particularly to 
Catholicism, also serves an ulterior purpose. In 18
71, some Irish Catholics were leading a 
campaign to ban Chinese immigration, that would cul
minate in the Chinese exclusion bill of 
1882. Child counters their stereotypes of the Chine
se as unassimilatable aliens both by 
underscoring the similarities between the two peopl
e™s religions, and by describing Christianity 
itself as a religion that has assimilated Asian ele
ments. Symbolically, the Ecclectic Church of the 
Future, which she offers as a model of religious an
d political unity, takes the form of a Catholic 
cathedral, but preserves the beauties of ?all ages 
and nations.? 
 
In our secular age, the religious tolerance Child a
dvocated may no longer sound radical. 
Nevertheless, the developments of (our) century: th
e worldwide resurgence of fundamentalism 
and religious warfare, the rise of the Christian ri
ght, the revival of calls to define the United 
States as a Christian country–suggest that the coun
ter-vision Child holds out in the 
?Intermingling of Religions? remains timely and rel
evant. 
 
 
The Second Reading
 comes from the Pali Canon, the oldest of the vast B
uddhist Scriptures; it 
was written down, we think, sometime in the second 
century before our era. It™s from the Digha 
Nikaya, the Cakkavatti Sihanada Sutta. I™ve removed
 all of the fancy titles and baroque language 
which makes  the Buddhist scriptures so often diffi
cult to folks used to more condensed Western 
styles of literature. 

 
A certain fellow came up to the newly-consecrated R
oyal Sovereign and said, ?You need to 
know, your majesty, that the sacred treasure of our
 nation, the Golden Wheel, has disappeared. 
We don™t know where it is.?  The Royal Sovereign wa
s grieved, and felt forlorn. He decided to 

 seek out the council of the local sage. The sage sa
id to the Sovereign:  ?Your highness, the 
Golden Wheel™s loss is terrible. But all it was rea
lly was just an heirloom from your forbears. So 
from now on, it™s time for you to turn a much bette
r wheel, the Wheel of What We Hold Dear. 
Honor that wheel now instead. Cherish it.?  ?What d
oes that mean for me as Sovereign??  The 
sage answered, ?Let the Wheel of What We Hold Dear 
turn for everyone: your own household, 
including the children; your guard, your citizens, 
people in the cities, people in the country, 
ascetics and clerics, even beast and bird. To those
 in need, give. Ask questions of those who have 
given up infatuation for things, and are now devote
d to forbearance and kindness. Ask them, 
‚What can I do that will lead to happiness?™ And th
ey will then join you in spinning the Wheel of 
What We Hold Dear by saying: ?Do not take life. Do 
not take what is not given. Do not lie. Do 
not intoxicate yourself. Do not harm others sexuall
y.? 
 
Sermon 

 
Friday night I enjoyed a lovely meal with my friend
 Fred. We ate at 
Indochine
, over on Hamilton 
Rd. It™s a Laotian and Vietnamese restaurant with a
uthentic food, and the friendliest staff 
imaginable. I asked the server if she attended the 
wat
, that is, the Buddhist temple, not too far 
away on Bexvie Ave. If you haven™t seen it, it™s a 
surprising South East Asian style building 
covered with golden dragons and lions. It looks as 
if it was wafted by some magician directly 
from Laos, and plopped down gently on Columbus™ Eas
t Side. The server answered, ?No, we 
belong to the Vietnamese 
wat
 over on Cleveland, near Morse. Hey, you should com
e on Sunday 
for our Vesak celebration. I know today is Vesak, b
ut 
we
 celebrate it on Sunday from 2 PM on. 
Invite your members to come if they want. Everyone 
is welcome at a Buddhist 
wat
.?  (Vesak, by 
the way, is the Southeast Asian Buddhist festival c
elebrating Buddha™s birth, death and 
enlightenment, sort of like Christmas and Easter al
l rolled into one.) I said, ?I™ll let the 
congregation know. But, I™m confused. The Laotian 
wat
 had a big Vesak festival back in April.? 
?Oh,? she said, ?the Laotians use a lunar calendar,
 and we use a modern calendar. You know, its 
like you celebrating Christmas in December, but in 
Moscow it™s in January. But, no matter. It™s 
the same holiday. In fact,? she added, ?I think 
all
 religions are the same at their core. They™re 
just different because of culture, that™s all. It™s
 culture people are really fighting about when they
 
talk about religious wars.? 

 
Well, Fred and I truly enjoyed our dinner. And we h
ad fun talking with this wonderful woman. 
But I told Fred later, ?You know, I hear that all t
he time. 
All religions are basically alike
. And I 
understand what™s being said, I think, because ever
yone usually hastens to add ‚at their core.™ 
But that 
core
 is a tough thing to grapple with. On the surface, 
the Buddhist concept of the 
Dharma, the Islamic concept of God™s Judgement Day,
 and the diverse Christian and Jewish 
concepts of Atonement, are all 
wildly 
distinct, at least to me. A religious Humanist read
ing Carl 
Sagan and a Pentacostal falling into a faint after 
being seized by the Spirit makes those fabled 
apples and oranges look almost identical by compari
son.  
 
And yet, the great Canadian Universalist Angus Macl
ean, whom I quoted in your Order of 
Celebration, really speaks to me. He grew up in a r
emarkably strict Presbyterian family in Nova 
Scotia. When he grew into his mature Universalist f
aith as an adult, he admits that though 
?Time? had changed his ideas about God, the Devil, 
the Bible and the Sabbath,? 
nothing
 had 

 changed his ?ethical core.? He calls that core ?hon
esty.? The culture of Scotch Presbyterianism 
gave way to the culture of Universalism, but his co
re remained solid. That™s exactly what I felt 
when I shifted from my childhood faith to my presen
t one. I gave up a lot of culture, but I kept 
the ethical core given to me as a child. I™d like t
o think that perhaps my Buddhist server at the 
Indochine restaurant was talking about that when sh
e offered me her opinion about religion. 
Maybe she was thinking of the root meaning of the B
uddhist word Dharma, or Dhamma, which I 
rendered in the Buddhist scripture you heard this m
orning as ?What we hold dear.? The Sanskrit-
rooted word which Buddha used means, after all, ?th
at which we hold? or ?that which we carry.? 
The core is what we carry with us, no matter when w
e celebrate Vesak, or whether we celebrate 
it at all. In the scripture you heard, the Dharma, 
the core of Buddhism a Buddhist carries around, 
was expressed ethically: ?Do not take life. Do not 
take what™s not given. Do not lie. Do not 
intoxicate yourself. Do not harm others sexually.? 

 
But if there is a core, is there not also an edge, 
an outer boundary? The seed-filled core of a 
McIntosh apple is not the same as its bright red ex
terior. The skin and pith of an orange are not 
the same as the juicy segments at its center. Does 
it make any sense to say that this is not true?  
So are there core beliefs among Unitarian Universal
ists, beliefs surrounded by edges and 
boundaries?  Are some beliefs closer to the center,
 some closer to the edge? Is this the 
conversation we are having when we skirmish about t
he ?real? meanings of the words 
affirmation, covenant, creed, belief, faith, 
and
 authentic
?  
 
Let me try to unpack this idea by telling you about
 a time when I really wrestled with these ideas 
in a surprising way. Long ago, at my former congre-
gation, a young woman who™d grown up in 
the church came to my office. She was unhappy.
 She told me that when she had recently outlined 
her own theological views to another member of the 
congregation, she had been told that she 
wasn™t 
really
 a Unitarian Universalist anymore if she believed s
omething like THAT.
  
 
I was immediately 
appalled
 that anyone in MY church had said such a thing. I 
asked the young 
woman to tell me more. She said to me that when she
 was a child in the Sunday school, she had 
always been told she could eventually make her own 
decisions about her religious views. She 
was told she could study other religious traditions
 as well as her own. She was to take up the 
responsibility for deciding for herself what to bel
ieve and when to be skeptical, knowing she 
might change her mind several times on the journey.
 No one was supposed to make choices for 
her. 

 
?That sounds right,? I confirmed. ?So what did you 
tell this guy about your theology?? She said, 
?Well, I told him that I believed the things that J
ane Roberts received from Seth.? 
 
?Seth?? I asked.  

 
?Yes,? she said, ?the personality that Jane Roberts
 channels while in a trance state. Seth told her 
that people create their own reality. That™s my bel
ief.? 
 
?Is Seth her name for God?? I asked, not sure at th
e time whether I had heard of this before. I 
was also in a bit of shock at the phrase ?creating 
your own reality.? I was wondering what my 

 friend Stefan, who was dying of AIDS inch by painfu
l inch, might think if someone told him he 
was ?creating? that horrendous suffering himself. 

 
She wanted to know what I thought of her theology. 
 I told her that I wasn™t sure I understood 
what it means when people say they go into trances 
and write things, since the people I know 
who have claimed to do such things–ranging from pro
phets to shamans to reformers–have all 
come up with totally different revelations. But I t
old her that I would actually like to preach a 
sermon about her story, and that I would read the S
eth books myself beforehand. 
 
I read the Seth materials. It wasn™t easy. They aff
irmed things which in all honesty I could not 
make sense of. It seemed to promote a view of reali
ty that didn™t overlap with my own at all. But 
then I read Jane Robert™s self-critique of her own 
work. She clearly owned that she thought that 
her imagination, and even her unconscious, had a lo
t to do with her trances. She was not really 
affirming, necessarily, that there was a being some
place outside of her named Seth. The passages 
I read affirming her rational self-critique were VE
RY clear. And, no-where in her writings could 
I find any instructions to those who trusted her re
velations which countered my own 
understanding of a core ethical life. She never say
s that some people are not really people, some 
groups do not belong, some people need to be treate
d with violence, sarcasm, or dismissal.  
 
The metaphysical understanding of the Seth world is
 certainly not my cup of tea. But as far as I 
can tell, it™s not a religion founded on banning so
me people, or being cruel to others, or declaring 
war. 

 
So I preached a sermon to that effect to my former 
congregation. I told them that our chief 
historians had noted that Unitarian Universalist hi
story is very complex, and there have been 
men and women who had come down on all sorts of the
ological sides within our living history. 
But what they shared in common, what drew them to o
ur historical tradition, was our clear, 
constant defense of personal freedom in religious e
xpression, our reliable tolerance of divergent 
points of view on matters like what kind of God a p
erson believes in or doesn™t believe in, and 
our tendency to reason things through by conversing
 with each other instead of trying to convert 
each other to the once and for all ?right? position
. Oh, yeah, and that love is a more important 
lens through which to view the world than either fe
ar or certainty. 
 
This, after you have surveyed our history name-by- 
name for the last thousand years, is what you 
will discover to be our living core. No metaphysica
l assertion–i.e. there is God, there isn™t a 
God, who knows what that word means anyway? etc is 
at the center, the core, of our history. No 
decision about the precise words of Jesus, the mean
ing of Buddha,  the feminism of Susan B. 
Anthony is at the core of our living tradition. My 
former parishioner who loved the Seth books 
knew she was further from our historic affirmations
 than most. Out at the edges, if you will. But 
she had not given up on our core any more than Angu
s Maclean gave up on his core. So, I 
concluded: ?Please don™t go telling anyone in this 
congregation that they are not REALLY part 
of our faith tradition. They may be closer to the e
dge than you, but all parts of the apple and all 
parts of the orange are still apple, and still oran
ge. 
 
 But why did I read that passage about Lydia Maria C
hild? How does that connect to this business 
of core and edges, boundaries and center?  

 
The immigration issues we are hearing about in the 
news these days, the Arizona debacle, are 
hardly newfangled inventions. Immigration craziness
 has been a big part of the history of this 
nation, including at the very beginning when a bunc
h of European immigrants, speaking English 
on one coast and Spanish on the other, landed on th
ese shores, crossed into these territories, and 
claimed everything for themselves without much rega
rd for the folks who had been living here 
for 17 thousand years.  But look, Lydia Maria Child
 was focusing on something much more 
specific and local than that. The upheaval of some 
Irish Catholics in Boston trying to get ALL 
Chinese immigrants banned. The Irish-American citiz
ens of Boston, who themselves had been 
treated harshly when they immigrated, and largely b
ecause of their religion. Unfortunately, they 
succeeded in getting some anti-Chinese immigration 
bill passed. Lydia Maria Child, a Unitarian, 
with core values of freedom of expression, reasonab
le conversational approaches, and a broad 
welcoming inclusiveness (which she called by the ol
d fashioned word ?tolerance?) responded. 
She moved out of these core values to look for a so
lution to this immigration conundrum. She 
tried to show the similarities between Christian, b
ut more specifically Roman Catholic, practice 
and Buddhist practice. She tried to break down the 
boundaries between the cultures and tried to 
show that at the core, and at their best, 
both
 religious traditions were celebrating the overlapp
ing 
values of 
compassion
 and 
community.
 Their great saints each lived equally ethical live
s. 
Remember, anti-Catholic prejudice was high amongst 
Protestants, and even among some 
Unitarians in those days, so her boundary-breaking 
solution in addressing the issues was a 
radical one. 

 
Carolyn Karcher suggests in her commentary that may
be Child™s work doesn™t seem radical 
anymore. She writes: 
In our secular age, the religious tolerance Child a
dvocated may no longer 
sound radical.   

 
I would disagree. I actually think her approach is 
still
 radical. To actually find similarities 
between two distinct groups, to find ways to build 
bridges across the cultural boundaries that 
separate them, and then to actually cross those bri
dges–that still seems radical to me. Downright 
revolutionary. 

 
Whether we are talking about the legal/illegal immi
grant issue, or theological and metaphysical 
issues, or even political issues–to entrench oursel
ves into final and fenced in positions without 
ANY hope of building bridges, or entering into conv
ersation, or finding connection core-to-core, 
means, as far as I am concerned, that hope is dead,
 self-serving Cruelty is the only real God 
worshipped in the world (and I mean by everyone), a
nd the old ?going to hell in a hand-basket? 
phrase is just sober hard-edged and plainly descrip
tive truth. 
 
But I, for one, don™t accept that. My core values a
s a Unitarian Universalist keep me faithful 
toward a hope for and a vision of a world that is w
iser and freer than our present age. This does 
not mean I foresee, or hope for an age, when everyo
ne is united in belief and culture, we have all 
abandoned our local cultures for some mythical huma
nistic commonality and utopian common 
civilization. To me, that is just a fairy tale. I t
hink there will always be core values, 
and
 also 

 divergent images at the edge. I think there will al
ways be diversity at deep levels–emotionally, 
intellectually, culturally. But our call as Unitari
an Universalists, as I see it, is to make that 
diversity work. To make that diversity just and fai
r. To make that diversity a strength that frees, 
instead of divides, the world.  

 
Now look. I understand. It™s not easy. Eleven years
 ago I told a story in this pulpit about a very 
tall and powerfully-built man in San Francisco who 
called himself Jesus Christ Satan, which is 
all you probably need to know about his mental heal
th. He entered our San Francisco Church at 
the late service on Christmas Eve with a can of gas
oline and a bull whip. The candles were all lit. 
The minister almost died of fright on the spot. But
 she knew that it was neither the time for 
conversation, or inclusive welcome–or fear. She kne
w it was wise to find a way, non-violently, 
to get him out of the building before he blew every
one up. She did that. I™m glad. There are times 
when you have to set boundaries, and set people out
side the edge of your community, for 
safety™s sake. I agree with that principle. But all
 I am saying is that it is not the final principle;
 
and that mental health issues like his may be addre
ssable. Just not at midnight– with candles 
and gasoline. 

 
Festivals like Vesak, or Christmas, or New Year™s w
ill continue over the centuries. They may 
take different forms, just as Buddhists and Christi
ans and even atheists, have all expressed 
themselves diversely and with variant metaphors, ri
tuals and calendars.  But I remain thankful 
that you and I, my friend Fred and the restaurant s
erver, the Pentecostal trembling on the floor, 
and even Jesus Christ Satan in his purple cape, are
 all each and every one human, part of the 
great mysterious wonder called 
the human race.
  
Offering 

 
What gifts do we bring this morning? Our presence. 
Our humility. Our teachable-ness. Our self-
questioning. Our risking. Our hope. Our ideals. Our
 conversations. And yes, our financial 
support, either given in more electronic ways behin
d the scenes, or offered in this more ancient 
way as an integral part of our celebration. The ush
ers are invited forward. 
 
Vision 

 
Spirit of Liberty, greater, deeper and wiser than w
hat I now imagine, kindle a vision of what each 
of us might do.   Help us to so live our lives that
 we strive to make a freer world, not as our 
ancestors did, ?monarch and creed defying,? but as 
is right for this age.  Whereas our ancestors 
challenged those who forced their own religious vie
ws on their citizens, may we instead 
challenge the newer religion of unconscious consump
tion and entitlement, which forces itself on 
the citizenry of the present age.  Whereas our ance
stors challenged long argued creeds, may I 
instead challenge un-argued creeds, signed by the t
hought ?Everyone truly wise must think just 
like me.?  Spirit of Freedom, help me to question t
he ways of the world so that I might see it with 
compassion and challenge its harsher ways with cour
age. But also, help me to question my own 
self, and my own motives no less, for I too am part
 of the world. Amen. 
 
