
  One summer evening after a Jewish women's retreat, I was invited to have
  dinner with one of the participants and her family. In our brief pre-dinner
  conversation her husband, Stan, spoke of his years of Buddhist practice -
  such a welcome refuge from the intrusively demanding yet vacant formulas
  of his Jewish upbringing. He had only recently begun to re-explore Jewish
  practice, he said, but it wasn't until dinner began that I learned why. We
  sat at the table and when the food was served, everybody looked at me: I
  was, after all, a rabbi, and, well, wasn't I supposed to say something?
  
  Everyone waited. I looked around, absorbing the goodness of the people gathered
  at the table. With a deep breath I reached toward the basket of warm dinner
  rolls and lifted it up, closing my eyes to be alone with the sensations.
  Steamy-hot, just-baked bread. I inhaled its warm sweetness. For just a moment
  it seemed that I held the fertile earth sprouting ripening wheat and saw
  the dough rising in an extravagant explosion of yeast. My fingertips touched
  the hot loaves. I sang: (sung) "Barukh Ata Adonay, Eloheynu Melekh Ha'Olam,
  ha'motzi lechem min ha'aretz. A Fountain of Blessings are You, Source of
  Life of all the Worlds, Source of the nourishment that is this bread, which
  You bring forth from the earth." We shared the bread around the table, and
  then Stan spoke.
  
  "I grew up so angry!" he said. "All these blessings, these brakhas and prayers
  that I had to memorize. Always some rote formula to recite, another phrase
  to mumble. When I finally discovered Buddhism, it was such a relief. I embraced
  meditation and cultivated a practice of insight and mindfulness. It was only
  because of my deepening relationship with Judy that I began to be anywhere
  near practicing Jews again. But there was the same obsessive-compulsive stuff
  that I hated before. Every time they used something or saw something or ate
  something, there was another interruption and another mumble. It was so annoying.
  I was so grateful to be past that.
  
  "One day, I don't remember what I was doing, it hit me! I was with someone
  and he stopped what he was doing to make a brakha. Like you just did. Suddenly
  I got it! All those years cultivating mindfulness and I didn't see. Making
  a brakha, the act of blessing, it IS a mindfulness practice. Mindfulness
  is what blessing IS."

  Blest is the dark earth beneath us, which shelters and nourishes the seed
  that grows into bread. And saying again the words of the great Stephen Hawking,
  by this act of breaking and blessing bread, we "remember the future," enacting
  in this sign the promise of peace for the world. Blest is this act and all
  the acts of courage it anticipates.

  Be blest, bread from the East, bread woven of rice, grown in paddies green
  in the spring, a mirror for the blue sky and white clouds. Inspire us to
  share all that is our lives with others.

  Be blest, bread from the south, bread made from corn, pure gold, slow-motion
  fire blazing in the fields of Mexico and Central and South America, the earth
  and sun joined for our nourishment. Inspire us to share in all that is our
  lives with others.

  Be blest, bread from Western plains of Central Asia, woven from wheat glowing
  white under the light of the moon, bread baked in the shape and look of the
  moon, bread made for hungry pilgrims on the streets of Istanbul, Baghdad,
  Jerusalem and Cairo. Inspire us to share all that is our lives with others.

  Be blest, bread from the North, made from tall rye grasses growing at the
  edge of the Baltic, bread as dark as night, and sour as an autumn apple,
  bread as beautiful as a loving grandmother's shadow falling on the face of
  a child. Inspire us to share all that is our lives with others.

  Blest are You, Love, who reminds us day to day, hour to hour, moment to moment,
  that only bread is for the breaking. Bodies and hearts and spirits are not
  for the breaking. Let the world remain whole, not broken and let it nourish
  all within its embrace.

  Blest is the community that knows that the gifts of the earth are for all
  the people of earth. As these breads were once but grain and grasses spread
  across the earth, then brought together and baked by human hands for our
  nourishment, so may the peoples of the earth one day come together to nourish
  each other with peace. May we take these breads from round the world as a
  sign of our thanksgiving that we are alive, and our mindfulness that we all
  share one world, and that our promises and visions are worthy of the keeping.
  So be it.
