
  Walls and crystal spheres and immobility! For two thousand years we believed
  that the sun and all the stars of heaven turned around us. The Pope, the
  cardinals, the princes, scholars, captains, merchants, fishwives and
  schoolchildren thought they were sitting, stationary, in this crystal globe.
  But now we're emerging from it, Andrea.
  
  For the old age is through, and a new age is upon us. During hundreds of
  years it has been as if we awaited something. The cities are narrow, and
  so are brains. But now the word is: since it is so, it does not remain so.
  For everything moves, my friend.
  
  On our old continent a rumor has arisen: there are new continents. And since
  our ships have sailed to them, the saying circulates on the laughing continents:
  the great, much-dreaded ocean is just a puddle. And we have come to take
  great pleasure in searching out the causes of all things: why the stone falls
  when it is dropped, and how it rises when it is thrown into the air.
  
  Every day something is found. Even the oldest of people have the young shout
  in their ears what new thing has been discovered. Much has been found already,
  but more can be found in the future. And so there is still much for new
  generations to do. The old teachings, believed for a thousand years, are
  on the point of collapsing? But humankind will soon be properly informed
  as to its dwelling place, the heavenly body where it has its home?
  
  All the world says: yes, that is written in the books, but now let us see
  for ourselves. The most celebrated truths are tapped on the shoulder. What
  never was doubted is doubted now. And thereby a wind has arisen which blows
  up the gold-brocaded cloaks of princes and prelates, so that fat or skinny
  legs are seen beneath, legs just like our legs. In the markets, the stars
  are talked about. It was always said that the stars were fastened to a crystal
  vault so that they could not fall. Now we have taken heart and let them float
  in the air, without support, and they are embarked on a great voyage - like
  us, who are also without support and embarked on a great voyage.
  
  The universe lost its center overnight, and in the morning it had a countless
  number of centers. So that now each one can be regarded as a center and none
  can. For, suddenly, there is a lot of room.

  Dona nobis pacem. Peace for us all, I pray.
  Not just for some of us, please note, 
  but all of us.
  
  OK the oppressed first, yes,
  but then the oppressors too, who will find their
  first peace in a lifetime by refusing to control and harm others or bend
  them to their will.
  Peace for all on this island glowing in the abyss,
  this small ship tossing on infinite waves!
  
  Peace for the poor first, of course,
  and then the ones who claim
  to own everything, even our souls;
  for in releasing their ownership, they too will
  know freedom for the first time, and peace.
  
  Dona nobis pacem, Amor
  
  Peace, please, for us all, O Love,
  Not as a golden gift from above, but as unexpected wind for our sails and
  sacred provisions for our journey?
  the provisions of friendship, anger, joy, and fierce honesty.
  
  Amen. Amen. Dona Nobis Pacem
