
  We are here
to worship, 
  to let the light of the world's deeper wisdom
do for us what the light of the autumn sun
  does to November maples:
kindle them like candles on a feasting table.

  Song and silence, music and word
come now, restore us to ourselves?.

(together) And may our reason and our passion keep us true to ourselves,
  true to each other,
  and true to those shared visions of what we can together
  become?.


  A woman, a member of this church who lives on King Ave, is still shaken and
  sad today as she gets ready to come to church. Many of the candidates she
  voted for lost this week. But she knows deep inside her that the loss of
  elections is not the same thing as the loss of her ideals or principles,
  and, as she remembers that, she manages a small smile.
  
  Two women, also members of this church, are relaxing after a long day of
  swimming at the Gay Games in Sydney, Australia. The stars in the sky over
  them do not shine over Columbus, but they feel "at home" in Sydney anyway.
  
  A minister of this church who lives on Rich St. prepares to join a Muslim
  friend tonight for a Ramadan supper as soon as the sun has set.
  
  Over at First Community Village, or down at Grant hospital, or in homes and
  convalescent centers around the city, there are other people of this church
  community who cannot be here today with those in this room. Some are in duress.
  Some are waiting for news. Others have colds. But all of them are part of
  our community. All of them are one with those here. And we are thankful for
  them all. For as the Lakota people say: Pilamaya ye. Mitakuye Oyasin. Thank
  you, all my relatives. And as they also say: Thank you, Wakan Thanka, thank
  you, Great Mystery, that I live to trust in sacred space, that pause between
  breathing in and breathing out which is where the silence lives. Let me breathe
  in that sacred space right now. Let me dwell in the tent of silence?.
  
  (silence)
  
  Remembering we are all relatives, not just to each other, but with all creatures
  that fly, crawl, run, swim or leap, we name those whom we love, and who love
  us, those who, as Chief Sealth once said, "take away our loneliness."
  
  We remember them, we name them, we uplift them in our hearts or in the common
  air.
  
(naming)

  Blessed is the earth which nourishes us, the air which sustains us, the fire
  which warms us, the water which cleanses us; and especially blest is the
  music which lets us soar like eagles.

  I am an old woman now.
  The buffaloes and black-tail deer are gone, and our Indian ways are almost
  gone.
  Sometimes I find it hard to believe that I ever lived them.
  My son grew up in the white man's school.
  He can read books.
  And he owns cattle and has a farm.
  
  He is kind to me.
  We live in a house with chimneys.
  My son's wife cooks on a stove.
  
  But for me, I cannot forget our old ways.
  
  Often in summer I rise at daybreak and steal out to the cornfields and sing
  to the corn as I hoe, as I did when I was young.
  No one cares for our corn songs now.
  Sometimes in the evening I sit and look out on the big Missouri.
  The sun sets and steals over the water.
  In the shadows I see our Indian village of earth lodges, with smoke curling
  up, and I hear the laugh of little children as of old.
  
  It is only an old woman's dream.
  
  Again I see only the shadows and hear only the roar of the river, and tears
  come to my eyes.
  
  Our Indian life, I know, is gone forever.

First, from Yehoshua, or the Book of Joshua:

  Joshua said to the people: "Shout for joy now!
  
  For YHWH our god is about to give you the city. The city with all inside
  it is to be considered a burnt offering to God. Only Rahab the Streetwalker
  is to be spared, she and her family members are exempt."
  
  So the people shouted, and the trumpets sounded, and the walls of Jericho
  crumbled flat, so that the Israelites were able to go directly into the midst
  of the city. They massacred everyone in the city, men and women and children
  alike, as well as the domestic animals. But Rahab the Streetwalker and her
  family were spared, for she had collaborated with the Israelite spies who
  had been sent into Jericho to search out their weaknesses.
  
And hear this beautiful poem from Second Isaiah, which has been set to
  music in our hymnbook

  With joy you shall leave this place,
  and you shall feel secure in the land.
  The mountains and hills before you
  shall burst into song, and all the trees of the wild
  shall clap their hands.
  Cypresses, not the thorns!
  Oak trees, not the briars!
  These shall be understood as the presence of the Eternal,
  a symbol that can never be cast down.

  When I was serving as chair for the Hymnbook Commission, congregations and
  districts often flew me to their meeting sites so that I could talk about
  the work we were doing.
  
  I got so used to "stumping" for the Hymnbook Commission that I didn't even
  blink when I was asked to come to Sioux City, Iowa to deliver the Judy Lecture,
  a special event at the annual District Meeting of the Prairie Star district
  of the Unitarian Universalist Association. I was told by the coordinator
  that the event was a year and a half off. I told her that my calendar didn't
  have that many pages, but that I thought I was free. Nevertheless, the very
  next week, someone sent me a text that was to serve as the theme of the district
  meeting, the famous Tewa Indian prayer with the sweet line: "Weave for us
  a garment of brightness!"
  
  Now, two months before I was supposed to fly to Sioux City, the conference
  director called to arrange the plane flight times. Then she asked me cheerily
  how my lecture on Lakota Religion was coming.
  
  "My paper on what?" I asked.
  
  "On Lakota Theology."
  
  "You asked the chair of the Hymnbook Commission to talk to you on Lakota
  Indian theology? I don't know anything about it. I know something about songs
  and readings for hymnbooks, but not Lakota religion. Look, why not ask a
  Lakota shaman to do that? And why did you think that I would be doing such
  a paper in the first place?"
  
  "Well," she said, somewhat nonplussed by my agitated response. "The meeting
  is being held in Sioux City, and Sioux is the old word for Lakota; and we
  did send you that Indian text which we are using for the theme, so we just
  figured?."
  
  I thought to myself, "Thank God we aren't meeting in Diagonal, Iowa; I'd
  have to lecture on triangles and the spirituality of the hypotenuse."
  
  So I argued with her. I argued for her going out and finding a genuine Lakota
  shaman, but to no avail. So eventually, she prevailed and I agreed to do
  the paper. I figured that, if nothing else, it would be a great learning
  adventure for me.
  
  So I started reading. And reading. And reading. I even interviewed a Miwok
  shaman who lived down the street from the church. The Miwok are not the Lakota,
  but at least he was an authentic shaman. With luck I found an excellent book
  on Oglala Religion, Oglala being another name associated with the Lakota
  people. (Sioux, by the way, is a word, in another Indian language, that means
  "snakes in the grass," and it obviously was a term of clear contempt, so
  I think it best to use the word they used for themselves, Lakota.)
  
  I found out that the Lakota religion, like all Native North American religions,
  was complex, not simple, theologically convoluted, not easy.
  
  As I plowed through the book, I found myself comparing it favorably to the
  philosophical Christian theology of Thomas Aquinas in the Middle Ages. This
  surprised me, for I had heard many well-meaning white people talking about
  Native Religion as being a sort of nature religion where the Spirit is found
  in everything that blooms or flows. And surely, this is part of the picture.
  But I was surprised to find out there was so much more. There is a complexity
  and ornate language inherent to the Lakota Religion.
  
  So I read about the sacred sites, the elaborate rituals, the theology of
  life beyond death, and the social structures. I read books by Native North
  Americans and Euro-American anthropologists. And I found one particularly
  interesting book describing the train journey our own Henry David Thoreau
  took from his beloved Massachusetts to Minneapolis, a very long journey in
  those days, as you may well imagine. He went there to learn from the Lakota
  people first hand. It slowly became clear to me that Thoreau's famous hut
  on Walden Pond was an experiment to see if white folks could learn how to
  see things through the eyes of the Indians, instead of the other way around.
  I was amazed at his humility and desire to be taught. Not many were like
  him in those days, when it came to the Natives of this land.
  
  When the first Anglo-European settlers arrived here, most of them had their
  Bibles with them. We were told most charitably in High School that they wanted
  religious freedom on these shores. Many of them did, I suppose, but for
  themselves alone. Most of them were frightened of these wild lands and the
  inhabitants here, and they certainly didn't think that Native religion was
  "real" religion. And so time after time they turned in those Bibles to the
  stories like the one I read to you this morning from Joshua, filled with
  terror and control. Yes, they did have the Gospels teaching them about love,
  and they had the Hebrew prophets warning them about justice, and they had
  poets like Second Isaiah who wrote about God and Nature in a way most Indian
  religions would have praised and accepted immediately ? the trees clapping
  their hands, the mountains singing. But they studiously neglected those passages.
  Within short years of their arrival, many of the Anglo colonists had decided
  that this was "the promised land," they were the new "Israelites," and the
  natives, whom they called either simply "Americans," or just "the savages,"
  were suddenly the biblical Amorites, Amelikites or the Canaanites, indigenous
  peoples that needed to be wiped out, their cities and villages torn down
  and plowed over.Now, of course, not everyone thought this way. And certainly
  the greatest portion of deaths among the American Native population resulted
  from diseases brought to this land from Europe.
  
  For example, fully half the population of what is now Georgia was wiped out
  in this way in just six years. But the cruel attitude toward the Native American
  populace got into the blood stream of the colonists, and kind men like William
  Penn and later, Thoreau, come across now as sublime exceptions to arrogant
  rule.
  
  After I read the books in preparation for my paper, I examined the text of
  my own life, for there are stories in me like there is breath in me, as we
  learned this morning. All I knew about the indigenous population of North
  America, growing up in industrial Detroit, was from television, to wit, the
  Indians, Tonto and Ching Ach Gook, the Last of the Mohicans. It appeared
  to me that Indians were grunting sidekicks to white heroes. These Indians
  were benign characters. But in the movies at the theaters, it was burning
  wagon trains, deft horseback riding and scalping which signed the presence
  of the Indian in many cases.
  
  When I dipped into the well of my memory as deep as I could, I did remember
  some vague story of the Iroquois League from grade school, and that corn,
  peppers and potatoes and tomatoes (then called chokecherries) were the cultivated
  vegetables of the Indian nations, but that is about all.
  
  In 1977, I was privileged to take a week-long trip as a sort of adult chaperone
  with Sunday School kids of the First Unitarian Universalist Church of Rockford,
  Illinois, where I was serving as an intern. We participated in an archeological
  dig in Illinois, a dig sponsored by Northwestern University. We were digging
  up the remains of a farming town that served the needs of what the chief
  archeologist called "The great walled city of Cahokia."
  
  "The great walled what?" I asked.
  
  "Cahokia. It was a city built at the time of what Europeans called 'The Middle
  Ages.' It had wooden walls, thousands of thatch-roof houses, huge earthwork
  pyramids for ceremonial use, and a circular calendar like Stonehenge, except
  made of wood, for ceremonially aligning with the equinoxes and solstices
  of the sun. In the year l100 it had a population of over 40,000 people, making
  it bigger than the Paris or London of that same time period. This little
  town we are digging up helped to provide food for the huge population."
  
  I was dumbfounded. In all of my education I had never heard of such a place,
  nor had I heard of the city of Aztalan in Wisconsin, or any other fortified
  Indian cities in the Midwest.
  
  I saw hide tepees and buffalo hunts on television. I was taught about squash
  and corn and feathers. But somehow they neglected to tell me about a city
  of 40,000 people? With an earthen pyramid larger than the pyramid of Khufu
  at Giza, Egypt? This was totally amazing to me. After thinking about it,
  I decided that such omissions cannot be an accident. What? "Oops, we
  forget"?
  
  I really believe that what got into the blood of the Anglo-and
  Hispanic-colonists, the idea that the Natives were all "savages," persists
  in subtle form to this day, even in how we choose to educate our young in
  the schools. After all, using European criteria alone, Cahokia is an example
  of a "high civilization" comparable in every way to what was going on in
  Europe at the same time, and, in many ways, better. And we moderns get away
  from civilization by camping in tents in the wilderness; thus, there can
  be no civilization for us where there are tents or teepees.
  
  Thus "savage" was the usual word used in congressional documents, on the
  lips of presidents and even, sadly to say, in the pulpits of churches. Thomas
  Jefferson himself, usually considered a very civilized human being, constantly
  used the language of "savage" in his writings about the Indians. It was the
  liberals, in the hundred and fifty years after the Revolution, who were the
  ones who wanted to get the Indians to "assimilate" into white Anglo-culture,
  or Hispanic-culture. It was the liberals who wanted the Native North Americans
  to become Christians, living in homes with chimneys, as Buffalo Bird Woman
  wrote about so beautifully and humanely in the first reading.
  
  This meant a giving up of culture, spirituality, religion, ways and means,
  language, customs and thus, ultimately, their identity. Such a loss is hardly
  different than death, as far as I am concerned.
  
  The liberals within the U.S. government believed thoroughly that assimilation
  was just a matter of time. Let me read you the 1880 writing of a liberal
  congressman, Henry Doss. "It is true we have not assimilated the Indians,
  but it also true that we have absorbed the Indian. The state can bring the
  Indian into?civilization. The Bohemians of Chicago, the Polish Jews
  in New York were absorbed into our culture, though they speak no English
  and live in squalor. Assimilation is another and better thing, and it is
  the step that follows absorption."
  
  One of the most popular books in the 19th century was a text called Applied
  Eugenics by professors Paul Popineau and Roswell Johnson. Here's what they
  have to say (and this won't be pleasant): "(Almost) all the natives, who
  have died in the New World since Columbus, have died because the evolution
  of their race has not proceeded so far in certain directions as that of their
  conquerors. The reason they died off was because of a civilization (their
  civilization) which was inferior to our civilization. They didn't deserve
  to have their civilization." Let's go to 1920, less than a hundred years
  ago.
  
  Some in this room may even have memories back to those days or close to it.
  
  So here are the words of Walter N. Camp, a so-called expert in the ways of
  the Native North American, who wowed congress with these words, which I think
  tell more than he intended. I have left his gender exclusive words intact.
  
    "I am about to express my own conclusion as to the fundamental difference
    between the so-called 'civilized man' and the so-called 'savage.' The savage
    is concerned only with the immediate necessities of life. The civilized man
    looks not only to the future, but beyond mere subsistence. In other words,
    the Indian is not a capitalist. It matters not which way this fact is stated.
    One might (also) say he is lacking in industry. Whichever way one puts it,
    the fact remains that it is not in the nature of the Indian to accumulate
    either property or forms of goods as a reserve against adverse conditions."
  

  I could make your blood run cold with plenty more quotations like this, enough
  for a week of sermons, or ten. And I have precious little else to offer you
  by contrast, except Thoreau in his hut on Walden Pond, William Penn, and
  a few modern pro-Native American organizations.
  
  Now I am aware, by people telling me so, that there are many people in this
  room who are part Native North American, or Indian, or First Nation. (And
  by the way, all of these terms are acceptable to most Indians that I have
  talked to, although they were originally called simply and interestingly,
  "The Americans.") Also, perhaps by coincidence and perhaps not, every single
  one of my African American friends is also part American Native, often by
  half. My friend Oliver's mother speaks Diné, or Navajo, and my friend
  Roy was raised on the Spokane Nation Reservation up in Washington State.
  But all of these folks I am talking about are either seen as black or white,
  not Native. Thus the extent of Native presence in North America is largely
  hidden. Hidden like Cahokia in our textbooks, or in our historical memory.
  Hidden like the Iroquois roots of the United States Constitution. Hidden
  like the outrageous misuse of the Hebrew Bible by the great European settlers
  we often call to mind at this season.
  
  What also hides, however, is our grief. You see, sometimes when I preach
  sermons on topics like this, folks will come up and say, "Gosh, now I feel
  guilty." I will come back every time, "Grief is a better use of your time
  than guilt. You are just hiding in your guilt, that's all. Come out and grapple
  with reality and work to change it." I learned to be tough about this liberal
  retreat into guilt from one of my interns. He was a young man who was born
  and raised in Germany, although his English was better than mine, I have
  to say. He was about 25 when he came to serve with me at the Hayward Church.
  On the long road-trip to a minister's retreat once I had the temerity to
  ask him how the whole World War II era was being treated in German schools.
  
  He said it had not been treated at all, for many years. Germany history stopped
  with the Kaiser in the early Twentieth Century. But he told me that, at the
  University level, things were changing quickly, and that new programs were
  being developed to help younger Germans to deal with their horrific ancestral
  history of horror and holocaust. He told me that the pulse behind this change
  was a single book, a book everyone was reading at college. It was a book
  with a title he translated as "Our Inability to Grieve." This book was asking
  the whole German people to admit that the whole sad history really happened.
  It asked them not to enjoy the paralysis offered by guilt or denial, but
  to move forward on the wings of grief. By doing so, the book suggested,
  consciousness of the human capacity to do terrible things to those who are
  different from them remains to the fore. Consciousness of how good people
  can turn others into demons or pathetic people, with a few twisted words
  and innuendoes wrapped in unreflective confidence and bravado. The book suggested
  ways to move from the consciousness-raising of grief to new energy, giving
  us power to turn things around for the present era in such a way that the
  past will not be repeated.
  
  Sure it sounds idealistic, but can you really tell me that hiding out in
  a cave of delicious guilt is a better way? Or can you tell me that the obviously
  true statement, "I'm not like those stupid congressmen talking about 'savages!"
  exempts any one of us from self-examination and study? I hope not. For
  self-examination is one of the greatest gifts we have as human beings, no
  matter what our cultural heritage. And as for study, school is not over yet.
  Ever.
  
  When we more liberal United States citizens talk about the Palestinian people
  having their own nation on their own land, or when we speak out for the
  indigenous people in African nations having a political say greater and more
  authentic than that of the colonial governments, we always stop short. You
  will never hear anyone here in the States go on to suggest that the same
  issues might apply here, and that whole States, not tiny reservations, but
  whole States, might be returned to the people of the Nations who first lived
  on those lands. But the concepts are parallel.
  
  I wonder, what would have happened if our European ancestors learned the
  Native Religions to the degree the American Natives learned the imported
  Protestant and Catholic religions? Would our ecological policies be different
  if every maple was a divine spirit? Would our family life be different if
  we gathered every night and stopped to thank Wakan Thanka, the Great Mystery
  of All and Spirit of Life, before we ate our meals? What would have happened
  if the non-capitalist Indian idea of the potlatch, a feast of extravagant
  generosity and gift giving, met and amended the capitalist approaches to
  the sharing of goods?
  
  Now, I am not romantic about this, please. I know that a few of the Native
  religions, especially in Mexico, but also among the Cahokians, supported
  the idea of human sacrifice. And war was practiced here, not less than in
  Europe. And I learned, while working on my paper, that the patriarchy of
  Lakota religion was every bit as sexist as the Christian missionaries' religions
  were. I say that both the cultures and religions of European derivation and
  the religions of the Native cultures have things about them that are good,
  and things that are, well, undeniably questionable.
  
  But I am convinced that our present civilization in this country would be
  far greater than it is if the two different and distinct civilizations of
  the Native North Americans and the European colonists had embraced each other
  and learned from each other, and respected each other, and corrected each
  other, and celebrated with each other, instead of the way it actually happened.
  You know, the invading cultures overwhelming the native ones. I, for one,
  am grieving about what actually happened, even as I am hopeful that what
  we could still learn is not as entirely lost as Buffalo Bird Woman lamented.
  
  Looking back, it was the right decision to accept the task of writing that
  paper in Sioux City. Researching the paper on Lakota theology turned out
  to be a great gift to me. I am still no expert, of course, on Lakota theology
  or Indian civilizations. But I am chastened and somewhat enlightened by all
  I have learned, and when I think about it, I can think of few things better
  than that for my life.

    "I am about to express my own conclusion as to the fundamental difference
    between the so-called 'civilized man' and the so-called 'savage.' The savage
    is concerned only with the immediate necessities of life. The civilized man
    looks not only to the future, but beyond mere subsistence. In other words,
    the Indian is not a capitalist. It matters not which way this fact is stated.
    One might (also) say he is lacking in industry. Whichever way one puts it,
    the fact remains that it is not in the nature of the Indian to accumulate
    either property or forms of goods as a reserve against adverse conditions."
  
Daltso hozhoni
  Daltso hozho'ka
  Daltso hozhoni

  Beautiful and balanced.
  Everything indeed, 
  may it indeed be beautiful and balanced.
  Beautiful and balanced.
  
  Now Mother Earth and Father Sky
  meet each other, companions forever.
  Beautiful and balanced.
  
  Now the Night and the Day
  meet each other, companions forever.
  Beautiful and balanced.
  
  Now the white corn and the yellow corn
  meet each other, companions forever.
  Beautiful and balanced.
  
  Now the life that never ceases
  and the happiness in all things
  meet each other, companions forever.
  All is beautiful. All is balanced.
  
Daltso hozhoni. 
  Daltso hozho'ka'
  Daltso hozhoni
