
  We are here
to worship, to remember in our bodies, hearts and minds
  that we are part, not all, of this whirling cosmos.
We worship to know the limits and dignity of our power,
  to freely open the door of our heart 
onto the summery threshold 
  of a world greater than ourselves,
and to restore our aliveness with music, word and
  silence.
  And at celebration's end,
  
may our reason and our passion
  keep us true to ourselves, true to each other
  and true to those shared visions of what we can together
  become?.

  Cottonwood fluffs settling on my shirt.
  Thunderstorms drenching.
  Irises. Shiny brick streets. 
  Black parking lots and tender garden shoots.
  Here we are in a local neighborhood set like a jewel
  in the large and quarreling neighborhood called the world,
  in the larger shimmering neighborhood called the galaxy.
  
  Let the music lift our hearts to drink in this world
  in the silence which will follow it.
  
  Shostakovitch Trio Largo then temple bowl and silence
  Silence is sweeter when it bridges expressions of beauty.
  Our life is sweeter when it bridges many relationships
  of love and care and concern, for we are all in this world
  together, no exceptions.
  
  We set apart this time for remembering those with whom we are in significant
  relationships of love,
  and friendship and family care.
  
  We name them in our hearts, or aloud in the common air
  in an embracing meditation on our lives.
  
(naming)

  Now let the chorus of sweet voices that shelters our
  spirits spread over us like the shade of great oak on 
  a hot day, a respite of coolness against the chafing
  sun or green leafy canopy to keep us dry in rain.

  All worlds have half-sight,
  seeing either with life's eyes
  (which is when things seem spirits)
  or
  (if spirits in the guise of things appear)
  death's.
  
  Any world must always half-perceive.
  
  Only whose vision can create the whole
  (being forever born a foolishwise 
  proudhumble citizen of ecstasies
  more steep than climb can time with all its years)
  who's free into the beauty of the truth,
  and strolls the axis of the universe---love.
  
  Each believing world denies,
  whereas your lover (looking through both life and death)
  timelessly celebrates the merciful, 
  (whose) wonder no world deny may, or believe.

  There is an ancient Indian saying: "We do not inherit the earth from ancestors;
  we borrow it from our children." If we use this ethic as a moral compass,
  then our rendezvous with reality can also become a rendezvous with opportunity.

  O Love, may all of our work this morning 
  serve to enhance our common life, 
  and bring both clarity and the more creative kinds of insecurity
  to our spirit's center.
  Like a great piece of music, 
  may our various tones
  and rhythms harmonize to make a whole,
  a whole that timelessly celebrates the merciful
  and always unlocks wonder's door.
  Let the practical hold hands with the visionary,
  the necessary embrace that which transcends us.
  Let no solo voice nor unspoken voice
  have undue sway, and may our reason and our
  passion keep us true. Truer. Truest. 
  Love, axis of the universe,
  temper us when we overflow, 
  freshen us when we frustrate, 
  burst the boundaries of any dead tradition,
  and yet keep us faithful, faithful, faithful to
  our children's children and their world.
  And to you I offer all the ancient praises!
  Kadosh, Alhamdulila, Oyasin, Gloria, Metta, Ave Athena, Om and Amen.
