
  In times past, the rejection of God by a heathen or of the divinity of Jesus
  by a Jew might unleash a criminal prosecution. There never was a time when
  only a person raised as a Christian could commit the crime of blasphemy against
  Christianity by denying the Trinity or some Christian dogma. Even in Leviticus,
  the blasphemer (in the story) was a non-Jew. In law and religion, only a
  believer could be a heretic, but anyone, even an unbeliever, could blaspheme.
  Historically, blasphemy has been a complex offense whose dragnet has ensnared
  people of no or little faith as well as the unorthodox faithful. At various
  times in the past, blasphemy was nearly indistinguishable from the crimes
  of idolatry, sacrilege, heresy, obscenity, profanity, sedition, treason,
  and breach of the peace. The meaning of blasphemy has ranged from the ancient
  Hebrew crime of cursing the ineffable name of God to the modern crime of
  ridiculing or professing atheistic principles in a way that insults the religious
  feelings of others. Blasphemy is not just an irreligious crime; political
  considerations have often tinged prosecutions, as have considerations of
  public order and morality. Universalist preacher Abner Kneeland, for example,
  would never have been prosecuted if he had not been a radical social reformer.

  The Silence of Plants
  
  A one-sided relationship is developing quite well between you and me.
  I know what a leaf, petal, kernel, cone, and stem are,
  and I know what happens to you in April and December.
  
  Though my curiosity is unrequited,
  I gladly stoop for some of you, 
  and for others I crane my neck.
  
  I have names for you:
  maple, burdock, liverwort,
  eather, juniper, mistletoe, and forget-me-not;
  but you have none for me.
  
  After all, we share a common journey.
  When traveling together, it's normal to talk,
  exchanging remarks, say, about the weather,
  or about the stations flashing past.
  
  We wouldn't run out of topics 
  for so much connects us.
  The same star keeps us in reach.
  We cast shadows according to the same laws.
  Both of us at least try to know something, 
  each in our own way,
  and even in what we don't know 
  there lies a resemblance.
  
  Just ask and I will explain as best I can:
  what it is to see through my eyes,
  why my heart beats,
  and how come my body is unrooted.
  
  But how does someone answer questions 
  which have never been posed,
  and when, on top of that
  the one who would answer 
  is such an utter nobody to you?
  
  Undergrowth, shrubbery, 
  meadows, and rushes?
  everything I say to you is a monologue,
  and it is not you who's listening.
  
  A conversation with you is necessary 
  and impossible,
  urgent in a hurried life
  and postponed for never.

Thus I have heard. 
  Siddartha the Buddha
  was walking the streets of Columbus
  one day, when he saw a woman begging.
  She wasn't part of his Order. 
  "Do you want to beg?" he asked.
  "No," she said, "I'm alone.
  I fall through the cracks, 
  they say downtown,
  shaking their heads. The State's 
  cut funds again. Thus, I beg."
  Siddartha said "Life is suffering, yes,
  but most suffering 
  doesn't blaspheme the sacred. 
  Allowing yours, does." 
  Then he said "Come, 
  join my circle, 
  that by our free faith 
  in our ability to undo blasphemies, 
  we might thrive together. 
  "Someday," said the woman, rising 
  "may the faith you live 
  be lived by many, not a few."
