
  We are here
after a week of hot and rainy summer days,
  and worry about loved ones in a power blackout,
and the exciting noise of construction 
  within this very building, our common home,
to worship, to lift our hearts and minds
  above the daily round, that we might catch the spirit.
It is a time when we pray

  (together)
  
May we live fully, love deeply, learn daily, and speak truly,
  that we might together leave the sacred legacy of a better world.


  In Xochitl In Cuicatl (FlowerSong or Poem) in
  the Aztec style by F. Alarcon
  
  every tree, a member of the family
  every hill, a pyramid, a holy spot
  
  every valley, a poem, a flower-song.
  
  every cloud, a prayer
  every rain drop, a miracle
  
  every body a seashore
  a memory at once lost and found
  
  we are all together:
  like fireflies in the night
  dreaming up the cosmos

In Ixtli In Yollotl / Literally Face and Heart, but meaning Sincerity,
  A prayer a la Aztec by Francisco Alarcon

  may our ears hear 
  what nobody wants to hear
  
  may our eyes see 
  what everyone wants to hide
  
  may our mouths speak
  our true faces and hearts
  
  may our arms be branches
  that give shade and joy
  
  let us be a drizzle,
  a sudden storm,
  let us get wet in the rain
  
  let us be the key, the hand, the door
  the kick, the ball, the road
  
  let us arrive as children
  to this huge playground: the universe
  
(silence)

  And now may we embrace in our dreaming,
  in our love, those people in our lives whom we hold dear, our families, our
  friends, our loved ones.
  We embrace them by the gift of our imagination,
  enfolding them far and wide in the arms
  of our care and love and devotion, making
  them part of our morning time together
  by naming them aloud or holding their faces
  in our silent hearts.
  
(naming)

  May the dreaming that is the universe
  rise up in our love, rise up in the flowers,
  rise up in the poems, in the prayers, and in the
  delightful rhythms of the music.
  

  What magical infusions, brewed
  from herbals of the Indians
  of my own country, spilled their old
  enchantment over all my lines?
  
  You have brought disgrace on me
  in making me so famous, for
  the light you shed reveals my faults
  more clearly, making them stand out.
  
  Everything that you receive
  is not measured according to
  its actual size, but, rather, that
  of the receiving vessel.

  In the house lined with paintings
  the singing begins,
  song is practiced,
  flowers are spread,
  the music rejoices.
  
  The songs resound.
  Little bells are heard.
  
  These our flowers,
  like tambourines,
  echo our answer.
  
  Flowers are spread,
  the music rejoices.
  
  Above the flowers I hear the song
  of the iridescent pheasant;
  his song unfolds
  over the waters of the lake.
  
  To him reply
  all manner of red birds.
  One red bird dazzles and
  beautifully sings.
  
  Your heart, o Giver of Life
  is a book of paintings.
  
  You have come to sing,
  to make your drums echo over the land.
  
  You are the singer of all things.
  
  Within the house of the flowering seasons,
  you make the people happy.
  
  You alone bestow
  flowers that intoxicate us,
  precious flowers.
  
  You alone are the singer.
  
  Within the house of the flowering seasons,
  you make the people happy.

  I have to admit, I had a very good vacation time this summer. For almost
  three weeks, I traveled far and away, and found both rest and excitement.
  
  First I flew to Santa Fe, where, while visiting my beloved friend Doug Robson,
  I was enraptured by the beauty of both the soft blue Sangre de Cristo mountains
  retreating into the distance, and the blinding red Chamayo chiles on the
  table.
  
  Second, I flew to the Bay Area of California, where, despite the eye-rolling
  silliness of the gubernatorial politics, I engaged deeply with my closest
  friends, Richard, Kevin and others. We shared exotic dinners and rare
  conversations under the clear glowing skies.
  
  But third and last, I visited my colleague and friend Farley Wheelwright
  and his wife Virginia down in Mexico. What wonderful people!
  
  Now, in a week, I only managed to visit three cities of that great country:
  1. Mexico City, 2. Teotihuacan and 3. San Miguel d'Allende. But I have to
  admit, I fell totally in love with the nation called Los Estados Unidos de
  Mexico, the United States of Mexico.
  
  First, I can now see clearly why some folks go bananas over the very concept
  of a pyramid. I was simply knocked flat by my first sight of them standing
  wide and solid in the lovely green valley of Teotihuacan. The ancient structures
  simply overwhelm you. They are so splendid, so mysterious, so old. You
  immediately want to climb them, though they are dizzyingly high. I wondered
  if I would find the energy to make the climb. But, despite my heart condition,
  and despite the 87-year-old Farley's necessary cane, we both made it to the
  top of the Pyramid of the Sun where we looked down in awe on the jade-green
  valley below.
  
  The city of San Miguel, where Farley and Virginia live, is simply one of
  the most charming towns on the whole earth. Like so many before me, I was
  seduced by the red, blue and gold houses, and the steep, cobblestone streets.
  I laughed inside the strange cathedral, which sported frescoes of Lenin and
  Trotsky at the foot of the cross, and peyote buttons carved into the spires,
  a delight left by the grinning Indian architect. The food in that city was
  wonderful too, the huitlacoche, or black corn fungus, the fragrant cherimoya
  fruits, and the wonderful national dish of Stuffed Chiles with Walnut Sauce
  and Pomegranite Seeds. The whole city was a feast of flowers too, with
  bougainvillaea spilling over the golden walls, and dayglow geraniums in every
  pot.
  
  But, in most ways, it was Mexico City that stole my heart. I cannot begin
  to list the treasures I gathered for my inner life while visiting that working
  miracle of 26 million people. Climbing through the fig tree, filled, blue
  courtyard of the painter Frida Kahlo's house, or strolling the brightly lit
  studio of her husband, muralist Diego Rivera, or lunching on a tamale flavored
  with sassafras leaves over at Trotsky's house would have been enough in
  themselves. But Farley and I packed ourselves into the crowded, but most
  efficient, bright red subway, or one of the green Volkswagon cabs, and visited
  all the museums of modern art the city has to offer. On top of that we saw
  three spectacular archeological museums.
  
  One day Farley and I went to the site of the Templo Mayor, or Great Temple
  Platform, right next to the soot-darkened, and much younger Cathedral of
  the city. I was surprised to find that these impressive ruins had been found
  only as recently as 1978. The dark stone walls date from the time of the
  conquest, in the early 15 hundreds. In those days, it was the largest structure
  in the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan. It looked something like a large steep
  pyramid, but with rounded corners, and precarious steps to the top. On top
  of this platform were two large temples with steep roofs, one painted red
  and one painted green. The temples were dedicated to the Rain God, Tlaloc,
  and the War God, Huitzilopochtli.
  
  And on those "divine" altars, adults and children were routinely sacrificed.
  Their living hearts were cut out of them by the priests with a razor sharp
  knife, made of a glassy black stone called obsidian. The theology behind
  this gruesome affair proclaimed the absolute necessity of human sacrifice.
  If it ceased for but a short time, the sun, they said, would not rise, and
  time itself, and every thing in the world, would come to an end.
  
  I was haunted by this ancient practice of sacrifice while I was down in Mexico.
  Now mind you, I am well aware that the Spanish conquest of Tenochtitlan was
  not the high water mark of European civilization either. From all I can tell,
  Cortes and his men were mostly cruel scoundrels with no more heart within
  them than the sacrificed victims of the Aztec priests. But despite their
  own moral numbness, they managed to be suitably disgusted by the Aztec
  sacrificial practice on the temple tops.
  
  For, yes, it remains a sober fact: the Aztecs, the Indians, or native peoples
  of Mexico, really did offer human sacrifice. This was not a European
  exaggeration. It was not a misunderstood practice, or merely a symbolic ritual.
  It was the religious murder of tens of thousands of powerless children, lower
  class slaves and conquered peoples.
  
  And any such practice was, and is, and will be forever, repulsive.
  
  But what makes it especially repulsive is the sharp contrast between the
  murder of innocents and the generally superior quality of the rest of Aztec
  culture.
  
  You see, the Aztecs in almost every other way were a most civilized people.
  For example, they provided for their elderly citizens with a system of care
  far better than anything provided in Europe. They justifiably prided themselves
  on their schools. They were responsible for some of the greatest poetry,
  art and engineering feats to ever blossom on this continent. They excelled
  in the tender and delicate art of flower arranging. Their sense of humor
  was rich, their design abilities superb by even modern standards, and their
  cuisine was among the most sophisticated, varied and delicious on earth.
  (Indeed, they discovered how to make chocolate, which alone makes them great
  in my book!)
  
  Yet they murdered children and called it religion.
  
  The more I read about the Aztecs, the more puzzled I was. How could such
  a sublime culture have fallen for such a cruel and daily practice? How could
  you write a poem of enduring beauty one minute, and watch blood pour down
  the steps of a temple the next, and not lose your mind?
  
  The city of Tenochtitlan had over 250, 000 inhabitants. It was over five
  times the size of Madrid in Spain. Yet a little, tiny army of 400 Spaniards
  overthrew this great city. Yes, I'm sure the religious mania of King Moctezuma,
  which we all heard about in High School, was part of it?he really did
  believe the old tales of a white God coming from the East. He really was
  scared of Cortes in a supernatural way. But, clearly, that is only part of
  the story.
  
  You see, the Europeans were not the only people disgusted with the Aztec
  practice of sacrifice. Many of the Indians themselves were speaking up against
  the practice. It was by no means universally popular. Even the theology itself
  was being questioned.
  
  And not just, as you might expect, by the class of people that were the most
  likely victims of the outrage, namely, the underclass, but even by those
  who stood in power and had privilege.
  
  I am thinking of Nezahualcoyotl, the ruler of Texcoco, who wrote the very
  fine poem you heard this morning as one of the readings. Nezahualcoyotl,
  although not technically by culture an Aztec Indian, was raised in Tenochtitlan
  to rule the Aztecs, and was steeped in the Aztec theology of his day. He
  knew both privilege and power.
  
  But, he seems to have given up the theology that supported such things. During
  his reign, he forbid the priests to sacrifice children, for starters. And
  he built a new temple, not to the God of War or the God of Rain, but to the
  mysterious Giver of Life, the unknowable, nameless and unfathomable power
  behind the universe. The temple rose high, toward the sky, and in its many
  stories were images of human beings, and the animals and plants and the stars,
  the beauties of creation, if you will. These things were for meditation only,
  not gods that demanded sacrifice. Meditating on creation, he suggested, was
  the chief way any human mortal can apprehend the Giver of Life. You cannot
  worship by bloodshed and controlling rituals, but only by appreciation of
  the magnificence of the world and its creatures.
  
  Furthermore, the wise poet said, human beings were just like the flowers
  of the field, beautiful, yet utterly fragile. Mortal. Everything comes to
  an end, wrote Nezahualcoyotl. Even gold. Even jade. Everything in the universe
  is like a song or like a flower?each has a beginning, a middle and an
  end. Simple as that. You cannot make the world or the things in it last
  forever? by bloody rituals or by any other means. You cannot control
  life and its duration. All you can do is live, be happy as life passes through
  us, and be thankful for our brief moment of life. For we too are flowers,
  we too are songs, we too, beautiful poems.
  
    You alone, oh Giver of Life, 
    bestow flowers that intoxicate us,
    precious flowers.
    
    You alone are the singer.
    
    Within the house of the flowering seasons,
    you make the people happy.
  

  Sor Ines de la Cruz seems to have been happy when she wrote her thank you
  poem to her European fans. She seems to have appreciated the beguiling power
  of her Indian heritage, and took delight in poetry and reform, much as
  Nezahualcoyotl did. When she was praised by European writers for her great
  poems, she claimed with a sly smile that her writing only appears good. She
  speculates that her critics like her stuff only because they have been
  "enchanted" by some herbal magic brewed up by the Indians of her country,
  i.e. the Aztecs.
  
    What magical infusions, brewed
    from herbals of the Indians
    of my own country, spilled their old
    enchantment over all my lines?
  

  Then she goes on to offer this amazing quatrain:
  
    Everything that you receive
    is not measured according to
    its actual size, but, rather, that
    of the receiving vessel.
  

  In other words, Sor de la Cruz is saying to her fans: "If you, those who
  praise me, think my writing is great, it can only be because you yourselves
  are great. A vessel can only hold as much as its size allows."
  
  This is a very wise saying, I think.
  
  She is saying that the more expansive and compassionate the human spirit
  is, the more it can take in and appreciate and praise, the more likely is
  it to find something praiseworthy and wonderful.
  
  If you are small and crabbed on the inside, you are likely only to see a
  small and crabbed universe outside you.
  
  But she also suggests that an expansive spirit is also likelier to notice
  when things are out of whack, when something is unbalanced, when there is
  poison in the system that needs to be drained for the health of the whole.
  
  Nezahuacoyotl and the Aztec men and women like him were people like that.
  They were so expansive of spirit that they were able to distinguish between
  what was whole in their society and what was broken. They were not confused
  by the fact that they benefited from that society and its ways. They knew
  clearly they had to make changes in part of their culture, or otherwise lose
  all of it, as well as their own soul. And they were not so foolish as to
  throw the baby out with the bathwater.
  
  They knew that just because blood had been shed for centuries, it no longer
  should be shed. They also knew that their religious life was basically good
  except for that one thing. They knew that elders must still be taken care
  of, flowers arranged, poetry written, children educated, and worship conducted.
  But the last must be done without blood and without the arrogant fear that
  the universe can be controlled by the mere actions of human beings.
  
  While I was in Mexico, I saw no sacrifices, just temples in ruins. But I
  did see down there exactly what I see up here. People in the street so poor
  and stepped on that nothing much is left of them. Up here, it's usually men
  I see on the street, scruffy and defeated. In Mexico, I almost always saw
  older women, like the one on the front cover, who is an actual beggar from
  San Miguel. And I saw plenty of children in rags on the street too, huddling
  next to these old women.
  
  I know, I know, there are lots of scams out there. And a human sacrifice
  with an obsidian knife is not quite the same thing as a child on the street
  with his or her hand stretched out, either in the United States of Mexico
  or the United States of America. But all of my religious thinking these past
  twenty five years makes me think they are at the very least intimately related.
  
  You see, both the ancient belief in sacrifice, and modern split of society
  into the well-to-do and utterly destitute are based on the same premise,
  to wit, "some folks among us are disposable. And some are not."
  
  The major difference to my eye seems to be speed. Suffering on the altar
  is fast. The black knife is sharp. Suffering on the street is slow, the knife
  of hunger being blunt. But both sets of folks remain equally disposable.
  
  And they will remain disposable until religious folks both powerful and
  powerless, both privileged and unprivileged, wake up. Wake up, you know,
  like Buddha waking up under his tree perhaps. Or Kwan Yin on her sick bed.
  Or Jesus in the wilderness. Or Mirabai walking away from her family degradation.
  Or Nezahualcoyotl himself looking up at the uncontrolled stars from his towering
  temple.
  
  When I went to Mexico, I was shocked by the practices of the Aztecs. I naturally
  counted myself different from them in every way. "I am a good person. I do
  not sacrifice people." Now, after spending a lot of time thinking about it,
  I am not so sure I am such a completely different species. For I too live
  in a society where people are disposable, and even have to come up with so-called
  scams to get their next meal, or wait for church groups to cook them a supper
  they would otherwise not eat.
  
  But my religion, my Unitarian Universalist faith,  calls me to the kind
  of discernment that religious figures like Nezahualcoyotl used, he who lived
  to make changes in his culture and in the world, and who gave up thinking
  that the universe was something that needed to be controlled. As his Indian
  descendant, Francisco Alarcon, would one day put it, in prayer language borrowed
  from Aztec style, in the true and deepest spirit of that most amazing country,
  the United States of Mexico:
  
    "May our ears hear 
    what nobody wants to hear
    
    May our eyes see 
    what everyone wants to hide
    
    May our mouths speak
    our true faces and hearts
    
    May our arms be branches
    that give shade and joy
    
    Let us be a drizzle,
    a sudden storm:
    
    Let us get wet in the rain.
    
    Let us be the key, 
    the hand, 
    the door
    the kick, 
    the ball, 
    the road!
    
    Let us arrive as children
    to this huge playground: the universe."
  


  I doubt if any modern Unitarian Universalist, or any ancient poet, even
  Nezahualcoyotl, could offer a better religious vision than that.
  
  May we find a thousand ways this coming year to wake up. May we find a thousand
  ways this coming year to arrive. And may we find ten thousand ways this coming
  year to live out the good news of our liberal faith, whereever we find
  ourselves?in Mexico on top of a pyramid, or right here in the U.S. of
  A?on a local street, or in our own back yard.

    You alone, oh Giver of Life, 
    bestow flowers that intoxicate us,
    precious flowers.
    
    You alone are the singer.
    
    Within the house of the flowering seasons,
    you make the people happy.
  
    What magical infusions, brewed
    from herbals of the Indians
    of my own country, spilled their old
    enchantment over all my lines?
  
    Everything that you receive
    is not measured according to
    its actual size, but, rather, that
    of the receiving vessel.
  
    "May our ears hear 
    what nobody wants to hear
    
    May our eyes see 
    what everyone wants to hide
    
    May our mouths speak
    our true faces and hearts
    
    May our arms be branches
    that give shade and joy
    
    Let us be a drizzle,
    a sudden storm:
    
    Let us get wet in the rain.
    
    Let us be the key, 
    the hand, 
    the door
    the kick, 
    the ball, 
    the road!
    
    Let us arrive as children
    to this huge playground: the universe."
  
  The gifts of the people are for the people.
  
  For the offering is a circle that signs the whole.
  
  We both give and receive the gifts,
  by this act of consciousness that proclaims
  that everything that is solid
  must stand on a solid foundation.

  may our ears hear 
  what nobody wants to hear
  
  may our eyes see 
  what everyone wants to hide
  
  may our mouths speak
  our true faces and hearts
  
  may our arms be branches
  that give shade and joy
  let us be a drizzle,
  a sudden storm,
  let us get wet in the rain
  let us be the key, the hand, the door
  the kick, the ball, the road
  let us arrive as children
  to this huge playground: the universe
