 1 2006-4-30     Anger Hot and Cold MLB 

Mark Belletini 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

exactly as we are, our whole lives present with us,
 to worship, that is, to join our own small stories 

to the larger Story of the World, lasting beyond us
. 
Here, heart and mind celebrate as one. 

Here, hope serves as our wings,  

as memory draws strength from our roots.  

 
So we begin together: 

 
Mindful of the responsibility our freedom presses i
nto us, blest by the beauty of the world, 
and drawn by a vision of a community known for its 
honesty, generosity, depth, love, and 
justice-work, we focus our time together by the kin
dling of light. 
 
Sequence
  
So I hear that the polls are going to be open on Tu
esday. All day. 
Good. I certainly intend to go to them. 

I certainly invite you to go to them and vote. 

But I say they are not just open on Tuesday. 

I say they are open every day. 

Every hour. Even here. Even now. 

Right now I am going to vote for the robin™s egg sk
y, the vanilla clouds, the purple shadow 
spreading under the ginko tree. 

I am going to vote for tulips and redbuds. 

I am going to vote for love that does not have to 

run in someone else™s circles in order to be love. 

I™m going to vote the homeless into homes. 

I going to vote the uneducated into classrooms, 

that teach them in the way they best learn, 

not the way it would be most convenient for me. 

I going to vote the sick into healing. 

I going to vote the lost into belonging. 

I going to vote, right now, for the right to dream 

of a world where the word 
politics
 doesn™t stop me in my tracks, and where the word 
honor
 still 
has a few good meanings left.  

I™m going to vote right now for the power of free p
eople to actually be free, no matter who they 
are, 

no matter who has abandoned them, 

no matter who hates them. 

I am actually going to vote for love. 

 2 I™m going to vote for truthfulness as the norm, 

not the exception. I am going to vote for a world 

that doesn™t vote for killing, control and swagger.
 I™m going to vote for you. I™m going to vote for me
. 
Right now. Right here. Silently. But for real. 

 
silence 

 
I want to vote for the folks who love me, and the f
olks whom I love. I want to vote for those who 
are grieving, who are suffering, who are sad. I wan
t to vote to hold them close to my heart, not 
just today, but on Tuesday too, and Friday, and nex
t Sunday as well. I want to name them right 
now, aloud or within, so they are not lost in the t
angle of my calendar and commitment. I want to 
make them my commitment first. Right now.  

 
naming  

 
I want to vote for love. I want to vote for peace. 

I want to vote for you and for me. I want to vote f
or thanks. I want to vote for music.  
 
The First Reading
 comes from Julia Vinograd, the great social poet of
 Berkeley CA. This poem 
was written in 1996. It™s got an undeniably cheeky 
title and text. I am reading it partially 
because last Tuesday was Yom Ha Shoah, the day set 
aside to remember the Shoah, that is, the 
Holocaust. 

 
WHY PEOPLE BELIEVE THE HOLOCAUST NEVER HAPPENED 

 
Because we lied to them. 

We told them an entire country turned into werewolv
es 
or at the very least, went insane. 

They don™t believe us and they™re right. 

It was much worse. 

One can plead innocent by reason of insanity, 

the Germans weren™t innocent 

and they weren™t insane. 

They also weren™t werewolves. 

I even found a used copy of a novel by Goebbels, 

An intense, clumsy story about love and patriotism.
 It wasn™t very good, but a person wrote it, 

not a comic-book villain. 

People are capable of everything. 

We can talk inhuman atrocities 

till we™re blue in the face, 

These atrocities were committed by humans. 

Anything else is not just a lie, 

it™s a Nazi lie. 

The Nazis claimed the Jews weren™t human, 

 3 so we claim the Nazis weren™t human. 

Enough. 

Everyone was human, 

We should stop writing fairy-tales 

in history books. 

The truth is much more dangerous. 

What comic-book villains do 

ends when Spiderman kills them. 

What people do, 

people can do again. 

 
 
The Second Reading
 comes from a Book in the Hebrew Scriptures, called 
Ezra-Nehemya. In the 
Christian Bible, this book is two books, called Ezr
a (Esdras) and Nehemiah. It may have been 
written as early as 400 BCE, but probably not until
 350 BCE. The author is unknown. It™s 
certainly not one of the glamour books in the scrip
tures. Since the BREAD meeting on Monday, 
May 8, is named after the main character in the boo
k, I thought it would be enlightening to read 
some of it this morning, since it quite convenientl
y deals with social and personal anger.  
 
There was a great outcry from some of the ordinary 
people, both men and women, against their 
sister and brother Judeans. Some of them were reaso
ning this way:  ?We have many children to 
feed, and we need grain in order to do that.?  Othe
rs said: ?Why do we have to hock our fields, 
our vineyards and even our homes in order to feed o
urselves??  And still others complained 
?Why do we have to get a second mortgage on our hom
es, just to pay the fool tax required of us? 
Are we not just as good as our sisters and brothers
? Aren™t our children just as deserving as 
theirs? Yet here we are, subjecting our own sons an
d daughters to the slavery of debt–and we 
feel powerless, since our fields and vineyards esse
ntially belong to the bank.? 
 
I was enraged when I heard this outcry of complaint
. 
After giving the matter a great deal of meditation,
 I raised the issue, critiquing the nobles and 
governors with my questions: ?Why are you pressing 
such hard claims on the loans you have 
made to your fellow citizens??  Then I gathered a g
reat assembly of the people, and we said to 
nobles and governors: ?Many of our Judean children 
effectually belong to other nations, other 
people, to whom they are now seriously in debt beca
use of how you finance things. Are you 
going to do the same thing to your own children??  
They kept silent, unable to answer. So I 
continued: ?What you have been doing is simply not 
right. You ought to act in a way that 
conforms to the godly way we used to live, so that 
our enemies don™t have plenty of evidence to 
reproach us for saying one thing and doing another.
 I intend to abandon any claims I have–I am 
asking you to do the same. We have to get things ba
ck on track by giving back the vineyards and 
farmlands to those who used to own them until they 
got taxed out from underneath their feet.? 
 
Sermon
  
Sometimes, when couples come to me to plan their we
ddings or union ceremonies, I ask them 
some questions. Questions beyond the 
when
, 
where
 and 
words
 of the ceremony, that is. Like 
when they tell me their parents are divorced and no
t speaking, it™s important to ask them how 

 4 they have planned for possible family conflicts at 
the ceremony. When they tell me that one 
grandmother, Sally, is a strong Southern Baptist an
d one uncle, Theodore, is Greek Orthodox, I 
ask them how their relatives will deal with the fac
t that the ceremony I do is in the style of 
neither
 of those traditions.  And sometimes, when they str
ess their romantic, and clearly cuddly 
relationship, and I wonder if they can see beyond t
hat bright shimmer of love, I might ask a few 
very pointed and personal questions too. Like ?What
 is your style of anger?? 
 
Often, people are surprised by the question. They s
ay: ?We love each other, so of course we 
don™t get angry at each other.? When my eyebrows go
 up, and I ask a few more clarifying 
questions, I usually find out that what they meant 
by saying that was that they don™t throw dinner 
plates at each other. So I clarify: ?I didn™t ask i
f you threw plates at each other. I asked you to 
describe what your anger looks like when you feel i
t. Can the other person even tell?? 
 
Then they usually get what I™m asking, and they go 
on to speak of their similarities and 
differences in emotional expression. Sometimes coup
les tell me later that they found that 
particular discussion helpful when they do get angr
y down the line. 
 
Styles of anger. It almost seems like I am talking 
about fashion or art. But I assure you, the tiny 
two syllable word ?anger? rarely sits for a portrai
t, and there really is no clear picture of it that 
works for everyone. 

 
Oh, there 
are
 people who, when they get angry, actually throw pl
ates. Of course. Or who want to 
break the world into smithereens, as Sophie wanted 
to in our story this morning. And there are 
other people who simply turn to ice when they get a
ngry. I grew up with both the fire and ice 
styles of anger, in my own family. On one side, esp
ecially among the men, there was the Mt. 
Vesuvius style of anger, where smoke and lava belch
ed out, destroying all the small, populated 
towns in the vicinity.  On the other side, often, b
ut not limited to, the women, there was the 
glacial form of anger, where arms were folded, eyes
 locked up under eyelids, teeth clenched, and 
at most you heard a chilling ?humph,? followed by c
lammy silence for three days. Later, of 
course, I discovered other styles of anger existed 
in the world. Bitter sarcasm for one. Slice and 
dice wit. Passive-aggressive anger disguised as a b
ig grin. Moralistic anger, complete with 
karmic sermons; you know ?I™m glad that happened to
 you. Serves you right, you creep.?  
 
And, yes, I also came to witness anger expressed wi
th quieter emotional language, without so 
much as a single smoke-plume or ice-cycle. ?Yes, I 
know you are refusing to ride with your 
sister in the car. I am wondering– how are you and 
your sister going to negotiate living under 
the same roof if you are so mad at her? She is not 
going to move out. You are not going to move 
away, are you? Yes, I know. You say she started it.
 Does that mean that she has to end it too? 
Maybe you and I can talk, when you settle down, to 
figure out what you could say to her next 
time you see her that might help end this. I know, 
it could take some time before your temper 
cools down. That™s OK. I am not asking you to rush.
 But you know very well this argument you 
just had has affected all of us–we were all going o
ut to a movie, and now we are not. I am 
disappointed, and even angry that it™s not possible
 to see the movie tonight. But at least this time 
at home will give you and your sister time to figur
e things out.? 
 
 5 The first time I heard a parent talk to a child tha
t way, I was stunned. It was not at all what I had 
ever experienced when I was growing up. And I liked
 it. 
 
But when I tried to do this, I found that such an a
pproach must take a lot of practice, because I 
was clearly not very good at this kind of anger. I 
had run so far away from the hot and cold anger 
that I grew up with, that I often denied I felt ang
er of any kind. I was fearful that I might hurt 
someone if I exploded, or distance someone for good
 if I became an iceberg. Often, the only way 
I was able to show anger was to cry, like Sophie in
 the story, which, of course, like so many in 
my day, I was told boys ?simply didn™t do.? Which m
ade me more angry. But I didn™t learn how 
to show it in a way that wasn™t scary or just symbo
lic. I still struggle with non-destructive 
expressions of rage even at this late age. I don™t 
want to be either hot or cold–I just want to be 
honest and clear. 

 
Why do people get angry? Well, first, before I tack
le that, I really have to address our physical 
natures. Some people, I™ve come to accept, are simp
ly more prone to anger than others are, either 
for health, metabolic or cultural reasons. There re
ally 
are 
people who can be said to have shorter 
fuses than others. Think of this as the deeper and 
more complex side of our Unitarian 
Universalist affirmation of the goodness of diversi
ty.  
 
And, there are more limited and time-bound physical
 underpinnings of anger which simply 
cannot be ignored–a good migraine, tremendous workl
oad stress, or being out of work, or 
endless crises on the home front: these are all tra
nsitory but very real springboards for anger. 
And, my study of anger this last week reveals that 
the differing hormonal realities in both men 
and women often contribute to different styles of a
nger at different times. 
 
But now that I have addressed the physical side of 
things, what is it that actually prompts our 
anger?  This is what I think.  I think anger has to
 do with two other words: 
fear
 and 
value
.   
 
I™ll tackle fear first. If I am afraid of losing co
ntrol of a situation I thought I had control of, I 
might get angry. If I fear being treated unfairly, 
I might get angry when that happens. If I fear 
being rejected, I may get angry. If I fear that I a
m about to be abandoned, I may get angry. If I 
fear that I am going to fail, I may get angry. If I
 fear that once people know the true me, they will 
just turn around and walk away, I may get angry. 

 
But the second word, value, is probably even more i
mportant. The values we hold are expressed 
in belief systems. I am not talking about religious
 creeds here, but mostly unconscious belief 
systems.  Do I believe that my possessions are valu
able, so that to lose them is a total disaster? 
Then I am bound to be angry, as Buddha warned us so
 long ago. If I believe my reputation is 
important, and people start telling stories about m
e, that serve to question that reputation for 
some reason, I am going to be angry. If I believe t
hat my physical appearance is a valuable part 
of how I am in the world, and someone makes a comme
nt about my hair style, my choice in 
clothing, my weight, my height, my posture, my what
ever,  even unintentionally, I will be angry.  
If I value my independence and someone or something
 yanks it away, ranging from an accident, 
to what my friend Anne calls ?the vagaries of aging
,? then I might get angry. If I value 
opportunities for progress and growth, and those ar
e taken away from me for whatever reason, I 
may get angry.  

 6  
Our identity, I think, is especially valuable. If y
ou see your identity as a woman, or a man, or a 
gay man, or lesbian woman, or bisexual, or transgen
der person, or a person of color, or a 
differently-abled person, or an older person, or a 
younger person, 
diminished in value
 by some 
ignorant bigot, some flawed law, some cultural or r
eligious foolishness, you™re going to be 
angry. Identity can be assaulted by even some well-
meaning, but rather co-opting inclusiveness, 
like ?Oh, we all worship the same God anyway, right
?? ?Or, we™re all the same on the inside, 
aren™t we??  I feel angry when people assume that I
 must be lumped into some universal 
category, just like that. 

 
But there is another kind of anger I need to addres
s. So far I have been talking about reasons for 
anger in our personal lives. But if what feminist O
SU writer Carol Hanish first said back in 1969 
is true, namely, that ?the personal is the politica
l,? then I can be angry, not just because of a 
physical or personal circumstance, but as a reactio
n to political and social situations. The idea 
that anger and social politics go together was made
 clear to me by the title of a book I found on 
my shelves this week. It™s a collection of great ed
itorial-page cartoons from newspapers around 
the world. It™s called ?Getting Angry Six Time a We
ek.?  The title says it clearly: the sorry 
situations in the world, both locally and far away,
 can indeed draw the sarcastic anger of 
cartoonists, and they can draw my own anger as well
. Often more than a mere six times a week. 
 
But the difference between personal anger and this 
more social anger is quite clear. If I say 
something to make you angry, or you say something t
o evoke my anger, we might be able to get 
over it in a short time. 

A day or two, perhaps.  Or a week. We™ll talk about
 it. I™ll sit down and we™ll hash it through. 
But when I look out into the world, and see the sta
te of inequality, injustice, violence, and 
systemic cruelty, the anger cannot be addressed by 
such personal means. I cannot have a little 
tête-à-tête with the powers that be in Darfur. I ca
nnot sit down and hash things through with the 
whole legislature in Florida, which allows gay men 
to foster care for children with HIV all they 
want, but refuses to let them adopt ?normal? childr
en without HIV. I cannot sit down with the 
three wealthiest people in the world, whose combine
d fortune is greater than the gross domestic 
product of the 48 poorest countries on earth, and a
sk them if that bothers them in the least.  I 
cannot have a reconciliatory chat with the 225 weal
thiest individuals on earth, four percent of 
whose combined yearly income could pay for educatio
n, food, and health care for every single 
person on earth.  I cannot call up the Columbus Sch
ool Board and ten thousand families by 
myself and say: ?I am angry that our city, the fift
eenth largest city in the nation, has the fourth 
highest high school drop out rate in that nation. F
ourth highest. I am furious. Can you help me to 
understand what is going on here??  

 
And the fact is, I cannot live enraged all the time
. In fact, people who are angry all the time, and 
suppress it because there is so much of it, often c
rack at the slightest provocation. Road rage, 
homicides, snipers–all of these events are centered
 on a toxic anger build up from both personal 
and social sources of anger. 

 
In the biblical story you heard this morning, Nehem
iah is angry. He is angry because he has 
found out that a small group of folks are benefitin
g off the majority economically, forcing them 
to go into debt slavery by actually re-mortgaging t
heir homes and living on borrowed money. He 

 7 does not see how any society can long survive such 
discrepancy of opportunity. So he expresses 
his anger clearly and with forthrightness. 

 
But please note: he does not do it alone. He calls 
an assembly of concerned citizens to help make 
that statement with him. And according to the story
, it works. There is a transformation, a 
promise by the self-anointed powers to work for the
 common good, instead of claiming 
everything for themselves, without regard for their
 brothers or sisters and their hungry children. 
 
But I would like to suggest that it worked, not jus
t because of the massed assembly, but because 
Nehemiah, as the text makes clear, ?gave the matter
 a great deal of meditation.?  You see, when 
people start to use phrases like ?righteous? anger,
 I begin to get worried. Righteous? What? You 
have all the answers? You are perfect, godlike, and
 survey the whole world with omnipotent 
eyes??  

 
No, our great poet, Julia Vinograd, pushes the sobe
r truth right in our faces with her fiercely 
clear writing. The world is not divided so cleanly 
between the pure righteous and the 
unrighteous, the human beings and the werewolves. T
he world is filled with human beings. 
Human beings who can do what Gandhi did, and do wha
t Goebbels did, too, and do something 
in-between as well. A sense of righteousness in fac
t does not guarantee the rightness of any 
action. Goebbels, after all, felt self-righteous to
o, in killing the Jews and Roma people. As self-
righteous as modern folks who know for sure they wo
uld never have cooperated with the Nazi 
regime, and would have righteously accepted death i
n the camps or before a firing squad. I say 
they don™t know that for sure. Only self-examinatio
n, contemplation, and long meditation gives 
anyone a provisional right to speak out like Nehemi
ah did. Shooting from the hip, because you 
think you are holy and your enemies are the werewol
ves is doing exactly what they are doing, in 
mirror image. They say you are not human. You say t
hey are not human. This makes the mutual 
rage everlasting and permanent. God knows I™ve fall
en into this trap many times during my 
years. 

 
But Nehemiah, you see, had plenty to be angry about
 for other reasons. He had been the royal 
cup-bearer (that is, taster) for king Ataxerxes of 
Sushan and his queen. When the royals 
responded to his request to go back to his ancestra
l city of Jerusalem to supervise the 
reconstruction of the long fallen city walls, they 
were sending him back ?home? yes, but to a 
home that was far less welcoming to him than even h
is place of captivity. For since the text 
insists he served the queen as well as the king, we
 know from the customs of that era that he 
must have been a eunuch, that is, a man who had bee
n mutilated to make him safe to serve 
women. In Shushan, eunuchs could rise to high offic
e. But in the culture of Jerusalem, eunuchs 
were not even allowed to worship in the main part o
f the temple. People thought they had strange 
voices and odd mannerisms. They appeared to be both
 male and female at the same time, which 
the culture found confusing, and thus (and unfortun
ately), worthy of rejection. 
 
But through reflection on his own anger at being a 
captive, reflection on having been mutilated, 
and reflection on being forbidden to worship in the
 very temple he loved, he still was able to sort 
all that out from the social misery of a nation, wh
ere the poor had no power at all, losing more 
every day, and a few men had the whole nation in th
eir pocketbook. The personal was the 
political for Nehemiah, but he fought the battles h
e could fight, and by appealing, not to the 

 8 inhumanity of his opponents, but precisely to their
 humanity. ?Are you going to treat your own 
children like you treat our children?? he asked the
m. And invited to their full humanity, not 
being cast as monsters, they turned back on their w
ays, and supported the common good. 
 
The latest BREAD meeting is called a Nehemiah assem
bly for that reason. To appeal to the 
humanity of everyone in question, not to denounce t
he humanity of anyone. To gather in 
assembled strength. The meditation, the research, h
as already been done by crews dedicated to 
the task. I thought you should know that before you
 show up on Monday the 8
th
. 
 
And I thought you might benefit, as I have done, fr
om thinking about anger as you approach that 
meeting, or even just tomorrow. And by the way, wha
t is your style of anger? 
 
Vision: A Prayer
  
I am not ashamed to be angry. 

I am not ashamed to see things with my inner eye, w
hich my outer eye 
has yet to see. 

I am not ashamed to see a beautiful world: 

a world of cooperation, education, and congratulati
on. 
I am not ashamed to see a world 

where scripture is a set of wings, not a hammer, 

where religion™s a celebration,  

not a species of cruelty or fantasy. 

I am not ashamed to see a world where the law makes
 things fair, not unfair, blesses, not damns. 
I am not ashamed to see a world  

where children are adored, not used to prove anythi
ng, or worse, used for their innocence. 
 
I am not ashamed to see a world where people are st
rong and reasoned in their convictions, and 
moved by compassion more than culture. 

And I am not ashamed of you, O Love. Amen. 

 
 
