 1 2007-03-04 On Being Single   MLB 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

as winter slowly, slowly brightens , 

to worship, to celebrate that we are; 

to say that morning sunlight on a gable,  

and the moving clouds in the sky, 

and a red cardinal in budding branches 

are joys both singular and wondrous. So, 

 
As we move through this year of transition and joy,
 we remember with 
gratitude the power of our living heritage, which m
oves through time like a 
clear running creek; 

refreshing us with the sweet draughts of courage, h
ope, justice-making, 
peaceful living, ever deeper honesty, and more trut
hful loving. And so we 
kindle this light in thanksgiving. 

 
Sequence
  
When the machetes of injustice tear apart the fabri
c of the nation and the world, I 
speak up. 

When the sunset resembles purple and orange vines e
ntwined like lovers, I sigh in 
silence. 

When the mud of deceptions and trickery smear the m
irror of public life, I speak 
up. 

When the moon rests like a thin slice of lemon in t
he sparkling glass of morning, I 
smile in silence. 

When the insecure bully me, or the greedy clutch at
 the common purse, I speak up. 
When a song lifts my soul aloft like a lark, I swoo
n in silence. 
When wars and rumors of wars destroy the hopes and 
lives of children, I speak up. 
When I am overcome by sheer reality of a web of lif
e connecting every woman, 
man and child on this one world earth, I give thank
s in silence. 
When I am restrained by systems of control, manipul
ation, denial and duplicity, I 
speak up. 

When words cease on Sunday, the breath moves deep a
nd slow, and the inner and 
the outer are as one, I wonder in deep, deep silenc
e. 
 
silence 

 
When the sting of life and its joys move from the h
earts of others into my own, 
when my own memories rise up and invite me to deepe
r loving, 

 2 I pause to remember my own life, and all those whom
 I miss, love, long for, 
struggle with and turn to, that I might be the best
 me I can be. Them I name in my 
heart, or in the common air. 

 
naming 

 
When the web of life, the whole singular world of w
hich we are all part, vibrates, 
struck by the rush of wind called spirit, called vi
tality, called love, it makes what 
we call music. It makes melody, and sigh and rest a
nd sharp and flat. It calls to our 
depth, deep calling unto deep. 

 
Readings
  
The First Reading
 is a poem, Possibilities, written by Wislawa Szymbo
rska, 
clearly my favorite poet. She is on the cover of yo
ur orders so that you might 
associate face with name, and also because she is a
 single person.  
 
I prefer movies. 

I prefer cats. 

I prefer the oaks along the river. 

I prefer Dickens to Dosteyevski. 

I prefer to like individual people 

to loving humankind as a whole. 

I prefer keeping needle and thread on hand, just in
 case. 
I prefer the color green. 

I prefer not to hold that there is some reason to b
lame for everything. 
I prefer the color green. 

I prefer to leave early. 

I prefer exceptions. 

I prefer talking to doctors about something else. 

I prefer the old fine-lined illustrations. 

I prefer the absurdity of writing poems to the absu
rdity of not writing poems. 
I prefer, where love™s concerned, nonspecific anniv
ersaries that can be celebrated 
every day. 

I prefer moralists who make no promises. 

I prefer the artfully kind to the gullible. 

I prefer the earth in civvies. 

I prefer conquered nations to the conquering kind. 

I prefer the hell of disorder to the hell of order.
 I prefer Grimm™s fairy tales to the newspapers™ hea
dlines. 
I prefer leaves without flowers to flowers without 
leaves. 
I prefer dogs with uncropped tails. 

I prefer light eyes, since mine are dark. 

 3 I prefer desks with drawers. 

I prefer many things I haven™t mentioned here to ma
ny things I™ve left unsaid in the 
past. 

I prefer zeros on the loose to those lined up behin
d one. 
I prefer the music of the insects to the silence of
 the stars. 
I prefer not to ask how much longer and when. 

I prefer to consider the possibility that existence
 has its own reason for being. 
 
The Second Reading
 comes from the moving and beautifully written memoi
r, The 
Elusive Embrace, written in 1999 by Daniel Mendel-s
ohn. Elul is the Hebrew 
month that falls around September, and the year 568
3 in Hebrew translates to 
1923. The Song of Songs is a book in the Hebrew Scr
iptures. 
 
I went to the cemetery to visit the grave of a fami
ly member from long ago. There 
is a Hebrew inscription and an English inscription.
 The Hebrew inscription says: 
To the memory of an unmarried girl, Rachel, daughte
r of Elkana, died on the 22
nd
 of Elul, in the year 5683.  
Ha™betulah
, an ?unmarried girl.? The word rang in my 
head, reminding me of something, a word in a Hebrew
 text I have been studying, 
something I am to read at a wedding the following w
eekend. The wedding is for a 
young couple wanting me to read from the Song of So
ngs.  The word in question is 
habatselet,
 ?rose? which, with the exception of one Hebrew let
ter, looks nearly 
identical to 
ha™bethulah
, an unmarried girl. At the wedding I will read ?
ani 
habatselet ha-Sharon?
 I am the rose of Sharon
, which is an allegory about 
distinctness and difference. I thought of the rose 
which now grows out of Rachel™s 
grave, signaling her difference, her specialness.  

 
I will never get married. But because of this story
, I will always be fascinated by 
weddings, the event that might not take place. 

 
Sermon
  
I too, like Daniel Mendelsohn, have always been fas
cinated by weddings. This 
fascination began, I suppose, when I was about 5. I
 remember being held up in the 
air by someone–I don™t remember whom---just so I co
uld joyously scatter a bag 
of raw rice onto Nancy Bono who had just married Ed
die Belletini. I thought this 
was a fun trick, to be sure. Others were simply thr
owing the rice. I got to dump it. 
 
Italian weddings in those days lasted long, cost pl
enty and were incredibly 
elaborate. You had the ceremony in the morning, say
, about ten. That lasted for an 
hour and a half, because of special rituals added t
o the Mass, like bringing a 
bouquet of roses to the Madonna. Then there was the
 wedding breakfast, with 
hundreds of people, often as much as 500, in attend
ance. Then, siesta, and a change 
into fancier clothes. Then an open bar at 5, a huge
 dinner at long tables, with tubs 

 4 of quill pasta and roast chicken, salads and potato
es and wine by the gallon. 
Ricotta cheese-stuffed sweet 
canoli
 for desert, then dancing, the cutting of the 
cake, bouquet throwing, garter-tossing and dozens o
f unsupervised kids running 
amok until two a.m. 

 
I have a friend who chose to be single when she was
 a young woman. Oh, she 
dated some, certainly, but soon she realized that s
he really preferred being single. 
You can be sure that there wasn™t so much as single
 
canolo
 brought to her door in 
celebration. No bouquets, no wine, no ceremony with
 elaborate rites and 500 
guests. Nothing. 

 
And certainly no special songs. No crooning. 

 
Just words–. behind her back. 
Spinster
 for one. 
Old maid
. Or when she gets even 
older, 
an old crone.
  
Yeah. An old crone. Like Elizabeth the First, Queen
 of England, Scotland and 
Wales. Or Louisa May Alcott. Or Florence Nightingal
e. Or Jane Austen. Or Helen 
Keller. Spinsters. Old maids. Today, according to o
ne delightful pundit on the 
subject, you can call such women ?Quirkyalones,? in
stead of spinsters or crones. 
But I am not really sure that the adjective ?quirky
? really helps all that much. 
 
And then there is the 
bachelor,
 a word I hardly hear any more, except when 
attached to the word 
pad
. And even that sounds like a joke from a 1960 spy 
movie. 
Still, there are not as many flippant names applied
 to unmarried men as there are to 
unmarried women.  

 
But, those unmarried men must have something wrong 
with them, don™t they? Like 
Johannes Brahms, the composer. Or Pascal the philos
opher. Or Lewis Carroll who 
let Alice float down into Wonderland. Or Newton and
 his apple. And Bill Maher 
on the television screen, and Al Pacino on the movi
e screen must be covering 
something up, since they™re not partnered either, r
ight? Worse, a single Jesus of 
Galilee has been so upsetting to some people that t
hey have squeezed the 
intellectual honesty out of historical study withou
t mercy, until there is either some 
sort of shotgun marriage to Mary Magdalene, or a li
ngering romance on the couch 
with some guy whose parents couldn™t find any bette
r name for him than ?the 
Beloved Disciple.? 

 
You might be able to tell I have some feelings abou
t this! 
 
You know, strangely, I didn™t know I had these feel
ings until I got into preparing 
for this sermon, and starting to think of my own li
fe in this regard. After all, I was 

 5 partnered for 16 years. Not a short time. And befor
e that I was single. And since 
then I have been single. But what does that mean? 

 
For instance, I live alone; but not every single pe
rson I know does. And I have not 
always lived alone. I have shared by digs with folk
s in between moves from one 
house to another, or friends down on their luck for
 a few months. Does sharing my 
home make me 
not
 single? 
 
And was I single when I traveled to Europe back in 
1984? I traveled alone. For 
well over a month. I even felt lonely at times, so 
lonely I once tried to 
?accidentally? touch elbows with a neighboring sing
le diner in Venice just to have 
human contact. But that was five years into my rela
tionship. My partner simply 
chose not to travel with me because of work schedul
es. Was I temporarily single? 
Of course, the United States government never recog
nized my partnership anyway. 
Not as a marriage. Not even as a relationship. Phil
 and I had no choice but to write 
?single? on our tax forms. And when the census came
, no one came around to 
interview us. After all, we lived smack in the midd
le of the so-called ghetto in 
Oakland, and none of our neighbors had been part of
 the census either. We had to 
call three times to get someone to take seriously t
hat we wanted to fill out the 
forms–the long forms mind you– so that we could und
erscore we were a couple. 
Someone eventually came out to interview us, but fr
ankly, we always wondered if 
the information got to anyone. So were we a couple?
 Or were we two single 
people? Depends, I suppose, on whom you ask. 

 
I know folks who are married but who live in differ
ent states. When I was on the 
Hymnbook Commission, there were only 8 of us on the
 committee, but two among 
us fit this particular arrangement. Were they singl
e or partnered? 
 
The funny thing is, right here in the United States
 of America, the number of 
people choosing to live single lives increases ever
y day. The number of single 
people right now is at 45% of the adult population,
 which is almost half. 
(Although, considering what I said about the census
 a few minutes ago, you never 
know how accurate that figure is!) Some singles hav
e even thrown parties for 
themselves, or come with ceremonies of promise and 
ethical commitment to lead 
an honest single life.  One single person in this c
ongregation told me that she once 
saw a cartoon about a woman who threw such a self-m
arriage, only to meet the 
love of her life at the reception. Such ironies of 
course exist now and always will 
exist. 

 
And certainly, it™s not news that a great number of
 single people have 
not
 chosen
 to be single. Over a fifth of all US citizens have 
been widowed or divorced into 
their single state. Their partners have died.  Or t
heir partners have gone out the 
door and left them, sometimes without even the cour
tesy of divorce. Some of these 

 6 single people do not even think of themselves as si
ngle people, but prefer widow or 
widower or describe themselves as abandoned, or sad
 or forlorn. Having no choice 
about this can be very depressing indeed. 

 
Or some singles have really wanted to find a partne
r in life and have just not really 
been lucky in love, and count their single state as
 less than ideal. The 
insensitive–and how packed the world seems with ins
ensitive people at times like 
this– sometimes accuse of them being ?too picky.? S
till, only 16% of all singles 
say they are looking for a partner. That is not a l
arge percentage in my book. And, 
many singles are 
in 
committed relationships of some sort. Even if they 
are not 
living together.  

 
Furthermore, some single people describe themselves
 as lonely; others as lovers of 
solitude. It gets kind of confusing after a while, 
doesn™t it? 
 
But still, some of the things that are true about s
ingles who have not chosen their 
singleness are also true about singles who have cho
sen it. For instance, single 
people make 25% less at work than their married cou
nterparts. And singles are 
promoted at work far, far less than those who are m
arried. 
 
Now immediately, someone might say ?Well, of course
 this business about salary 
and promotion is true. It takes less money to take 
care of one person than it does 
two–or eight, if a couple happens to have six child
ren. True. But the serious 
trouble with that assumption is imagining that sing
le people do not have children. 
Millions of widowed and divorced people certainly d
o. And there are millions 
upon millions of single parents in this nation, esp
ecially single mothers who have 
been abandoned, or have even opted to adopt childre
n on their own, which is 
possible in most states. And as far as I am concern
ed, taking care of several 
children while you yourself are working full time i
s undeniably a miracle. Not a 
metaphoric miracle, but an old fashioned one, on th
e stature say, of the parting of 
the Red Sea. Of course, no scholar I know even thin
ks that that any such thing ever 
happened.  Single parenthood, however, happens ever
y day. Its real and its often 
tough. And that™s true even for those single people
 who joyously adopt. 
 
And, beyond children of whatever origin, the assump
tion is often made that single 
people like, say, myself, have nothing but themselv
es to spend their livelihood on. 
Again, there is tremendous bigotry and ignorance in
 that assumption.  The quite 
ordinary generosity of a godparent to his five godc
hildren left completely aside, 
there are many other people I have supported over t
he years, and far more than 
emotionally. I™ve helped pay tuitions. I™ve vouched
 at the car lot for barely 
working-class friends who have no other family to d
o so. I™ve financially supported 
people during difficult and tragic times in their l
ives. I™ve been real family to those 
who have none of their own, with all that entails. 
Why? Because I love them. 

 7 Because I care deeply for them. Because family is f
amily. No better reason exists. 
I™m not terribly different from folks with children
 of whatever origin, married or 
unmarried. Oh, don™t get me wrong. I do what I do g
ladly. I am not complaining or 
asking for anything. I have a pretty good life, acc
ording to most visible signs I can 
think of. But its important to assert that being si
ngle does not mean being a hermit 
in the desert, or worse, swinging from chandeliers 
every night in some sort of 
bachelor pad.  

 
And it does not necessarily mean celibacy, although
 it does for some, I suppose. 
The poet Wislawa Szymborska was, for a while, like 
me, married, although in her 
case I suppose the Government of Poland at the time
 actually thought it was a legal 
coupling. But for most of her life, Szymborska has 
been single. A single person. 
She has had love affairs, clearly. She writes of th
em all the time. And her poem 
this morning describes a person with many preferenc
es. She prefers cats to dogs, 
she tells us. And prefers writing poetry to not wri
ting poetry. But the point is, she 
is a person with likes and dislikes, cultures and p
atterns, ways and means, just like 
every other person on earth. Whether they are singl
e or married, partnered or un-
partnered, gay or straight or part of any other cat
egory of human beings we like to 
create in order to assert some sort of artificial c
ontrol over things–we all have 
dislikes, likes, preference and joys and sorrows. E
very one of us.  Isn™t the worth 
and dignity of every person one of our basic assert
ions, throughout our long 
Unitarian and Universalist history? ?Every person? 
means the worth and dignity of 
persons no matter the categories they™re slung into
. No matter their conditions, 
their bodies, their minds, their backgrounds, their
 arrangements, their choices, their 
suffering, their joy. Every one of them. 

 
Daniel Mendelsohn in the second reading says he wil
l never get married. Never 
have 500 or even 50 people at a reception, or hold 
an elaborate ceremony, and 
serve a five-tier cake. Perhaps. But how moved I wa
s to read his story, about 
visiting the grave of a relative whose only descrip
tion was ?unmarried.? She was 
not seen in relationship to herself, but only by he
r lack of relationship to someone 
else. She was not 
habetselet ha Sharon
 ?a rose of Sharon?– something beautiful, 
something as much a part of the erotic and lovely u
niverse of persons as anyone 
else, but merely an ?unmarried girl.? Mendelsohn ma
y not ever marry, but I am 
sure he has no intention of being remembered for th
at alone. There is so much 
more to him. He is not a father, per se. But he is 
a father figure to the young son of 
a single woman friend. He is gay; she is straight. 
They are not a couple. But he is 
with this boy and her mother every weekend. And I t
rust, after reading his moving 
memoir, that Mendelsohn™s spirit is open and growin
g past the limiting tombstone 
description of his ?unmarried? family member. Its c
lear that he sees that dignity 
and worth are intrinsic, and that all categories wh
ich twist or distort that intrinsic 
worth need to be questioned at all times, at all co
sts. 
 
 8 Children in our culture need to grow up knowing tha
t there are many choices open 
to them, may ways of living good, honest, and yes, 
happy lives. Many ways their 
intrinsic worth may find expression and meaning. 

 
When I was up in Toronto last Friday, preaching Deb
ra Faulk™s installation 
sermon, the choir of the Ottawa Unitarian Church ca
me down to sing at her 
ceremony. One of the things I heard them sing was a
 song I have heard our own 
choir sing before, I don™t remember how long ago. 

 
But the words of the song, written by Fred Small, a
 Unitarian Universalist minister, 
and a singer of the quality of Pete Seeger by many 
lights, sums up exactly the point 
of this sermon, and the words I imagine Daniel Mend
elsohn is even right now 
saying to the young boy he is helping to raise, the
 young boy who is not his son, 
but whom he loves with all his single man™s heart. 
Here are the words to that 
amazing song, with which I will end this sermon. An
d I tell you truly, no one in the 
Ottawa choir could sing the words of this song with
out wet eyes. When you hear 
them, I think you™ll know why. I™ve rearranged the 
words a bit to make them more 
the poem and less the song, but I have not changed 
their impact one whit: 
 
We have cleared off the table, the leftovers saved;
 washed the dishes and put them 
away. I have told you a story, and tucked you in ti
ght at the end of your knockabout 
day. As the moon sets its sails to carry you to sle
ep over the midnight sea, I will 
sing you a song–a song no one ever sang to me. May 
it keep you good company. 
 
You can be anybody you want to be. 

You can love whomever you will. 

You can travel any country where your heart leads, 
and know I will love you still 
You can live by yourself, you can gather friends ar
ound, you can choose one 
special one. 

And the only measure of your words and your deeds w
ill be the love you leave 
behind when you're done. 

 
There are girls who grow up strong and bold; 

There are boys quiet and kind. 

Some race on ahead, some follow behind. 

Some go in their own way and time. 

Some women love women, some men love men 

Some raise children, some never do. 

Don't be rattled by names, by taunts, by games.. Yo
u can dream all the day, never 
reaching the end of everything possible for you. 

And know I will love you still. 

 
Offering
 
 9  
There is no one else to support us but ourselves. 

There is no hidden resource, no great reserve. 

We, and we alone, are this congregation, its 

support and its power. Alone and together we make a
 future for ourselves by the 
simple courtesy of generosity. 

 
Ceremony of Installation
  
Wendy 

 
In the life of a liberal religious congregation, we
 try to put people before beliefs, 
and persons before ceremonies. Being present to eac
h other in both joy and sorrow, 
rejoicing and suffering is a mark of our religious 
practice.  
 
The ordained ministers of this church including the
 minister emerita, and our 
Commissioned Lay Leader Candidate, Dick Dawson, emb
race among their 
ministries the pastoral or caring services. In this
 we are supported and helped by 
the Caring Committee and the Neighborhood Network, 
which helps people in time 
of trouble with very tangible food, and rides to an
d from medical appointments 
among many other things. 

 
Mark 

 
To these ministries, Wendy and I have added the Pas
toral Team. The first team 
was installed five years ago. Today, after receivin
g training, we hereby install the 
new members of our team. Some members of the former
 2 teams will continue to 
serve in their present manner. 

 
The work and names of the Pastoral Team are describ
ed in the insert in your orders 
of celebration. Know that they each understand conf
identiality, promising to keep 
the sacred stories of every human life safe. They h
ave been trained to do this work, 
and Wendy, Dick and I hereby acknowledge them as pe
rsons of character, 
compassion and commitment, worthy of trust. 

 
Dick 

 
With Wendy and Mark, and on behalf of the members o
f this congregation and its 
leaders, I hearby install you within the Pastoral T
eam of First Unitarian 
Universalist Church. Working with the ministers and
 the Caring Committee and 
Neighborhood Network to live out our values of comp
assion and service one on 
one, I commend you to the congregation as servants 
of the heart.  
 
