 1 2007-1-21 Family as Metaphor MLB 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

as a warm winter gives way to colder days, 

to worship, which means to turn from the frantic 

toward the sublime, to leave the surface 

for the depths, to face our lives  

in the mirror of love, tender and tough. 

And so we approach our time together by saying: 

 

??

?ˆ???ˆ?

???ˆ???

???ˆ??
ˆ?
 
Sequence
  
When I contemplate the cosmos, stretching in all di
rections beyond my calculation, mostly 
empty, but dotted with small stars who cannot know 
I am here, I think, how rare is love! 
How unlikely! How surprising! 

 
When I contemplate the earth quietly spinning throu
gh this vast abyss; or when I note the 
unspeaking mountains, the secretive seas, the inart
iculate clouds, the unthinking rocks, I 
think, how rare is love! How unlikely! How surprisi
ng! 
 
When I contemplate the city which surrounds me, wit
h streets lined with trees which I can 
name but which cannot name me, with bricks and conc
rete which delight my eyes but 
never address my heart, I think, how rare is love! 
How unlikely! How surprising! 
 
When I contemplate the building which houses me rig
ht now, the hushed warm wood 
above me, the still soft carpet below me, the clear
 mute glass of the windows, I think, how 
rare is love! How unlikely! How surprising! 

 
Oh Love! When I contemplate how little I really kno
w, how unsure I am, I think, maybe 
the cosmos, the planet, the city and this house are
 setting a good example without knowing 
it –because to exist at all seems surprising and un
likely! And in this noisy world where so 
many assure me that they know both the name of God 
and the trajectory of fate, how can I 
help but want but to join in on such a rare and pre
cious silence–
  
Silence 

 2  
Oh Love! You have no face nor body nor house, 

yet you echo in the faces that inhabit my heart, th
ose who live there forever no matter if 
they are near or far, past or present, haunting or 
blessing. 
Let their names rise into my heart, or into my mout
h, that I may share this moment of 
silence with them–
  
Naming 

 
When I contemplate the wonder of the silent stars, 
the quiet oak trees, the perfectly still 
stones, and then come to realize that their wonder 
is actually transcended by the 
astonishment called love, and the transforming magi
c called music, I open my heart in the 
gratefulness that confirms my every breath. 

  

Reading
  
The First Reading is a journalist™s reflection on n
ew forms of family, and the original 
essay written just last year by Kristy Karras can b
e found in a website called 
?www.Unmarried America.org?  
When an uninsured member of Adriane Colvin's urban 
tribe had a brain aneurysm, the 
tribe - a group of friends that served as her subst
itute family - was there to help. They 
arranged her doctor visits, helped her around the h
ouse and started a fund to pay her 
medical bills.  

    "It was just an amazing outpouring of support,"
 Colvin said. But she wasn't surprised: 
The tribe has been supporting its members' needs fo
r years.  
    Such groups of adult friends usually don't call
 themselves tribes, or even necessarily 
think of themselves that way. All they know is, whe
n they need someone to help them 
move the furniture, give dating advice or plan a ho
me-cooked meal, they often turn to 
chosen families rather than biological ones.  

    "They evolve so organically that you don't reco
gnize the social momentum they contain. 
Once it gets to that point, you can remove a person
 from the group, and it doesn't change 
the group. It's highly clustered. You can actually 
graph it and see how this works in vast 
numbers of lines between people."  

    How do you know you're in a tribe? Go down the 
list of things your family used to do 
and ask, 'Does my family do this for me, or do my f
riends?'  For example, who vets 
potential dates? Whose shoulder do you cry on if yo
u've had a bad day?  
  

People have never done this before. They haven't sp
ent this much time away from family 
before. It's unheard of, and it creates a lot of an
xiety. Just by giving it a name and kind of 
sparking this discussion - a lot of people came for
ward and said, 'Me, too.' They have 
bought property together, started businesses and ar
e helping each other raise kids - an 
especially helpful aspect of tribal life when blood
 relatives aren't near and for people who, 

 3 as single adults with single friends, didn't have m
uch experience with marriage or children. 
 
The Second Reading comes from the Gospel of Mark, w
ritten by an anonymous author just 
after the Romans sacked Jerusalem in the year 70. T
he book is an interpretation of the 
ancient life of the Galilean teacher in the context
 of the times, rather than a sober 
reporting of it. Note that this author characterist
ically writes in the present tense. 
 
His mother and his brothers come on the scene. They
 stand outside the place where he is, 
sending a message into him. People are gathered rou
nd him, sitting on the floor, as the 
message is presented: ?Your mother and brothers are
 outside and want to see you.?  
 
He answers ?Who? My mother and brothers?? And then 
looking right at those seated 
around him, he says, ?Here is my mother and my sist
er and my brother.?   
 
Sermon
  
Life doesn™t really care very much if you are on sa
bbatical, I discovered while on one. 
Heart-breaking things do not go on hiatus just beca
use you are. 
 
My mother called me in September to tell me the sad
 news that Elaine died. My aunt 
Elaine. My mother™s best friend since childhood. El
aine™s daughter Chris asked if I might 
offer a eulogy for her mother at the Memorial Mass.
 Of course I was honored and moved 
to do so.  

 
Elaine came from a large family, with many, many re
latives in all directions. My mother, 
on the other hand, like my father, are both single 
children. So, according to literal 
bloodlines, Elaine was not my aunt, since I have no
ne. 
 
But as I said in her eulogy, with all of her blood 
nephews and nieces present, Elaine was 
my favorite aunt. There were other aunts too. Aunt 
Imelda. Aunt Emma.  
 
This is a somewhat common practice in the States, I
 have discovered, to use bloodline 
family words as metaphors for very special relation
ships among friends. Perhaps some of 
you do this in your own circles. 

 
My friend Paul™s wife Janice died suddenly while I 
was on sabbatical, too. I had married 
them 12 years ago, and, movingly, they named their 
son Mark after me. I adored Janice. 
 
When I went out to California to spend time with Pa
ul and grieve for Janice, Paul always 
referred to me as Uncle Mark in the presence of his
 son Mark. Paul has several blood 
brothers who are Mark™s uncles. But I too am an unc
le to Mark. 
 
 4 My family was small, but metaphor made it large. Ev
en my beloved grandfather Umberto 
was not my blood grandfather–my mother™s birth fath
er Eduardo Pozzi died at the Mayo 
Clinic of meningitis when she was but a little girl
, and Umberto later married my 
grandmother Anna, and officially adopted my mother.
 But I assure you, Umberto was no 
less my ?real? grandfather than my grandfather Nazz
areno was. 
 
Almost anyone who has had the privilege of adopting
 children will understand, probably 
viscerally, what I mean when I say that my grandfat
her Umberto was a ?real? grandfather. 
 
The word ?family? 
itself
 is used as a metaphor: ?This church is my family,?
 is one 
common affirmation I hear around here. ?Or the choi
r is my family.?  Some of you could 
probably add a dozen or more ways that you use the 
word ?family? in your own 
life–metaphorically. 

 
Now ?friend? is a perfectly good word. One of my fa
vorites. It™s what I would call a 
significant word. After all, ?friendship? is one of
 the richest gifts life offers us. Yet there 
are times that  family metaphors seems to supercede
 that powerful relationship, and 
reshape it. For example, the Rev. Barbara Pescan, w
ho preached here while I was gone on 
sabbatical, calls me her brother. And I call her my
 sister. 
 
I have a blood sister, Lynne, whom I love. But Barb
ara is also my real sister, whom I love. 
And when my best friend, Richard Sinkoff, flew to t
he General Assembly in Salt Lake 
City back in 1998, to come and hear the sermon I de
livered there, (he did this, bless him, 
as my birthday present that year,) I introduced him
 to the 17 members of the church who 
attended that General Assembly in this way ?This is
 my brother, Richard.?  Now I have a 
perfectly good brother in blood, Robert, up in Mich
igan, whom I love. But Richard is my 
real brother too. The metaphor is important to us b
oth. Like calling Elaine ?aunt? was 
important to me. Because it describes something rea
l. 
 
Rev. James Dobson claims to know a great deal about
 ?the family? here in the United 
States of America.  And not just here. His radio br
oadcasts called Focus on the Family are 
heard even in the People™s Republic of China, in tr
anslation. He is the most powerful 
conservative evangelical leader in the United State
s right now. His devotees are, in 
number, far greater than both Jerry Falwell™s and P
at Robertson™s at their peak of 
influence.  

 
Rev. Dobson is very clear–the patriarchal family wh
ere the father rules the roost is the 
only
 kind of family. Spanking children until they cry i
s perfectly appropriate, he affirms. 
And if they cry over five minutes, he says, it™s no
 longer the well deserved pain making 
them cry, but protest, so you need to give the chil
d another whack. Homosexual people 
have no right to families, except the families they
 were born into, families, he asserts, 
which should not support their children in their pe
rverted ways in any way. 
 
 5 The words ?diversity? and ?tolerance? sound noble, 
he says, but they are not. They are 
code words, he says, for saying that there is more 
than one opinion which can have 
authentic religious or philosophical underpinnings.
 Such as that there is more than one way 
of looking at the concept of abortion and the right
 of women to make fully accountable, 
and well-thought out controversial moral decisions 
on their own. Or such as that people 
who love same sex partners are fully human and not 
the hateful, stubborn lust-crazed 
monsters he makes them out to be. 

 
James Dobson is educated. Passionate. And he cares 
about the word ?family.?  But, he 
understands the word family to have an intrinsic an
d absolute structure. There can be no 
metaphorical families, nor can any metaphor be real
. There is no such thing as a diverse 
family. Oh, he understands legal adoption, don™t ge
t me wrong. And he understands that 
many modern families, such as the one portrayed in 
our story this morning, do not share 
skin color or ethnicity.  And he understands, begru
dgingly, that single parent families have 
to exist, because both death and divorce are undeni
able realities. 
 
But, he and his fellow religious leaders have taken
 complete control of all modern 
discourse about this in the United State of America
. The phrase ?family values? which he 
champions means primarily this for him: that famili
es have limited, absolute structural 
forms. This phrase is never associated with folks l
ike us in this congregation. This is a 
church chock full of families, all kinds of familie
s–look around you–but because we use 
the words 
diversity
 and 
tolerance 
around here
, he insists, we really don™t understand 
family values at all. 

 
Yet ultimately, although his power is great, and al
though Dobson™s preaching to 
200,000,000 on the radio is numerically more impres
sive by far than the mere 200,000 
Unitarian Universalists that exist in this world, I
 have to believe that Dobson™s ideology is 
ultimately doomed to failure.  

 
Why? Precisely because of what Kristy Karras writes
 about. There are already lots of 
diverse and metaphorical families out there for rea
l. Those urban tribes, as she calls them. 
Those people who live far away from the blood famil
ies that they love–or even from 
families they find hard to love. Our society has be
come mobile beyond the expectations of 
people at the turn of the 20
th
 century, who often lived all their lives in small 
towns, often in 
houses their grandparents built. Now, the great cit
ies on the coasts–west coast, east coast 
and the north coast cities like Chicago are filled 
with people who live far away from their 
parental home. Even Columbus, nowhere near any coas
t, is packed with these urban tribes.   
 
And all of these tribes, little by little, she insi
sts, discover they™re acting and behaving 
entirely like blood families. Because Dobson is rig
ht about one thing–families are very, 
very important. It™s hard to live without one. They
 are the central building blocks of 
society.  

 
 6 Oh, Jane Howard may be right, in her thought placed
 at the top of your order of 
celebration. Perhaps people don™t have to use the m
etaphor ?family,? if they don™t want to. 
Perhaps tribe will do for some, or clan, or even th
e rather computery word, network. I 
think as these new family systems develop, the voca
bulary will remain fluid for a while, 
which is fine, as far as I am concerned. We don™t n
eed any new Dobsons deciding once 
and for all, and for all people, what certain words
 mean, and who owns them. 
 
But I think it pretty clear what all these metaphor
s are about, what reality they stand for. 
They stand for raising money for a woman who has no
 health insurance, as Kristy Karras 
suggests. Or they stand for the people who help you
 move. Or for people who are there to 
?vet? your dates–that is, the people who scrutinize
 your dates to help you determine their 
suitability. Or they stand for people who cook you 
home-made soup when you have the 
flu, and the people with whom you talk about the re
al stories of your heart–without 
strategies or fears. 

 
Having these new families doesn™t mean giving up bl
ood families, although, sometimes, it 
has to be said, some of these new families thrive p
recisely because the blood families have 
taken such a sour course over the years, with vario
us betrayals and dramas. But mostly, 
these families live side by side, and both are impo
rtant. 
 
For example, this December I visited Richard Reisma
n, the brother of John Reisman of 
this church. By amazing co-incidence, Richard is th
e oldest California friend of my own 
best friend and brother, Richard Sinkoff. The small
 world quality of this amazing 
connection is the kind of thing that gets me spinni
ng with delight. So I went to visit 
Richard on his ranch an hour and half or so north o
f San Francisco in wine country.  
Richard lives on a huge ranch, which he bought with
 and shares with a number of other 
people, many of whom, like him, have lived there fo
r 30 years since they all joined 
together to buy the place, about a thousand acres o
f paradise. It™s a beautiful landscape in 
which to live, with rolling hills, lovely lakes, Fr
ench intensive gardens, wide pastures and 
working vineyards. There are many splendid houses, 
some already on the property when it 
was bought, some designed beautiful and new, all wi
thin short walks from each other 
along rustic paths.  

 
Richard Reisman said to me: ?It™s like a wonderful 
family here, with weekend dinners, and 
deep conversations and walks and shopping trips.?  
And I really had a sense of that family-
like feeling while I was there. But one of the thin
gs Richard told me over and over again 
while I was there was how much he loved John his br
other in Columbus, and how 
important John and Jane are to him. He said this wi
th moving emotion visible on his face. 
So clearly, having a local family does not at all m
ean tearing away from your blood 
family. Not at all. Both of Richard™s families will
 show up when he needs them, and vice 
versa. 

 
 7 Although the story in the gospel of Mark suggest ot
herwise, doesn™t it? It seems at first 
like a rude gesture on Jesus™ part, to turn away hi
s mother and brothers by telling them that 
his real family consists of the people he is now ha
nging around with. But in so doing, the 
critic Elizabeth Schussler-Fiorenza, suggests, Jesu
s is making a pointed attack not on his 
own family, but on the whole idea of what might be 
called a Dobson family, where the 
father and father alone had any dignity, and the ch
ildren and wife were simply adjuncts to 
the father, with no rights or dignity of their own.
 When Jesus says of his friends: ?These 
are my brother and sister and mother? he seems deli
berately to have neglected to mention 
?father.? Not because, please, that fathers are ter
rible–they are not. But a family structure 
that is predicated, as most first century families 
were from Rome to Damascus to 
Jerusalem, on the total freedom of the father or pa
triarch set against the powerlessness of 
the wife and children, nieces and nephews, younger 
aunts and uncles, economically, and in 
every other way, could only prove disastrous to the
 human spirit. You might call the Jesus 
of this story ?the anti-Dobson.? 

  

But the most important factor of this story to me i
s that it reveals that new forms of family 
have been living side by side with blood families f
or a long, long time. It™s not just 
something new that popped up in coastal cities of t
he United States because of great youth 
migrations. It™s been going on for along time. And 
in other countries besides this one. For 
example, there are, in India, Bangladesh and Pakist
an, over a million people called 
hijra
. 
They are male to female transsexuals and in some ca
ses, transvestites. Some undergo 
operations, some do not. But they are a whole cultu
re to themselves, more than half of 
them Muslim in religious affiliation, although ther
e are a many Hindus as well. When a 
young man decides he is to be a 
hijra
, most often his blood family kicks him out onto th
e 
streets.  And no matter what schooling you may have
 had, there will be no more work for 
you–no pharmacies, factories, schools, offices. 

 
The only thing you can do in the culture is to 

beg–or sell your sexual favors on the street. And o
ver a million do just that. But, 
everyone, even those degraded by society, needs a f
amily. So over the last hundreds of 
years, the 
hijra
 family itself has become something of an instituti
on, living along side 
families of more traditional patriarchal structure.
 And the culture thrives, despite the 
horrendous obstacles. 

 
Leonardo Da Vinci treated his pupil Francesco Melzi
 as a son. Sometimes their 
relationship is portrayed as erotic, but there is n
o evidence that Leonardo engaged 
erotically with him, only with Salai, his lover of 
many decades. And he left Melzi all his 
drawings, his paintings, his famous note-books, mos
t everything a father might leave a 
son, except some lucrative vineyards which he left 
to Salai, to take care of him. 
 
As I wrote in the newsletter, I have a son too, eve
n though we are not related by blood. 
Tony™s mother died when he was six, his biological 
father was never part of his life, 
having spent the most of his years in prison. And h
e grew up a ward of the state, raised in a 

 8 variety of foster homes in different towns. I™ve kn
own him since he was 19. We love each 
other very much, and communicate daily. I am his ba
bbo, his dad, and he is my figlio caro, 
my beloved son. We agree about this, we covenant th
at this is true. It™s deliberate. It 
sustains us both, this new family relationship. Ton
y is 23 now and lives in Albuquerque, 
with his partner Colin, my sweet son-in-law. The la
ws of our nation don™t think he™s my 
son-in-law, nor Tony my son, and neither does James
 Dobson. But Dobson has nothing 
worthwhile to say about my family life, except to a
gree with me that family life is central, 
important, and precious. And laws–
 well, in time, they almost always change. 
 
Western and Eastern histories are filled with stori
es of families that do not follow 
traditional norms. Many traditional families are wo
nderful. 
 
Some are not of course. Many chosen families are wo
nderful. Some are just as poorly 
functioning as some of the sad families rooted in D
obson™s religious worldview, where 
parents are encouraged to smack their kids till the
y cry, and then smack them when they 
don™t stop crying. 

 
The point is, we religious and philosophical progre
ssives, call us what you will, are even 
more supportive of the centrality of the family tha
n Dobson ever could be. Blood families, 
chosen families, accidental families, deliberately 
covenanted families. Those uncles and 
aunts, those brothers and sisters, those sons and d
aughters–
 blood or no blood, 
metaphorical or biological–they™re real. As far as 
I am concerned, religious liberals 
cannot go wrong in proclaiming without any hesitati
on whatsoever that you cannot 
possibly have too many healthy real families, the g
round and source of our cultures, the 
support of our individual selves.  

 
For W.H. Auden is right you know–?we must love one 
another or die.?  Love fiercely, 
honestly, deeply emotionally, unconditionally, joyf
ully, painfully and with gratitude. 
Blessed be Love, our true end, and our true means, 
our joy and our struggle, our 
sustenance and our strength. Amen. 

 
Offering
  
We always offer this time as an opportunity during 
our meeting for worship to bring our 
pledges and gifts for the support of the institutio
nal health and welfare of this 
congregation, its site, buildings, staff, heat, and
 future. Thank you for making this place 
possible.  

 
A New Heart Sutra 
 The heart that beats in my breast 

rhymes to the beat of the heart in your breast. 

 9 The beat is a poem written by no one with a name, a
 verse written for both for those who 
suffer and let that suffering define them, and for 
those who have learned not to let 
suffering define them once and for all time. 

The muscle heart that beats in my breast is real, 

made of flesh and blood.  

The metaphoric heart that beats in my breast 

is also real, made of yes and love. 

Family and friends and strangers, all with hearts 

beating, rhyming with each other, 

making a world where we are never, not now, 

not ever, alone, or entirely our own. 

Empty and full at the same time, I bow, o Love. 

 
