 1 2007-04-08 Easter  

 
Mark Belletini 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here, 

after a wild week of warm blue skies one day, 

and snow falling like cherry blossoms the next, 

to celebrate life with joy and flowers, 

to sing and reach out and hone our hearts 

and dream of a world transformed. And so: 

 
As we move through this year of transition and joy,
 we remember with gratitude the power 
of our living heritage, which moves through time li
ke a clear running creek; 
refreshing us with the sweet draughts of courage, h
ope, justice-making, peaceful living, 
ever deeper honesty, and more truthful loving. And 
so we kindle this light in thanksgiving 
 
Sequence for Easter 

 
Here we are at the still point, 

the fulcrum between one moment  

and the next, 

between the first part of the celebration 

and the last,  

between the big bang at the beginning of time, 

and the final day when the last sun goes out. 

Each precious minute a bud, slowly opening 

into the blossom of experience, 

and a whole bouquet of gratitude. 

Here we are, poised at the next step, 

dancers on point, about to step back and leap, 

rookie pitchers just releasing the ball, 

or children just waking up from a nap; 

but here, not quite there yet, 

not aloft, or released, or fully awake, 

just on the edge, the verge, the threshold. 

So come now, Spirit of Life, 

Song of Songs, Life of Life,  

and clap, ring, chime! Startle us 

until, like spring robins, we too rise, aloft, free
 in imagination™s silent flight.      
silence 
On this Easter Day, let us pause, especially to cal
l to mind and heart those who have risen to 
stroll within the deep-scented garden of our best l
ove, those we miss and whom we recognize as 
givers of gifts that continue to be opened. We bles
s them by naming them aloud, or remembering 
them with quiet reverence and peace in our grateful
 hearts. 
 
naming 

 
 2 Cold or warm, the world around us choruses on Easte
r day; blossoms chant, roses hum, daffodils 
trumpet, snapdragons ring. And deepest laud and pra
ise blooms in the sacred garden called 
music. 

 
Readings
  
The First Reading is a poem by the Nicaraguan poe, 
 Claribel Alegria, 1993, from her book 
Fugues. 

 
I think of our nameless boys, 

of our burnt-out heroes; 

I think of the fiercely wounded,  

who lost their legs, or both eyes: 

the stammering teenagers. 

At night I listen to their spirits 

shouting in my ear, 

shaking me out of lethargy, 

issuing me commands. 

I think of their tattered lives, 

of their feverish hands 

reaching out to clutch at ours. 

It™s not that they are begging; 

no, they™re demanding, 

they have earned the right to order us, 

to break open our sleep, 

to wake us up, 

to shake off once and for all 

this weariness. 

 
The Second Reading comes from the end chapters of t
he Gospel of John, a meditation on the life 
of Jesus written over a hundred years after his bir
th, edited by several editors, but containing 
novelistic details that make this work a favorite a
mong many passionate believers, and the most 
criticized gospel by historians. 

 
Joseph of Aramathea asked Pilate for permission to 
take Jesus™ body down from the cross, since 
he was dead. Pilate agreed, so Joseph came and remo
ved the body from the cross. Nicodemus 
came too, bringing about seventy-five pounds of spi
ces, a mixture of myrrh and aloes. So they 
took Jesus™ corpse, and wrapped it in strips of bur
ial cloth suffused with the spices, for this is the
 
typical custom in Judea. Now there was a garden nea
r the place where he had been crucified, and 
a new tomb in the garden where no one had yet been 
buried. Since this tomb was handy, and 
because of the approaching holiday, it was here tha
t they laid Jesus. 
 
On Sunday, by the half-light of early morning, Mary
 from Magdala comes to the tomb, and 
notices that the stone across the entrance has been
 rolled away. So she runs and comes to Simon 
Peter and that other student of Jesus, the one whom
 he loved the most, and tells them ?They have 
taken our Master from the tomb, and we don™t know w
here they took his body.?  
 
So Peter and the other student went out from where 
they were staying, and made their way to the 
site of the tomb. They were running, actually, but 
the other student ran faster than Peter and got 

 3 there first. Stooping down, he could see all the cl
oths lying there, but he didn™t go in. Then Peter 
came huffing along behind him, but he immediately w
ent in. Inside, he too sees the burial cloths, 
and the piece of cloth they use to bind the jaw, ov
er on the side, rolled up by itself. Then the 
other student also came in. But since neither of th
em understood, they went back home. 
 
Sermon 

 
Well, even though most modern scholars that I respe
ct are not too keen on the author and editor 
of the gospel of John as an accurate historian, thi
s classic Easter story is important to me. 
Because, you see, I lived it. And I mean, quite lit
erally. 
 
A few years ago I was in Jerusalem, or Yerushalayim
 as it™s called in modern Hebrew, or Al 
Quds, as it™s called in Arabic. I truly fell in lov
e with that beautiful city, and could even imagine 
living there. It was so vital, so alive, so complex
, so surprisingly cosmopolitan.   
 
One day, my friend Ned and I were climbing down one
 of the cliff-like rocky hills that seem to 
jut up and down everywhere in that amazing city. 

 
At the base of this stony cliff, carved into the ro
ck itself, was a tomb. A tomb with a great big 
round stone that been rolled away from the entrance
 on a sort of stone groove. The dark entrance 
to the tomb was low and square, and black as pitch 
when contrasted to the bright, sunlight-
whitened granite of the cliff. 

 
Ned and I looked at each other. I said ?Whaddya kno
w? Looks like you and I are right smack 
dab in the middle of a genuine Bible story! Let™s g
o see it!? 
 
We didn™t exactly run, like the two students in the
 story, because the ground was quite littered 
with loose rocks and, unfortunately, sharp daggers 
of broken glass, so we had to be careful. But 
we did, as the Bible sometimes puts it, ?hasten.? 

 
When we got to the tomb, we noticed that there were
 some Greek letters carved into the space 
right above the dark entrance to the tomb. Time had
 faded the letters some. But since the very 
sight of this tomb had turned us both into excited 
amateur archeologists, we put our heads 
together and dated the sign above the tomb from the
 early Byzantine era–say the year 400 or 
so– because of the style of Greek letters we could 
make out. But the actual structure of the tomb 
itself suggested that it probably dated from much e
arlier, even to the days of Herod the Great at 
the turn of the millennium. It was a very typical f
irst century Judean tomb. 
 
The low, square entrance was totally dark, and we c
ouldn™t see much. And of course, we had no 
flashlights with us. We were both a little hesitant
 to enter the tomb, because it was so dark we 
didn™t know if we would bump into walls or hit our 
heads on some low arch. Or even if some 
wild dog or city rats might not have claimed the pl
ace as a home. 
 
But it was just too incredible to find such a site 
not entirely fenced off with warnings by 
professional archeologists that we decided to enter
 the tomb. We agreed to let our eyes slowly 
adjust to the dark so we wouldn™t hit our heads. 

 
 4 There were three low chambers in the tomb, very typ
ical of the First Century. Each chamber had 
two or three shelf-like niches in its walls where t
he dead bodies were placed. After the bodies 
had decomposed, their bones were put in a bone-box 
and then perhaps buried elsewhere.  
 
We could see pretty well from reflected light in th
e first two chambers, but when we got into the 
rear chamber, we had to be still for a while until 
our eyes adjusted. Then Ned said, ?Mark, do 
you see that??  I did see what he was seeing. There
, on one of the shelves, were cloths. Colored 
cloths all kind of bundled up or strewn across the 
shelf. Again, we felt like we were right in the 
classic story. 

 
But as our eyes focused, however, we saw more thing
s, things not found in any biblical story. 
We found trash left over from fast-food stands, and
 some paper dishes; and on the rocky floor, 
three well-used sleeping bags. Ned and I looked at 
each other. We knew who had risen that 
morning from this tomb, and gone into the city to a
ppear to passers-by–not a prophet, but a 
small community of homeless folk. Since Jerusalem™s
 altitude leads to snow and bitter cold, 
shelter is necessary even at that latitude to keep 
homeless folks alive as they sleep outside of 
heated buildings occupied by their human brothers a
nd sisters. 
 
It was a very moving realization to both of us. Wit
hout a single angel in sight, we heard the 
words: ?They have risen. They are not here.  They a
re up in the alleys of old city, trying to figure 
out where to get their next meal. No one particular
ly sees them.  They are like ghosts to them, 
not real people with real lives. Behold. 

They have gone before you.? 

 
The Easter story all of a sudden had a new meaning 
to me. 
 
The idea considered fashionable on this Sunday is t
hat Easter is about one man™s death being 
reversed somehow, and that this is somehow signific
ant. Personally, when I read the Greek 
scriptures, I don™t see that at all. The story of E
aster, after all, is not an isolated story. It™s on
e 
chapter in a book of many chapters. It seems to me 
that a man, who all of his life blessed the 
poor, addressed the oppressed, fed the hungry and g
ave bear hugs to outcasts is hardly being 
treated fairly if the last chapter of his life of s
ervice and love is only a magic trick of personal 
resuscitation, as if the poor and outcasts suddenly
 just dropped out of sight. It seems to me, they 
too are in that story. And after my experience in J
erusalem in a tomb, I think I understand how. 
 
In the stories as they have come down to us through
 the reflective generations, Jesus is not 
recognized either when he leaves his mythic tomb, a
nd people think he™s a ghost, a spirit.  And 
as I see it, that™s not much different from a homel
ess person, or a teenager truant from a 
Columbus High School, or a 14-year-old with blown o
ff legs in a suburb of Baghdad. Or the 
families hidden away in shelters of every major Uni
ted States city, including this one. Ghosts. 
Spirits. They are not on the cover of 
People Magazine
, or being televised with rolling eyes on 
American Idol
, or smiling with bared teeth on 
Fox News.
 They are the completely unseen. They 
are, in short, those whom society prefers to remain
 invisible, or even dead, to the living before 
they are actually dead. 

 
But our poet, Senora Alegria, 
does
 see them. She can™t sleep, because she sees them s
o well. 
Especially the young ones, the teenagers, the namel
ess ones. The wounded and wound up. And 
they make demands of her. They ask her to see them.
 To notice them. They have earned the right 

 5 to wake us up, she writes. To prod, ring, poke, clu
tch at us until we are awake and can rise up out 
of our weariness. 

 
Now when I read of young people dying in distant wa
rs, or see and talk with homeless people in 
our city, or hear of painfully high numbers of teen
agers running truant from our high schools, my 
first temptation is to be overwhelmed.  To feel dow
n. Discouraged. 
 
But when I give it a bit of thought, I begin to rea
lize that feeling down about such things is just 
like a tomb where the stone stays put, and the swee
t spices with which the dead are buried 
completely conceal the stench.  

 
And of course, when I talk about things which disgu
ise the stench, the reality, I am not just 
talking about the sweet luxury of feeling bad or di
scouraged.  I am talking about all the things 
which those seventy-five pounds of myrrh and aloes 
in the story symbolize. I am talking about 
all the ways modern society has found to disguise t
he stench of corruption and death in our days. 
I am talking about the weighty trivialization of th
e humane idea of justice for all, and the power 
it takes to achieve that ideal. When our young men 
and women get taken out by the powers that 
be, we don™t disguise their misery with myrrh and a
loes. No, we use more modern methods: 1. 
We encourage everyone to go after their 15 minutes 
of fame - with the internet, not a problem. 2. 
We offer wildly inflated fascination and wildly inf
lated salaries for the symbolic people 
Americans tend to worship instead of God: media sta
rs like Anna Nicole Smith, or famous 
coaches or players on dazzling teams; 3. We think t
hat the number of children movie stars can 
adopt from foreign countries is a more upbeat stati
stic than giving the number of children blown 
up in foreign cities, or walking our streets instea
d of going to school. 4. We still live as if things
 
falling in, and out of, fashion is meaningful. 5: W
e still offer Madison Ave the opportunity to 
hype us with clever Geico cavemen spoofing inclusiv
e ideals. 6. We still fall for the notion that 
there is an instant diet that will cost us nothing,
 feel good, and magically transform us, or that if 
we follow a certain program, real estate success wi
ll be ours in two weeks at most. Or even 
sooner, if you prefer the magical thinking offered 
by the new best seller, 
The Secret
.  Me. Me. 
Now. Now. All of these and more are the sweet smell
ing spices favored  to disguise and hide the 
death of a culture where, in Lynne Laitala™s perfec
t words, ?homelessness is only a lack of 
shelter, not a breakdown of community.? 

 
No, instead of feeling bad, I, along with Unitarian
 Universalist theologian Sharon Welch, prefer 
to use the word ?accountability.?  If we promote ?t
he inherent worth and dignity of all human 
beings,? and we Unitarian Universalists do, then it
 seems to me we are accountable to those 
folks–among us and outside our circle– who have the
 inherent worth kicked out of them, 
stolen from them, denied them, or not seen in them,
 for one social reason or another. It seems to 
me that accountability means us wanting, with all o
f our heart, to do the, yes, joyful work that 
transforms the world, so that the power of inherent
 worth no longer allows exceptions.  
 
 
And isn™t that what the Easter story is all about? 
Transformation? Something that becomes 
something else? ?Feeling bad? transformed into joy.
  Discouragement transformed into the spirit 
that gets things done. And what is that proverb peo
ple are always quoting to me all the time?  
If 
you do the same thing over and over and expect diff
erent results, then you are deluded.  
A 
healthy person expects transformation, and thus doe
s different things, not more of the same.  
 
 
 6  
The early Christians read the same stories as moder
n conservatives do, and somehow did not 
read about the singular resuscitation of a singular
 person. Instead of depicting Jesus as coming 
back to life just as he was before he died, except 
for a few nail holes, the Roman Christians filled 
their catacombs with paintings of butterflies, soar
ing birds, and wonderful flowers. Why? 
Because Easter is not about more of the same, but a
bout transformation. Because, as our 
children™s story points out so clearly, when caterp
illars transform, they become astonishing 
butterflies that don™t look very much like the fing
er-thick green thing clinging to a branch. And 
oval eggs, smooth and sky blue, give way to bright,
 rising robins; and small hard seeds explode 
into bright flowers of tender fragility and heartbr
eaking beauty. Transformations all.  
 
And homeless people can demand and command and haun
t us all, until we too, as a society, are 
transformed, and homelessness no longer exists as a
 word in English, or Hebrew, or Arabic or 
any language. And tombs can be left as archeologica
l curiosities, not shelters for the poor. And 
the streets of the city can be for people with jobs
 and an education that means something to them, 
not truants from school. And explosives can be used
 for fireworks marking the end of a war, not 
as weapons to destroy life and limb. Real transform
ations. No disguises, no running away from 
reality. No shelter in the cold tomb of discouragem
ent and even cheap guilt. But the truly joyful 
honor of accountability, the satisfaction of compas
sion, the pleasure of allowing ourselves to be 
touched deeply. 

 
This is why Wendy and I lift up the great social ju
stice organizations like BREAD, or 
RESULTS, or the Unitarian Universalist SERVICE COMM
ITTEE. Because these are 
organizations of accountability, of compassion, str
uctured with the strong muscles of 
organization.  When literally hundreds of people fr
om this congregation show up at a meeting 
with hundreds from other Jewish, Protestant and Cat
holic congregations around Central Ohio for 
a meeting that engages, practically and with deep s
tudy, the serious problem of truancy in this 
community, they are living out the very meaning of 
Easter. And of Passover and the Flower 
Ceremony too. Take Easter first. For the Greek word
, translated as resurrection in English, is 
anastasis,
 which really just means ?to stand up again.? And t
hat™s what we™ll be doing at both 
the BREAD meetings in April and May, 
standing up
 again for both compassion and justice, and 
the inherent worth of every single person, no matte
r who. And the Passover is about the 
complete, if slow, transformation of servile people
 with bent backs, into people who together 
stand up straight and tall for each other as they m
ake pilgrimage toward their freedom. And the 
Flower Ceremony describes, with almost infinite bea
uty, the worth of every single flower, 
despite their universal fragility. Norbert Capek, t
he originator of this ceremony, went to his death 
at Dachau rather than refuse to live out the promis
e of this rite in his every day life. Even when 
the Nazis came knocking at his door, he stood up fo
r his principles with joy. 
 
The life of Jesus ended in shock and sadness for th
ose who loved him. Of this there can be little 
doubt. But the Easter story, and the literary const
ruct of what we now call the Empty Tomb, 
provides a strong sign that, although individual li
ves may end, the spirit of justice, of 
compassion, of love itself, which bind individual l
ives into communities of power and joy, may 
never be buried for good. Nor may the stench of inj
ustice be long disguised by the spices of 
cultural excess or the sealed exits, provided by jo
yless discouragement. For as my friend Ned 
and I figured out that day, if the whole world were
 an Easter World, tombs of certainty can 
become wombs of hope, from which new life, transfor
med life, can come forth–the un-free set 
free, the truants welcomed home and to school, the 
homeless sheltered by now transformed and 

 7 joyful living people; no longer would they be ignor
ed by the sweet-smelling dead who like their 
tombs closed nice and tight. 

 
Blest is this Easter Day, and the transformation an
d accountability it asks of us. 
 
Offering:
  
Remembering that transformation is a constant deman
d, that growth of spirit and joy ask of us a 
certain generosity of heart, we set aside a time du
ring each Sunday Celebration when the 
blessings which have sustained us become the blessi
ngs we share with our community. 
 
Flower Ceremony  
(adapted from Capek™s 1923 prayer) 
 
Minister: 
In the name of that Mystery which implants in the s
eed the future of the flower, and in 
our hearts, the longing for harmony and peace; 

 
East Voice  
In the name of the Most High and Most Deep, in whom
 we move and have our 
being, and who makes father and mother, brother and
 sister, lover and loner what they are; 
 
South Voice 
In the name of the sages and prophets who lived out
 their lives to hasten the coming 
of the age of mutual respect--- 

 
West Voice 
Let us renew our passion to find ways to be real br
others and sisters to each other, 
regardless of the kinds of barriers which try to se
parate us, one from the other. 
 
North Voice 
In this holy resolve may we be strengthened, knowin
g that we are as one family, 
the human family; that one spirit, the spirit of lo
ve, unites us, and in that spirit, may we move 
toward a more just and joyful life each and every d
ay.
  
