  2008-10-12 Forgive or Relive  

Mark Belletini and Meg Barnhouse 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

to see ourselves in the mirror of this day 

that we might know how to turn 

toward the days to come with deep honesty. 

Today may we remember that we are free  

to be who we are, not what we were. Amen
. 
In gathered community we dare to say:
  
And so, though our ways of thinking and feeling abo
ut the meaning of our days may 
differ, we agree to journey together, side by side,
 face to face. Within this circle of 
strong spirit, mutual care, and ethical vision, may
 we ourselves remain open to 
being transformed by a welcoming heart and emerging
 justice. 
 
Sequence
  
The leaves are falling. 

Let my belief that my worries 

are dials with which I control the world also fall.
 The leaves are falling. 

Let my belief that if I expect nothing good, 

then I™ll never be disappointed also fall. 

The leaves are falling. 

Let my pre-emptive self-doubts also fall. 

The leaves are falling. 

Let my steaming impatience fall away too. 

The leaves are falling. 

Let my self-lashing about not accomplishing 

everything I wanted to do fall away too. 

O Silence, you whom I neither create nor erase, 

come now, like the autumn breezes. 

Shake my branches. 

Strip them of what is dry and no longer vital, 

no matter how beautiful they appear to be. 

And let them fall, fall, fall way. 

 
silence 

 
Silence, you hold all names within your center. The
 living and the dead, 
the old and the young, the troubled and the joyful,
 the worried and the hopeful. 

  Bring us too into your center as we name the names 
important in our hearts–those we 
love and miss, those who are suffering, those who a
re struggling. In our quiet hearts, or in 
this quiet room, we name them–
  
naming 

 
Song of peace, lead us to peace. 

Let your beauty grant us rest and  

diminish our faith in worrying.  

Let your beauty remind us that,  

come day or night, 

we are part of the beauty too–
 the beauty of the world,  

the beauty of storms passing,  

the beauty of forgiveness,  

the beauty of being stubborn no more 

and opening to the possible. 

 
The First Reading
 is a cautionary folktale from the Hebrew Scriptures
; it™s even 
possible that it™s organically related to a very si
milar story in Greek mythology, called 
Agamemnon and Iphigenia, since they date from the s
ame era. We don™t know its origin, 
save that it was written down in its present form a
t the same time as the Torah was finally 
edited. In the English Bible, the man™s name is ren
dered Jephthah. In Hebrew, it™s 
Yiftakh. The war between the Ammonites and the Isra
elites was not a war between two 
different nations, since the word Ammon simply mean
s ?compatriot.? So we are talking 
about a civil war here. 

 
Yiftakh was an able warrior, the son of Gil™ad. But
 he was born of a sexual affair Gil™ad 
had, and his mother was not Gil™ad™s wife. When his
 half-brothers, who were the sons of 
Gil™ad and his wife, grew up, they shunned him, and
 took away his inheritance. So 
Yiftakh left the town of Watchtower, and lived in t
he hills, gathering a rag-tag collection 
of ruffians around him. They lived by raiding local
 villages. 
 
When the Ammonite people began a war with the Israe
lite people, leaders from his clan 
came to Yiftakh and said: ?We want you to come and 
be our general.?  Yiftakh said: 
?You threw me out, and now you want me back!? So yo
u only come to me when you are 
in trouble, is that it??  The clan elders, his brot
hers, said ?We beg of you–we are asking 
in all sincerity.? 

 
So Yiftach gave in, and came to serve. At first he 
approached the Ammonite leaders, and 
tried to make peace with them. But they refused to 
respond to his pleas. So he prepared 
for battle. As he laid out the march for his men, h
e made the following vow to God: ?If 
you give me victory, O Eternal One, then I promise 
to sacrifice as a burnt offering 
whatever comes out of the door of my house to greet
 me when I return home.? Yiftach 
won the battle, a complete rout. 

 
  But when Yiftach arrived back home in Watchtower, w
here he lived, who should come 
out to greet him and welcome him home but his daugh
ter, dancing, with tambourines 
rattling in her hand. She was his only child. On se
eing her, he rent his garments, and cried 
out: ?How low you have brought me! How depressed I 
am! For I have opened my mouth 
to the Eternal and I can™t take it back!? 

 
His daughter said, however: ?Do to me as you have v
owed. Just give me two months to 
mourn my death as just a teenager who will now neve
r know a romantic relationship.?  
So she did, wandering the hills grieving for her li
fe, weeping with her companions and 
friends. Then she returned home, and her father did
 as he had vowed.
  
The  Second Reading
 this morning comes from poet Jacquiline Osherow, wr
itten in 
1999. The Scroll of Ekah or Book of Lamentations wh
ich she quotes at the end, is a slim 
volume in the Hebrew Scriptures. 

 
 Sonnet for Yom Kippur with a line from Lamentation
s 
 
 Can a person atone for pure bewilderment? 

 For hyperbole? For being wrong 

 in a thousand categorical opinions? 

 For never opening her mouth, except too soon? 

 For ignoring all week long, the waning moon 

 retreating from its haunt above the local 

 canyons, signaling her season to repent, 

 then deflecting her repentance with a song 

 because the rest is just too difficult to face? 

 What we are, I mean in all its meagerness, 

 the way we stint on any modicum of kindness? 

 What we allow ourselves? What we don't learn? 

 How each lapsed, unchanging year resigns us? 

 Return us, Lord, to you, and we'll return. 

 
Sermon Meg Barnhouse 
(these are 
notes 
for a sermon, not the actual sermon itself. 
Please note–the recording of the actual 
preached
 sermon is still available.)
   

One of the things you hear over and over again from
 this pulpit is that church is for 
proclaiming liberty to the captives and setting the
 prisoners free.  One way we are 
imprisoned is by not forgiving the wrongs that have
 been done to us. Our prison is our 
resentments and our replaying the wrong while waiti
ng for    an apology.   When there is 
someone whose actions hurt you and keep hurting you
, when your memory of what they 
did to you is re-lived over and over in your mind, 
they are living in your head. They are 
intruding on your life. They are plugged in to your
 energy grid, sucking life force and 
soul-force out of you.  Booker T Washington, organi
zer and first president of Tuskegee 
Institute in Alabama, had a lifelong motto:  "I sha
ll allow no man to belittle my soul by 
making me hate him."   

 
   When I talk about wrongs done, some people will th
ink about a fight they have 
had with a sibling or a friend, others will think o
f the boss who is making their lives hell, 
and still others brace themselves, wondering if I a
m going to say they have to forgive and 
forget incest or other abuse. What I want to ask is
 that you listen this morning as you are 
able,   take what speaks to you, and let the rest g
o. You are the only one who can say 
where forgiveness is needed between you and another
, between you and yourself, or 
between you and God.  Some people live feeling that
 God hasn™t forgiven them, and 
some people live as if they have not forgiven God. 
Why do we need to talk about 
forgiveness? Forgiveness is related to both emotion
al and physical healing. Every 
religion of the world says it™s important. Feeling 
  you have been wronged is not good for 
you. Holding on to impotent anger makes us cramped 
and closed. What is ?impotent 
anger?? It is anger that is not doing anything for 
you, anger that has no fruitful power. It 
may be a collection of small grudges and resentment
s or it may be rage, but if the anger is 
not bearing good fruit for you in terms of moving y
ou out of hurtful situations, protecting 
you from hurtful people, energizing you to do what 
you can to make things better for 
yourself. We may talk more about anger another Sund
ay.  
 
 Forgiveness is difficult because when we are wrong
ed, we stiffen into self-
righteousness. Self-righteousness is dangerous, the
 root of almost all wicked behavior. 
We have a picture in our mind that the one who wron
ged us should apologize. We start 
watching the movie of how it should be. We  articul
ately explain our point of view with 
just the right amount of calm and just the right ed
ge,  and the ones who wronged us slap 
their heads in enlightenment, in realization. They 
say: ?How wrong I was!!! You were 
right and I was wrong. What can I do to make it up 
to you?? We exercise our arguments, 
we polish our grudges. We repeat them to ourselves;
 we can drop into the groove of 
recrimination and resentment at a moment™s notice; 
we can do it in our sleep. We lull 
ourselves with the recitation. The resentment can b
ecome part of who we are. Part of our 
personality™s clothing, our identity. It feels good
 to be a righteous victim. We go to 
friends and get as many people as we can to hear ou
r story. It is soul-satisfying to hear 
them say: ?Oh NO she did not say that!?  
 
There is nothing wrong with this if we do it in goo
d faith.  We are trying to 
validate our perceptions: ?Would this make you mad?
   Is this person being a jerk, or is it 
me?? I have to say there   is a lot to learn about 
yourself from watching to whom you go 
to tell your story. Some people are going to be on 
your side no matter what. Others will 
tell you if you are being a jerk. We go to the peop
le we think will tell us what we are 
ready to hear. Many people are completely justified
 in feeling like a righteous victim. It™s 
an archetypal role, an ancient one, and it may be a
ppropriate for a time, but we have to 
watch out for it, as we do all well-defined roles, 
that we do not start sleep-walking, letting 
it   make our choices for us. Forgiving requires a 
willingness to look at the harm being 
done to you by not beginning to forgive, looking at
 the stiffening righteousness. The 
harm is that you are stuck. You are also stuck to t
he person at whom you are angry. You 
cannot go anywhere without dragging them along with
 you. The harm is that you feel that 
other people might hurt you the same way. You becom
e braced. Ready to be hurt, to be 
left, to be abandoned, to be betrayed. You don™t ha
ve to look at yourself, if you are a 
victim of mean parents or two timing lovers. You ge
t to be the right one. Being RIGHT is 

  a BIG part of not wanting to forgive. You can be ri
ght, absolutely. And still be hurt by 
harboring anger against the person who hurt you.  T
he Course in Miracles, which some of 
you have studied, says: ?You can be right or you ca
n be happy.? 
 
 One way to let go of someone and get your strength
 back is the resentment prayer. 
Ask for/wish for them everything you want for yours
elf. You don™t have to mean it. Try it 
for fourteen days straight. It™s amazingly powerful
 magic, and I™m not sure exactly how it 
works. Clarissa Pinkola Estes: "Forgiveness seems u
nrealistic because we think of it as a 
one-time act that had to be completed in one sittin
g. Forgiveness has many layers, many 
seasons. It is not all or nothing, if you can do a 
95% forgiveness, you are a saint. 75% is 
wonderful. 60% is fine. Keep working/playing with i
t. The important things are to 
BEGIN and to CONTINUE.    

 
 For most of us, the day-to-day act of forgiveness 
is the art of forgiving ourselves. 
We make vows we can™t keep. We end relationships wh
en we said we would love the 
person forever.  We tell our parents we will take c
are of them, and then we can™t. We say 
we won™t ever yell that way again, then we do. We s
ay we will remember that our partner 
has our best interests at heart, then we forget and
 accuse them of treachery. How can we 
put one foot in front of the other when we fail so 
often? Forgiveness. We™re human 
beings. We need the grace of forgiveness, from othe
r people and from ourselves. This is a 
good day to remember that.  

 
Song 

 
Mark Belletini 

 
Yes, today IS a good day, as our children™s story m
ade so delightfully clear, to lift our 
head up from its downward tilt, and look at each ot
her face-to-face, and even to look at 
the sky–so radiant and blue, but totally invisible 
to anyone maintaining a resentment, an 
anger, a grudge, or any other emotional weight that
 keeps the head bent down, as under a 
heavy weight.  Meg lifted up the point of that stor
y delightfully.   
 
But what of that other story, the one from the Hebr
ew scriptures, that starts off with a 
description of a family that sounds like an episode
 of Jerry Springer, and ends with a 
horrific Greek tragedy that hurts the heart? 

 
In the first place, this very adult story, in one f
orm or another, is found around the 
Mediterranean world–just like the story of the Grea
t Flood, just like the story of the 
doomed greedy city of Gomorrah, and just like the s
tory of the wealthy patriarch 
Abraham. Call him Croesus or call him Abraham–it ma
kes little difference. Stories, 
after all, are true in the way they are true. They 
are not sober history, but they are sober 
invitations to get real. 

 
That™s right. Get real. For this holiday is about t
he reality of our human responsibility, not 
about our opinions about theology and God. 

 
  As I said once before, when I told the story of Avr
aham and Yitzak (Abraham and Isaac) 
which is usually retold on this day, the point is n
ot ?Obey God.? The point is not that we 
should be resigned to any demands made of us. The s
tory says this: Avraham was a 
terrible father. I assure you, if a great voice wer
e to come out of the sky, and say: ?Take 
your son, whom you love, and offer him to me as a b
urnt offering,? the answer is not 
obedience, but ?Hell, no!?  

 
The stories attached to this holiday, in other word
s, tell us that we have to make up our 
own minds on our own moral understanding, and not f
ollow the dictates of even an all-
powerful God should such a being exist in some lite
ral form with a voice and great 
power. 
You must never harm children
 is a higher authority than any voice that asks us 
to 
hurt or harm. 

 
The Jephthah/Yiftakh story makes this even clearer.
 In this case, Yiftakh makes a vow to 
God. God is not asking him to do this. He is just f
oolishly showing off his piety before 
his troops. And they all hear him make his rash vow
.  
 
Who knows who he thought would greet him when he ca
me home? Clearly not his 
daughter. The thing is, it makes no difference who 
he thought would come out to meet 
him. His dog, his valet, whoever–it was a stupid vo
w to make, a rash promise, a 
dramatic gesture to curry favor with his community.
  
And in this story, unlike the story of Avraham, the
 child is actually burnt on an altar as a 
sacrifice. She even encourages him to keep his word
, though it means her death. She too 
is caught up in a system of community shame which i
s willing to let people suffer and die 
so that the controlling shame can be maintained.  

 
 Now Yom Kippur has to do with forgiveness, yes, bu
t the religious thinkers behind this 
holiday understood that there were times when defia
nce was more important than 
reconciliation.  

 
But when all the power is in the hand of the oppres
sor, what to do? Say ?Hell No!? and 
be killed? Defy and let your children be killed?  

 
Hard question. But
 the Kol Nidrei, the beautiful prayer of cancellatio
n associated with 
this day, offers an amazing solution. The prayer is
 not biblical, but is from a period of 
history when the Christians of Spain forced the Jew
s to convert to Christianity, or leave 
their homeland and their heartland forever. Loving 
their land, many made outward 
conversions to spare themselves and their children.
 But on Yom Kippur, they would 
quietly go to hidden meeting place where their vows
 would be annulled. Why? Because 
they were not freely made, but in servitude. And hu
man beings are for freedom, not 
servitude. 

 
But Yiftakh was not being forced by anyone to make 
his vow. He was the general, the 
story said. He had power. He could do what he wille
d. But, he was caught up in a system 
of shame. He was ashamed to admit he had been a foo
l to make such a rash vow. He 

  yielded his great power to his troops to shame him 
into keeping a vow. In short, he 
rejected any God worthy of the name, and erected an
 idol called Shame. ?A good general 
doesn™t go back on his word, on a vow!? he assumed 
they were saying. ?A good leader is 
consistent!?  Well, maybe they were saying it, mayb
e they weren™t. But Yiftakh lived his 
life as if their voices had more importance than th
e deeper truth of Love: 
?Do not harm 
your children–ever. For any reason.?
  
Yiftakh was resigned to the power of the culture wh
ich valued consistency and shame 
over any other value. 

 
But Yom Kippur is about 
not being resigned
 to anything malevolent. As in Jacquiline 
Osherow™s poem: Can a person atone for letting each
 lapsed year resign us?  Yes. Yes. 
Yes.  We don™t atone, she says, just for the small 
things–for opening our trap when it 
was inadvisable, for being bewildered instead of un
derstanding right away, like with all 
this financial nightmare seizing the world. For not
 noticing how beautiful the moon is 
because our face is turned to the ground, not the s
ky. No, this day, says the poet, is even 
to help us face our resignation, and to turn it aro
und that we might weigh the world in the 
scales of justice and outrage, not submission and f
atalism. 
 
I don™t know about you, but this ancient Mediterran
ean folk tale still speaks to me today. 
Oh, I am not going to sacrifice my child, sure, but
 I often show little reluctance to 
sacrifice myself. I allow myself to feel pressured 
to make promises that are rash and 
foolish. Is anyone really pressuring me? Not that I
 can tell, any more than Yiftakh could 
tell. And, I don™t make them publicly, like Yiftakh
, but unconsciously before my 
imagined peers. But I do make them. 

 
My best friend Richard and I always have a talk abo
ut such unconscious vows at this time 
of the year, sometime during these Jewish High Holi
days. We usually examine our lives 
together. This year I found myself saying to him th
at I too often put perfectionism before 
necessary bodily exercise, passion for my work befo
re passion for my family (both of the 
blood kind and the heart kind) and the opinion of o
thers before my own self-evaluation. 
 
My Yom Kippur work this year is to begin to turn th
at around. What do we allow 
ourselves? the poet asks? What we don't learn? How 
does each lapsed, unchanging year 
resign us? Can we turn around and go another direct
ion? Yes, says the story of 
Grudgeville. Yes, says the poetry of Yom Kippur. Ye
s, says the story of Yiftakh in a 
most dramatic way. You turn from resignation by fac
ing your child and saying, ?I love 
you and would never harm you.? You turn from resign
ation by looking at your own face 
in the mirror of the Kol Nidrei and saying, ?I love
 you and will never harm you by being 
faithful to foolish things instead of honest, lovin
g ones.? You do it by revoking foolish 
vows, by refusing to bow to the idol of shame, and 
by remembering that Love is a deeper 
truth than anger, than guilt, and than the year™s r
esignation. 
 
Offertory
 Some folks contribute to this community 

of life and love 

  by leadership, decision and vision.  

Others, by teaching. 

Others, by learning. 

Others, by singing or dancing or playing or 

engagement with the arts. 

Most contribute financially too, via 

a pledge that comes in electronically or by 

mail. But many prefer to contribute during this 

time of worship, celebration and thoughtfulness, 

as a way of placing their gift in this context. 

The offering will now be given and received.  

 
Kol Nidrei
    
 
All vows we have made 

consciously or unconsciously, to live 
 an unexamined life are now cancelled 

 Gone are the promises we made because of pressure 
or praise. 
Gone are the promises we made because of shame. 

Gone are promises and vows we made because of habit
, because of custom, or 
because of confusion.  

Gone they are, vanished! I see them no longer. They
 are no more.  
Gone the excuses for why I can™t live within my own
 truth, but must orbit some 
other truth. 

Gone the vows I made to confirm myself by jumping t
hrough someone else™s 
hoops. 

Gone my vow to never have dreams, so I wouldn™t off
end anyone else.  
Gone, vanished, just like that! 

As magically as sunset, 

as wondrously as moonset, it disappears, 

this habit of refusing to live on the edge. 

 
Cut is the knot of all the choices I did not make, 
could not make, would not make, 
sundered by the sharp knife of this prayer,  

just like that, just like that. 

The paper is blank, the field is empty, the map has
 not been made.  
The pretend guarantees, like morning dewhave evapor
ated. 
And thus now I no longer have to hide  

in the shelter of guilt, but I can show up, 

and be present to myself and to others. 

Now I will no longer define myself  

by my failings and the strains of my life. 

 
Nishmat hayay tevarykh v™kherev libi yahshir: Kol o
d neshamah bekirbi.
 The breath of my life will bless; the cells of my B
eing sing in gratitude, 
awakening! 

   Sung Portion with Litany 
 
We forgive ourselves and each other, we begin again
 in love
. 
 For remaining silent because of fear instead of yie
lding to our courage and 
speaking up out of our deep care and mindfulness: 

 
We forgive ourselves and each other, we begin again
 in love. 
 
For all the times when a sense of guilt or an unnam
ed fear kept us rigid, 
 righteous, raw and resentful, and ready for rumors
: 
 
We forgive ourselves and each other, we begin again
 in love. 
 
For each time we have moved toward anger and defens
iveness instead of slowly 
 welcoming the saving intrusion of the truth: 
 
We forgive ourselves and each other, we begin again
 in love.  
 
For each time we have moved toward the familiar and
 the comfortable alone, 
without taking the time to learn how to open to uni
queness and distinction
: 
 
We forgive ourselves and each other, we begin again
 in love. 
 
For the times we have confused our feelings of lone
liness with other things, such 
as our self-worth, or need to be approved: 

 
We forgive ourselves and each other, we begin again
 in love. 
 For trying to be perfect when no measure of perfect
ion is even possible in this 
 life: 
 
We forgive ourselves and each other, we begin again
 in love. 
 For trying to earn love, instead of living lovingly
; for trying to control life rather 
than accepting it as a wondrous gift. 

 
We forgive ourselves and each other, we begin again
 in love. 
 For these and for so many attitudes and actions, bo
th obvious and not so 
 obvious, which have fostered the illusion that we 
are truly separate from 
 each other and completely self-derived–
 We forgive ourselves and each other, we begin again
 in love. 
  
