 Cracks 
Rev. Mark Belletini 
March 15, 2009 
 
Opening Words:
  
We are here 

as winter™s last days give way to spring 

to worship, to find the deep, strong places 

in the midst of leaner times, 

to celebrate the wholeness at the heart of it all, 

and the sacred in the perfectly ordinary
. 
 
And so, though our ways of thinking and feeling abo
ut the meaning of our days may 
differ, we agree to journey together, side by side,
 face to face. Within this circle of 
strong spirit, mutual care, and ethical vision, may
 we ourselves remain open to 
being transformed by a welcoming heart and emerging
 justice. 
 
Sequence:
  
Spring is coming with its buds and mud, 

spring is coming; 

and the rain comes down 

to soak you and me with warmer, if wetter joy. 

Yellow petals, unfolding cautiously, 

peek out at bare branches knotting up with promise,
 shaking off winter weariness. 
The far-flung clouds split open now and then, 

crack like delicate wafers 

and the sweet sunlight pours through, 

pin-spotting our world like a stage. 

 
O invincible Spring, You are 

still hidden behind my disbelief and wary caution, 
still a premise, not entirely a presence, 
I nonetheless turn to you. 

Let your muddy ways unroll into lanes of flowers at
 their own pace, not my own. 
Let your rains wash me, cleansing my often clogged-
up eyes so that I might see your 
blossoms trumpet forth even before they open. 

Let the cracks in the clouds open wide to allow 

your light to come down, for what else are such cra
cks for, but to let in the light? 
And now let these words also split open, 

that your silence might also flow and pour in. 

 
silence 

 
Spring is coming, and with spring comes memories of
 springs past, and dreams of 
springs to come.  Into this present spring, 

 faces from other springs–faces I love, 

faces I miss, hearts that I struggle to understand.
 These faces have names,  

and their names are woven with my own. 

May we each now take a moment to 

bring our own lives into this time of 

our Common Life, that our worship might 

be whole, personal as well as universal. 

We name aloud or in silence. 

 
naming 

 
Spring is coming. Let music be our praise. 

 
Readings 

 
The First Reading
 this morning is a poem 
by Albany NY poet Frederick Pollack, 

written just last October. The unusual word 

toward the end of the poem, quixotism, 

comes from Spanish literature and means 

impracticality. The title is Amends
  
When the bridge collapsed,  

the engineer tracked down and phoned a guy  

he had roomed with in college.  

The call at first resembled the Ninth Step in AA,  

where one makes amends,  

but was more comprehensive, and convulsive. 

 
I made fun of you, the engineer said.  

Your impracticality, your idealism.  

But I™ve lived to see cracks in the dams, the beach
es gone, clogged rusting rails, E coli 
and mercury in the faucets, billions of gallons of 
untreated sewage,  
brownsites under houses, sinkholes in roads,  

and people freezing, or baked in blackouts. 

 
I told them the cables were fraying,  

that the bed wouldn™t hold SUVs. 

 
They didn™t want to hear.  There was no money.  

The Feds laughed.  It was my job.  I™m fifty. 

I buried the memo.   

I realized there is no rationality 

or rather that everyone™s rational, each 

in his or her own short-term way. 

  
Then after it happened, I thought of you  

and I called to say I™m sorry.  

The ex-roommate tried to be upbeat. 

He employed the male convention  

common when someone calls after thirty years,  

of talking as if you™d spoken yesterday. 

 
He knew he could say nothing useful.  

Was touched that someone like the engineer  

would regard a humanities type, 

still, as a keeper of values.  

He imagined a new artistic movement,  

a return to the Constructivism of the '20s. 

Scientistic, elitist, slightly scolding,  

it would have the quixotism that guarantees  

the life and death of a style. 

With poems about Wiring or Solar Panels;  

a detailed, impersonal novel called  

The Distribution of Stress
. 
 
The Second Reading
 is a poem by the Berkeley poet Julia Vinograd, whos
e piece 
in the Discoverer, our congregational newsletter, s
eemed to delight so many of you. It™s 
called American Dream, and it was written in 1997. 

 
I™ve been trying to remember America 

when Walter Cronkite of the handsome white hair was
 president 
and there weren™t any politicians. 

When fireworks and immigration were both legal; 

we 
wanted
 everyone to want us, 
it proved we were the best. 

I held a sparkler, the Statue of Liberty held a tor
ch, I expected my light to grow into hers. 
I remember when boys who wore baseball caps  

played baseball. 

There were maps full of geography 

but they were the past. 

We had fast food, fast cars and movies 

of the slowest kiss in the world, 

the one that™s still going on 

but I can™t see it anymore. 

America.  I grew up believing it worked 

even through it didn™t work for me. 

Like all the sad housewives 

sure their neighbors™ marriages were happy,  

watching afternoon soaps in empty houses 

with the blinds pulled down. 

 It might even be better now 

in the dark where nothing works. 

We™re all scared and the birthday cards 

painted on the sky peeled off long ago. 

No more pretending. 

Everything™s broken from promises to plumbing, 

it™s not just us anymore. 

 
Sermon 

 
These are apocalyptic times. What do I mean by that
? Well, about two hundred years 
before Jesus, and for a hundred years after, there 
was a form of literature called 
apocalyptic literature, a true sign of those times.
  
 
Other forms of literature have come down to us from
 that era which we all can recognize. 
Poetry. Letters. Novels. Essays.  

 
But apocalyptic literature is not like any of these
 forms. First, unlike letters or poetry, it™s 
a temporary form. It only seems to surface during a
 time of great cultural transition, when 
anxiety is high, the future unclear, and all the or
dinary signs of the times have shifted. 
Second, it's highly fanciful and exaggerated, almos
t like some of the more popular forms 
of science fiction in our own era. The Book of Dani
el in the Jewish Bible, and Book of 
Revelation in the Christian testament, for example,
 are works of apocalyptic literature, 
and both books are filled with dire warnings, threa
tening predictions, strange creatures, 
over-the-top dramatic fantasies and wonder tales.  
They were never meant to be taken 
literally in the first place, but they do evoke the
 anxiety of a particular time and era very 
well.   

 
Walking through the library or bookstores this week
, in 2009, I am convinced that we are 
living in another apocalyptic age. Apocalyptic lite
rature is everywhere. I find hundreds of 
new books promising horrors and gloom galore, and s
haking scolding fingers at 
everyone. One fellow confidently predicts a great w
ar between Turkey and Poland in the 
year 2050; another, atomic war in Iran, and still a
nother, the complete conversion of all 
Middle Eastern Muslims to right-wing American Chris
tianity. I find books describing the 
end of the world according to the Mayan Calendar in
 2012, or books predicting planetary 
crashes, or announcing a reversal of the earth™s ma
gnetic poles. There are predictive 
portraits of America reduced to a Western version o
f Bangladesh during its hardest years 
in the seventies, whole populations reduced to star
vation and street sewage. 
 
And of course, there are long shelves of books play
ing the blame game. It appears that we 
have reached the final form of that game–everyone i
s blaming everyone else for 
everything, period.   And they are using the most v
ile, purple-in-the-face intemperate 
language I™ve seen since the era of the Reformation
 five hundred years ago, when the 
Protestants were flinging mud in buckets at both th
e Pope and the Jews, and the Pope was 
busy confidently spitting venom toward the Jews and
 the Protestants. 
 
 Two thousand years ago, apocalyptic literature plac
ed the blame squarely on Satan, or the 
Devil, or some other historically rooted character,
 like Nebuchadnezzar, or the Emperor 
Nero with his name spelling out the terrifying numb
er 666. Today, the blame is placed on 
folks decidedly lacking hooves or horns or special 
numbers. One book actually offered a 
list of the hundred figures he felt were 
screwing up
 America (
his
 words in the title), 
complete with little biographies. These vile folks 
include (some of you may be surprised 
to know,) Harry Belafonte, Barbara Walters, Dan Rat
her, Julian Bond and Diane Sawyer. 
And another apocalyptic writer is sure that the pre
sent president is entirely and personally 
responsible for the stock market plunge, all by his
 lonesome. He breathes. It tumbles. 
 
But just because this sudden return to apocalyptic 
literature is over-the-top, and rather 
bizarre, does not mean that the world we live in no
w isn™t different from the world we 
lived in two years ago at this time. 

 
The lay offs are real. The stock market downs and u
ps are real. The collapsing industries, 
what few seem to be left in this country that is, a
re real. The people being thrust from 
their homes and sent to live in their cars are real
. The upswing in theft, break-ins and 
packed shelters is real. And for many, the over-the
-top apocalyptic literature 
and
 media 
of our era, however nutty, express well their very 
real anxiety, fear and discouragement. 
For many, the famous American Dream that we have he
ard of all of our lives has cracks 
in it. Large, and very real cracks. 

 
Julia Vinograd wrote her poem 
American Dream
 long before the present apocalyptic era. 
But she too notices a real difference between what 
she was seeing when she wrote the 
poem, and what she remembers from her childhood: 

 
I™ve been trying to remember America when Walter Cr
onkite of the handsome white hair 
was president and there weren™t any politicians.  W
hen fireworks and immigration were 
both legal; we wanted everyone to want us, it prove
d we were the best. 
 
Distorted by emotion, sure, but it™s an authentic p
ortrait. Walter Cronkite was one of the 
most trusted newscasters of the day; and when Presi
dent Kennedy was shot, many hung 
on to his voice and image as security. ?President K
ennedy died today at 1 PM Central 
Standard Time,? he said, choking back tears, almost
 unable to go on. But he did, and 
those of us alive back then hung on his every relia
ble word. 
 
There weren™t any politicians
, she says. Well of course there were. They just we
ren™t 
making Willy Horton commercials, or digging up dirt
 on each other day and night, or 
lying through their teeth. Or were they? she wants 
us to ask. 
 
She goes on with her romantic portrait: 

 
We had fast food, fast cars 

and movies of the slowest kiss in the world, 

the one that™s still going on 

  

 Now, if we didn™t already think she was both being 
romantic and, 
at the same time,
 calling that romanticism into question, she makes i
t plain here by bringing up that slow 
movie kiss, the very emblem of romance. 

 
And then, just to make sure we get it, she uses pai
nfully clear English: 
America. I grew 
up believing it worked even through it didn™t work 
for me.
   

Let me repeat that. 
It didn™t work for me.
  
The American Dream, she is saying plainly, may soun
d lovely. But it just was never 
meant for everyone. It was only meant for some. 

 
And I am telling you that this has been true, folks
, from the very beginning of the 
American Dream. One of our own spiritual ancestors,
 one who claimed to be Unitarian in 
his theology, and yet one who both kept slaves and 
enjoyed long slow kisses with them, 
to wit, Thomas Jefferson, told us so from the very 
beginning in 1776. 
 
All men are created equal
, he famously wrote.  
They are endowed by their Creator with 
certain inalienable rights, and that among these ar
e life, liberty and the pursuit of 
happiness.
  
Jefferson was brilliant, but in this case, his memo
rable words were entirely based on 
earlier writings by others. He partially quoted the
 philosopher John Locke, who wrote of 
?life, liberty and Property.? And the phrase ?All m
en are created equal? was actually 
Jefferson™s translation from his immigrant friend F
illipo Mazzei™s Italian motto: 
Tutti gli 
uomini sono per natura egualmente liberi e indipend
enti. All men are by nature equal, 
free and independent.  

 
Nevertheless, from the very beginning of our nation
, despite the clear language, all 
people were not considered to have been created equ
al.  In short, it didn™t work for them. 
White males with some land, is what ?men? means in 
Jefferson™s document. Not women. 
Not men or women with darker skin. Just propertied 
males of European ancestry.  
 
That was the original form of the American Dream. I
t was a great improvement on the 
English Monarchy, to be sure, but in no way can it 
be considered entirely democratic, 
since well more than half of the populace wasn™t ev
en allowed the chance to vote in our 
foundational documents. 

 
So there were a few cracks in the system at the ver
y beginning. Like small cracks in a 
windshield, or a dam, these small cracks, barely no
ticed, start to spread until the 
windshield or dam become dangerous things. In the f
irst poem, 
Amends
, poet Pollack 
talks about two men, college roommates, who talk af
ter 30 years. One is an engineer, the 
other in the arts. The engineer calls his friend af
ter the bridge he has been trying to repair 
collapses. 

 
I made fun of you, the engineer said. Your impracti
cality, your idealism.  But I™ve lived to 

 see cracks in the dams, the beaches gone, clogged r
usting rails, E coli and mercury in the 
faucets, billions of gallons of untreated sewage, s
inkholes in roads, and people freezing, 
or baked in blackouts
.  
I told them
, says the engineer, talking about his bosses, his 
company, his government. But 
They didn™t want to hear.  There was no money. The 
Feds laughed.  It was my job.  I™m 
fifty. I buried the memo.   

  

Of course. Very few want to hear. And at some time 
in our life, I suspect we all bury the 
memo. The memo that Jefferson didn™t write. The mem
o Mazzei didn™t speak. The memo 
even Martin Luther King had not seen in written for
m, only as light pouring through a 
crack in the clouds on the day of his famous speech
 about the American Dream. This 
memo: 

 
We hold these truths to be self-evident: that, by n
ature, all women, children and men, of 
what-ever color, ability, origin or education or ca
pacity for love, propertied or not, 
healthy enough to work or not, smart or smarter, ar
e created equal, and that they are 
endowed by the Spirit of Life with certain inaliena
ble rights, and that among these are 
love of life, liberty, the capacity to cooperate wi
th others to pursue happiness and health 
for all, including self, and for the common good. 

 
The engineer felt bad that he hadn™t tried hard eno
ugh to make himself heard. He actually 
confesses to his artistic friend, as if the idealis
m of the artist trumped his own idealism. 
But the artist knows otherwise. In he words of the 
poet–
He knew he could say nothing 
useful. 
Because he too had not read the memo, and had burie
d his ideals in what he 
ruefully dismisses as 
poems about Wiring or Solar Panels; a detailed, imp
ersonal novel 
called The Distribution of Stress. 

 
The artist too had seen all the cracks in society, 
the tendency to put profit before people, 
to treat real human lives as means to an end that d
oes not benefit more than a few. You 
cut corners because coming out ahead is more import
ant than relationships with your 
brothers and sisters on earth. You tighten the belt
, not because living simply is better for 
the environment, but because you can pack away more
 for yourself. You never question 
the ethical decisions of the authorities that run y
our place because you are not free to do 
so–you can get yourself fired, since liberty and th
e pursuit of happiness is for them, not 
you. 

 
In other words, if you want to talk about freedom a
nd liberty for all, then you have to put 
human values first, human welfare first. All humans
. Not just a few.  
 
The bright diamond of the American Dream has some c
racks in it, cracks that were there 
at the beginning, but which have gotten larger, and
 which in our present apocalyptic era 
seem rather frightening and depressing. 

 
But I say light is coming through those cracks, lik
e it cane through the clouds around the 
Washington Monument when King was speaking. And tha
t thus this is an era for hope 

 and goodwill, because now those cracks are evident 
to everyone who has the courage to 
look up from their very real problems for a moment 
or two. 
 
Like the diamond cutter in the story, we have littl
e reason to court despair, despite the 
hardships of this era. For the cracks in our way of
 life could serve to reveal a rose hidden 
in the middle of it, as in our story this morning. 
If we remember to reach out to each 
other, like the two men in the poem who talked to e
ach other after a collapse; if we 
remember that engineers need artists, and artists n
eed engineers, that men need women 
and women need men and all variations on gender for
 that matter; if we remember that all 
colors of human beings need all other colors of hum
an beings, and that people of 
differing abilities need each other, if we remember
 that the American Dream is far greater 
if it's for everyone and not merely a portion of th
e population, and if we remember that 
this dream is not about getting for ourselves, but 
the building up of the common good 
where everyone benefits in some way, we have every 
reason to be glad in these days. 
 
Jefferson wrote his words based on the words of Maz
zei and Locke. I now offer again 
this declaration for the present age, based on the 
reworking of Jefferson™s words. Call it a 
memo, as I did, or a declaration, or a vision of a 
rose locked in a cracked diamond, it 
doesn™t matter. But here it is again: 

 
We hold these truths to be self-evident: that, by n
ature, all women, children and men, of 
whatever color, ability, origin or education or cap
acity for love, propertied or not, 
healthy enough to work or not, smart or smarter, ar
e created equal, equal! equal! and 
that they are endowed by the Spirit of Life with ce
rtain inalienable rights, and that among 
these are love of life, liberty, the capacity to co
operate with others to pursue happiness 
and health for all, including self, and for the com
mon good. 
 
Offering 

 
Let this time set aside for music be also a time 

set aside for giving and receiving, for as we move 
within the beauty of the music, let us 
also thrive within the beauty of generosity. 

 
Vernal Alleluia 

 
Spring does not bring justice.  

We ourselves have to tinker it together daily, 

a little at a time. Alleluia. 

Spring does not really spruce up the 

fallen down house with sudden geraniums. 

No, we have to bring our nails, our paints,   

and sweat a little. Alleluia. 

Spring does not write policies or 

require honesty or encourage courtesy. 

We have to do those things 

with all of our clumsiness, insecurities 

 and doubts in tow. Alleluia. 

No, spring does not bring peace. 

But we cannot claim our wisdom unless we live it in
to being ourselves. Alleluia. 
 
 
 
  

