Page 1 of 10 
Mothering Ourselves and the World 
Jolinda Stephens 
Director of Religious Education 
May 10, 2009 
Opening Words 

We are here... 

after a week of glorious sun and some showers that 
caught us by surprise 
 
after a week that included the excitement of the B.
R.E.A.D Nehemiah Action Meeting 
where we shouted again and again
 ?We are ONE? 

Here to hold up what we find worthy 

to honor the maternal in us all. 

We join with one another in seeking to include more
 and yet more people in who we mean when we say 
?we.? 

And so, though our ways of thinking and feeling abo
ut the meaning of our days may differ, we 
agree to journey together, side by side, face to fa
ce. Within this circle of strong spirit, mutual 
care, and ethical vision, may we ourselves remain o
pen to being transformed by a welcoming 
heart and emerging justice. 

COMMUNING
  
Sequence:
 STEVE: I see a young man who likes one Mom but has 
a hard time with his other mother. 
ERIC: I see a 14-year-old girl crying with her moth
er after they exchanged sharp words. 
JOLINDA: I see a mother gazing at her newborn and w
ondering if she will know what to do in the next 
moment. 

STEVE: I see a 5-year-old boy sitting in his mother
's lap, delighting in Dr. Seuss as his mother reads
 
Bartholomew and the Oobleck. 

ERIC: I see a 6-year-old girl learning how to make 
potato pierogi with her mother. She says it's like 
clay. 

JOLINDA: I see a mother with tears in her eyes as s
he struggles to explain to her 6-year-old son why 
an adult hurled a racial epithet at him. 

STEVE: I see a 10-year-old boy playing baseball on 
his school's mother-son team. 
ERIC: I see a 12-year-old girl slamming things arou
nd in her room because her mother has been on a 
business trip and only called once. 

JOLINDA: I see a mother awake and alone in the midd
le of the night - afraid of what the divorce will 

Page 2 of 10 
mean to her daughter. 

STEVE: I see a 12-year-old boy locked out of the ho
use for most of Saturday with one glass of water 
and a sandwich because his working mom wants to mak
e sure he gets the yard work done. 
ERIC: I see a 12-year-old daughter bouncing around 
in her excitement to hold her new baby brother 
just born to a surrogate mom. 

JOLINDA: I see a mother holding her twin 8-year-old
 sons, kissing their heads, saying "I love you" as 
they squirm to be off to play games. 

STEVE: I see mothers and sons, daughters and grandp
arents, aunts, uncles and cousins, all finding a 
moment in their lives to be quiet....together. 

[gong] 

 
Naming
 ERIC: I see a congregation before me with a thousan
d stories of mothers, fathers and grandparents 
whom they love, with whom they struggle, whom they 
miss, whom they wish were different. Stories of 
those who, by their presence in our lives, have mad
e us who we are.   We bring them into this company 
now by calling their names in a whisper, or within 
the silence of our hearts. 
 
Music:
 I see mothers in countries around the world dreamin
g dreams that their children may live life to its 
fullest, and singing lullabies to sooth their own f
ears for their children.  
READINGS 

JOLINDA: The first reading is taken from 
Radical Hospitality: Benedict's Way of Love 
written by 
Father Homan, the Prior Major of St. Benedict Monas
tery in Oxford, Michigan, and Lonni Pratt, a lay 
person who organizes retreats there. It is based on
 the hospitality required in the Rule of St. Benedi
ct, 
the oldest governance document still in use in Cath
olic orders. 
 
ERIC: "Hospitality involves accepting responsibilit
y to care for the strangers...The biggest obstacle 
to 
hospitality is not the state of the world, it is th
e state of our minds and hearts. It is the comfort 
we crave 
so badly that we will do almost anything for it.  

"...Hospitality requires not grand gestures but ope
n hearts. When I let a new stranger into my heart, 
I let 
a new possibility approach me. When I reach past my
 own ideas, I begin to stretch myself open to the 
world, and this opening of my heart could change ev
erything. That's pretty frightening stuff. You can'
t 
ever be the same if you start doing that kind of th
ing.  
"Maybe you are one of those people who find hospita
lity easy...If you have experienced abiding and 
strong relationship, hospitality comes more easily.
.. 
"....[It] is the overflowing of a heart that has to
 share what it has received. It takes a whole perso
n to 
open up, it takes a secure person to be available, 
it takes a strong person to give yourself away. 
 
"...It is possible to serve meals in a nursing home
, to cook in a homeless shelter, to read stories to
 
children in an inner city library and never let oth
ers into your heart. It is possible to do the good 
thing 
and end up feeling satisfied with yourself and even
 just a bit superior. It is possible to do the good
 thing 
and not be changed for the better by it. Hospitalit
y includes cooking the meal, reading to the kid but
 it 

Page 3 of 10 
demands that you let the people that you are servin
g into your heart. Only when you open yourself 
wide to another are you transformed by the power of
 love."  
Radical Hospitality: Benedict's Way of Love 
by Daniel Homan and Lonni Collins Pratt 
2. JOLINDA: The second reading is an excerpt from a
 sacred text found in Nag Hammadi, Egypt in 
1945 among 50 or so other Gnostic documents. It is 
written in Coptic and represents the voice of 
Hokhmah or Sophia, a female divine being from the H
ebrew and Christian traditions. It is said that she
 
danced the world into existence, making her the mot
her of us all. 
The power sent me.  

I appear in the minds I make restless.  

If I disturb your mind with images, why not look at
 them?  
Don't deny you've seen me,  

You cannot fail to ?know? me, anywhere or anytime. 
 I am both what knows and what denies knowledge.  

Don't claim ignorance of this mind.  

 
For I am first and last,  

honored and dishonored  

experienced and virginal.  

 
I am the silence not grasped by the mind,  

the image you can't forget.  

I am the voice of every natural sound,  

the word that always reappears.  

I am the intonation of my name Œ hu-khm-ah  

the breath returning from form to its source.  

 
I am knowledge and ignorance.  

I am timid and bold.  

I am shamed and shameless.  

I am strength  

I am fear.  

Listen to me:  

I am infamous and renowned.  

 
Listen to my poor voices,  

Listen to my rich ones.  

 
Do not turn your back on my weakness  

or fear my power.  

Why despise me when I am afraid,  

or curse me when I am inflated?  

 
I am the ?within.?  

I am the ?within? of all natures.  

In the beginning all spirits claim my creation.  

Page 4 of 10 
In the end, all souls request my presence.  

 
I am the Hokhmah of my name:  

earth-wisdom,  

breath of the mother,  

source of all livingness in form.  

 
You would like to forget me,  

but I am everywhere in your mind.  

I am uneducated but everyone learns from me.  

You despise me  

but you cannot remove me from your mind.  

 
Embrace me from the place in you that understands a
nd that grieves,  
from the place that seems ugly and in ruin,  

from the self that steals from its neighbors  

though they are really no better off.  

 
From the place that feels shame,  

embrace me shamelessly.  

 
Advance together to me:  

you who know my unity and disunity  

the One Self or my separate selves.  

Bring the ?great? the spiritual Self  

to live among the small, the animal selves.  

 
Advance together to childhood:  

the small, the simple, the poor  

living with  

the great, the complex, the rich.  

Don't isolate ?great? from ?small,?  

?rich? from ?poor? within you.  

By one you know the other,  

and none can live in health divided.  
The Thunder, Perfect Mind
, interpreted from the Coptic by Neil Douglas-Klotz
 SERMON
 When I say the word "mother," what do you think of?
  
For some of us, the memories of our mothers are str
ong, sweet, basic and unclouded.  
For some of us the memories are painful, very diffi
cult. For many others the feelings are complex and 
conflicted.  

You can count me among that last group and my own m
otherhood made it much worse. At 21 I gave 
birth to a wonderful daughter without benefit of ma
rriage. Furthermore I refused to even consider 

Page 5 of 10 
marriage. We celebrated Heather's birthday just two
 days ago.  
As a result of my actions my parents severed connec
tion with me because it would "harm your father's 
ministry." I can't tell you how often those words w
ere used to control me as I was growing up. As 
usual, it was my mother who pronounced the sentence
.  My mother and I didn't speak again until two 
years before my father died. I initiated the rappro
chement, but it was not a very complete or satisfyi
ng 
one. My mother died two years later. 

Yet, every evidence is that in my youngest years I 
was cherished. It was only as I began to ask 
questions, starting at about 7 - about our fundamen
talist theology, about the balance of power between
 
the genders and the races - that I became a disappo
intment and a problem.  
Even with all that passed between us, and all that 
didn't, two words that are close to the top of my l
ist 
when I hear the word "mother" are food and care. I 
suspect that's true for many of you.  
And, those two words relate directly to two of my s
piritual practices that I would like to share from 
this 
morning. My definition of spiritual practice is any
thing that helps me grow in my ability to be aware 
of 
my connection to that which is greater than me.  

 
Hokhmah, the voice in the second reading, is a Hebr
ew word. She is a divine being, or goddess, if you 
prefer. In Greek she is called Sophia or Wisdom.  A
ccording to some scholars [Cady, pg 15] there is 
more written about her in the Hebrew scriptures tha
n about Abraham, Sarah, Joseph or Adam and Eve. 
Only the various names for the god presumed to be m
ale (as well as Job, Moses and David) receive 
more attention.  

Hokhmah in her Greek form of Sophia also appears in
 the Christian Bible but there is major gender 
bending going on when she does. Jesus is thought to
 be the embodiment of Hokhmah. But the 
beginning of the Gospel of John with its chapter fe
aturing the concept of "the Word" neuters the femal
e 
divine.  

Furthermore, the descriptions of Hokhmah in the Heb
rew Bible are often contradictory, resembling the 
contradictions you may have noticed in the reading 
The Thunder, Perfect Mind.
 It seems clear that she 
played a role in creation, according to Hebrew trad
ition. But the exact role is confusing. In some pla
ces 
the male God, YHWY, does all the heavy lifting, whi
le Hokhmah plays around and adds the creative 
touches. In another she alone dances the world into
 existence. In another, YHWY searches for her first
, 
so that he can then begin creation.  

 
But one of her defining characteristics is unequivo
cal. It is as the hostess, calling to her table the
 "first 
and the last, the honored and the dishonored, the s
mall, the simple, the poor, the great, the complex 
and 
the rich." 

This is the strongest tie supporting the idea that 
Jesus was the spiritual embodiment of Hokhmah. Jesu
s 
told the same story of going into the streets invit
ing people to dine as was told of Hokhmah. 
Remember? He ate with those who were despised. The 
successful, despised by the peasants for selling 
out; the peasants, despised by the powerful for bei
ng weak; the tax collector, despised by everyone.  
The story of Jesus feeding the 5000, or the miracle
 of the loaves and fishes, is the most oft-told sto
ry in 
the Christian Bible. It is repeated six times. (Bro
ck) Whom you hosted and with whom you ate were 
powerful political and spiritual acts during the ti
me from 500 BCE to 100 CE.  

Page 6 of 10 
In the breathtaking book 
Saving Paradise: 
Unitarian Universalist theologian Rebecca Parker an
d co-
author Rita Nakashima Brock emphasize again and aga
in the importance that feeding everyone played 
in the ministry of Jesus and in the worship of earl
y Christians. The Roman Empire maintained its 
power by distributing bread to the poor. So an act 
of feeding 5000 mostly poor people was a powerful 
challenge to Roman control. It was a testament that
 Rome was not the source of sustaining life.  
In the Christian catacombs lies evidence of the cen
tral place that the table and the loaves and fishes
 had 
in early Christianity. Everywhere are drawings of t
he loaves and fishes. In Priscilla's catacomb it is
 all 
women who sit around the table calling for more bre
ad. "The early church framed its most important 
ritual meal as this act of feeding. They called it 
the Eucharist, the Great Thanksgiving, the meal tha
t 
celebrated the bread of earth, blessed by heaven, a
nd shared in community," say Parker and Brock. It 
was this sense of the Great Thanksgiving that Rev. 
Mark shared with us a few weeks ago with the 
Socinian Communion. 

 
Of all these images of feeding it is the act of bri
nging to the table people who are radically differe
nt 
that spoke to me so strongly a few years ago, and h
elped me get through a very difficult period in my 
life. My mentor, a Minister of Religious Education,
 introduced me to the work of Neil Douglas Klotz at
 
that time. When I explored the Beatitudes through N
eil's eyes in 
Healing Breath, 
I found a spiritual 
practice that spoke to me on a very basic level. Ev
entually I applied to study with Neil, and I'm not 
quite at the mid point in a four-year interspiritua
l leadership program. One of the attractions of 
Columbus for me is the fact that the US administrat
ive headquarters for this work is just north of us 
on 
High Street. 

 
In the fourth Beatitude I learned much more about H
okhmah than I knew before. A part of the practice 
is to learn the words of the Beatitudes from the Pe
shitta, the Aramaic Bible that has been in continuo
us 
use since the 5th century. Its version of Aramaic, 
a middle Syriac, is close to the Aramaic that Jesus
 
spoke.  

Now many scholars don't believe that Jesus actually
 spoke the Beatitudes, although many accept the 
Lord™s Prayer as authentic. I feel about that the w
ay I feel about some learning theories that seem to
 
work in practice - Gardner's Multiple Intelligences
, for instance - but don't have a lot of data to ba
ck 
them up. If it works, then it's valuable. 

 
Here are the words of the fourth Beatitude in Syria
c. Tubwayhun layleyn d™kaphneen watzheyn 
l™khenuta d™hinnon nisbhun. Blessed are those who a
re starving for justice, for right relations, for t
hey 
shall be filled.  

 
At this stage in the healing path laid out in 
Healing Breath
 one meditates on a Jungian idea of bringing 
together all the warring parts of ourselves around 
a common table, Hokhmah's table - the parts of 
ourselves that we are proud of and the parts that w
e despise, the ones we consider childish, and those
 
that we honor as mature.  

There are parts of ourselves that we starve. Often 
our most creative parts have been ruthlessly starve
d 
because they don't support gainful employment and t
he acquisition of the symbols of prosperity. Many 
times we starve parts of ourselves that we fear are
 evil or uncontrollable, so we lock them away in da
nk 
basements of our psyche. They never see the sunligh
t or receive decent food or water.  
Many forms of psychiatry indicate that while this p
ractice is common, it often has very negative resul
ts. 

Page 7 of 10 
People living like shadows of their true selves and
 people exploding with all that hidden and represse
d 
anger and energy are two examples. What are all the
se neglected and maligned parts of ourselves 
starving for? The word "L'khenuta" suggests it is n
ot righteousness, not an impossibly high standard o
f 
purity, but something rather more relational. Right
 relations or justice. That's what they need. And 
when they are fed this justice, when the many parts
 of our psyche come into community with each 
other, there is "nisbhun." A fullness. And that sug
gests the ancient Middle Eastern idea of perfection
 as 
a fullness of the end goal of our lives. 

 
We often think of attaining righteousness, or purit
y, or just ordinary self-improvement as a sort of 
pruning process, ridding ourselves of all those par
ts that are imperfect. The end goal in the middle 
eastern mind of Jesus' time was closer to becoming 
more full of our authentic selves, of adding to wha
t 
we already have. In a similar vein, our mother in t
he Ingathering Story this morning, dreamed that her
 
children would live life to its fullest. 

 
When we fear and despise parts of ourselves there i
s another result. We project our fear and disdain o
n 
to others, often others whom we don't even know. It
 is only when we can bring ourselves into harmony, 
and love all of ourselves, that we love others.  

And this brings us to my second spiritual practice 
- Radical Hospitality. It is bringing the internal 
version of Hokhmah's Table out into the world. It i
s inviting those whom I meet into my life. That is 
very hard to do. First, I am an introvert. Just mee
ting strangers is difficult. Developing a casual 
friendship takes thought. And, as our first reading
 indicates, radical hospitality involves letting 
strangers into my heart and, with the rejection of 
my own mother, it is an extra challenge. 
Possibly as little as 10% of UUs are extroverts. I 
remember telling someone that. They said it can't 
possibly be true. You can't 
ever
 get UUs to shut up. We are constantly talking. But
 we are talking 
about our ideas. OUR ideas. We aren't listening to 
get to know another. Our IDEAS. We talk a whole 
lot more about ideas than about feelings.  

The basis of the book 
Radical Hospitality,
 from which we took the first reading, is that the 
monks are 
to see God in every human they encounter. They are 
to offer food and lodging and the space to find 
peace to everyone, as if offering it to God.  

In Unitarian Universalist terms it might be equival
ent to our first principle - promoting the inherent
 
worth and dignity of every person - except that our
 principle is a bit removed and somewhat cold when 
compared to offering shelter, food and a place in o
ne's heart. It is closer to the idea of the Univers
alist, 
unconditional love, that Mark Morrison-Reed challen
ged us with two weeks ago. Both Radical 
Hospitality and Universalist love come with a promi
se, a promise that their practice brings about a 
transformation in us and leads us to richer, fuller
 lives.  
True hospitality can flow from us in a consistent w
ay only if we are at peace with ourselves. As long 
as 
we believe that parts of ourselves are evil, or inf
erior, we are going to project those on to others, 
particularly those whom we don't know.  

But coming into harmony with ourselves is not enoug
h. Radical Hospitality takes practice, it takes the
 
acquisition of skills, it takes changing our hearts
. Fortunately, as with most spiritual practice, act
ual 
practice leads to a heart change which increases ou
r ability to practice, which leads to yet more chan
ge. 
We can make a conscious decision to practice, and, 
as we follow the practice, our transformation 

Page 8 of 10 
becomes a gift of grace.  

 
Yet, radical hospitality is not easy. It involves r
isk at many levels. Homan and Pratt put it this way
. 
?The stranger next door, and at our door, is partic
ularly frightening–People have been hurt by 
strangers –When we speak of the depth of hospitalit
y, we are proposing something scary and radical. 
But it™s worth the risk. Unless we find a way to op
en ourselves to others, we will grow even more 
isolated and frightened. If we do not find and prac
tice ways of hospitality, we will grow increasingly
 
hostile. Hospitality is the answer to hostility.?  

The dream of the mother in our story was not withou
t struggle and sorrow. She sees, as a part of a ful
l 
life for her children, that someday they will hear 
something so sad that they will fold up with sorrow
. 
As we open our hearts more and more, we open up to 
the discomfort and the sorrow more fully. But 
that is the price of a life lived to its fullest 

There are many people who come through our doors se
eking Radical Hospitality from us. Our faith 
calls us to provide it to all. Our faith also calls
 on us to go out from here to live in Universalist 
love. 
We have taken up that call through a focus on anti-
racism, anti-oppression work. We committed to 
B.R.E.A.D., a coalition of many churches across the
 spectrum of races and ethnicities dedicated to 
seeking justice. Now we are proposing to formalize 
that focus by adopting new Mission and Vision 
statements that put anti-racism, anti-oppression, m
ulti-cultural work front and center.  
Let's look at the proposed Mission: 

"We are here  
· to learn and practice authentic hospitality, 
· to revere both the reasoning mind and the generous 
heart, 
· to claim the challenges of our diversity as a sourc
e of spiritual strength, 
· and to relinquish the safety of privilege for the f
reedom to engage in transforming justice." 
This is crucial work. This is life saving work. Thi
s is exciting work. This is a work that will bring 
us to 
fullness. This is hard and sometimes painful work. 
It is the kind of work that requires a spiritual 
component to inspire and heal. 

I didn't decide to study with Neil Douglas-Klotz be
cause his work spoke to me and helped me through 
a difficult time. I undertook the study because I b
elieve that 
The Healing Breath
 can be an important 
support in anti-racism and anti-oppression work. Ho
khmah's Table, the Welcome Table, is a powerful 
symbol for the work that we seek to do at First UU.
  
But I thought less about the whole community, when 
I chose this study, and much more about members 
and friends who are people of color. People who car
ry an unequal emotional burden whenever we do 
anti-racism work. Even when the work is done with a
n equal number of persons of color and white 
folks, the burden is unequal. Within our congregati
ons there are nowhere near equal numbers and the 
emotional load can be overwhelming. We European Ame
ricans can wound again and again in our 
naiveté. We say, "but they should just get over it,
 they should heal their hurts." 
My younger daughter is African American. When she w
as barely four we moved from the inner city to 

Page 9 of 10 
the suburbs. Our neighborhood was not very welcomin
g and when she finally got an invitation to play, 
she was excited. Her welcome lasted only a few minu
tes. The grandmother in the house informed her 
that black folks weren't allowed in their house and
 put her outdoors. That was the beginning. Many 
more incidents followed. Some obvious. Others harde
r to deal with because they were covert and she 
could never be quite sure. Do they hate me because 
there is something wrong with me or because they 
hate black people? she always wonders in those situ
ations. It seems that the hurts never get a chance 
to 
truly heal. The scabs are constantly being ripped o
ff.  
Let us commit ourselves to preparing our hearts to 
open to others without unreasoning fear, to feeding
 
our minds with an understanding of how racism and o
ther oppressions operate, and to learning and 
practicing skills that will make us effective in ou
r work. Let us gather together and be open in both 
giving and asking for support and advice in this wo
rk. If we do this we will place less of a burden on
 
our members who are more vulnerable because of past
 experience. As Audre Lorde says: ?The quality 
of light by which we scrutinize our lives has direc
t bearing upon the product which we live, and upon 
the changes which we hope to bring about through th
ose lives.? 
In the end we will find fullness. When we relinquis
h privileges in the interest of justice we will see
 it 
not as a true loss but as a release from a burden, 
in much the same way that a heroin addict who 
overcomes his addiction is released from a burden, 
or in the same way that Voluntary Simplicity would 
have us release from consumerism. Like kicking drug
 and consumerist habits, giving up privilege is not
 
easy.  

One of the hardest privileges we will need to give 
up is the privilege of being the Decider. Within th
e 
larger society European Americans somehow have the 
idea that we are disinterested when it comes to 
deciding on what is racist or discriminatory. We ha
ve a very hard time recognizing our own bias about 
the subject. We also have a hard time allowing othe
rs their experience if it differs radically from ou
r 
own.  

Another difficult privilege to relinquish is the id
ea that we can engage in anti-racism work only when
 
we are comfortable.  

I agree that the motivation for anti-racism work sh
ould never be guilt, just as it should never be 
noblesse oblige. If it is to carry us through the m
any tough times and the long stretches when we feel
 
we are not making any progress, the motivation must
 always be the sheer joy of becoming more full of 
who we most authentically are, of the promise that 
the radical gospel of Unitarian Universalism holds 
out. 

There is much we can do immediately and in the next
 few months to take these next steps. Those of us 
who have not joined B.R.E.A.D and First UU Allies c
an do so now. This Saturday First UU Allies will 
be attending a statewide anti-racism conference at 
OSU. There are two more films in the year-long 
series on race called The Other Friday Film Series.
 Next fall the Adult Enrichment Committee will 
offer an anti-racist, anti-oppression, multi-cultur
al curriculum called 
Building the World We Dream 
About 
and we will offer other support for the learning, s
kill-building and reflection portions of justice 
work. 

If we are faithful to this work eventually somethin
g close to the dream of the mother in our story wil
l 
be true for us at First UU. Someday we will be full
 of a joy so deep that we shine.  
PRAYER 

Page 10 of 10 
O Deep Mystery of our lives -- voice in our hearts 
and light in our minds -- in the joyful freedom of 
our 
fellowship, we are here together as adventurers cal
led forth in spirit, men and women moving, 
yearning, questing, pushing the limits of our lives
 outwards to what is more loving and just, more 
beautiful and true.
  
O Source and Spirit of our lives, may we respond bo
ldly to your call to adventure -- for justice, for 
love, and for joy. Amen and Blessed Be. 
Sheldon W. Bennett (excerpted) 
Singing: #407 We™re Gonna Sit at the Welcome Table
 Œ This started out as a spiritual, probably 
called ?Someday,? like our story. The welcome table
 as a verse came somewhere in the middle. Then, 
in 1964, the students of the McComb, Mississippi, F
reedom School adapted the spiritual, featuring the 
Welcome Table. It includes verses about getting our
 civil rights and sitting in at the Woolworth's lun
ch 
counter. 

BLESSING - 
May we hold one another in the deep and tender plac
es with compassion, and may we 
grace one another by sharing our own vulnerabilitie
s, being ever mindful of the divinity within that 
makes soulmates of us all.  
Carol Meyer (excerpted) 

