 Making the Best of It 
August 28, 2011 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 Gathering, Greeting, Centering, Kindling 

Opening Words 
 
We are here
 after a week of many beautiful days 

to celebrate the wonder that we live at all, 

and to remember that we have the power  

to receive each day of life as a gift 

and can offer each other the equal gifts 

of love and truthfulness. 

 
And so, without guarantees, we lean into joy, and b
end toward a just way of 
life, both for our own sakes, and for the sake of o
ur children and everyone 
with whom we share the earth. We would engage our m
ission 
wholeheartedly, with courage, self-questioning, com
passion, vulnerability 
and honesty. 
Story    
Joseph Had a Little Overcoat
 is the title of a 1999 book by 
Simms Taback
 that won the 2000 
Caldecott Medal
.[1][2]
   The main character is Joseph, a 40-something 
Jewish
 farmer, who has a little striped 
overcoat
.  When it is old, Joseph makes it into a little 
jacket
 and so on until he makes it into a 
button
.  Then 
Joseph loses the button and makes a story out of it
. The 
moral
 of the story is "you can always make something out
 
of nothing."
 Sequence:  
(thanks to Marguerite Molk for the bouquet of catta
ils) 
 
There you are, you late summer cattails, 

slowly revealing yourself as a particularly fine ch
apter in nature™s holy book, 
open and ready to teach how we might best live. 

You teach the equal beauty of straight line and wav
y, the comparable loveliness of soft seeds 
and crisp stems. In hurricanes, you bend, not break
.  
You offer all your beauty, and refuse to demean any
 part of yourself.  
May we be more like you. 

You offer yourself totally for our nourishment- 

every part of you is delicious, the pollen, 

the seeds, the stalks. You refuse to be seen as 

a weed for the pulling or poisoning. You insist 

that all parts of your living self have something t
o offer to the rest of us.  
Your generosity is without peer.  

May we be more like you. 

 From your leaves, I hear, we can make a glue that h
olds things together,  
or weave baskets to carry our abundance.  

From your seeds we can stuff pillows for our comfor
t.  
You never waste a moment denying your usefulness, y
our gifts, or your capabilities.  
May we be more like you.    

In the silence before us, we begin our discipleship
. 
 
silence 

 
Remembering that the silence is populated with the 
faces and voices and songs of those people 
with whom we share this earth, or have shared it, w
e set aside some time to free the silence by 
naming and claiming those we love, those we miss or
 for whom we mourn, those with whom we 
struggle.  We name them in our silent heart, or whi
sper their names into the common air, as 
pleases us. 

 
naming 

 
From the comforting silence to the soaring melody o
f a great work of the human heart, a work 
struggling to turn every aspect of life into song. 
And may we too soar, and thus be more like that 
song. 

 
Anthem 

 
The First Reading 
is by the late star of film and the television show
 Saturday Night Live, Gilda 
Susan Radner. It™s from her autobiography, which sh
e wrote during a reprieve from cancer 
treatment. 

 "I wanted a perfect ending. Now I've learned, the h
ard way, that some poems don't rhyme, and 
some stories don't have a clear beginning, middle, 
and end. Life is about not knowing, having to 
change, taking the moment and making the best of it
, without knowing what's going to happen 
next.  Delicious Ambiguity."  

 
 
 
 
  The Second Reading, 
comes from a very different source. A book on Russi
an architecture, of all 
things. But it at least might help you to understan
d why I might have put that photo on the cover, 
the photo of that magnificent wooden church, the Ch
urch of the Transfiguration, on the island of 
Kizhi. Hubert Faensen wrote these words back in the
 early 80™s around the time I visited these 
monuments. 

 
The much praised instincts of Russian architects fo
r proportion, rhythm, outline and decoration 
derives ultimately from traditional simple peasant 
structures, and of pantheistic surrender to the 
forces of nature, by which a pre-Christian sense of
 community was evoked. The piety of the 
people was permeated with a sense of closeness to n
ature which interpreted Christian rebirth 
quite literally as the beautifying of earth and the
 transfiguration of human life. The people often 
did not assemble inside the churches for services, 
but outside in the open air, watching the action 
through the open doors. They wanted to feel at home
 both inside and outside the church. As they 
put their imagination into their buildings, they un
furled and developed their own selves, 

 transforming menacing forces into familiar ones, an
d in the world made by their own hands, they 
could contemplate and experience something that was
 nobler, and more beautiful than the 
circumstances in which they lived. 

 
Sermon 

 
There is so much going on in the world right now, i
sn™t there?  
Events that clutch at the heart, and furrow the bro
w. 
Hurricanes on the Atlantic seaboard. 

Surprising earthquakes in unusual geographies. 

Droughts in one area, flooding in others. 

Religious fanatics insisting that each of these nat
ural occurrences signs the beginning of the end, 
and it™s your own damn fault for not believing the 
right way. 
Their way. Your way doesn™t count. 

Ah yes, events that clutch at the heart, and furrow
 the brow. 
 
Public discourse these days breaks the heart as wel
l, and revs up both fear and pessimism.  
One politician confuses the unswerving teachings of
 her Wisconsin Synod Lutheran upbringing 
with both science and politics; another blames bord
er-crossers for apocalyptic fires without a 
whit of evidence; while still others calmly assert 
that all of the numbing economic and 
unemployment figures of our age are all you-know-wh
o™s personal and singular fault. 
 
And then there is the constant media litany of omin
ous words that many people barely 
understand, if at all–
sub-prime rate, default, Freddie Mac
 and 
Fannie Mae
, and the overly 
graphic 
dead cat bounce. 
 
And even closer to home, this very congregation has
 been reeling from localized loss: so many 
beloved movers-and-shakers moving away for work, or
 to retire to warmer climates. Dozens. 
Every one of them missed both for who they were, bu
t also, for the gifts of experience and skill 
they brought to the mix of this place.  

 
Oh yes, it™s hard for me to be an optimist sometime
s. It seems especially easy to be a pessimist 
these days. 

 
But then, while thinking on these things this week,
 happily, I stumbled across these words of 
William Arthur Ward, a lay Methodist theologian. 
?The pessimist complains about the wind. The 
optimist expects it to change. The realist adjusts 
the sails.?
 And that set me to thinking about the 
words, first coined, I believe, by Benjamin Frankli
n: ?to make the best of it.? 
 
I first started thinking about this phrase when I w
as on my first sabbatical, back in 1987. I was in 
Russia, then called the Soviet Union, diligently pr
acticing the Russian I had learned in college 
(to not much avail!).  I loved exploring the great 
architecture and remarkable art collections of 
the major cities, and admiring the vast layouts of 
their incredible subway systems, an 
idiosyncratic obsession of mine as some of you know
. 
 
 I had seen a photo of the Kizhi churches in my Russ
ian text book, and knew that one day I 
wanted to see them with my own eyes. While in Mosco
w, I arranged for a special tour of the 
place. I took the eleven-hour sleeping car train tr
ip overnight to the quaint city of Petrozavodsk 
in Karelia, a Finnish speaking area of Russia, now 
an independent republic. 
 
There, I boarded a superfast hydrofoil, a boat that
 skimmed on something like aluminum skis 
across the waters of Lake Onyega. Lake Onyega, a La
ke Superior-sized body of water to the 
north east of St. Petersburg, and not too terribly 
far from the Arctic Circle. But please don™t 
imagine Dr. Zhivago snow drifts –I was in Karelia i
n the early summer, close to the time of the 
midnight sun. So please picture green grass, dandel
ions gold in the white-hot sun, and a vast 
array of flat islands and peninsulas splayed toward
 the center of the deep blue lake that stretched 
past the horizon like an ocean. 

 
You could see the wooden churches in the distance r
ight from the pier, which was nested close to 
the shore then in a corral of cattails. But I assur
e you, nothing could have prepared me for the 
magnificence of those buildings when I got up close
. Eighteen stories high, the Church of the 
Transfiguration with its log-cabin-like understruct
ure rose into the air, like a huge bonfire made 
of wood. The twenty-two onion domes, crafted from w
ooden shingles, mesmerized us all for a 
great length of time, rendering all of us chatty fo
lk, who had traveled on the boat for an hour and 
a half, speechless. Inside, the relative tiny inter
ior of the church boasted, like all Orthodox 
sanctuaries, a screen of icons or holy pictures tha
t blocked the altar from view. The icons were 
painted with very untypical colors– chartreuse, ora
nge, lavender– but they were very beautiful. 
 
As we studied this collection of 18
th
 century buildings, churches and homesteads, we lea
rned that 
flat islands in the middle of lakes aren™t great so
urces for metal ore, so the churches were built 
without nails of any kind. They were all fitted tog
ether like jigsaw puzzles. While smaller 
buildings had been built that way before in Russia,
 this was by far the largest and most 
extravagant such structure ever built that way. Eng
ineers and architects still shake their head in 
disbelief when they see it.  

 
And, since metal was so rare, money so scarce, they
 didn™t have lots of saws and fancy tools 
from the cities. It wasn™t an 11-hour train trip ba
ck in 1714, it was a 
week-long
 trip all the way to 
the hardware shops of St. Petersburg. They just had
 a few axes with them, that™s all. So they built 
the entire thing with what they had, a few relative
ly clumsy tools, and trees from the nearby 
mainland.  

 
The icon screen was painted untraditional colors, n
ot because the artists were experimental or 
avant-garde, but because the berries and roots and 
minerals that supply traditional paint pigments 
simply didn™t grow that far north. So they used the
 plants and berries and minerals at hand from 
their own land. 

 
As the reading from the book of Russian architectur
e said, most people didn™t even 
see
 the icon 
screen, anyway. They were standing outside the chur
ch, sometimes on their own little homestead 
islands across the channel. The harsh bells would r
ing, they would face the church, offer a few 
prayers, and then get back to their farming or fish
ing, diligently laying things in storage, and 

 smoking and salting the fish for the long dark wint
er ahead of them, a winter where the sun 
doesn™t even rise much above the horizon for a few 
days. 
 
Many people saw the colors on the icon screen in th
eir original form, out in nature. In Hubert 
Faensen™s words from the reading: 

The people often did not assemble inside the church
es for services, but outside in the open air, 
watching the action through the open doors. They wa
nted to feel at home, both inside and 
outside the church. As they put their imagination i
nto their buildings, they unfurled and 
developed their own selves, transforming menacing f
orces into familiar ones, and in the world 
made by their own hands, they could contemplate and
 experience something that was nobler, and 
more beautiful, than the circumstances in which the
y lived. 
 
The circumstances in which they lived. 
What were those circumstances? Hard winters; 
demanding summers; having to build their own houses
 by their own hands in a distant land just 
to escape the wars tearing apart the cities; and le
sser resources than most other geographies. 
 
And yet, these people built, without nails, with ax
es and muscle alone, the single most revered 
and beautiful example of Russian Orthodox architect
ure in the world, now a United Nations 
heritage site. Well is this great building named:  

 
 
 (tserkof 
pryeobrazhyenia gospodia) ?Church of the Transfigur
ation.?  With their stubborn realism, they 
transfigured
 their circumstances, and made the best of their si
tuation. They didn™t merely cope, 
or tolerate, or put up with it. They didn™t complai
n, and they didn™t pray to be spared. They want 
to both transform their lives and be transformed by
 their vision of something ?greater than their 
circumstances.? And, they didn™t want their religio
n to be something that happened just 
inside
 an 
incense-filled building, as beautiful as that was. 
They wanted to live deep lives, both inside and 
outside the door. They wanted to make the best of 
all
 of their life. 
  

They were neither romantic optimists, hoping that m
aybe winter wouldn™t be coming that year, 
nor sour pessimists, wringing their hands and compl
aining about it all. They were realists who 
refused to deny, avoid, or even to try and walk 
around
 reality, as if that were even possible.  
 
The late star of Saturday Night Live agrees heartil
y. 
"I wanted a perfect ending. Now I've 
learned, the hard way, that some poems don't rhyme,
 and some stories don't have a clear 
beginning, middle, and end. Life is about not knowi
ng, having to change, taking the moment and 
making the best of it.? 

 
Right.  She should know too, facing cancer as she d
id at such a young age. She™s right. Some 
poems 
don™t 
rhyme. Sometimes summer balm turns into hurricanes.
 Sometimes greedy schemers 
destroy whole national economies for a billion buck
s or two.   Sometimes loudmouths do take 
the mike and say irritating things about evolution,
 gays and lesbians, or God. 
 
And sometimes, even, people we love and can™t imagi
ng living without, move away in droves. 
Sometimes difficult people take up all of our time.
 Sometimes, even, oh yes, you and me–we 
can be difficult people too. The real story, after 
all, has to include us, or we™re only fooling 
ourselves. 

 And it seems to me, when I look at the teachings of
 so many spiritual teachers across the ages, 
they were saying what I am trying to say. Take Jesu
s for example. ?Red sky at morning, sailor 
take warning,? he said one day, quoting a version o
f a well-known proverb famous even then. 
?Red sky at night, sailor™s delight.?  Then he adde
d: ?You can interpret the weather pretty well. 
Why do you have such a hard time interpreting your 
lives? Why don™t you decide what™s right 
and live that way?? (Luke 12:54-57) 

 
What™s right? To love your neighbor as yourself, ev
en though Bernie Madoff and a few hundred 
banks and investment companies did crooked things. 
 What™s right? To love your neighbor as 
yourself, even though some political upstarts make 
you sick to your stomach.  What™s right? To 
love your neighbor as yourself, even though storms 
come without warning, and loss is never 
parceled out equally or happily, ever.  What™s righ
t? To love your neighbor as yourself, 
without hiding out in the false shelters of either 
a wishful romantic optimism or whiny self-
aggrandizing pessimism. Keep your eyes on the prize
, not on the escape or the excuse. Like the 
guy in the children™s story this morning, or like t
he Buddha, 2500 years ago for that matter, keep 
aware that everything wears out in the end, but tha
t you can transform your ever-changing 
situations– and be transfigured yourself–.by your l
oving and thoughtful and creative decisions 
to do the right thing anyway, to do your absolute b
est. 
 
I™m not always a fan of the word ?realist.? I too o
ften hear it used in a way that pats the user on 
his or her own back, or puts a swagger in their ste
p. You know: ?I™m a realist–you live in a 
fantasy world of wishes and wants and fluffy theolo
gy, unlike me, your rational and natural 
superior in all things.? 

 
But I am not sure of a better word at this juncture
, so I™ll use it.  
 
?The realist adjusts the sails,? concludes Ward™s p
roverb that I began my talk with. I know a 
little bit about adjusting sails. I used to sail wi
th my friend Bonni and a friend of hers on a 
catamaran with a hydrofoil attached, on Lake Huron,
 and I am here to tell you that adjusting the 
sails is no small feat. It™s pretty scary when you™
re hanging off the edge of the boat to begin with, 
and the waters are choppy and you™re in a wetsuit. 
It required both strength and skill and tight 
cooperation. But I remember few things more excitin
g from those days than doing that hard work 
with focus and persistence. We sometimes doubted, a
t least fleetingly, that we would ever make 
it to shore, when the brewing storms rose up sudden
ly off the lake, or the waves were so wild we 
went through them, not over them. But we made it to
 shore, and built the fire on the beach, and 
ate the supper we had carried with us the whole whi
le in the boat. 
 
Times may be tough, aggravating and disappointing, 
and circumstances may sometimes change 
the wind, making the sails flap dangerously. Someti
mes the wind drops completely, and your 
sails, and your soul, droop for a while. But when y
ou adjust the sails to the circumstances, and 
wait instead of expect–and there is a difference in
 those words I hope you™ll meditate on–I 
assure you, you will eventually, in all likelihood,
 get to shore. 
 
At least, that™s the image I™ve been using to get t
hrough these times, without veering either 
toward optimism or pessimism. How do you do it? 

   

Offering 

During the time of the offering, we try to express 
our realism about the actual costs of a place 
like this, but we also want to be realistic about t
he modern world, where some share with the 
community electronically, and others through the ma
il. Still, this ancient way of doing it is 
poignant to many, and so we receive your gifts for 
the health and welfare of this our chosen 
community, and our common house of life and love. 

 
Returning:
 Personal Affirmation of Miriam Makeba 1987 
 
There are three things I was born with in the world
, and there are three things I will have until 
the day I die: hope, determination, and song.  

 
