 The Story of our Story (GLBTQ Sunday) 
June 12, 2011 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 
Welcoming, Centering, Kindling 

Opening Words: 
 
We are here 

after a week of sun and dark storms
 to worship, to openly claim who we are 

refusing the manipulations of shame, 

revering truth for authority, 

and remaining open to questions 

while living out the answers of love. 

 And so, we pledge to journey together along the way
s of truth and affection, as best as we 
can name them now, or may learn them in days to com
e; that we and our children may be 
fulfilled, and that we may speak to our world in wo
rds and lives of peace, justice and 
goodwill. 

 
Story:    All the World by Liz Scanlon 

Following a circle of family and friends through th
e course of a day from morning till night, this 
book affirms the importance of all things great and
 small in our world, from the tiniest shell on 
the beach, to warm family connections, to the wides
t sunset sky.
  
Hymn: We Are Dancing Sarah™s Circle 

 
Sequence: 
a dance from our Movement Choir
  
following
 second temple bell, these words of William Butler Y
eats: 
 
?Labor 
is
 dancing–
 dancing where the body is 
not 
bruised to pleasure soul,  
nor beauty born out of its own despair–
 O chestnut-tree, great-rooted blossomer, 

are you the leaf, the blossom or the bole? 

O body swayed to music, how can we know the dancer 
from the dance?? 
 
And how can we know the griever from their particul
ar griefs, 
or the grateful from their unvoiced thanks? 

And so we enter a place of spiritual safety where 

we may name our joys, our griefs, our losses 

within our quiet hearts, or sounded aloud, 

knowing that just as we can™t separate the dancer f
rom the dance,  

 so we cannot separate our 

common worship from our personal hearts. 

 
naming 

 
All the world is in this place and in this moment: 

sorrow and joy, wood and skin, memory and hope, 

glass and color, story and absence, culture and per
sonhood, love, fear, hope, friendship  
and the delight of playfully familiar music. 

 
Choir Anthem: 

 
The First Reading 
is from the Gospel of Luke, written at the end of t
he first century by an 
anonymous person we know by that name only since th
e middle of the second century. This story 
is also found, with variations, in two other gospel
s, and is clearly based on an original story 
which the writers had before them to shape with the
ir own author™s voice. This is Luke™s version, 
and I am leaving one word in the original Greek for
 a reason: 
 
In the city of Kefar-Nahum, a Roman centurion stati
oned there had a certain 
doulos
, whom he 
was very fond of. The 
doulos
 was very sick, even at death™s door. When the cent
urion heard 
stories about Jesus, he asked some of the influenti
al locals to speak up on his behalf, so as to ask 
him to come and heal the 
doulos
. They did so, urging Jesus strongly with these wor
ds:  ?He is 
very deserving of this boon, for he loves our peopl
e, and even contributed to the building of a 
local Meeting House for us.?  So Jesus went with th
em toward the house of the centurion. The 
centurion however sent a messenger out to Jesus and
 said: ?Don™t trouble yourself to come any 
further. Stay where you are, for I am not some exem
plary person that you should grace my home 
with your presence. But just give the word from whe
re you are. After all, I understand authority. 
I tell a private ?Do this or that? and he does. I t
ell another to come to me, and he does. If I ask 
my 
doulos
 for a favor, he does it.? 
 
When Jesus heard this little speech, he was astonis
hed, and he turned to the group of people who 
were trailing behind him and said:  ?I have not hea
rd words of such pure confidence anywhere 
before, even among my own people.?  And when the me
ssengers went back to the centurion™s 
house, his found his 
doulos 
was all better.
  
The Second Reading 
is a wise observation by a woman named Laura Riding
 Jackson, from her 
book called The Telling
, from 1972. 
 
How our story has been divided up among the truth-t
elling professionals! Religion, philosophy, 
history, poetry, compete with each other for our ea
rs; and science competes with all together. 
And for each we have a different set of ears. But, 
though we hear much, what we are told is as 
nothing: none of it gives us ourselves, rather, eac
h way of telling stories steals us, to make 
its
 reality of us. 

 
Sermon 

  
Several times after I first arrived in Ohio, I had 
the pleasure of attending a concert of the Bill T. 
Jones-Arnie Zane Dance Company. I have been a fan s
ince my California days. Some of you 
may remember that I have uplifted the wisdom of his
 performance art a number of times in 
sermons during my tenure here. 

 
I even ran into Bill while I was interviewing to se
rve as senior minister here in May of 1998–he 
happened to be walking across the OSU campus, as I 
happened to be that afternoon, and we 
stopped and chatted for a while. We™re not friends 
in any meaningful sense of that term–he 
doesn™t know my name. But I have talked with him ma
ny times after performances. And did 
write him a long letter once after a concert, thank
ing him for his wonderful choreography, but 
thanking him even more profoundly for a singular ac
t, which I received as a personal gift.  At the 
end of each concert in Berkeley, as the applause wa
s finishing, he and his late beloved, Arnie 
Zane, would turn to each other and kiss.  

 
A simple act. Not a European peck on the cheek mind
 you, but a loving kiss.  But, even as late as 
1986, I had never seen two men kiss publicly before
. 
Publicly
 I said. Not hidden in the shut-off 
privacy of a house, or some dark bar. And to my sur
prise, I would always get teary when they 
kissed there out in the open, under the spotlights.
  That compact Italian Jewish guy, and that 
lanky, stately African American guy. And some time 
after Arne had died, I wrote Bill all about 
the effect of that kiss in the letter I wrote.  I t
old him how that simple, tender and public act 
affected me, strengthened me, encouraged me.  When 
Bill and I would talk after a concert from 
that time on, say, while he was autographing my pro
gram, I would simply say: ?I™m the guy who 
wrote you that letter.? And he would say: ?Ah, yes,
 the letter–the letter about the kiss. I 
remember. Thank you.? 

 
Now, of course, people of the same gender have kiss
ed before. In private. The future King 
David, according the Scroll of Samuel, went off to 
a wilderness place with crown prince 
Jonathan, where (I Samuel 21:41b), and I quote: ?th
ey wept and kissed passionately.?  But the 
sad people of the world try to diminish such things
, trying to convince me that David and 
Jonathan were ?just friends–? as if friendship coul
d be called ?just? anything, and worse, as if 
friendship always included passionate kissing, whic
h makes no sense. It™s this kind of denial that 
has made up much of the story of same-gender love a
nd cross-gender identity. And I find myself 
more and more frustrated and angry that this is so.
  
The historic story often told about the progress of
 variant sexuality and gender identity is trotted 
out at this time of year because of the Pride parad
e. But it™s a very limited and little story, really
. 
The first Pride parades were held in New York City,
 Los Angeles and Chicago on June 28 in 
1970, in celebration of the Stonewall Riots that ha
d erupted in Greenwich Village the year 
before. This riot exploded when police raided a wor
king-class bar owned by the Mafia, but 
favored by drag queens, homeless street hustlers an
d other sorts of people on the margins of even 
Greenwich Village society back then. The people in 
the bar fought back, refused arrest for being 
who they were, and the riots continued for several 
nights. This is the official Story I always hear, 
and often tell–
but it™s not the full story–
it affirms that all of the sexual and gender identi
ty 

 minority liberation movements began in planned poli
ce violence met by unplanned violence, in 
late June of 1969. 

 
But the trouble with this story is that it isolates
 this incident as an initiating event. And worse, i
t 
associates sexual liberation entirely with urban Am
erica.  As if people didn™t live out their 
unique identities and lives long before–and often o
penly–all over the world. From ancient 
times till now. 

 
Take the story found in the gospel of Luke, variant
 forms of which are found in other gospels as 
well. Not matter what your opinion of Jesus is, no 
matter whether you think this whole business 
of him being a healer is too much for you or not, n
o one can deny that the gospels, which give 
their slant on this Galilean story, were all set do
wn at the end of the first century, and were 
completed, in common Greek, by the early second cen
tury. In other words, a thousand years 
before English was born, and smack dab in the middl
e of a culture very different from our own. 
So when this story was told, it was told to people 
with ears that opened onto that culture, not ours 
in Columbus, Ohio. And long before any of our words
 for variant sexuality were used. But in the 
first century, the word 
doulos, 
like so many English words,
 had many authentic meanings, and 
one of them meant ?younger partner in a romantic re
lationship between two men.? Why do we 
know that first century ears would have heard the w
ord to mean that instead of any of its other 
meanings? Because the story is about a centurion, a
 Roman captain in the military in charge of a 
hundred privates. One of whom was his 
doulos,
 in training to become a centurion one day 
himself.  And because the emperor had passed a law 
forbidding centurions to marry women or 
have children, the 
doulos
 was a sexual partner and portable family as well a
s a mentee. And the 
text we receive says that the centurion was fond of
 this doulos. The Greek word is 
entimos
, 
meaning much the same as our cognate word 
intimate 
in English. 
  

So the story is a story about a man living openly w
ith his lover in a small lakeside city in the 
Galilee.  Jesus heals the lover of his fever, and e
ven praises the centurion for his thoughtfulness 
in asking him not to come into his house–he obvious
ly knew that it would taint Jesus™ 
reputation if he was hanging out with one of the op
pressors of his own people, and thoughtfully 
asked him to expel the fever from a distance with h
is singular authority over evil spirits. 
 
Long before Stonewall, someone was living out and o
pen, with love, with tenderness, with 
public kisses perhaps; but we don™t know that becau
se a hetero-normative (you can figure out the 
meaning of that word with no trouble) reading has b
een given to all ancient texts. In the English 
gospels, 
doulos 
is rendered 
bondservant,
 and intimations of loving intimacy are covered ove
r. 
There are many other stories in the gospels which s
peak of same-gender issues too–but all of 
these have been disguised, and twisted into submiss
ion by the translators. It™s a form of literary 
violence, in my book. And frankly, it hurts–
  
But even though most of us can™t read ancient Greek
, we can read English. Yet I would wager 
cash money that few have read about the Iowa Sister
hood, that is, women ministers, living as 
couples, who served Unitarian congregations in Iowa
 in the last century. Or, who have read the 
story of Deborah Sampson, the Massachusetts woman w
ho dressed herself as a male, and fought 
in the Revolutionary War, getting wounded several t
imes until she was discovered. She was 

 honorably discharged by Washington himself, and rec
eived a pension by his demand. Some 
people say of Abraham Lincoln and Joshua Speed exac
tly what they say of David and Jonathan 
–they were ?just? friends, and the fact that they s
lept in the same bed for four years was just the 
culture of the time.  The intimacy of their letters
 to each other tells another story, sorry. The stor
y 
that remains hidden, stuffed, denied, ignored. It i
nfuriates me.  
 
But like I already lamented, the story of same-gend
er love is so parochially American that I need 
to leave our shores for a few minutes, so as not to
 think WE invented same gender love or 
alternate gender identities, or are the only ones o
n earth responsible for courage and freedom. 
How about vast ancient China, and the millions of w
omen who refused to get married and lived 
with each other, remaining openly coupled. The clum
sily cobbled word ?homosexual? was fused 
from Greek and Latin roots in the 1900™s by a Hunga
rian physician and bad linguist, but the 
Chinese phrase ?Love of the Cut Sleeve,? which mean
s exactly the same thing, goes back to 
three centuries 
before even our gospel story
 this morning was written down on paper. In Japan, 
the samurai warriors had 
wakashu
, which translates exactly like the word 
doulos
 in the Greek for 
our centurion. Nothing hidden there. In India, the 
hijra
 are referred to as Third Gender People, 
and have been, since long before a European named U
lrichs suggested calling gays and lesbians 
by that same phrase in 1864. At the famed erotic te
mple of Kajuraho you can see sculptures of 
monks caressing a lay visitor to the monastery carv
ed in stone forever, perpetually visible, public 
and not hidden. 

 
Back in English speaking lands, Queen Anne and Sara
h Churchill had a relationship which some 
have wanted to shove under the radar just like Davi
d and Jonathan–but anyone reading their 
letters would never be able to do that and still re
tain their sense of honesty. Eleanor Butler and 
Sarah Ponsoby eloped openly in 1778 and settled in 
Wales, coupling openly for 51 years. The 
poet William Wordsworth used to visit them in their
 cottage. No one stoned him for visiting the 
two women, nor were they banned from society. 

 
Then there was the tremendous San Francisco-like sa
me-gender, and mutable-gender love life in 
Berlin before the war–open, free and totally out in
 the open until Herr Hitler rose to power. 
Have you read about the transgender natives in this
 country, the Berdaches or the Inhamana? 
Their importance in Indian culture? The same-sex re
lationships open and out among the Ashante 
in Africa, in Ghana? Or among the Zande? Or the rit
ual same-sex behavior among the Ndembu, 
also in Africa? How about the 
mahus
 in Polynesia, or 
aikane 
in Hawai™i, both terms referring to 
same sex relationships which existed without shame 
or denial? The cultivated stereotype of 
Islamic culture is that same-sex love is always pun
ished by death–yet no one killed the still 
much appreciated authors of the homoerotic and stil
l well-read 
The Delight of Hearts
 by Ahmad 
Al Tifashi, or Omar Khayyam™s famous 
Rubiyat
, or Sa™adi™s 
Gulistan
, all of which celebrate 
same-gender love undisguised. And my same-gender fr
iends, who go dancing right across the 
street from the royal palace in Saudi Arabia, do no
t live in fear of their lives all day long, nor 
does the Somali lesbian I know hide herself in Cair
o, although she is careful, certainly. They 
know fanatics exist there as they exist here, and a
re not careless, but they don™t define their lives 
by the possibility of social bullying. And earlier 
this year I twice read readings in services by my 
Muslim Moroccan gay email bud, Abdellah Taia, who h
as been featured on the cover of 
Moroccan magazines as openly gay. 

  
Oh, please, don™t get me wrong. I understand that b
ullying and religious and political persecution 
are real. In several state legislatures recently, t
he conservative legislatures are trying to forbid 
even mentioning same-sex realities. In North Caroli
na, the legislation is so bad that even some 
conservative churches are embarrassed. I know that 
young folks take their own lives each and 
every day because they are bullied into doing so–in
 this country, in this state, in the year 2011.  
 
But I wanted to lift up ?the story of our story,? o
f sexual and gender liberation, in another way 
this morning. To remind myself that first and forem
ost, I am a person, not a sexuality, a human 
being, not a category. When people bully my sexuali
ty they are bullying 
me
–I cannot separate 
out parts of myself and I cannot hide sections of m
y soul just because it upsets someone else™s 
stomach or something. You can™t do that either. Lik
e Laura Jackson says in the second reading, 
and I want to read the whole thing again–it™s short
: 
How our story has been divided up among 
the truth-telling professionals! Religion, philosop
hy, history, poetry, compete with each other for 
our ears; and science competes with all together. A
nd for each, we have a different set of ears. 
But, though we hear much, what we are told is as no
thing: none of it gives us ourselves, rather, 
each way of telling stories steals us, to make its 
reality of us. 
 
These words are as true as steel is hard.  None of 
the story as we usually tell it 
gives me myself.
  I 
am more than someone who has been hurt by others–I 
am someone who has been loved by 
others, and who has loved others much. I am someone
 who has read the theories of psychologists 
trying to explain sexual variation, and have never 
found myself there. I have read studies of the 
brain, and find lo, I am not reducible to a loop in
 the limbic system; I am a person. I have read 
the philosophers speaking of constructed same-gende
r relationships, and do not find myself 
there. I have read the philosophers speaking of con
structed same-gender relationships, and do not 
find myself there.  They are all very passionate–an
d, like Jackson says, they all want me to buy 
into their own theory, their own lexicon, and bow t
o their theories.  Someone wants me to think I 
have a lifestyle, not a life. Someone else wants me
 to admit I had a weak father and strong 
mother. Someone else thinks it™s important to look 
at the length of my middle toe. Someone else 
wants me to bow to their sociological construction 
theory. Yet someone else insists that I secretly 
hate myself and want to be bullied by anti-gay legi
slation. And yet another talking head tells me 
that it™s only my sexual identity which allows me t
o like things like Bill T. Jones dancing, and 
that ?real men,? whoever they may be, prefer doing 
other things.  All of this–a complete waste 
of time, and consummate baloney.  

 
So instead, I go home and do the laundry, which I d
on™t enjoy doing, fold some beet ravioli 
called 
casonsei 
for friends coming over Monday night, which I do en
joy doing, worry about 
family issues with my sister on the phone, have a t
otal kick of a conversation with my son, 
schedule a date for the latest Terrence Mallick fil
m, answer fifteen emails, thank a friend for 
birthday dinner, help out my out of work friend Ken
ny with a few bucks, and go out with my 
friend Anthony to a late night establishment where 
we laugh and talk till two AM, and then go 
home and cry a bit before I sleep, because of the p
ain I share with some friends going through a 
divorce. And, because I miss being able to see my m
other very often. You know, human things. 
Person things.  Mark Belletini things.  Non-categor
ical things. 
 
 Things a lot like Arne Zane and Bill T. Jones kissi
ng in public– without shame, embarrassment, 
or explanation. Things that are very human. Things 
that are evidence of wholeness, things not 
separated out from the rest of my story–my supper, 
my dancing, my grief, my laughter, my 
aches and pains. The best stories, after all, are w
hole, not partial, full, not empty, bold, not 
ashamed. The best stories remind us, as our childre
n™s story did this morning, that we are each 
and all part of the whole world, with every part of
 that world equally resonating in every one of 
us.  As the story put it:  All the world is here. I
t is there. It is everywhere. All the world is righ
t 
where you are.  Now.  

The Pride Parade next Saturday is not going to chan
ge anyone™s mind about anything. Fred 
Phelps and his family will still be a cruel after i
t is over with, and the legislatures will still pas
s 
laws making some of us in this room even more secon
d class citizens than we already are. And 
90% of the folks walking in the parade not only don
™t know what happened at Stonewall, but 
were born long after it. So it™s hardly some solemn
 commemoration. The parade is just a big 
block party, some fun in the sun more than anything
 else. But it is, in a way, about pride. It™s 
about pride in being a human being, a human being t
hat is a whole person. Not just pride in a 
certain kind of sexual or gender history, each of w
hich remains always and entirely unique–but 
pride in 
everything
 about you and you and you and you and me, no matte
r how you define the 
sexual or gender part of your wholeness. Pride that
 the story of our story, when told fully, is 
filled with examples of open, courageous, and unash
amed people over the last 5000 years, and 
that not everything can be defined by the post Ston
ewall ?coming out? metaphor. Some of us 
have never been ?in,? thank God. I don™t think any 
kissing I see in public during the parade will 
be as meaningful as that first kiss between Arne Za
ne and Bill T. Jones. But it won™t hurt–.
  
Offering 
The sun does not choose where to shed its light, an
d the rain does not fuss over where 
it falls.  In like manner, when we give, our giving
 calls forth life within the 
whole
 congregation, 
and within our own 
whole
 hearts. There are many other ways and times we giv
e, for we don™t 
follow a strict schedule any more than the rain and
 sun do.  But this time is important to many as 
their 
time. Let the ushers come forward. 
 
Prayer  
(with Bob Rice) 
Roots hold me close: 

Let me see the faces of those who struggled to be w
ho they were as living reminders that we can 
be who we are. 

Let me remember the courageous, tell the stories of
 those who refused to be either ashamed or 
quiet. 

Let the roots they sent deep into our common earth 
move through my heart and root me in their 
power as they lift up nourishment from the deep, so
 as to open wise, but often wounded, hearts. 
And wings, spread forth now, and lift me off the ea
rth into the skies of hope, and let the faces of 
the past recede that I can see the world to come, w
here no one tip-toes up to any subject, where 
no question is considered stupid, where the bright 
light of no honest and mutual love is blotted 
out by clouds of ignorance and false and twisted ce
rtainties, and where visions of justice for 
every person, and hopes for a world at peace unbetr
ayed, are never ridiculed, suppressed or 
denied.  Roots, hold me close. Wings set me free. L
ove, ordain me and all here gathered to be 
who we are without shame or hesitation. 

  
