   Yom Kippur 
October 9, 2011 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 
Kindling 

Opening Words 
    We are here, 

  
after the splendor of golden days,
   to worship, to examine who we are, 

  
and what we are becoming together, 
  
and to take seriously both our dreams
   and the realities of our shared world. 
 
 And so, without guarantees, we lean into joy, and b
end toward a just way of 
life, both for our own sakes, and for the sake of o
ur children and everyone 
with whom we share the earth. We would engage our m
ission whole-
heartedly, with courage, self-questioning, compassi
on, vulnerability and 
honesty. 
 
Story  
from Bereshitô/Genesis in the Torah 
  

This is a story about a man named Joseph, which has
 been told and retold for three thousand 
years. He was the next to the youngest in a family 
with a whole lot of kids å the 11
th
 out of 12 
brothers and we don't know how many sisters.  Josep
h, as they say, was spoiled, and wasn't very 
nice.   
 Joseph would tattle on his brothers and get them in
 trouble with their father. 
 His father made a very special coat for Joseph, and
 Joseph wore it all the time to make his 
brothers mad. 
 Joseph bragged about the wonderful dreams he had an
d then bossed everyone around.     
His brothers were fed up. None of them liked him an
d they wanted to get rid of him.  
One day, Daddy sent Joseph to check on his brothers
 who were working far out in the field. 
When he finally found them, they saw him coming and
 decided now was the time to get rid of 
him. They grabbed him and imprisoned their brother 
in a dry well, arguing what to do with him. 
They saw a slave trader passing by, and decided to 
sell him for silver. Then they went home and 
claimed that a wild animal had killed him. His fath
er cried and cried. All of his sons and 
daughters tried to comfort him, but he could not be
 comforted. He said, "I will be sad about my 
son until the day I die."   

 
The slave trader took him to Egypt where he sold hi
m to a very wealthy man. But while he was 
working in the household, Joseph was blamed for som
ething he had not done, and was thrown 
into jail. While he was in jail, he got to be well-
known as someone who could listen to others 
tell of their dreams, and make sense of them. Some 
of the people in jail with Joseph were 
eventually set free, but no one ever came to set Jo
seph free. 
After Joseph had been in jail for two years, the Ki
ng of Egypt had two dreams that no one could 
make any sense of.  Suddenly one of the people who 
had been in jail with Joseph remembered 

   his ability, and told the King. Within the hour, Jo
seph was set free, cleaned up, shaved, given a 
proper set of clothes, and brought to the court whe
re the king awaited him.  
 
Joseph indeed figured out what these dreams meant. 
And, they were VERY important dreams. 
According to Joseph, Egypt was going to have seven 
years when all the crops would be good. 
There would be much more food than they needed. But
 that would be followed by seven very 
bad years, when nothing would grow. Joseph advised 
the King that he should gather up and 
store all the extra food during the good years, so 
they would have something to eat during the 
bad years.  The King was so impressed that he put J
oseph in change of the whole project.   
 
And, everything happened just like Joseph said it w
ould. When the famine came, it hit not only 
Egypt but the countries next door, including the on
e where Josephôs family lived. But only 
Egypt had enough food because of Josephôs project, 
which had set food aside and saved it. 
Everyone was coming to Egypt to beg for food, even 
Joseph's brothers. Everyone who wanted 
food had to talk with Joseph first.   

 
The brothers had no idea that the man they were beg
ging food from was their hated younger 
brother, the one they had betrayed. He was dressed 
as an Egyptian in white. He was wearing a 
wig, and he no longer had a beard. As they had grow
n older they had realized that what they did 
was wrong, but they hadnôt done anything about it. 
Their father still cried every day for Joseph.  
 
Joseph recognized his brothers immediately and pret
ended that he didn't know who they were. 
He was very glad to see them. But he wasn't quite r
eady to forgive them yet. So he pretended he 
didn't know them. Even so, he had to leave the room
 at one point so he could cry. But he didnôt 
tell them who he was. 

He needed more time. So he arranged for them to go 
back home and bring their father and the 
rest of the family, including the youngest brother.
 He tested them several times, accusing them of 
theft, and even throwing his older brother, the one
 who had sold him in the first place, in prison 
for a while.  

 
But eventually, he couldnôt hold himself back. He t
old his staff to leave: "Leave! Clear outä
everyone leave!"  They did, but Joseph started cryi
ng, and his sobbing was so loud that the 
Egyptians heard him.  

Then Joseph spoke to his brothers: "I am Joseph.?  
 But his brothers couldn't say a word. They 
were speechlessäthey couldn't believe their eyes or
 their ears.  
"Come closer to me," Joseph said to his brothers. T
hey came closer. "I am Joseph your brother, 
whom you sold into Egypt. I am a different person n
ow, and I have been able to save many lives. 
But I am still your brother.? 

Then Joseph kissed all the members of his family, a
nd cried more tears. 
When the King heard about it, he told Joseph that h
e was giving them the best land in Egypt. 
Josephôs whole family, including his now very old f
ather, immigrated to Egypt and lived there 
for many generations. When Joseph died, he was buri
ed there, not in his own birthplace. 
 
Sequence 

    
As far as I can tell at this time of atonement, 

of at-one-ment, I am already ?at one?  

with the whole universe. All of it. 

I cannot pry myself loose from it. I cannot live ou
tside of it.  
I cannot deny that this communion with all that is,
 is a permanent state,  
even if I donôt always feel it,  

even if I am terrified that this is so. 

And, as far as I can tell, I am at one with the who
le flow of time, too.  
The ?now? experienced by the people of ancient Egyp
t is the same ?now? I experience in present 
day Ohio.   

That they are in my past, and I am in their future 

is true, but the deeper truth  

is that when I look upon this beautiful building, 

and they looked upon their beautiful buildings refl
ecting in the Nile, the experience and 
immediacy of ?now?  was and is exactly the same. 

As far as I can tell, my body, including my heart, 
my eyes and my gray matter is made up of the 
same star stuff as yours, as well as same stuff tha
t makes up koalas and artichokes and roses, and 
even the flesh and bones and gray matter of individ
uals I find it hard to forgive, let alone love or 
even like. 

As far as I can tell, the hurts and injuries Iôve c
aused, known or unknown, or have felt myself, 
are all part of that real universe of common star-s
tuff, yes, but no more than the power to let go, 
to recognize commonalities, to stop clutching so ti
ght, to breathe in peace. Let the silence teach 
us soñ. 

 
silence 

 
As far as I can tell, weôre all in this together.  

Were bound to each other by both love and uncertain
ty, fear and openness, memory and hope. 
On this day, may we name those to whom we feel most
 bound, most deeply connected, however 
we name that.  Whispered aloud, or echoing withinñ
 we claim our communion with those we know by naming
 them as we remember them in the 
silence. 

 
naming 

 
As far as I can tell, music is a mystery, a form of
 magical communion no one has yet fully 
explained.  Star-stuff joining with star-stuff in a
n embrace of beauty beyond our power to name.  
How wonderful! 

 
Choir Anthems 

The First Reading 
comes from the book Walking Toward Morning by Victo
ria Safford, minister 
of the White Bear Lake Unitarian Universalist Congr
egation in Mahtomedi, Minnesota. The 
meditation is titled ?At One.? 

 
Imagine this. 

On the days between Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, e
very fall, every year, the people make 
their peace with anyone they have wronged, or sligh
ted, or injured, or in any way neglected in 

   the past twelve months.  The task is not to patch t
hings up, smooth things over, reach a 
compromise, or sweep mistakes and uneasy memories u
nder the rug; the task is not to feel better.  
The task is ownership.  The goal is truth, for its 
own redemptive sake.  
I did this.  I said this to 
you, and it was wrong.  I neglected this.  I botche
d this.  I betrayed you thusly.  I demeaned you, 
whether you ever knew it or not.  This is the truth
 in which both of us are living.  I ask you to 
forgive me.
  
 The task is not about comfort; awkward is irreleva
nt. It is about truth, about wholeness and 
restoration. Imagine this. 

 
Imagine.  Something yearns in us to come round righ
t.  Something creaky, rusty, heavy, almost 
calcified within us, tries å in spite of us and of 
all our fears and self-deceptions å to turn and tur
n 
and creak and turn again and come round a little tr
uer.  Something in us stretches.  Imagine 
healing, wholly, from within. 

 
The Second Reading 
is from John Pattonôs book Is Human Forgiveness Pos
sible? 2003. The 
Rev. Mr. Patton is a Pastoral Counselor in Atlanta.
  
Forgiveness is not doing something, but discovering
 something å that I am more like those who 
have hurt me than different from them. I am able to
 forgive when I discover that I am in no 
position to forgive. Human forgiveness is overcomin
g shame, and rediscovering who one is 
beyond the experience of injury or brokenness. Forg
iveness is something that is discovered to be 
in the midst of us, as part of our neighborhood wit
h one another.  
 
Sermon 

 
When I wake up in the morning, I, for one, am very 
groggy. Iôm slow to wake up. Always have 
been, since I was a child. I 
need
 a bit of coffee. For an hour or so, I do not so mu
ch walk as 
stumble around my loft. I think about what day it i
s. Is it Tuesday already? What happened to 
Monday? Sometimes I sit down for a bit at my comput
er to check the news on line, and get an 
overview of the worldôs present condition. Now and 
then, I am stopped in my tracks, like this 
week, when I saw that Steve Jobs died, or when I re
ad the Declaration of the Occupation of New 
York. Other days, not much grabs me. So, still grog
gy, I put in a load of laundry. I try to 
remember where I left my calendar to check on my da
y plan: letôs see; two appointments in my 
office, a phone call to a colleague who wants help 
solving a parish problem, a hospital call, 
requisite emails,  composing a letter to help get s
omeone into the Air Force Academy, 
scheduling conversations with Eric or Jolinda or Br
ian; answering phone messages, revising a 
pamphlet, calling my sister about our motherôs deep
ening health problems, a Worship 
Committee meeting at night, and then a late dinner 
with a friend. By then, at least, Iôm not 
groggy. 

 
I know very well that some people rise bushy tailed
 from their morning beds, and are more likely 
to fall asleep at 9 PM. And others nap in the after
noon, and feel alert at both ends of the day. 
Most of us, whether groggy or alert, spend time thi
nking about our day in the morning, and all 
the things we have to do. Or, reflecting on it in t
he evening. Or not reflecting on it, but wishing 
we had. 

 
   But as far as I can tell, no one on this whole wide
 earth, no one, wakes up every morning, 
whether groggy or alert, and says, ?I am going to h
urt and harm as many people as I can today by 
word and deed. I am the very embodiment of delibera
te evil, mayhem, cruelty.? If there was 
anyone on earth who woke up to say such things, Iôd
 have to believe that they were entirely 
deranged, with a brokenness in the brain as severe 
as the most aggressive cancer. 
 
But, as far as I can tell, no one decides on being 
especially good either. ?Ah, today I will be a 
saint.  I will spend every minute alleviating the c
onditions of the down and out, the ill, the 
destitute and the angry. I will give away half of w
hat I make to golden charities, and offer cots to 
three homeless people at my house. I will cook 40 g
allons of bean soup for a shelter, and serve it 
myself. And Iôll take the bus to get there; no gas 
guzzling cars for me.?  Iôm not sure if someone 
exists who thinks that way, nor could I say that th
at their brain is out of whack like the first 
person I mentioned; but Iôd be sure to worry some a
bout their grandiose energy, frantic 
perfectionism, and lack of self-care. 

 
The thing is, few, if any of us on earth, decide ea
ch morning to be either total devils or perfect 
angels. Either to act entirely out of our brokennes
s, shame or anger, or to be better than the most 
revered saint, hero or humble champion. 

 
The thing is, most of us are living our lives as be
st we can. We falter, make mistakes, hurt each 
other unintentionally, offer help and solace, gum u
p the works, embrace denial even as we aim 
for the good, or at least, the better. We are neith
er perfect nor worthless. We live our lives mostly 
in-between. 

 
Thatôs why, I think, itôs 
in
-between 
two days, namely Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, the 
Jewish High Holidays, as my colleague Victoria Saff
ord writes, that ?the people make their 
peace with anyone they have wronged or slighted or 
injured or in any way neglected in the past 
twelve months.  The task, she reminds us, 
is not to patch things up, smooth things over, reac
h a 
compromise, or sweep mistakes and uneasy memories u
nder the rug; the task is not to feel better.  
The task is
 ownership
.  
The goal is truth, for its own redemptive sake.
  
I did this.  I said this to 
you, and it was wrong.  I neglected this.  I botche
d this.  I betrayed you thusly. I demeaned you, 
whether you ever knew it or not. This is the truth 
in which both of us are living.  I ask you to 
forgive me. 

 
What she is saying I think is that Yom Kippur is a 
time of waking up, an opportunity to become 
reflective, and to be more conscious. Conscious of 
ourselves. Conscious of the situation of 
others.  Conscious of the larger pattern of which w
e are a part. Conscious of our humanity. 
Conscious of the reality that there are always two 
sides to any story, even if those two are not 
?equal? in any ordinary meaning of that word. This 
is a time of year when Jews, many Unitarian 
Universalists, and yes, many liberal Christians as 
well, set the alarm clock of self-reflection to 
wake us up to the larger realities that contain us 
all. To jar us into an accountable consciousness 
which helps us to discover the role of mutual forgi
veness in our lives. Our completely human in-
between lives. 

 
Forgiveness, Iôve said in previous years, is a proc
ess, not a pardon. Itôs an engagement, not a gift 
or a pronouncement. Itôs neither easy, nor finally,
 if we are awake at all, escapable, especially if 
we have any loyalty to our childrenôs future.  

 
   John Patton puts what I have been saying over the y
ears this way: 
Forgiveness is not 
doing
 something (i.e. pardoning someone), but 
discovering
 somethingñ that I am more like those who 
have hurt me than different from them. I am able to
 forgive when I discover that I am in no 
position to forgive. Human forgiveness is overcomin
g shame, and rediscovering who one is 
beyond the experience of injury or brokenness. Forg
iveness is something that is discovered to be 
in the midst of us, as part of our neighborhood wit
h one another.  
 
In other words, the world isnôt neatly divided betw
een angels and devils, perfect saints and 
satanic sinners. Weôre all simply human, with diffe
ring hopes and differing mistakes, but at least 
we all have hopes, and make mistakes. We are all in
 the same boat whether we find it comforting 
to think so, or not.  

 
And the point is, we canôt live each otherôs lives,
 but only our own. Patton states this with his 
wonderful paradox:  
We can only forgive when we realize we are in no po
sition to forgive. 
When 
we wake up, that is when we discover that weôre all
 completely human in the neighborhood 
called the earth, we begin to discover forgiveness 
between
 us. Itôs not something poured down 
from some superior, angelic and righteous position.
 Forgiveness means first and foremost 
beginning to feel accountable for 
our
 part of the story. If the person who has injured u
s does not 
see his or her part of the truth we share, it doesn
ôt make any final difference, although I certainly 
admit that it makes discovering forgiveness somewha
t more difficult. Still, we have to live our 
own lives, not live in constant reaction to someone
 elseôs mistakes, or someone elseôs sins, to use 
the more common religious word. Living that way wou
ld be 
our
 mistake, our sin. 
 
Back in the early 90s, someone, whose name has not 
been recorded, uttered these words at a 12 
step group: 
To refuse to forgive is to drink poison yourself, t
hinking that the person you refuse to 
forgive will die from the poison.
 Since it was first spoken, itôs traveled everywher
e. There are 
many variations to this phrase now, but after my re
search this week, this is as close as I can come 
to what was first said. The statement from the Jeru
salem Talmud at the top of your orders is a lot 
older than 12 step groups, but it says pretty much 
the same thing, even if with a different 
metaphor. Both statements stress that, when you are
 not about discovering where the forgiveness 
can exist between you and someone else, you really 
only end up hurting yourself. Even if you 
took the course of vengeance against the one who in
jured you (which, I well realize, is a 
perfectly natural human feeling), you are the one w
ho would finally suffer the consequences. 
 
Steve Jobs, who, as you know, died this week, stres
ses how we are accountable to ourselves first, 
and have to live our own lives. He warns us not rea
ct to other lives, (even the lives of those who 
have injured us) unconsciously, for the rest of our
 days. He put it this way in his famous 2005 
address at Stanford University: 
Your time is limited, so don't waste it living some
one else's life. 
Don't be trapped by dogma ä which is living with th
e results of other people's thinking. Don't let 
the noise of others' opinions drown out your own in
ner voice. And most important, have the 
courage to follow your heart and intuition. They so
mehow already know what you truly want to 
become. Everything else is secondary
. 
 
The Joseph story in the Hebrew text of the Bible, w
hich Jolinda told this morning, is justly 
considered by critics to be one of the truly great 
works of literature in the whole ancient world. 
Significant  modern archeologists are convinced itô
s even a story, at its core, if not in its detail, 
rooted in the history of the 12
th
 Dynasty at the time of Sesostris II. Regardless of
 its historicity, 
itôs a story about how long it takes to live oneôs 
own life without being trapped in resentment; in 

   short, how long it takes to discover forgiveness. T
he discovery is so beautifully exemplified in 
the depictions of Joseph sobbing loudly. But itôs a
lso a story about a context, about a whole 
family and all the generations that followed them. 
Injury, in this case, is not just done to Joseph, 
but Josephôs father, his younger brother, and even 
the brothers who sold him into slavery. Joseph 
toys with revenge, another form of injury, by putti
ng one of his brothers in prison. But eventually 
his heart opens, and, together with his whole famil
y, discovers in Victoria Saffordôs words: 
something yearned in them to come round right.  Som
ething creaky, rusty, heavy, almost 
calcified within them, tries å in spite of them and
 of all their fears and self-deceptions å to turn 
and turn and creak and turn again and come round a 
little truer.  Something in them stretched.  
And they found wholeness. 

 
Forgiveness isnôt about us and them, suggests John 
Patton. Itôs just about us. Us. At least those 
of us who havenôt deluded ourselves that weôre supe
rhuman, not mere mortals. This is true in 
Columbus OH, yes, but also, I have to say, in New Y
ork NY. You see, when I read the 
Declaration of the Occupation of New York, the plat
form statement issued by the people 
occupying the Wall Street area of Manhattan, I was 
thrilled. Excited. Moved. Great, elegant and 
remarkably clear English, clearly patterned on the 
kind of precision our founding forebears used 
in their documents. The documentôs critique of our 
economic way of making decisions about 
peopleôs lives is rich, covering corporate greed, f
oreclosure, oil profits, monopolization, working 
conditions, healthcare, privacy, graft, media, capi
tal punishment and colonialism. You can read it 
afterwardñitôs out in the gallery in a basket as yo
u leave, on one sheet. But what yanked at my 
heart while I read it is that the authors say itôs 
not 
us
 who are involved with the way America is 
going. Itôs 
Them. They did it. 
They stole, they cheated, they lied, they oppressed
. And what? 
We
 are pure, righteous, holy, perfect and totally sepa
rated out from the systems that hold us in place? 
And one day, when these wicked corporations all rep
ent, and start to revere people, not profits, 
we
 will offer them our forgiveness, from our lofty, a
ngelic height? Please understand what I am 
saying: this document is a 
great document
 in my opinion. Brilliant. I agree with their well-
described grievances all the way. But I wish there 
was a way to rephrase it in such a way that we 
are not falling back into the notion that there are
 angels and there are devils, and youôre either 
one or the other and thatôs that. Send the angels t
o cushions in heaven, throw the devils 
screaming into hell, and weôre done. There are peop
le with power and people with less power, 
sure. I know that. There are people who are differe
nt from each other in many waysñin feelings, 
looks, intellect, education and accessibility. But 
all of us, all of us who are human at least, Yom 
Kippur  reminds me every year, are not at our best 
when weôre just sleepwalking, thinking that 
the world out there has nothing to do with us. That
 unconsciousness may feel good. But 
forgiveness is not, Victoria rightly says, about fe
eling good. Itôs about telling the truth to 
ourselves first as well as speaking the truth we ha
ve experienced to others. Her perfect words: 
This is the truth in which 
both
 of us are living
. You and me
. 
Them and Us. We share this nation, 
and gladly, the marchers in New York are claiming j
ust that.
 I salute them. Every one of them. 
My excitement about what they are doing there, and 
what will be happening here in Columbus 
this week, has not abated, even with my questions a
bout the word ?They.? The themes of Yom 
Kippur, however, demand more. Yom Kippur invites al
l of us to wake up and live our own lives 
out with accountability. The process of forgiveness
 clocks no time, cares little whether its Them 
or Us, and is unimpressed whether weôre groggy or a
lert in the morning. Yom Kippur just rings. 
Time to wake upñ.   

 
Offering 

   The sun draws up life from the earth. In like manne
r, when we give, our giving calls forth life 
within the congregation and within our own hearts. 
There are many other ways and times we give, 
for we donôt follow a strict schedule. But this tim
e is important to many as 
their 
time. Let the 
ushers come forward. 

 
A Contemporary Kol Nidrei for 2011 
 
Mark:
 All vows we have made to live 
 the unexamined life are now cancelled. 

 Wake up! Wake up! 

 Gone are the unconscious promises we made  
because of pressure or praise. 

Wake up! Wake up 

Eric:
 Gone are the promises we made 
because we felt ashamed not to do so. 

Gone are all the promises and vows we made 

out of thoughtless habit or custom, or 

even because we may have felt confused.  

Gone they are, vanished! I see them no longer,  

like water that flows past the horizon.  

Gone the excuses I make for why I canôt live within
 my own truth,  
insisting on orbiting some other truth instead. Gon
e the vows I made to confirm myself 
by jumping through someone elseôs hoops. 

Gone, my vow to forgo my dreams, so I wonôt disturb
 anyone else. Gone, vanished, just 
like that! Gone, this seductive habit of refusing t
o live in the freedom of redemptive 
honesty. 

Wake up! Wake up! 

Lisa:
 The paper is blank, the field is empty,  
the map has not been made.  

The pretend guarantees are far away now. 

And thus now I no longer have to hide  

in the shelter of guilt, or the cave of shame, 

but I can show up, 

and be present to myself and to others. 

Now I will no longer define myself only  

by my failings and the strains of my life, 

but also by my joys and strengths, 

and my willingness to be accountable. 

 
Mark
: Nishmat hayay tevarykh vôkherev libi yahshir: Kol
 od neshamah bekirbi.
 The breath of my life will bless, the cells of my B
eing will sing in gratitude, awakening! 
(Marcia Falk) 
 
Sung Portion 
 
For all the promises we spoke in good faith but wer
e not finally really willing to fulfill: 
We forgive ourselves, and each other, we begin agai
n in love. 
 
   For the times when a sense of guilt or a muffling s
hame kept us rigid, righteous, raw and 
resentful. 

We forgive ourselves, and each other, we begin agai
n in love. 
 
For each time we have moved impatiently toward bris
tling anger and procrastinated the 
often very slow intrusion of the larger picture. 

We forgive ourselves, and each other, we begin agai
n in love. 
 
For any time our comfort with our own lives  

has kept us from seeing the real lives of others  

We forgive ourselves, and each other, we begin agai
n in love. 
 
For the times we have been surprised or disappointe
d that other people do not think or 
feel exactly like us: 

We forgive ourselves, and each other, we begin agai
n in love. 
 For trying to earn the love of others by working to
 be perfect and always in control, 
instead of risking vulnerabilityñ
 We forgive ourselves, and each other, we begin agai
n in love. 
 For the times when we have spoken intemperately, ir
responsibly or unaware of our impact  
We forgive ourselves, and each other, we begin agai
n in love. 
 
For these, and for so many attitudes and acts, both
 obvious and not so obvious, which 
have fostered the illusion that we are truly separa
te from each other and completely self-
derived. 
We forgive ourselves, and each other, we begin agai
n in love. 
 
Blessing  
(reprise) 
 
Your time is limited, so don't waste it living some
one else's life. Don't be trapped by dogma ä 
which is living with the results of other people's 
thinking. Don't let the noise of others' opinions 
drown out your own inner voice. And most important,
 have the courage to follow your heart and 
intuition. They somehow already know what you truly
 want to become. Everything else is 
secondary.    

Go in peaceñ
 
