 Resisting Certainty 
January 8, 2012 
Rev. Doc. Mark Belletini 
 
Gathering, Welcoming, Centering, Kindling, 

Opening: 

 
 We are here, 

 after a surprisingly warm couple of days 

 to worship, to praise that we live at all, 
and that we can decide to live lives  
 of purpose, mission, kindness and love. 
 May our community, both soulful and safe, 
 flow like a great river toward  

service in the world 
 
And so, without guarantees, we lean into joy, and b
end toward a just way of life, both for 
our own sakes, and for the sake of our children and
 all beings with whom we share the 
earth. We would engage our mission wholeheartedly, 
with courage, self-questioning, 
compassion, vulnerability and honesty.
 The Ingathering Story with Pantomime 

There once was a Zen Buddhist teacher named Nan-in,
 who lived about 150 years ago. One day, 
a teacher from a local university who lectured abou
t religion came to find out about about  Zen 
Buddhism from Nan-in, who was as well-known in Zen 
circles as was the university teacher.  
Nan-in welcomed the teacher with a traditional bow,
 and smiled, and took him over to the table, 
but didn't say anything after that. So the professo
r, un-comfortable with the silence, started to 
talk about what he thought Zen Buddhism was about. 
He went on and on. "I'm certain," he said, 
"that of all the religions on earth, Zen Buddhism i
s the most strange and unusual. They always 
talk about riddles, right? And they ask questions i
nstead of telling people what they should know 
in order to live good lives. Don't you think that's
 the way most people see it, Rev. Nan-in? I'm 
sure I'm not the first person to tell you that, rig
ht?" 
Nan-in just smiled warmly, and served tea, which ha
d been steeping in a pot next to the table. He 
poured his visitor's cup full, and then kept on pou
ring.  
The university teacher watched the cup overflow unt
il he no longer could restrain himself. "It is 
overfull. No more will go in!"  

"Like this cup," Nan-in said, "you are full of your
 own opinions and speculations. How can I tell 
you anything about Zen unless you first empty 
your 
cup?"  
New Member™s Ceremony
 
 Sequence 

It's a few days into the New Year. 

New Year resolutions are fine, I suppose,  

but now it™s time to do something  

bolder, more committed...more basic. 

It's time to say good-bye 

to the lingering regret  

about all the mistakes I have made, 

and all the wasted hours spent 

on feeling inadequate,  

or believing that the image 

in the wavy funhouse mirror is my own.  

It™s time to say hello to the phrase 

"It™s not about me" 

and time to say hello  

to the clarity which truth, unattached to 

anything but itself, requires. 

It™s time to say hello to the incomprehensibly 

beautiful gift that is life itself 

and to be grateful for my own life;  

time to weigh both my joys and my sorrows on the sc
ale that is balanced on the other side 
by the expanding universe, 

the galaxies whirling silently, 

the hundred million year eras 

of dying species and asteroid strikes, 

so that I return all things to proper proportion. 

Time for goodbyes. Time for hellos. 

Time to head toward the horizon, 

not crawl back in bed. 

Time to drop the baggage,  

welcome the possible, 

and to make friends with the silence 

that was there before it all began: 

 
silence 

 
Time to remember the context of our own lives 

in the larger context of the Story of the World: 

our loves, our losses, our struggles. 

Linking the names of those bound to us in love,  

those bound to us in memory, and those bound to us 
in difference, we keep from confusing our 
own lives with the larger Life by speaking their na
mes in our heart,  
or whispered into the common air.  

 
the naming 

  
Time to say hello, time to say goodbye, time to con
sider our lives in the larger context of spirit, 
time to be blessed by the unmatched beauty of this 
song. 
The First Reading 
comes from one of my favorite books read in the las
t year, with the 
impossible and yet evocative title: It™s Really All
 about God: Reflections of a Muslim Atheist 
Jewish Christian by Samir Selmanovic 

In a relational world, mere information will not do
.  The moment we think we know someone, 
we don™t.  Certainty about the other, whether human
 or divine, effectively does away with the 
relationship.  To acknowledge the limitations of ou
r faith language does not make our love more 
elusive but more real. 

 
Without certainty, this world is a frightening plac
e to live.  We are fragile creatures who crave as 
much certainty in this life as we can possibly get.
  We lose jobs, health, lovers, and homes, and 
we know how exhausting uncertainty can be.  But the
 anguish of uncertainty about God is a 
source of tremendous comfort.   

 
Our sense of incompleteness pulls us from our reaso
ned private world into the universe as is, a 
place of freedom where the cosmic love story is unf
olding.  That™s why religion and its words are 
for lovers, for people who want to live with burnin
g passion and outrageous hope. 
 
The same goes for what we think of as exclusively r
easonable endeavors, such as science.  Every 
discovery in a research lab is nothing but a stop o
n the journey of a lover.  A scientist Œ a 
champion of reason Œ starts out with certainty and 
then, stepping into faith, challenges what has 
been proved.  Every innovation begins with a transg
ression.  The preponderance of data and 
people of knowledge may say one thing, but a true s
cientist, a lover of life, sees what other 
cannot see, seeking truth and beauty concealed behi
nd appearances.  Conversely it is–certainty 
that holds the world back. 

 
The Second Reading
 is a terrific poem by my favorite poets Wislawa Szy
mborska. 
 
A Few Words on the Soul 

 
We have a soul at times.  

No one™s got it nonstop, for keeps. 

 
Day after day, year after year  

may pass without it. 

 
Sometimes it will settle for a while 

only in childhood™s fears and raptures. 

Sometimes only in astonishment 

that we are old. 

It rarely lends a hand in uphill tasks, 

like moving furniture, or lifting luggage, 

 or going miles in shoes that pinch. 

 
It usually steps out 

whenever meat needs chopping 

or forms have to be filled. 

 
For every thousand conversations 

it participates in one, if even that, 

since it prefers silence.  

Just when our body goes from ache to pain,   

it slips off duty. 

 
It™s picky: it doesn™t like seeing us in crowds, 

our hustling for a dubious advantage 

and creaky machinations make it sick. 

 
Joy and sorrow aren™t two different feelings for it
.  
It attends us only when the two are joined. 

We can count on it when we™re sure of nothing 

and curious about everything. 

 
Among the material objects, 

it favors clocks with pendulums 

and mirrors, which keep on working 

even when no one is looking. 

It won™t say where it comes from 

or when it™s taking off again, 

though it™s clearly expecting such questions. 

 
We need it but apparently 

it needs us for some reason too. 

 
Sermon 

 
Brian, our marvelous Church Administrator, called m
e out of my office about 5:30 on Friday to 
see something outside. 

 
Workers had been up on the roof of the office wing 
fixing a heating problem, so I imagined he 
was going to show me what they had done. I asked hi
m if that was it, and he said that he hadn't 
received the report yet. 

 
When we got outside on that perfectly beautiful and
 spring-like evening, he pointed up. There 
was the bright moon, looking something like an almo
nd, the shape a teacup's lip makes when it™s 
tilted toward you. Ah! this white tea-cup floating 
amid the thin fingers of the tree-branches 
stretching out against the dark blue sky. Beautiful
! 
 
 I knew that, in a few days, there would be no teacu
p in three-quarter view, but rather, a round 
full moon, as if I was looking at the tea-cup from 
directly overhead. Of course, in a few more 
weeks, it will be invisible completely, then turn i
nto the most elegant finger-nail nested in the 
tree-branches. Then in mere days: a tea-cup again, 
and then a white disc full and round. 
 
The thing is, the full moon™s light will never spil
l over, like the tea did this morning in the Zen 
story.  

 
Please note that the moon will be the moon no matte
r what it looks like. A fingernail, a 
disc...they are all moon. The phases of the moon do
 not signify that the moon itself is different. 
 
When I arrived here 13 years ago, there was a theol
ogical survey taken of the members. What 
struck me most was that the largest number of folks
 checked "eclectic" out of the many 
categories offered to choose from.  The word eclect
ic embraces a bit of this and a bit of that, 
even things that don't usually go together. 

It also implies an openness that changes position e
very now and then.  I want to lift up the 
eclectic pattern of faithfulness for what it is: a 
form of resistance...
one that resists certainty as 
the goal
.   
 
My beloved Szymborska begins the conversation about
 resisting certainty by talking about 
soul.
  
 
What does she mean by 
soul
, I wondered when I first read her poem title. 
Soul
 music and the 
culture around it? The 
soul
 of a community? That's how a member of my former c
ongregation 
used to describe its most senior member, with her e
legant felt hats and  
warm, welcoming presence.  

 
How about 
soul
 as sheer gumption... like in the recent film 
Soul Surfer,
 where a young woman 
returns to her surfboarding after having one of her
 arms literally bitten off by a shark?  
 
Or the Hebrew 
nephesh
, often translated as 
soul
 in English Bible translations, which basically 
meant the pulse of life in the carotid artery, a ve
ry materialistic version of 
soul
 indeed. Or maybe 
the 
soul
 articulated by Thomas Aquinas (based on Aristotle'
s works), who saw the 
soul 
as the 
immortal real Self within us which does not rise up
 out of any material organ in our bodies, like 
brain or heart. How about Unitarian Waldo Emerson's
 Oversoul, based on the Hindu concept of 
atman, 
the 
soul
 of the whole universe intersecting with our own in
ner life? That very 
atman
 or 
soul
 which Siddattha Gautama, the Buddha, in his very f
irst sermon, said didn't exist at all? 
 
Szymborska clarifies her meaning, without arguing w
ith any of the others: 
We have a soul, 
she says,
 at times
. No one™s got it nonstop, for keeps. Day after day
, year after 
year may pass without it. 

 
Not Aquinas's immortal soul, is it, which endures b
eyond death? Nor the very fleshy pulse in the 
carotid artery. No 
atman
 or Oversoul either. No community standout or even 
pure gumption. 
 
She continues: 
Sometimes it will settle for a while
 only in childhood™s fears and raptures.
 Sometimes only in astonishment that we are old. 

  
I felt 
soul
 like that when I was a child and wept fearfully af
ter my mother sat me down to tell me 
that my cousin Linda, aged six, had died of leukemi
a. I also felt soul when I raptured under the 
million stars brightening the dark clear midnight s
ky over Pt. Pelee, in Ontario.  
 
And believe me, several times each day I am astonis
hed by the sheer fact that I am 62. 
I think about the whole stretch of my life from inf
ant in my mother's arms to confused teen, to a 
wet-behind-the-ears-and terrified young adult climb
ing into his first pulpit, to a 62-year-old who 
has built his complex career in liberal congregatio
ns and the larger Unitarian Univeralist 
movement. Every time it occurs to me that I'm that 
old, I sigh, I shiver, I feel what Freud called 
the "oceanic feeling," a sense that the farthest st
ar and closest speck of dust are both partners in 
my brief life. My life, which it seems to me has ph
ases exactly like the moon...sometimes I'm 
full, sometimes I'm dark, sometimes I™m 
mezzimezz,
 as my grandfather used to say in dialect: 
right in the middle. But somehow, I'm always me. 

  

Just when our body goes from ache to pain, the soul
 slips off duty
, Szymborska says. 
  
She seems to be saying that she sees the word 
soul 
standing for a feeling of self-awareness, but 
one that can disappear when something as intense as
 deep pain eclipses it. Believe me, when I 
passed a kidney-stone at age 28, I wasn't feeling t
he sublime connection to the farthest star, I was 
screaming my fool head off in the emergency room. 

 
Then Szymborska notes a moral quality to soul: 
our hustling for a dubious advantage, 
she says, 
and creaky machinations
– make it sick
. 
Maybe she is saying soul is the upwelling of 
conscience in the midst of a world of entitled priv
ileges for some, nothing at all for others. 
Makes sense to me. 

 
And most importantly for me, she writes: 
Joy and sorrow aren™t two different feelings for it
. It 
attends us only when the two are joined. 

 
This is exactly how I felt after my mother died in 
November...feelings of immense joy and 
gratitude that she and I had the best conversations
 
in our lives
 these last two years.  Yet these 
joyous feelings were 
absolutely fused
 to my feelings of deep sorrow that I can no longer
 
converse with her.  

 
Thus, in the last two months, besides dealing with 
the strange 2011 calendar deadlines for 
holiday services, a month long virus of some kind, 
two trips, and a sense of being unsure about 
everything - which is another, but very real expres
sion of grief - I have nevertheless felt 
soulful 
each and every day. Which means I agree with Szymbo
rska: 
We can count on the soul when 
we™re sure of nothing
, 
and curious about everything. 
 
Ah yes, curious about everything. Like a scientist,
 perhaps, of some sort...a paleontologist, a 
chemist, a biologist, an astronomer. In the field, 
in the observatory, in the research lab. 
 
Samir Salmirovic enters the conversation here. You 
heard these words earlier: 
Every discovery in 
a research lab is nothing but a stop on the journey
 of a lover.  A scientist Œ a champion of reason 

 Œ starts out with certainty and then, stepping into
 faith, challenges what has been proved.  Every 
innovation begins with a transgression.  The prepon
derance of data and people of knowledge 
may say one thing, but a true scientist, a lover of
 life, sees what other cannot see, seeking truth 
and beauty concealed behind appearances.    

 
The use of the word "faith" in the laboratory may n
ot resonate with some folks, for whom the 
word is far more a symbol for "a list of beliefs no
t based on scientific method." I understand, and 
that is one meaning of the word, surely.  But just 
as Szymborka finds many contradictory 
meanings in the ancient word 
soul,
 refusing to bow to anyone who tries to tell her wh
at 
soul
 really
 means, so I think Salmanovic is using the word ?fa
ith? in the ways Buddhists and liberal 
Christians use it. After all, faith is a worldwide 
word, not just an American biblical word 
distorted by blubbering TV evangelists. When Salman
ovic talks about the scientist's faith in the 
duty of the scientific method to up-end long held c
ertainties, he's using a perfectly good meaning 
long associated with that word. He's speaking about
 a faith that no matter how certain we are 
right now, our information will one day be transcen
ded. I'm especially thrilled about his striking 
assertion 
"Every innovation begins with a transgression."
  What a powerful, wonderful phrase 
that is! 

 
But then he adds this wonderful surprise: 
Conversely, it is–
certainty
 that holds the world back. 
And he makes it clear in his larger context that he
's talking about the swaggering certainties of 
the clergy, the politicians, etc. 

 
So, to be clear, he's 
not
 talking about the certainty of 2+2 equals 4, or th
e welcome certainty of 
ample cash-flow passing through the retiree's accou
nt. No, he's speaking of the claimed certainty 
when a politician or cleric or anyone self-anointed
 defines words for others, or proclaims the 
absolute authority of their personal dictionary, as
suming that those meanings are the 
only
 deep 
meanings those words can have. But I say the meanin
gs of words have evolved and changed at 
least as much as the dinosaurs evolved over the yea
rs, all the way into birds.  
 
Over the decades, I™ve enjoyed the privilege of lis
tening to hundreds of people sharing their 
spiritual journeys with me. In every single case, t
hey have used the classic religious words in 
different ways from each other, or even with multip
le meanings in the same conversation. It™s 
true, I know, both compassionate people and proven 
scoundrels can use these words. But giving 
scoundrels the power to define them for the rest of
 humanity is just plain foolishness. Why give 
such power away to those who abuse their power? 

 
A person crafting an eclectic worldview might, afte
r all, accept some word meanings while 
absolutely rejecting others as poison. But in any c
ase, whether you are deeply comfortable and 
rooted gladly in a particular belief 
or
 unbelief system, or even if you™re eclectic about 
your 
beliefs, it™s important, I think, to never make ass
umptions that, when others talk about the 
religious words 
soul, God, faith or spirit
, they mean exactly what you do. The life of religi
ous 
community, however liberal, progressive or diverse,
 is not made known by our unbending 
assertions, but by our conversations.  Conversation
s with each other.  Conversations with me, or 
Eric, or any of the staff as well.  It™s really OK 
to ask me why I do or do not use certain words in 
my pulpit or in my office. It™s never OK, however t
o assume that when I use any particular word, 

 I mean what you mean by it, pro or con. This is not
 a healthy world when it™s a world of 
assertions, assumptions and certainty only.  Rather
, I™d say, it™s an entirely 
relational
 world. 
 
As Selmanovic says: 
In a relational world, mere information will not do
. Certainty about the 
other, whether human or divine, effectively does aw
ay with relationship.  To acknowledge the 
limitations of our faith language does not make our
 love more elusive but more real. 
He then 
writes a rather sympathetic statement about our nee
d for certainty. 
Without certainty, this world 
is a frightening place to live.  We are fragile cre
atures who crave as much certainty in this life as 
we can possibly get.  We lose jobs, health, lovers,
 and homes, and we know how exhausting 
uncertainty can be
.   That's honest and quite a compassionate stateme
nt about the human 
condition, I think. 

 
Yet he calls us to resist certainty in our thinking
, our believing, and our imagery anyway. He 
himself - and I have mentioned him before and will 
undeniably mention him again - lives in a 
deliberate community, in Manhattan, composed of ath
eists, agnostics, Jews, Protestant 
Christians, Catholic Christians, Muslims, Sikhs, Ad
ventist Christians etc. They each speak out of 
their traditions and culture, and listen to others 
speak about theirs. And all of them, being open 
and not closed, are moving, changing, and becoming 
more eclectic– and less certain. Like 
Szymborska, Selmanovic doesn™t likely think that th
e person who may describe the soul as 
intermittent is being wishy-washy, but rather atten
tive to the actual phases of life, which change, 
in Shakespeare's words... like the inconstant moon.
 He has nothing but good to say about 
atheism, too, despite his own beliefs. 

 
Like anyone whose cup isn't overflowing with certai
nty, Selmanovic knows that there are many 
meanings of religious words like 
God
 and 
Soul, 
and that there never has been a time in history 
when that was not true. Making assumptions about wh
at others mean by those words, without 
having a conversation with them, is an unwarranted 
magical
 assertion of certainty which corrupts 
any possibility of a real and open-hearted relation
ship. Szymborska says it best, as she often 
does. 
The soul won't say where it comes from or when it™s
 taking off again, though it™s clearly 
expecting such questions.
 I would love to see more questions, and conversati
ons between the 
?isms,? the differing philosophies and theologies i
n the world, and in this congregation. I'm not 
negatively criticizing any ism, like theism or athe
ism or agnosticism or even Buddhism etc. 
Hardly. I claim a couple of ism™s myself, at least 
most of the time. I'm just asking people to find 
ways of having soulful conversations with each othe
r. Few conversations 
are 
soulful, 
Szymborska reminds us. One in a thousand, she sugge
sts. And I would clarify further, small talk, 
however easy it might be, is not soulful. Talking a
bout others behind their back is not soulful. 
Talking down to anyone is not soulful. Hiding behin
d sarcasm is not soulful. Soulfulness is open, 
not closed. 

 
I'm also going to say it™s good to have soulful con
versations with ourselves, to get to understand 
what really drives us through life. By this I'm say
ing that it™s possible for every individual in this
 
room to have multiple beliefs and unbeliefs moving 
inside them 
at the same time, 
and that this is 
perfectly OK. Very human. I can use the word God, a
s I might define it, on one day, and think it 
inadequate and even a misleading word the next, and
 that does not make me dizzy, inconsistent, 
or "afraid to commit" just because I remain open in
 my approach, and routinely empty my cup so 

 that there might be room for new evidence, new insp
iration. Resistance to certainty, I think right 
now, promotes relationship in our common world, rat
her than silences it.   
 
And so I will look up at the moon anytime Brian sug
gests it, and even when he's on his day off.  
I might find myself thinking of the well-known word
s from the Book of Qoheleth in the Hebrew 
scriptures, which go like this: ?To everything ther
e is a season, a time for every experience under 
the sky.?  The author could have gone on:  There is
 a season for every phase of the moon, and for 
every chapter in our lives. We are always growing, 
changing, developing, and discovering 
ourselves amidst the changing fortunes of love and 
life. 
 
Certainty, you see, is not the goal of life. 

Living life fully, however, is. 

  

Offering
  
Closing Sequence on Life 
(this is Szymborska™s poem, Notatka, the Note) 
 
Life is the only way 

to get covered in leaves, 

catch your breath on the sand, 

rise on wings; 

to be a dog or stroke its warm fur; 

to tell pain from everything it™s not; 

to squeeze inside events,  

dawdle in views,  

to seek the least of all possible mistakes. 

An extraordinary chance 

to remember for a moment  

a conversation held with the lamp switched off. 

 
And if only once, to stumble on a stone, 

end up drenched in one downpour or another, 

mislay your keys in the grass 

and to keep on  

not
 knowing something important. 
 
#123 Spirit of Life 
 
 
 
 
 
