Hard Work:  What I Learned  
Making Leaf Springs for Dodge Trucks 
September 2, 2012 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 
Gathering Welcoming Centering Kindling Opening 

 
We are here, 

on a wet holiday weekend in late summer, 

to worship, to turn toward the deeper questions, 

remaining attentive to the spirit of loving communi
ty 
and the demands of justice for all beings on earth.
 And so
  Grounded in gratitude for the cosmos that is our ho
me, claiming 
deepening wisdom as our authority, and daring to en
gage joy, burden, loss 
and insight in a deliberate community of many ways 
and ages, the flame 
summons us to 
awaken
: to listen with our whole lives, to open, to serve
. 
 
Story: 
The Tall Tale of John Henry 
 
Sequence 

 
"There can be no great accomplishment without great
 risk," the late astronaut Neil Armstrong 
said. 

Which, my heart tells me, can be said this way too:
 There can be no life without the newborn risking ta
king a breath outside the womb. 
No trip to the store without risking the first step
. 
No hope without risking an open mind. 

No song without risking the act of singing. 

No joy without risking the fact of inevitable loss.
 No education without risking listening deeply. 

No unity without first risking naming difference. 

No spoken word without first risking entering silen
ce. 
 
silence 

 
There can be no great accomplishment without great 
risk:  risk of loving, risk of friendship, risk 
of family-making, risk of relationship. And so in h
onor of the great risks we have taken to live 
deep lives, we risk remembering the names and faces
 of those whom we love, those who love us, 
those we find hard to love, those we miss, those fo
r whom we grieve.... 
 
naming 

 
To risk singing a courageous and luminous Halleluja
h, in a world diminished by name-calling, 

innuendo and disrespect, is the very reason I remai
n faithful to my religious principles of reason, 
honesty, reverence, caring and awe. Hallelujah and 
Amen. 
 
Readings 

 
The First Reading 
comes from Alice Koller's The Stations of Solitude,
 written in 1980.  
 
Work is a world apart from jobs. Work is a way you 
occupy your mind and hand and eye and 
whole body when they're informed by your imaginatio
n and wit, by your keenest perceptions, by 
your most profound reflections on everything you've
 seen and heard and been a part of. You may 
or may not be paid to do your work. 

 
The Second Reading
 is from a letter written by Benjamin Franklin to Be
njamin Vaughn on July 
26, 1784. 

 
It has been computed by some political mathematicia
n that, if every man and woman would 
work for four hours each day on something useful, t
hat labor would produce sufficiently to 
procure all the necessities and comforts of life, w
ant and misery would be banished out of our 
world, and the rest of the 24 hours might be leisur
e and pleasure. 
 
Homily
 (notes for an extempore talk) 
 
1. Labor Day antique sound 

telecommuting, NY DC. web design from home, 

 
labor used to mean hard physical labor. 

factories, farm work, railroads and road work, 

mining, fishing muscles 

 
John Henry signed beginning of end of human physica
l labor. 
I did physical labor Factory, Fenestra, Chuck Rzepk
a, describe, 6 days a week, 10 hour a day, 
over time demanded. union 327 and a half. 

heat stroke. broke a machine. scarred. dirty. burn 
clothes. oil pit. John Henry muscle guy. 
great burn.... 

 
Folks have often thought of working less 

thought about Ben Franklins 4 day work life 

several utopian communities in 19th century and 20t
h century America tried such rational 
approaches. 

little by little in many places 37 hour work week. 

  

Spiritual Lessons 

 
1. Difference between job and work. Job was to make
 leaf springs. Work was to make sure their 
kids never did same thing; saved for college; saw l
ife as transitional; sacrificial for higher 
purpose. 

 
2. Learned that the interdependence of all thing is
 not a simple religious affirmation in our 
principles, but the hard fact of reality...in facto
ries. we either worked together or everything shut 
down. 

 
3. Learned that focus on a common endeavor allows f
or diversity; racial, age. Everyone 
cooperated;  gave purpose to life. 

 
4. Learned to be grateful for what I have received;
 hard work, done by robots now; the story of 
John Henry is still happening, we™ll see more in ou
r life time. 
 
Offering
 (extempore) 
 
End of Summer Prayer 

 
Light of Life, 

shining through the transparency of every 

woman and man and child who risks loving, 

who risks kindness, who risks imagining a unity dee
per than our real differences and risks 
singing Hallelujah in the midst of brokenness, 

shine for a moment like the summer sun, 

like the blue moon of August, 

like the candles on the table  

and eyes of children at play, 

like the sweat on the arms of women and men 

at work in the garden, 

and illumine us for a time 

with a sense of the interdependence of all things: 

the inner and the outer, 

the yes and the no 

life and death,  

dark and light. 

 
  

 
