Resisting Authority 
January 1, 2012 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 Welcoming, Centering, Kindling, Opening: 

 
We are here 

on the first day of the month, and the new year, 

to worship, to celebrate life and love 

within the labyrinth of our time on earth. 

It's freedom, not fate, which calls us;  

honesty, not ease, which summons us here. 

 
And so, without guarantees, we lean into joy, and b
end toward a just way of life, both for 
our own sakes, and for the sake of our children and
 all beings with whom we share the 
earth. We would engage our mission wholeheartedly, 
with courage, self-questioning, 
compassion, vulnerability and honesty. 

 
[Let readers be aware that there was a classical
 Chartres Labyrinth in the center of the Meeting 
House, with the chairs all around it.  Thus referen
ces to the labyrinth, which is not a maze.] 
 
Sequence for New Year's Day 

Hear these words, written 2500 years ago by an unkn
own prophet,  
whose texts were attached to the book of the prophe
t Isaiah:  
How beautiful in the highlands are the feet of thos
e who bring good news of peace. 
And in the chambers of my heart, 

the echoes of this great text flow like this:
 How beautiful in the lowlands are the hands 

of those who comfort. 

How beautiful in the sky are the winter birds 

which carol in the clouds. 

How beautiful in the sea are the dolphins 

which leap. 

How beautiful in the community are the tears 

which glisten on faces. 

How beautiful in the assembly are the courtesies 

which support striking differences
. 
How beautiful in the heart are the struggles 

which remind us to seize each day with joy. 

How beautiful in the silence is the refreshment  

which flows when words are dropped to the floor 

and life is only what we sense, not what we say: 

silence 

 
How beautiful in the assembly are the lives of thos
e who remember loved ones; face themselves 
in the mirror of love; reach out to others in hones
ty; and bless the world with their lives. Calling 
to mind our own personal lives in the context of th
e larger life, our community, we are free here 
and now to name silently within, or whisper aloud, 
the names of the people who dwell today and 
every day in our hearts of love, worry, struggle or
 memory. 
 
naming 

 
How beautiful are the words of the prophet Isaiah: 
 
















 Mah nawu 'al heharim ragle m'vasser mashmiya shalom
 m'vasser tov mashmiya yeshu'a
.  
How beautiful upon the highlands are the feet of th
ose who announce the good news of peace.
  
The First Reading 
is from a famous sermon my dear friend Jane Rzepka 
preached in Madison 
back in 1996.  

 
There are two kinds of people.  There are people wh
o can sit there and let the phone ring, and 
people who just 
have
 to answer it.  There are people who want to lay ou
t a vacation™s precise 
itinerary, and people who™d rather drift.  Cat peop
le.  Dog people.  Two kinds of people:  People 
who like to shop; people who hate to shop.  People 
who wear hats.  People who don™t.  Shower 
people; bath people.  Two kinds of people.  People 
who believe a cup needs a saucer; and those 
who never notice.  People who always know what time
 it is; and others who lose track.  Some 
people keep everything; some throw it away.  Some r
ead the manual, and some fiddle with the 
knobs.  Some like sailboats; for others it has to b
e a power boat.  Two kinds of people.  There are 
people who file every warranty, nice and neat.  Oth
ers set them free.  There are people who cross 
only at the crosswalk; and others who just–cross.  
Some people leave the dishes in the sink; 
others need to get them washed right away.  We have
 morning people; night people.  Some 
people jump into the pool; and the others like the 
slow, inch by inch approach.  Two kinds of 
people.  Two kinds of people.  

The notion of ?kinds of people? seems to be a natur
al one.  We know it™s never true, exactly, and 
that life is more complicated than that and the dis
tinctions more subtle.  We know how 
dangerous stereotyping is.  We have our little syst
ems for categorizing.  They make sense, they 
create order, they seem obvious, real, and true Œ u
ntil we™re confronted with someone else™s 
categories.  Once we hear a list of categories so d
istinct from the ones we ordinarily encounter, 
we are reminded that all categories in our lives ar
e wholly artificial.
  
The Second Reading
 is from the Scroll of Qoheleth, or Ecclesiastes, in
 the Hebrew Scriptures, 
which was written and edited by an anonymous philos
opher in the 4th to 3rd centuries before the 
common era. This is my edition of Eugene Peterson's
 breezy and wonderful translation. 
 
Don't always be asking, "Where are the good old day
s gone?"  
Wise folks don't ask foolish questions. 

There is nothing better than wisdom. 

Knowing how to interpret the meaning of life. 

Wisdom puts light in the eyes, and brings gentlenes
s 

to words and manners.  

Seize life now! Enjoy the bread you eat, 

drink from your cup with a robust heart, 

for God takes pleasure in your pleasure. 

Dress well each and every morning, don't skimp on c
olors and grooming.  
Relish life with the one you love, each and every d
ay, too, for life is precarious. 
Every day is a gift. Make the most of each one. 

Whatever work you choose to do, do it heartily. 

Invest in acts of generosity,  

which always yield high return.  

 
Sermon 

 
So, it's New Year's Day in the year 2012. I'm prett
y sure that when I was a ten-year-old, I 
believed that by now, I would see flying cars, a Hi
lton Hotel on the Moon, feel pride at a few 
trips to Mars under our belt, and marvel at the sub
way tunnel under the Atlantic Ocean to get us 
to London in a couple of hours. You know. The Futur
e, capital F. Roadways soaring in the air 
between mile-high skyscrapers, spaceships to Alpha 
Centauri, and life spans of two hundred-fifty 
years apiece, just like that. Wouldn't you know it.
..all we have are these lousy cell phones 
(holds 
one)
 to indicate that decades have passed.  
 
So, it™s New Year's Day in the year 2012. There are
 a disturbingly high percentage of people in  
the US of A who, by totally twisting ancient Mayan 
texts, predict an end to it all; or, who read 
their own rage into the Rorschach verses of Nostrad
amus; or who ignorantly twist and literalize 
the images of the Book of Revelation with a lunatic
's precision of dates; or who use the 1954 
movie by George Pal, "When Worlds Collide," to shap
e their conviction that a fictional planet 
called Nibiru will pulverize the earth this year an
d smash us all to bits. Me, I just shake my head. 
And muster up some gladness that at least we do hav
e some 
small
 measurable progress in this 
2012. 
(lifts up smartphone again)
 At least I can research Nostradamus and Nibiru in 
two minutes 
flat
 on this thing.  In 1960 I would have had to ride m
y bicycle to the library and spend a hearty 
two hours
--or even 
two days
--looking up the apocalyptic foibles of humanity. 
 
So, it™s New Year's Day in the year 2012. Election 
craziness is already beginning to pollute the 
media, understandable worry about the economy of 
the whole world
 is still stirring up our 
anxieties, and people are still searching for work 
in large numbers.  
 
But, I have to say this too. In this new year of 20
12, it™s not all tough news. People are also 
searching for deeper meanings in their lives, for t
ruths which impel them rather than repel them, 
and for the kind of love that roots them in the hap
piness, the joy, they first imagined for their 
future selves...with or without flying cars. 

 
And Alice Walker tells us that "Resistance is the s
ecret of joy."   
(Possessing the Secret of Joy, 
1992)
  
It is? Resistance to what?  

 
I'm suggesting this morning it™s to authority. Now 
please, I am not talking about turning my back 

to the mayor or congressperson, or thumbing my nose
 at some bishop or pastor that claims to 
know everything, or folding my arms and frowning wh
ile some professor or teacher or librarian 
or doctor is doing what they do. I'm not talking ab
out tossing away organizational policy 
manuals, burning the newspaper because a critic sla
mmed my new favorite movie, or righteously 
nitpicking, with flourish, the Ten Commandments. Or
 the Sermon on The Mount. Or the 12 
Steps. Or the Bill of Rights. I'm not talking about
 those kinds of authority right now. 
 
I am talking about the authorities in our lives whi
ch are invisible, which don't wear uniforms, 
tailored suits or smart outfits, badges, lab-coats,
 stoles, or which are not written down on paper 
somewhere. 

 
Jane Rzepka makes clear to me the locus of the firs
t authority I want to resist with all my heart. I 
am going to call it the Binary Authority of Categor
ies. The idea that there are two, and only two, 
categories of anything and everything. Which transl
ates, she says, into the authoritarian assertion 
that there are two, and only two kinds of people. 
There are people who can sit there and let the 
phone ring, and people who just have to answer it. 
 There are people who want to lay out a 
vacation™s precise itinerary, and people who™d rath
er drift.  Cat people.  Dog people. People 
who like to shop; people who hate to shop.  People 
who wear hats.  People who don™t.  Shower 
people; bath people. People who always know what ti
me it is; and others who lose track.  Some 
people keep everything; some throw it away.  Some r
ead the manual, and some fiddle with the 
knobs. There are people who file every warranty, ni
ce and neat.  Others set them free.  Some 
people leave the dishes in the sink; others need to
 get them washed right away.  We have 
morning people; night people; 
and so many more she offered us. To that, I need to
 add: The 
introvert and the extrovert. The secular and the sp
iritual. The political and the religious; the 
scientific and the religious. And my personal favor
ite: the believer and the non-believer. In 
summary, I want to resist the claimed authority of 
the either-or. But thankfully, after that strobe-
like list of 
either's
 and 
or's
, Jane offers us this sensible and clear-eyed obser
vation: 
The notion of ?kinds of people? seems to be a natur
al one.  
We know
 it™s never true, exactly, and 
that life is more complicated than that and the dis
tinctions more subtle.  
We know
 how 
dangerous stereotyping is.  We have our little syst
ems for categorizing.  They make sense, they 
create order, they seem obvious, real, and true Œ u
ntil we™re confronted with someone else™s 
categories.  Once we hear a list of categories so d
istinct from the ones we ordinarily encounter, 
we are reminded that 
all categories in our lives are 
wholly
 artificial. 
 
Wholly artificial.  Made up.  Fictional.  Projected
.  Comforting for a moment because it creates 
order, but dangerous if it persists, because the or
der it creates will eventually hurt someone 
outside our neat little categorical house of cards.
 "You know how those Catholics are..." is a 
categorical statement that hurts. "Oh he's one of t
hese Christian evangelicals...they are all crazy 
as far as I am concerned."  That is a categorical s
tatement with the power to hurt, despite, yes, 
despite
 the true obnoxiousness of your uncle Faustus who g
oes on about non-Christians roasting 
in hell, or about the "evils" of abortion or same-s
ex marriage; or about those fool tax-loving 
Democrats; and, and here I quote,  "that damn Obama
 who has ruined our country."  His 
categories hurt too....but that does not mean we ha
ve to return the favor and universalize his 
hurtfulness.   

 
And as far as I'm concerned, the world is not divid
ed between believers and non-believers. I can 
think of at least ten other alternatives to either 
belief or unbelief.  Jungian alternatives. Spiritua
l 

practice alternatives. Cultural alternatives, like 
many Reconstructionist Jews, or Cultural 
Catholics. Emergent Evangelical alternatives. Multi
-cultural alternatives. Classical mystical 
tradition alternatives, such as those of Johannes E
ckhart or Shankara. Poetic alternatives. 
Alternatives where people pray 
without irony
 to "Oh God, you who both are and are not..." You 
can complain about Karl Marx's economic theories, o
r you can revere him, but in any case, I 
liked reading recently that he was very clear that 
"non-belief" is simply a mirror form of "belief" 
as understood by the non-believer, and that ultimat
ely, this artificial dualism too would not stand 
up to the passage of time.   

 
So I want to spend 2012 resisting the authority of 
binary, either-or categories. I may fall into 
using them some times...it™s normal, Jane reminds u
s, but my commitment is to 
shatter
 those 
"eithers" and those "ors"...those artificial, if so
metimes momentarily convenient, categories. And 
in that resistance, I imagine finding some sense of
 joy. 
 
The second authority I want to resist is the author
ity of the Imagined Past. As the unknown 
philosopher who wrote the scroll of Qoheleth put it
 so clearly: 
"Don't always be asking 'Where 
are the good old days gone?' Wise folks don't ask f
oolish questions.  There is nothing better than 
wisdom. Wisdom... brings gentleness to words and ma
nners."  
 
So much of the national conversation is neither gen
tle nor mannered. Loud voices decry the way 
our nation has been going, and lift up the way "it 
used to be" as some ideal: white picket fences 
edging the bungalow's lawn, families of pearl-weari
ng mothers and suit-wearing fathers and the 
two aw-shucks kids sitting around the table eating 
pot-pies with superlative manners, the beloved 
old malt shop down the street, the friendly and hon
est auto-mechanic named Mac down at the 
Shell station, and a $40 grocery bill for the week 
for a family of four. And none of these Roes or 
Wades, these marches on Washington, these little pe
ople ungratefully resenting trickle-down 
economic philosophy, these pride parades and movies
 suggesting that sexualities, and human 
beings, come in more than one representational vari
ety. Why can't churches be family size 
instead of these large and even mega-church monstro
sities? And we never used to mention 
Hanukkah or Kwanzaa or things like that. Why start 
now? 
 
But this is fantasy-land of course. Based in part, 
sure, on the personal memories of a small 
number of people, but also on the self-serving desi
re to make those singular personal memories 
part of the universal memory of the national past. 
So don't even bring up the parts of the past that 
don't fit this perfect little fantasy...such as tha
t African American veterans couldn't get loans to 
buy homes whereas their white comrades could, after
 the Second World War. Or that there were 
mega churches back in the thirties, except that the
y were all liberal and the often Unitarian-based 
People's Churches, such as the one in Chicago led b
y Preston Bradley with 4000 members; or 
urban Catholic parishes with 25,000 members like th
e one I went to; and that the conservative 
evangelical churches were small in those days. Or, 
that there were marches in the 30's too, and 
that being invisible in your sexuality or your gend
er does not mean the same thing as not-
existing; and that just because you personally were
n't neighbors with the Blitzsteins in 1953 
doesn't mean that Hanukkah is a new invention. Yes,
 Kwanzaa wasn't invented yet, but then 
neither were these fool cell-phones, 
(lift it up again)
 soooo... so what? The "good old days" were 
partially good, partially bad, partially neutral, j
ust like these present days. There were picket 
fence homes 
and
 tenements back then, just as now there are $500,00
0 homes in the suburbs 
and
 $5000 homes in the ghetto. The choice to abort a pr
egnancy has been chosen  since ancient 

times, and it has nothing to do with either Roe or 
Wade. Liberals and conservatives are saying 
rough things to each other? Do you think vocal anar
chists like Emma Goldman pulled her 
punches when speaking of the likes of the KKK bloss
oming all over the South in the "good old 
days"? She was boldly lifting up the dignity and ri
ghts of sexual minorities back in 1915 too. So 
Qoheleth is right, I think. Resist 
anyone
 moaning and wringing their hands that the good old
 days 
are gone, and how sad that is. There 
is
 no wisdom in such a thing, especially since they a
ctually 
are 
gone, that is, in the past. Only the present is her
e. And we are wise, the author says, when we 
make the best of every 
present
 day, not lionize days that never were like we thin
k they were 
anyway. And I know that I for one DO experience the
 feeling of joy when I live in the present, 
instead of living with resentment that much of what
 I knew in 1960 no longer exists. 
 
The third thing I want to resist is Stated Interpre
tations of Reality instead of Actual Sensual 
Reality. What do I mean? Qoheleth says: 
Seize life now! Enjoy the bread you eat, drink from
 
your cup with a robust heart, for God takes pleasur
e in your pleasure. Dress well each and every 
morning, don't skimp on colors and grooming. Relish
 life with the one you love, each and every 
day, too, for life is precarious. 

 
These are rich sensual details. Bread and wine, clo
th and color, relishing a loved one. Sensual 
reality. I can taste bread. I can life up a cup in 
toast on New Years Eve. I can wear colors around 
my neck. 

 
But this week, I had to resist someone trying to ge
t me to not pay attention to sensual details. I 
have a friend, whom I've mentioned many times in th
is pulpit before, who has been struggling 
with alcoholism for much of his life. He's been doi
ng pretty well for a few years now, getting his 
life in order, and I have been proud at his progres
s. It™s a hard road, certainly. But this week he 
showed up at the front door of my building, drunk, 
WAY drunk, at one o'clock AM. He wanted 
me to let him in. I told him 
No
. I told him he was drunk, and that I was mad at hi
m for waking 
me up, and disappointed in him. He said, "But I'm n
ot drunk; I haven't had a single beer." He 
said this with 
amazingly
 convincing sincerity. Part of me wanted to buckle 
and believe him, it 
was so sincere. But I resisted his own description 
of his reality, and opted instead for the sensual 
reality I myself perceived. I said to him: "I can s
ee your lower lip is swollen, which has always 
been clear evidence that you tossed quite a few dow
n. Your voice is lower by a whole half- 
octave, and it™s raspy. Your words are slurred. You
 are drunk." He kept on insisting he was not 
drunk. "But you are my friend!" he said. "You shoul
d be there for me." He was bringing out the 
big guns, because, despite his problems I have alwa
ys loved and cared for him. But, fortunately, 
I didn't trust his sincerity, or even my sympathy f
or him as a troubled human being I've 
genuinely cared for, but rather, my own capacity to
 read the sensual details of the reality right 
before my eyes. It meant leaving him outside in the
 cold, barely able to walk...so it was a serious 
decision to trust my senses and not his words. He w
ould have to sleep outside. But I did it. The 
whole incident kept me up for a couple of hours bec
ause it disturbed me that he had lost himself 
again, and it pained me to witness this. But realit
y is what it is, not what I wish it could, or 
should, be.  

 
But where is the joy in such resistance? you may we
ll ask. You may say: "Deciding not to be co-
dependent is exhausting and hard work. I know. I ha
ve an addicted father, son, brother, mother, 
daughter, spouse, friend, or second cousin twice re
moved. It doesn't seem joyous when I have to 
resist their incessant baffling attempts to deceive
 me."   

 
I understand, but I do feel the joy of knowing that
 I have not contributed to his self-deception by 
falling for it. Yes, he was 
angry
 I resisted his ploy. Yes, it kept me up. Yes, he w
anted to blame 
everyone but himself. But I know that giving in to 
him to avoid those pains would have made 
things worse both for me 
and 
for him. Sometimes, just keeping things from gettin
g worse is even 
better than when everything is going OK without me.
 Sometimes walking the labyrinth of life, 
where you yourself come out of it exactly where you
 entered it, is more helpful than trying to 
solve the difficult maze erected by those suffering
 from deep addictions. 
 
So, it's New Year's Day in the year 2012. It™s righ
t now; not yesterday, not tomorrow. We're not 
divided into only two categories, but are a communi
ty of unique individuals with amazing stories 
that overlap sometimes, and don't overlap sometimes
. But no matter, the wise know that every 
category is artificial, and has no lasting authorit
y.     
 
And it™s not the past, the good old days, with all 
of their joys and sorrows, ideals and 
disappointments, 
but the present right before us,
 with its joys and sorrows, its ideals and 
disappointments mixed together, where we really liv
e. It™s the present moment, not tomorrow, 
which offers us sensual details we can relish, and 
to which we pay attention to make our 
responses to life clear.   By resisting the Binary 
Authority that saws reality into artificial 
either/ors; or by resisting the Authority of the Im
agined Past that fools us into thinking that 
change, in-and-of-itself, is evil; and by resisting
 the Authority of Described Reality instead of 
engaging with what I actually sense, I might, in th
is year 2012, actually experience a deeper joy 
than I ever before imagined.  

 
Offering 

 
To invest in our future, to secure the strength of 
the presence of this congregation in the lives of 
its members and in the life of the community it emb
races, to offer practical expression of our 
stated mission of generosity of spirit, we offer th
is time of offering. It™s not too late to put 
Holiday Appeal on the Memo Line if you are writing 
a check. Guest at Your Table boxes can 
also be placed in the baskets today. 

 
Riff Prayer 

(On) ne voit pas les choses du dehors. (Nous sommes
) dans le labyrinthe aussi. 
(Alain Robbe-
Grillet Dans Le Labyrinthe 1959) 

We are in the labyrinth too. 

We cannot stand outside the cosmos. 

We cannot get a view from the other side of the edg
e of things.  
We can only live within the universe, 

and face what befalls us with honesty, courage, 

doubt, faithfulness and the life-giving hallelujah 

we call wonder, we call love, we call awe, 

we call humility. The glory of this hallelujah 

chorus echoing through our hearts is the very soul 
of our life on earth. Glory, glory, hallelujah! 
 
 
