   Love and the Tree of Life 
February 12, 2012 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 
Greeting, Centering, Kindling, Opening: 

 
We are here, 

as winter finally pays a cold, snowy visit, 

to worship, to remind ourselves that 

we™re fragile, small leaves on the tree of life, 

neither branch or trunk, nor wisp of root, 

teaching us that humility and gratitude 

are deep taproots of our love. 

And so, without guarantees, we lean into joy, and b
end toward a just way of life, both for 
our own sakes, and for the sake of our children and
 all beings with whom we share the 
earth. We would engage our mission wholeheartedly, 
with courage, self-questioning, 
compassion, vulnerability and honesty. 

Teacher Thanksgiving 

Sequence
 O Love, here I am, at this moment, on this planet, 
in this place, utterly in awe that I am alive, and 
that everything is. In awe because I know I 
would not be here at all
 except for what has been 
revealed in a grand and sacred text written in stra
ta, stars and grateful observation: 
That I am here proclaims the tale of billions of ye
ars of gathering stardust, solar birth, gravity 
and other forces scooping the dust into the solid o
rb on which I stand, thunder and lighting and 
boiling seas for countless years, lava, proteins, c
ells, unnamed early blobs of what we now call 
life, a billion, billion trilobites in warm seas, s
oft mollusks in their spiral shells, bony fish, and
 a 
hundred million  years of shiny amphibians, centipe
des the size of my body, ferns and trees that 
no longer exist; a hundred million years of great r
eptiles, feathered creatures morphing into 
birds; great sloths and wooly mammoths and wide-eye
d lemurs grabbing onto branches with 
almost human-like hands; early humans gathering aro
und waterholes on the African veld; 
pyramids and reed boats, star-watching and calendar
-making, the vain smoke of sacrifices, the 
groan of chants curling into songs, the taming of h
orses and dogs, the refinements of cruelty and 
their antidote, empathy; the mutation of genes and 
chromosomes, the cry of language, the 
prophets, farmers, seafarers and laborers in stone 
and wood; the discovery and ritualization of 
alcohol; the struggles and wonders of genders, sexu
alities and spiritualities; war, peace, famine, 
greed, critique, abundance, loss and love. And all 
of these things together lead to this moment, 
and to me and you, fragile leaves on the tree of li
fe who are now keeping proper silence before 
this wonder. 

Silence
 
   Here and now blend with past and future, as our liv
es blend with others in our hearts. Here and 
now, we can bless this reality by naming in our hea
rts, or whispered aloud, all those whom we 
love, find hard to love, miss terribly, or remember
 with gratitude. 
naming
 The golden blossoms on the tree of life open now, a
s the transforming wonder that is music 
blesses our hearts. 

Music 

The First Reading
 is a poem by Dorianne Laux, whom Steve Abbott intro
duced me to this week. 
He will read the piece, called The Life of Trees 
written in 2007. 
The pines rub their great noise 

into the spangled dark, scratch  

their itchy boughs against the house, 

that moan™s mystery translates roughly 

into drudgery of ownership: time 

to drag the ladder from the shed, 

climb onto the roof with a saw 

between my teeth, cut  

those suckers down.  What's reality  

if not a long exhaustive cringe  

from the blade, the teeth. I want to sleep 

and dream the life of trees, beings 

from the muted world who care  

nothing for Money, Politics, Power, 

Will or Right, who want little from the night 

but a few dead stars going dim, a white owl 

lifting from their limbs, who want only 

to sink their roots into the wet ground 

and terrify the worms or shake 

their bleary heads like fashion models 

or old hippies. If trees could speak, 

they wouldn't, only hum some low 

green note, roll their pinecones 

down the empty streets and blame it, 

with a shrug, on the cold wind. 

During the day they sleep inside 

their furry bark, clouds shredding 

like ancient lace above their crowns. 

Sun. Rain. Snow. Wind. They fear 

nothing but the Hurricane, and Fire, 

that whipped bully who rises up 

and becomes his own dead father. 

   In the storms the young ones  

bend and bend and the old know  

they may not make it, go down  

with the power lines sparking, 

broken at the trunk. They fling 

their branches, forked sacrifice 

to the beaten earth. They do not pray. 

If they make a sound it's eaten 

by the wind. And though the stars 

return they do not offer thanks, only  

ooze a sticky sap from their roundish 

concentric wounds, clap the water 

from their needles, straighten their spines 

and breathe, and breathe again. 

The Second Reading
 is from the Scroll of 'Yob or Job in the Tanakh, th
e Hebrew scripture. It 
was both written and compiled by anonymous authors 
between the fourth and sixth centuries 
before the beginning of our era. The Hebrew is the 
most difficult to translate in all the Tanakh, 
and its one of the rare poems from ancient times th
at is both sarcastically humorous and richly 
philosophical at once.
 Why do you confuse the issue? Why do you talk witho
ut knowing what you are talking about? 
Pull yourself together, Job. Get up on your feet. S
tand tall. I have some questions for you and I 
want some straight answers. Where were you when the
 foundations of the earth were being set 
down? You know so much. Tell me what you know! What
 influences contributed to the earth's 
size? Do you think there were blueprints? Measuring
 tools? Do you have the original plumb 
line? Did you help pour the stone? Maybe it was you
 personally who set the cornerstone, while 
all the morning stars brimming the sky were singing
 for joy? Did anyone you know take charge 
of the first waters when they gushed like a newborn
 from the womb? Did you build a playpen for 
the waters, saying: "Stay here, this is your place.
 Your wild tantrums are confined to this 
seabed?" 

Sermon 

This last summer I went to see a film by Terrence M
alick.  I went with high expectations because 
of my haunting and vivid memory of seeing his film 
Days of Heaven
 more than 30 years ago.  
The cinematography was so over-the top beautiful, I
 remember people actually gasping out loud 
in the theater.  

The story itself was not the point of 
Days of Heaven.
 It was simply a retelling of the rather sordid 
biblical story about Abraham making a small fortune
 off the King of Egypt by loaning his wife 
to him, a sexist romp if there ever was one. But th
e film's sheer beauty overcame even the 
tawdriness of the tale. 

Many people who went to see the movie 
"Tree of Life,"
 however, were 
not
 grabbed by the beauty 
of the film. (And it indeed was beautiful as I expe
cted.) They just walked out of it. Many more, 

   who stayed to the end because of Malick's reputatio
n, walked out during the credits, shaking 
their heads and saying aloud "Really? 
Really?
"   
I admit it. The film 
was
 long. And though the beauty of the cinematography 
was sumptuous, the 
story in the film was way more moving than the one 
in 
Days of Heaven
. It portrays a Waco, 
Texas family in the 1950s. Father, mother, three bo
ys. One of the boys dies, although all you see 
is the grief, the movie's impressionistic style nev
er tells you who or how. That's odd enough. But 
the film also shows, and I am not making this up, e
verything that ever was, beginning with the 
fabled "big bang" that exploded into what we now ca
ll the universe.  Malick shows us the 
formation of the stars and solar systems out of Hub
ble-revealed dust clouds, the whole 
development of earth through ages of lava and steam
, the evolution of life...one celled creatures, 
fish and ferns and trilobites and dinosaurs (they w
ere hadrosaurs, I think) and even a surreal 
image of a beautiful beach ending to everything far
 away in the future. 
In other words, Malick sets a limited, particular m
oment in time, with singular people living 
singular moments, right smack in the middle of the 
 unlimited, impossibly majestic flow of 
creation from beginning to the end. Or imagine what
 he did as something like a small jewel on 
ten acres of black velvet. The film reminds us that
 we are but very small leaves on an infinite tree 
of life, with a million branches we know almost not
hing about. 
Tree of life. Lovely phrase. The stuff of world the
ology apparently. Ygdrassil, the Norse Tree of 
Life. The 
Etz Ha Hayim
 of the Kaballistic Jews. The Chinese, Assyrians, E
gyptians all had a tree 
of life symbol. The Bahai's speak of it, and Christ
ians of all kinds lift up the tree of life with 
healing leaves found in the Book of Revelation. Wel
l, I too use 
tree of life
 as a theological 
symbol. The one used by Charles Darwin to describe 
evolution, which well symbolizes my own 
theology. And this morning, after a wild week of lo
ud political pundits (I'm being charitable 
here) flinging 
their
 theology into just about everything...contraceptio
n, same-sex marriage, 
economics, ecological concerns, I think it™s probab
ly time I lay out my own theology, even if 
only serves to keep the strangeness of present publ
ic theological discourse from doing me in.  
So, this morning, I'm here to talk about love. More
 precisely, I'm here to talk about the profound 
theological connection I personally make between  e
volution's tree of life and the reality of love 
which I experience. I'm here to talk about what I t
hink about several times each day...honestly!... 
as I do what I do in my ordinary life... write serm
ons, call folks on the phone, visit people in 
duress, mourn alongside those who mourn, answer ema
il, write letters, mentor young ministers, 
watch films, do my laundry, wash the dishes and tak
e my daily fistful of pills and vitamins for 
my heart and diabetic issues. I think about the mea
nings of love 
every day
. I think about life and 
death everyday, including my own. I think about the
 sheer "thatness" that everything is, and that 
I, by comparison to the limitlessness of it all, am
 no more important than a single grain of sand 
on an infinite beach. 

Now listen, I have been thinking this way all my li
fe. There never was a time in my life when 
evolution was not at the center of my worldview and
 my theology. I was not raised to think, like 
so many I have met, that science and faith were ete
rnally at odds, and that if evolution was true, 
then God was meaningless. I was taught about evolut
ion from first grade on in a Catholic school. 
Teachers delighted us with the story of the Big Ban
g billions of years ago, especially because the 

   idea was first articulated by a Belgian priest, Abb
é Lamâitre. Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, a Jesuit 
priest, was required reading. He wrote extensively 
about his theological understanding of 
evolution. Furthermore, I was taught in a Catholic 
high school that both creation stories in the 
book of Genesis were in fact witty, sarcastic comme
ntaries about the creation stories of the 
neighboring Sumerians and Canaanites, and that only
 sadly uneducated people actually thought 
there was an actual wooden tree of life in a garden
 someplace. Unlike many raised in different 
parishes, or different denominations, or different 
religions, I did not have "a crisis of faith" when 
I started going to that Universalist Church in Farm
ington MI in 1972. I simply went further down 
the path I was already walking. I know now I must h
ave been lucky, since so many I have talked 
to in the last 30 years are convinced that to move 
with
 the ideas of evolution and not against 
them is to be 
irreligious, anti-Christian and to toss God out the
 window.
 Those I don't talk to are 
often even more clear about this. Evangelist David 
Stewart, for example, says that if I accept 
evolution as a fact I am possessed by the devil.  A
nd according to Joyce Meyer, the popular 
television evangelist, people like me, who have "fa
llen for evolution" are just plain "stupid." 
Now she preaches...with great charm, I freely admit
... to millions each and every day. Me, on a 
good Sunday I preach to about 400 over the two serv
ices. Now it™s true that Richard Dawkins, 
the articulate atheist, insists that people who 
deny
 evolution are not just stupid, but completely 
insane, so the practice of self-assured name-callin
g and virulent derision can be found across the 
playing field. I, for one, am not sure what such ta
ctics can possibly accomplish except for a little 
self-aggrandizement.  

If the often repeated polls - from every conceivabl
e source - convince you as they do me, more 
than 50 percent of all United States Americans beli
eve with Joyce Meyer, David Stewart and 
most other evangelists that I am completely wrong a
bout my theology.  They say I am not just 
wrong, but a real threat to their religious way of 
life. Over and over they have preached to me to 
that evolution is just my atheist belief, and that 
it™s my poor substitute for "real" religion. And 
real religion, I'm told over and over again, is fou
nd only in taking the book of Genesis as a 
science text. And so it goes further for many: even
 though Genesis in no way talks about 
prescriptions for contraception, passages from that
 misunderstood collection of Bedouin legends 
are being used to club our President's head to try 
and demolish 
his 
take on contraception; and of 
course the famous and entirely distorted understand
ing of the Sodom story is being hurled 
around by those who have banned teachers from using
 the word "Gay" in history classes in 
Tennessee schools, as well as by who want to get th
e judges of California's 9th Court of Appeals 
tossed off their benches, and the governor of Washi
ngton State tossed out of her gubernatorial 
office...all for thinking that it™s reasonable that
 same-gender folks can marry. 
As far as I am concerned, no one gets to lecture me
 on "true religion." Years ago I made a firm 
commitment to never allow 
anyone 
to tell me I am irreligious, or worse, a "non-belie
ver," if I 
don't accept 
their
 understanding about religion. I don't let anyone e
lse define my life for me, my 
theology for me, my secularity for me, my commitmen
ts or my love. I and I alone have that 
privilege, burden and holy responsibility.  I am ve
ry clear about that. I hope you are clear about 
that in your own lives.
 This afternoon we are sponsoring an interfaith cere
mony where people who have been together 
in committed relationships, either legally or witho
ut the blessing of the state, can be treated 
equally as they "renew their vows of love and commi
tment."  The State of Ohio may not like it 

   that I think these are relationships of equal spiri
tual dignity, but then, the state of Ohio, like any
 
state,  or any country in the world for that matter
, has only been involved with marriage for far 
less than two hundred years. Before that, marriage 
was blessed by a justice of the peace, or 
clergy, but there were no records in any city burea
u. But even that tradition of clergy 
solemnizing marriage only began in the 13 hundreds.
..before that, marriage was only about clan 
and family arrangements. No state-ordered certifica
tes, no special privileges except for anyone. 
When King Louis left his riches to Eleanor of Aquit
aine in the 11 hundreds, he had to draw up 
papers no different from Leonardo Da Vinci when he 
left his estate to his partner Francesco 
Melzi in the fifteen hundreds. No one had "wedding 
licenses" in those days. Marriage by state 
law, with documents kept in state offices, I am tel
ling you, is a relatively recent invention in the 
history of the world. Actual marriage you see, is m
ostly, and I mean mostly, not about 
certificates. It's about love. Let me say more. 

I accept love as the ground of partnership because 
the great insights of evolution remind me that 
I am an animal, a mammal among mammals, and that th
ere nothing to be ashamed about there. 
Evolutionary scientists have observed that many spe
cies, especially Homo Sapiens, have over the 
course of millions of years come to feel more and m
ore empathy. This empathy is in our 
biological makeup. The practices we call love evolv
ed in human beings 
from that empathy
, 
especially, evolutionists remind us, the bonding of
 mother for child.   And love, as Phyllis Rose 
defines so well, is "the momentary or prolonged ref
usal to think of another person in terms of 
power." Steven Levine boldly adds: "It™s the 
only
 rational act of lifetime." Yes, rational, because 
love is 
not
 a feeling (that is, a reaction to stimuli), but a 
decision
, yes, usually based 
on,
 or 
invited 
by,
 a feeling, the feeling we call "falling in love," 
it™s a very human thing to do. But the 
feeling "being in love," at the initial intensity, 
does not seem to last for a long time. But love 
itself can eventually deepen enough to survive grea
t difficulties. If my son does something that 
drives me crazy, my love for him is not diminished 
in any way.  Oh, yeah, love CAN end, sure. 
I've lost love several times. But my capacity to lo
ve never seems to diminish, and mostly my 
love thrives, not ends. 

Remember, I didn't grow up with this foolishness ab
out some absolute conflict between religion 
and science. And though some may not believe this, 
evolution can make as much perfectly good 
sense to those who use God language as well as to t
hose who don't.  The present Pope, with 
whom I share no important theological language, cer
tainly...and I think we can agree here... uses 
God language to express his spirituality; yet he al
so clearly accepts evolution as the best 
description of the way things are.  He believes tha
t God got the universe going, but does not 
imagine that God micromanages the death of species.
 Evolution works as a process, not a design. 
The natural world, Dorianne Laux reminds us in her 
poem, 
The Life of Trees
, is not conscious in 
any way that would make sense to us, the thinking m
ammals, many of whom, like me, count 
themselves religious. 
They do not pray
, she reminds us. 
And though the stars return, they do not 
offer thanks, only ooze a sticky sap from their rou
ndish concentric wounds...straighten their 
spines and breathe, and breathe again.
 The trees "breathe," but not very much like we do. 
They do not give thanks. They do not love. 
And the stars that explode into supernovas and dest
roy the planets around them like soap bubbles 
in a furnace do not feel empathy for them. The abys
s of space has no feelings, no love. Those 
possibilities have evolved mostly in the human brai
n.  

   Now I well realize that sex and love are not the sa
me thing...same-sex copulation and different-
sex copulation occur throughout nature, in tens of 
thousands of species; but only humans, as far 
as we know, try 
to fuse
 these two great inheritances from evolution's vast
 centuries, sex and love, 
into one relationship. Sometimes it works, sometime
s it doesn't, as we all know, 
But listen, the fact that the universe is not tende
r does not make me resist my own tenderness, or 
worse, make me dismiss it as "mere biology." Biolog
y is not "mere"...it™s awesome and glorious 
and wondrous. The book of Job, with its amazing poe
try, reminds us that awe and wonder about 
creation are the basic foundations for any theology
 worth a damn. 
"Where were you when the 
foundations of the earth were being set down? You k
now so much. Tell me what you know! What 
influences contributed to the earth's size? Do you 
think there were blueprints? Measuring tools? 
Do you have the original plumb line? Did you help p
our the stone?" 
The book of Job is rather agnostic; it™s not in any
way a lecture about being faithful to God no 
matter how many children die.  No, the book of Job 
insists that we don't have answers to 
everything, and never will. The universe is too vas
t and we are too small. It reminds us that it's 
love which is central, the 
most rational thing
 we do, and not figuring out some meaningful 
reason why babies die. Love is central even though 
floods wash children away, famine kills, and 
certain groups of people hurt and harass other grou
ps of people for so-called biblical reasons. 
This is the very point Malick was making by quoting
 the book of Job at the beginning of his 
film...one of the passages you heard this morning, 
actually...and portraying the story of a family 
suffering the awful loss of a child in the context 
of the whole panorama of evolution, where 
whole species die out with regularity. Stop thinkin
g the universe is about you and your concerns, 
evolution tells me, quite religiously. The sufferin
g you feel is not a punishment, or something 
you earned...it™s just part of the whole astonishin
g parade of evolution as are you. You however, 
very small parts of that evolution, have the power 
to love, to treat others not from a place of 
privileged power, but with recognition and empathy.
 With Love. That evolved within you over a 
billion years. And maybe I'll have to agree that Lo
ve 
is
 God, as Gandhi once said. Maybe that, in 
the end, is the best summary of my evolutionary the
ology. At least, it grounds my life as I move 
through a world that distinguishes itself from me..
. and most UU's I know, theologically.   
 Offering
 Alleluia and Gradual for the Tree of Life
 Take a step. Go deeper. Find the alleluia hidden in
 your every day life, the trip to the store, the 
laundry, the oil change, the dishes, the shopping. 
The alleluia is this: you are alive, you are able 
to do these things, you are doing these things at t
he center of an infinite line stretching toward 
the unseen origins of all things, and unseen fate o
f all things. You are the only you there is or 
ever will be. Glory, Glory Hallelujah. 

Take another step, go deeper. Find the alleluia in 
your struggles and uncertainties. They are your 
honesty, the sign of your humility and redeeming tr
uthfulness. They are a life-saving allelulia. 
Glory, Glory, Hallelujah. 

Take another step, go deeper. You can do it. Step o
n the ground. It will hold you. The ground 

   that you have no final words for, the ground that i
s solid even though its meanings shift. Lay 
your burdens down now. Stop carrying them. You are 
you, not Atlas. Set the world down. I 
assure you, the fire breathing dragons don™t live h
ere anymore. You are safe. You are free. You 
can dance without embarrassment. The sap that keeps
 the tree of life alive keeps you alive, 
lending you glory, lending you alleluia. Glory, glo
ry, alleluia! 
  

  

 
