 Resisting Authenticity 
January 29, 2012 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 Greeting, Centering, 

Kindling, Opening Words  
   
We are here 
  
on a sunny day after a wet and gray week, 

to worship. Praise the gift of another day! 

Praise that we can think, feel, move, 

grieve, rejoice, and freely be together, 

that we might grow more alive in love. 

 
And so, without guarantees,  we lean into joy, and 
bend toward a just way of 
life, both for our own sakes, and for the sake of o
ur children and all beings 
with whom we share the earth. We would engage our m
ission 
wholeheartedly, with courage, self-questioning, com
passion, vulnerability 
and honesty. 
 
Sequence 

Ah, the great build up, the anticipation rising in 
the blood of millions. Ah, the pre-game 
programs, the wagers, the predictions, the talk-bac
k, the very food shows on the networks 
teaching the art of finger-food so no one next week
 has to leave the television for the table...the 
annual mid-winter ritual begins But these rituals h
ave no reality for many I love. 
 
My friend Mark called me from Montpelier, in the so
uth of France, where he lives. No talk of 
football, soccer or the fisticuffs of politics, but
 just sweet words about his wonderful girlfriend 
up in Gent. 

My friend Doug loves football, but emailing me this
 week from Melbourne where he's covering 
the Australian Open, he's much more focused on inte
rviewing Victoria Djokovic and Rafael 
Nadal to care about the Superbowl build-up or polit
ics
. 
My godson Ben from Portland, Oregon and I talked th
is week about his grandmother's 
Alzheimer's and his med school dreams, not candidat
es fighting. 
My friend Bonni called this week from Chile, entire
ly focused on getting new looms to weave 
her farm's alpacas' fur into cloth. No debates ther
e. 
 
My old California mentor Keith told me this week th
at he's been dancing in Ghana at the new 
arts complex there. Soccer news there, not football
. 
 
My life is local, and too often I am grabbed by the
 immediate, the loud, the dramatic and the 
blaring. But friends saved me this week from losing
 myself. O Love, deeper than the demands of 

 our local life, fill the silence for a moment that 
we might embrace the far as well as the near, the 
different as well as the familiar, the tender as we
ll as the loud, that our lives might be whole. 
Silence, befriend us, now
.     
silence
  
Opening from this local moment to the wideness of o
ur love, may we whisper aloud or name in 
the silence those for whom we grieve, those we miss
 who are far away, those with whom we 
struggle, and those whose love inspires our own. 

        
naming 
 
Music, bring us back gently to the reality of this 
place and time. Announce your dreams with 
beauty, and invite us into wholeness by singing you
r ?yes? and your ?no,? your laughter and 
your tears, and all your love. 

 
Anthems
  
The First Reading 
comes from William Ellery Channing's second most fa
mous sermon, 
Likeness to God, which he delivered in 1828 at the 
Ordination of F.A. Farley at the Unitarian 
Church in Providence, Rhode Island. Channing is usu
ally considered the best articulator of 
Unitarianism in its early institutional days in the
 19th century. 
 
The idea of God is the idea of our own spiritual na
ture, purified and enlarged. God is conceived 
by us only through knowledge of ourselves. God is a
nother name for human intelligence raised 
above error and imperfection. The same is true for 
God's goodness. How do we understand this 
but by the principle of love in the human breast?  

 
In these remarks I have spoken strongly. My only fe
ar is that I shall dishonor this great subject. 
Whenever we invigorate the understanding by honestl
y and resolutely seeking truth, and by 
withstanding whatever might warp our judgment, when
ever we encounter peril or scorn with 
moral courage...then divinity is growing within us.
 True religion then blends with the common 
life. 

 
The Second Reading 
comes from Wislawa Szymborska, whose poetry I've be
en reviewing lately 
with great satisfaction. This poem is called Surpri
se Encounter and goes back earlier in her 
career, to 1981. 

 
So we're very cordial to each other, 

telling each other how nice it is to meet  

after all these years. 

 
Our tigers prefer milk. 

Our hawks hug the ground. 

Our sharks drown in their water. 

Our wolves yawn in front of their open cage. 

 
Our snakes don't bother to resemble lightning bolts
. 

 Our monkeys don't bother to entertain us, 

Our peacock don't bother to have feathers. 

And bats...it's been ages, hasn't it...don't bother
 to nest in our hair. 
So we fall silent right in mid-sentence 

smiling without a net to catch us. 

Our people 

don't bother to actually converse with each other. 

 
Sermon 

 
Forty years ago, my mother kindly bought my grandmo
ther Carmalina a pasta rolling machine, 
hand-cranked, with shiny metal rollers. My mother k
new that my grandmother, then in her 
eighties, had lost some of her strength, and if you
 watched my grandmother make pasta with her 
wooden dowel, as she had all of her life, you would
 notice how hard her arms had to press into 
the lump of dough to make the golden sheet thin eno
ugh to read the newspaper through... the test 
of 
any
 good pasta, according to her.   
 
My grandmother thanked my mother but never used it.
 Why? Because it wasn't authentic. Her 
grand-mother and her mother had used wooden dowels 
and by God, she would use them. She 
was convinced that pasta made with metal actually 
tasted
 different, and that only wood imparted 
just the right texture. 

 
I thought she was fooling herself. Turns out, it wa
s the way Emilian people like my grandmother 
all 
thought. The great Italian chef Maria Batali had pe
rfected his techniques not very far from my 
grandmother's village, and he affirmed that even to
day, if Emilians suspected that a restaurant 
where they were eating had served pasta made with m
etal rollers and not wooden ones, they 
would get up in a complete snit and walk out. He sa
w it happen many times, he said. "I guess 
there is only one right way to make truly authentic
 pasta," he grinned. 
 
Of course, that is simply not true. Oh, it might be
 a personal truth, but it™s not a universal truth. 
Every cook in Emilia, whether a family-trained gran
d-mother like Carmelina, or a cooking-
school trained chef like Batali, has her or his own
 "authentic" sauce for pasta, her or his own 
"authentic" way of making artichokes, her or his ow
n "authentic" way of making broth. The 
thing is, every dish is delicious no matter who mak
es it, and the authentic recipe, with all its 
variations, turns out to be 
all 
of them.   
 
Authenticity is like that. An authentic Van Gogh wi
ll cost millions; a skillful copy, when 
discovered, will be worth only the materials, yet b
oth 
look
 completely authentic to almost 
everyone, including museum curators. It takes truly
 specialized experts, who use the x-rays of 
modern technology, to ferret out the fake from the 
authentic. 
 
Trying to live an authentic spiritual, religious, o
r just plain human life is a bit like that, except 
that each of us is called to be the expert on our 
own 
life.  The "technology" we use to do that is 
pausing to ask questions of ourselves, pausing to l
isten to what we say to others in conversations, 
and then measuring our integrity by matching our in
ner life with our outer life, to quote Sokrates. 

 We "x-ray" the art of our own lives, so to speak, b
y trying to bring mind, heart, spirit, and 
emotions together. Congruency is the fancy word for
 this: to live authentically, instead of being a 
mere pawn to shame, guilt, social custom and social
 pressures, I have to live congruently. I have 
to think for myself, question myself, love myself, 
all within the context of a trusted, deep, loving 
and safe community.   

 
Mary Benard, the editor at Skinner House, the press
 that published my book, asked me to write 
why I am a Unitarian Universalist. She wanted me to
 write, what she called, a "wallet-sized" 
response that she might publish. This is what I sen
t to her: 
 
I move through my life in a Unitarian Universalist 
way because:  my mind , heart and body are 
one "me," and need not compete in the ministries of
 mercy and justice. I can say that great 
words, like God, are too limiting for me, and the n
ext day, say they are quite moving, and I don't 
then have to marginalize myself because my faithful
ness is lively. I can continue to converse with 
others, instead of stopping for good to believe tha
t something is so, or 
not
 so. 
 
I can retreat from defensiveness, and leave aside i
deas like "proof" and "either/or" for honesty's 
sake.  I can discover I was wrong, and see that rev
elation as an opportunity for wisdom. I can be 
happy measuring life's depth rather than its length
. I can be all of me, in religious community, 
and still be loved as I love. 

 
Because of the deadline, I wrote those words in one
 sitting, almost trancelike, and when I read it, 
I realized that I was also talking about living an 
authentic
 life. I also noticed, however, that what 
made it more than that, what made it a statement ab
out my Unitarian Universalism, was that I 
used the line 
"I can continue to converse with others"
 and the word "
community.
" That's because 
I think I can only learn to be an expert on myself 
by staying in communication with others who 
freely enter this particular community of memory an
d hope, heritage and vision, that is, a 
Unitarian Universalist congregation 

 
When people to their delight discover one of our co
ngregations, and tell me they then feel as if 
they had been a Unitarian Universalist most of thei
r lives without knowing it, I usually say, 
"Well, yes, you certainly may have thought for your
self, and lived a questioning and congruent 
life all these years, but to be a Unitarian Univers
alist is to worship and work and study as part of 
a Unitarian Universalist community, whether you joi
n institutionally or not." 
 
Not everyone gets it when I say that, but I'll keep
 trying to find ways to say it better. After all, 
the census told us that over 650,000 people think o
f themselves as Unitarian Universalists, yet 
less than 250,000 are involved in our congregations
 as members or friends. That's a revealing 
statistic, isn't it? 

 
We have many communities, of course, outside this U
nitarian Universalist one. Neighborhoods, 
families, friends, affinity groups like bridge-play
ers or quilters, theological study groups, or book 
clubs, gamer websites, dancers, parent support grou
ps, retiree lunch conversations, and 
professional retreats.  

 
 But because most of us try to live authentic, deep 
and congruent lives in no way implies that we 
live deeply and authentically in any group we are p
art of; nor, probably, can we. The courtesies 
of civilization itself mitigate against it. If some
one I care about runs into me at Kroger's and asks 
me how I am, I am most likely going to say "I'm doi
ng fine" even if I am struggling about many 
things, even if I am grieving, even if I am upset o
r riotously joyful about something.   
Conversations rising from our deep authentic selves
 are not always warranted, after all, and 
deeply vulnerable and revelatory conversations whil
e standing near the artichokes and the 
escarole are often not even appropriate. Simple cor
diality is not necessarily shallow, but a 
rational structure to protect the heart. It™s a kin
d of sabbath. 
 
Szymborska tells the story of two people who haven'
t seen each other in a long time running into 
each other in a public place. We don't know what th
eir history is: if it was loving, or tumultuous, 
or bitter, but clearly, no authentic communication 
is going on here. Even if it™s common 
knowledge that tigers prefer bloody meat to a glass
 of cold milk, that hawks fly rather than walk, 
and that sharks make their home in the water rather
 than drown in it, Szymborksa suggest that 
this particular cordial meeting with small talk is 
actually 
in
authentic: 
Our tigers prefer milk. 

Our hawks hug the ground. 

Our sharks drown in their water. 

She concludes sadly at the end: 

Our people don't actually bother to converse with e
ach other. 
 
But notice the date of the poem, 1962. It's back in
 the days long before 
Solidarity
 opened things 
up in Poland. It dates from back when the official 
state often oppressed people who expressed 
unapproved opinions, so that small talk and cordial
ity were not a form of sabbath, but the only 
safety people could know. I know folks from the Sta
tes who lived there in those days, and they 
were astounded by how everyone was walking on egg-s
hells, and found ways to say green is 
actually red to protect themselves, while smiling c
ordially the whole time. 
 
But years of experience in the ministry has shown m
e that many of us live in similar situations, if 
on a smaller, less national scale. If you express a
 good opinion about the President, for example, 
you may find that in certain family gatherings your
 opinion is looked upon as almost naive or 
evil, both very clever ways of shutting you down to
 safe and cordial and an inauthentic form of 
small talk. If you believe with William Ellery Chan
ning that the word God stands for 
the idea of 
our own spiritual nature, purified and enlarged, 
and you actually say this aloud at some family 
reunion, or in some work lunch room, you may very w
ell be squelched from any further 
exploratory conversation by people preaching the on
ce and for all only truth of God as Creator 
and Christ as Redeemer. Or if you even 
mention
 God in some supposedly progressive circles, 
people might ask "What? How can you believe in some
thing so ridiculous as God?" and 
straightaway you are cowering back in cordial small
 talk to avoid more shame, humiliation and 
anger. No one, you see, has to visit Poland in 1962
 to resist actually having an authentic, open-
ended conversation with someone else. 

 
Now, believe me, Channing's sermon was VERY radical
 for 1828. It was however, his authentic 
and deeply felt expression, after much thought and 
conversation, and he caught heat for it. 

 People denounced him as an infidel, or, at the very
 least, a heretic, for saying 
God is another 
name for human intelligence raised above error and 
imperfection.  
Even today I sometimes find 
myself thinking exactly what Channing preached, and
, in many places, it would still be 
considered radical. 

 
But Channing's sermon brings me to another aspect o
f authenticity. Most small talk is not a way 
of resisting authenticity; no, not at all. It™s sim
ply a kind of resting place for a few moments from 
the deep questioning and thoroughgoing honesty livi
ng an authentic life demands.  
 
But there 
is
 one activity associated with the word "authenticit
y" which I hope to convince you to 
resist with all your heart. It's whenever people tr
y and tell you that there is one authentic way to 
be anything. Whether it™s practicing Unitarian Univ
ersalism, or some form of Christianity, or 
Judaism or anything else. Or even one authentic way
 to be an atheist. 
 
Here's what I mean. Channing's sermon - he called i
t a discourse, not a sermon - took him over 
an hour to deliver all by itself. The rest of the s
ervice contained some 18th century music, some 
singing of hymns no one has sung again for over a h
undred years, and two other discourses, 
called charges which went on at length. The ordinat
ion prayer went on for fifteen minutes. There 
was no chalice to light, no suits and ties, since t
hey had not been invented yet, no women even 
near the pulpit, no stoles, no meditations, and no 
quotations from secular Polish poets. But the 
fact that Channing was the chief articulator of Uni
tarian theology in that part of the century, 
indeed, one of first persons in the States to use t
hat word publicly freely, instead of with shame, 
does not mean that the way of preaching and worship
 he favored is a more 
authentic 
form of 
Unitarianism. It is not. Nor is ours the authentic 
form for all time. Our children's children may 
express themselves quite differently than we do, an
d maybe better for them in every way. But 
even that does not mean that our way is inauthentic
. 
 
The Jewish priests, in the days of Hillel, and Jesu
s slaughtered animals and sprinkled their blood 
on a stone altar as an expression of their biblical
 understanding. Modern Jewish religious leaders 
do no such thing. In fact, I know more Jewish veget
arians than I know Gentile vegetarians. 
Killing animals is not a more authentic version of 
Judaism because it™s closer to the origins. 
 
I have a book in my office by Frank Viola and Georg
e Barna, called Pagan Christianity, which 
posits that authentic biblically-based Christians w
ould 
never
 meet in a church building, would 
never 
have professional clergy, would 
never
 have choirs, or worship leaders, would 
never
 have 
special clothes or listen to sermons or preach them
. They would never celebrate communion 
without a full multi-course supper, or use professi
onal musicians for the music. They would 
never ritually proclaim Christ as their "personal s
avior," since (and the two authors are most 
certainly right about this) none of that is found i
n the New Testament. But then again, neither 
was the New Testament found in early Christian cong
regations. It wasn't even considered 
"scripture" until after 300 CE. And when pieces of 
it 
were
 read, none of the early church teachers 
taught they were to be taken literally, but only me
taphorically. Treating the Bible as something 
to quote as the final literal authority didn't real
ly come together until the Reformation, when the 
human pope in Rome was replaced by the reformers (a
nd Herr Gutenberg's famous printing 
press) with a 
paper
 pope on everyone's shelf, namely, the scripture. S
o there is no honest way for 

 the authors to claim that they know 
authentic
 Christian life, and that all the Catholic and 
Protestant and Anabaptist and Evangelical and Ortho
dox congregations in the world can just go 
fish. Worse, accepting the anti-Semitic lens of the
 gospels without criticism, as they do, demeans 
Christian practice, and in no way blesses it. 

 
I really am convinced that proclamations of all for
ms of institutional authenticity are dangerous, 
whether it™s writers like Viola and Barna telling u
s they know what the authentic early church 
was like, or whether it™s other folks insisting tha
t the Bill of Rights and Jefferson's "clear 
intention" means they can carry a pistol into your 
church or your house as they please. I say it™s 
dangerous when some hothead prates on and on that b
ecause the phrase "separation of church 
and state" is not found in the constitution itself,
 our only "authentic" authority in this nation, the
y 
say, it's therefore OK to promote evangelical praye
rs in public schools and teach in biology class 
that the notion of the earth being created in six t
wenty-four-hour days in the year 4004 BCE is 
somehow "equal" or "equivalent" to all the magister
ial collection of evidence underlying the 
universally accepted fact of evolution in the scien
tific world. 
 
On the covers of your order of celebration you can 
find a famous, often reproduced, optical 
illusion.  If I look at it one way, I can see a bea
utiful young woman like my mother in 1945, 
elegant, dark haired, well dressed. If I look with 
a different lens, I can see an older woman much 
like my grandmother, with a lacy babushka on her he
ad, a larger nose, and a fake-fur coat. Both 
images are real, authentic portraits. But you can o
nly see one at a time. It™s impossible to see 
both together. 

 
It™s a reminder that there are many different ways 
to live authentic, deeply congruent lives, just 
as there are many different authentic ways for the 
Emilian grandmothers from the hills, like my 
own Carmelina, to cook authentic mountain sauces fo
r their authentic pasta made with wooden 
dowels. 

 
There are also many ways to live a deeply congruent
, and authentic life, a life of depth, honesty 
and self-reflection as a Unitarian Universalist. Bu
t there is no way I can think of to proclaim any 
form or any institution as once and for all authent
ic, and it™s that kind of self-serving 
proclamation I have to resist if I am to work on my
 own authentic religious life.
 As I wrote to 
Mary Benard earlier this week:
 I move through my life in a Unitarian Universalist
 way 
because:  my mind , heart and body are one "me," an
d need not compete in the ministries of 
mercy and justice. I can say that great words, like
 God, are too limiting for me, and the next day, 
say they are quite moving, and don't then have to m
arginalize myself because my faithfulness is 
lively. I can continue to converse with others, ins
tead of stopping for good to believe that 
something is so, or not so. 

 
I can retreat from defensiveness, and leave aside i
deas like "proof" and "either/or" for honesty's 
sake.  I can discover I was wrong, and see that rev
elation as an opportunity for wisdom. I can be 
happy measuring life's depth rather than its length
. I can be all of me, in religious community, 
and still be loved as I love. 

 
Offering 

 Simple Prayer 
(Levertovian
 Form)
  
That our inner life and our outer life 

move closer to union every day of our lives. 

That we never take ourselves to be 

grown up, but 
always growing
 till our last day. 
That the struggle to live a deeply 

authentic life, in our world wed to superficiality 

and entitlement, might be seen as a gift, 

not a burden. 

That love will be our path, our goal, our pleasure,
 our healing, and at last, our legacy. 
    

  
