  Yom Kippur Letting Go                             
September 15, 2013
                                                   
     
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
Gathering, Welcoming, Centering, Kindling, Opening:
  
We are here 

*once again, to worship, 

to hold up the habitual reality of our lives 

*to the light of the 
greater r
eality 
of unrepentant honesty
. 
*Claiming ancient insight for our own days,  

we bless this time of song, silence and word,  

*with our anticipation, and these words: 
And so, bearing witness 
both
 to our world as it is, 
and
 as Love can imagine it, we 
would claim that vision of a just world in our own 
lives. And because of a growing 
sense of kinship with all beings, inviting our comp
assion, we begin in this 
celebration to engage our mission with our whole li
ves: body, mind, and heart. 
Ingathering  
Blessing for the Beginning of the New Year Lane Cam
pbell
 Sniff, Sniff...  Do you smell it?  Fall is in the a
ir this week, a time of a new season 
beginning, a time for change. 

 
Let's see a show of hands here- how many of you all
 started school this past month?  
How many of you started school in a new school?  It
's quite a change and sometimes 
change can be hard. 

 
This is a time of change, of new beginnings for man
y of us and our church is no different.  
As many of you know, this is our first Sunday of th
e year for our new Religious 
Education classes.  This is a first day for you all
 gathered here and for your teachers. 
There's a little garden just around the corner from
 this church.  In this garden, they have 
many different kinds of plants and flowers: ones th
at grow tall and strong, ones that are 
viney and leafy, growing over the ground, ones that
 have beautiful colored blooms, and 
ones with tiny blossoms.  Has anyone here ever seen
 a garden like this one?   
In this church, we are like a garden, with all kind
s of people.  People who look different, 
people who talk differently, some people seem the s
ame, others stand out.  We need kids 
here who are different from us and others that seem
 kind of the same as us.  We need kids 

  here of all kinds: some with big blooms and others 
growing short and sturdy.  Each one 
of us is different, just like those flowers in that
 garden, because even when they are the 
same kind of flower, something is always different 
about us. 
 
But we all share something in common and this is wh
at is important.  Each one of us is 
constantly growing.  As we learn new things, our mi
nds grow; as we get older, our bodies 
grow, and when we are here in this church, our hear
ts grow. 
 
I have three wishes for you this year: 

My first wish for you is that you never stop growin
g.  I bet you couldn't, even if you 
tried.  Never ever stop growing. 

My second wish is that you know your roots, that pa
rt of each plant that goes deep under 
the soil.  I wish for you to know this church and k
now what Unitarian Universalism is. 
My third wish for you all is to love the ways you a
re different.  To see ways we are not 
the same and to be together in this community, in a
ll of its differences. 
 
And now I want all of our teachers that are here to
 stand up, please.  Let us all Œ the entire 
congregation Œ extend a ?Thank you? to our teachers
 this year.  Will you repeat after me?  
Thank you. 

 
You all have taken on the mantle of tending to this
 garden, of helping each of these 
children and youth gathered to grow.  In the coming
 weeks, may you tend to your own 
selves, may you too continue to grow right next to 
these young people.  And may you 
know this congregation supports you in your growth.
  Thank you, please be seated. 
As I said before, this entire church is like a gard
en Œ each one of us different and each 
one of us growing.  Our community is the soil and i
t has an important role to play in the 
growth of each and every one of us.  This is a part
 of our lives we all share; may we all 
continue to grow, to learn, to be here with each ot
her. 
 
Let the year begin as you all head back to your cla
sses, as Nathan plays us out, knowing 
this church loves you and supports you. 

May this year be fun, 

May it be playful, 

May it be filled with growth and beauty just like t
his lovely garden we have here. 
 
Greeting   
announcements and JAM presentation: Cathy Elkins  (
Mark to invite her 
forward) 

Affirming   #461 

written in 1952 by Reinhold
 Neibuhr in the Irony of American History 
Nothing worth doing is completed in our lifetime;  

therefore, we are saved by hope
.  
Nothing true or beautiful or good makes complete se
nse in any immediate context of 

  history;  

therefore, we are saved by faith.
  
Nothing we do, however virtuous, can be accomplishe
d alone;  
therefore, we are saved by love
.  
No virtuous act is quite as virtuous from the stand
point of our friend or foe as from our 
own;  

therefore, we are saved by the final form of love, 
which is forgiveness. 
Singing: #216 Hashiveinu 

Communing: 
Love, I am weary of holding on tight to my life wit
hout reflection,   
as if life was not life, transient, flowing, moving
–but rather some still lake I'm floating 
in, where I am holding on for dear life to a block 
of ice.  Love, I want to let go of the ice. 
Now. I want to loosen my clenched muscles, 

desperate to hold on no matter what. 

I want to remember what I already know, 

that I am not floating in the deepest part of the l
ake, but close to shore. 
I want to stop clutching my legs up to my chest, 

but to slowly let them hang down below me. 

They will reach the bottom not far below me. 

It will be formless, that bottom, soft and sandy,  
 but firm enough to let me stand on my own. 

The bottom will not at all be like my fear, 

which is cold as steel, icy, and slick. 

So now I can let go, and breathe again freely; 

deeply too, not those little shallow puffs 

when I am afraid that people will somehow find me o
ut to be not what they think I am. 
But I know very well that the deepest me is soft li
ke a lake bottom, shifting, yet real.  The 
deepest me, I mean, the ?me? that is not crusted ov
er with calendars, schedules, 
deadlines, duties, urgency, planning, worrying, pas
t hurts, or the felt shame for having 
hurt others. 

The deepest me is none of these things. 

They could all vanish, and I would still be me. 

The me that can be, not do. Be, not self-flagellate
.                                                  
        
The me that can breathe, not clench. 

The heart that can feel, not deny. 

The me that can sit in the silence, without concern
 for how long it goes... 
silence 

Love, I am 
never
 weary of the shapes you take in my life. The frien
ds whom I love, the 
family members, even the strangers. Sometimes you g
et distorted, and there is hurt, but 
how glad I am that there is healing too, and recove
ry. I miss those whom I love who are 

  gone now as well, and that great love which doesn't
 seem to ebb. So, without weariness, I 
name them all in my heart, or whisper them aloud: t
he loved, the ones hard to love, and 
the departed in peace, that they too may know atone
ment, that is: At One Ment. 
naming 

Love, you are beautiful when you shine in people, b
ut you 
really
 let go in the music! 
The First Reading
 is from my colleague Tim Kutzmark, who wrote these 
words in 2008. 
Most of us tend to identify with the obvious surfac
e of our lives. Most of us tend to 
identify with the way we feel at any given moment. 
Consider the thoughts that float 
through our head over the course of our day. We hav
e thousands upon thousands of 
thoughts. 
I™m happy. I™m discontented.  I know what™s right. 
I™m not sure. I need to do 
that. I can™t do that. I really want to eat that co
okie. I really want to lose some weight. 
I™m bored. I have so much to do. I love you. I hate
 you. I miss you. Give me some space. I 
feel great. I feel lonely. My body aches. I™m looki
ng pretty good. My wrinkles aren™t 
going away. I can™t get sick because I need to take
 care of things. When will he die? How 
will I die? 
Round and round and round. 
Most of us identify with this commotion of emotion 
that swirls inside our head. We think 
that is who we are
. And it is unceasing, isn™t it? Thought after thou
ght after thought, 
always shifting, changing, sweeping us into a new f
eeling. It is like a ride at the state fair. 
One of those rides that spins you around and around
 and around. You™re pressed to the 
sides, the bottom drops away, and you just hang the
re, helpless in the endless whirling.   
Spiritual teacher, Philip Moffitt, says: ?Many peop
le fail to distinguish between their true 
nature and their personality traits, particularly t
heir less desirable traits. The fact is you 
are not the worst characteristics of your personali
ty–.. You may feel overwhelmed by 
the circumstances of your present life or bound by 
past traumatic events. Again, this is a 
failure in perception. They can be seen as imperman
ent (just like everything else) and, 
therefore, they do not, ultimately, define your tru
e nature.? 
The Second Reading
 also comes from a colleague, Cricket Potter, who 
serves our Follen congregation in Lexington MA. The
se words date from 
last year, 2012.
 I want to tell you about the trees in my yard Œ two
 big maples in particular. They suffered 
a hard summer this year that was too hot and too dr
y for them. 
 
I remember seeing the top branches with their leave
s looking so sad and wilted during the 
worst dry spells. Well, I started noticing several 
weeks ago, as I was waiting for the bus 
with my daughter, that the leaves on these maples w
ere turning color much earlier than 
usual. 

 
They weren™t turning the usual brilliant mix of ora
nge and magenta that is absolutely 
stunning during a normal fall. They were turning br
own or a dull yellow 

   
And, just as quickly as these leaves turned their d
ull color, they dropped to the ground. 
Usually, these maples turn their bright colors, and
 then stay that way for a few weeks to 
everyone™s delight. But, not this year. The trees h
ad suffered, and now they were letting 
go. They were letting go of what was left from a di
fficult summer, because those 
withered and brown leaves could no longer serve the
m well. The trees, in their deep 
wisdom of the seasons, could not change what had ha
ppened to them, but they could let 
go. They were turning their tree-energy toward maki
ng the new buds that would grow 
next spring. How smart is that? 

 
Sermon 

 
I assure you, if you show up here on a Wednesday or
 Tuesday afternoon, when I am in 
my office, there is a very good chance that you wil
l hear me running down the hall to our 
Administrator Brian's office, screaming in despair 
about what my stupid computer is 
doing now! 

 
He knows when I peer around the jamb of his open do
orway that we are not going to be 
talking about the roof leaks, the overflowing commo
de, the new sound in the copier, or 
the banging sound in my office air unit. No, no bud
get talks, no capital campaign 
questions. He knows I am going to have him come dow
n to my office, and help me find 
lost documents on my computer (which seem to have j
ust disappeared from my screen 
without me touching anything, honest!), or explain 
why my cursor has flown the coop, or 
ask why the spell-check feature keeps on making stu
pid assumptions, not just correcting 
my spelling, but actually changing my words entirel
y. Which is changing my ideas, as if 
"it" knew something that I don't know. 

 
To his eternal credit, Brian smiles his patient smi
le, and comes and shows me what I have 
been doing wrong (although sometimes he admits I ha
ve some very unusual problems 
he™s never seen before). 

 
The spell-check function is particularly irritating
. I am not a master speller by any 
means–ask Olwen when she edits the order of celebra
tion. But often, when someone 
asks for my email address, the spell-check device c
hanges it to 
macrocell 
instead of 
marcobell. 

 
I have no idea why the computer function assumes I 
don™t know my own address, but it 
does. And, I waste a lot of time during the week ju
st being peeved by having to always be 
conscious, aware, attentive and focused to double c
heck everything I write so something 
the machine writes on my behalf doesn't go out.   

 
But when I survey the various, but most respected r
eligious teachers and secular 
philosophers of the world, most of them also seem t
o be asking me to be more conscious, 
aware, attentive, and focused. They offer me words 
to define what they want from me, 
like: mindfulness, self-awareness, and watchfulness
. People often make the mistake of 
thinking this idea stems mainly from Buddhist teach
ers like Thich Nhat Hanh, but it™s 

  found in all the non-conservative sectors of the We
stern Religions. The Muslims call it 

  
taqw
, the Jews 

 kavanah, 
and in the parochial school I attended, the word wa
s 
contemplatio i.e. 
contemplation
, always described as the highest form of prayer or
 
meditation, much deeper than mere traditional words
 or liturgy. The Greek Orthodox use 
the word 

 ?theoria? from which English gets its word ?theory
,? interesting enough. 
Makes sense to me, since any physicist offering a w
ell-thought-out theory must be 
mindful indeed. 

 
But mindfulness, as my computer experiences outline
 for me day after day after day, does 
not blossom without prompting. Our daily habits are
 just that, habits. I don™t have to think 
about brushing my teeth, or turning the pages of my
 calendar. And it goes deeper–if 
someone's face reminds me of a person who hurt me d
eeply once–obviously through no 
fault of their own– I still might find myself cutti
ng myself off habitually, as I did for 
years, to save myself from another wound. When I wa
s ten years old, the principal got so 
mad when I spoke out of turn that she told me to go
 soak my head in a bucket of vinegar. 
I was humiliated. Since then, I have a tendency to 
respond to any rule or regulation with 
an inner, but undeniably defiant, ?Oh yeah." And ye
t I have hurt people because I reacted 
from my humiliation, not mindfully. 

 
However, ?I am 
not
 the worst characteristics of my personality.? Ther
e is something 
deeper than my wounds, or the hurts and mistakes in
 my past. As Tim Kutzmark reminds 
me, I am not the sum of my daily cascade, cascade, 
cascade of thoughts. He gave his 
list–remember? Here™s part of it: 
 I have so much to do. I love you. I hate you. I mi
ss 
you. Give me some space. I feel great. I feel lonel
y. My body aches. I™m looking pretty 
good. My wrinkles aren™t going away. I can™t get si
ck, because I need to take care of 
things. When will he die? How will I die? 
To which I add a few more?
 This fool 
computer! Now what?  She said WHAT to you?  I alway
s stand in the grocery store line 
when the cash register breaks. Why, God, why? OMG I
 know I am not supposed to eat 
that cinnamon role, with all the sugar in it, but I
 can™t help myself. I am too tired to go to 
the gym. Why did I say that? WHY DID I SAY THAT? Di
d I leave the burner on in the 
stove? Oh, goodness, I left my card at the restaura
nt last night. I am sooooo stupid.  etc. 
etc. 

 
The great Jewish Day of Yom Kippur, the Day of Aton
ement, serves as one of the most 
powerful summons, or prompts, to mindfulness, that 
I can think of. "Yeah, but it™s just a 
ritual" I sometimes hear. Sure, it™s a ritual, yes,
 but so is going out for a drink every night 
to dull our pain, so is the habit of overeating to 
deny discomfort, so is the ritual of 
explosive anger every time you hear anything that p
ersonally does not go your exact way. 
Not rituals with chant and sacred languages, but ri
tuals nonetheless. Automatic practices 
that have been going on for years. 

 
I will say again what I have said many times–namely
, that the day of Yom Kippur is not 
about guilt. Oh, you may feel guilt. But you are br
inging that with you yourself. The 
word 
guilt
 is not found 
once
 in the entire Hebrew Scriptures. Not once. I repea
t. Not 
once. We might find a way to inflict flinches of gu
ilt on each other, or on ourselves. But 
it™s simply not part of the scriptural tradition be
hind atonement.   

   
But being mindful of our deeper lives 
is
 part of the tradition. Deeper than our hurts and 
the ways we have hurt others. Deeper than our prese
nt address, phone number, or 
computer preference. Deeper than our floodgate of t
houghts which tries every day to 
wash away any trace of mindfulness. Deeper than our
 self-flagellation, our regret, or our 
flinching. And as Paulus Tillich, the most quoted p
rogressive theologian of the twentieth 
century puts it–the religious life is refusing to d
efine oneself by our habitual and quite 
superficial torrent of thoughts we might think is u
s. ?Religion,? he said, ?is depth.?   
 
The Kol Nidrei is the ritual that reminds us to bre
ak any unspoken vow to remain in the 
superficial flow. It calls us to remain far from th
e unspoken, unconscious vows or 
promises we have made to ourselves to spend the res
t of our days avoiding the hard stuff, 
the pains and the regrets, the hard memories which 
freeze our present life into a mold of 
the past.  

 
Let go! Let go! the ritual says, calling us to mind
fulness. The word sin is used in many of 
the traditional formulas, but let go of something e
lse, the baggage around that word. The 
Hebrew simply refers to an archer missing the cente
r of the target. You might be aiming 
for love, but miss the mark and settle for somethin
g a lot more transitory. You might be 
aiming at wisdom, but you miss the mark and settle 
for flashy or even sexy authority 
telling you what to do. You missed the target. Get 
mindful of your deeper self, and take 
better aim. Today is practice for doing that. For e
xample, the ritual of voting is simple, 
you press a few buttons next to someone™s name. Aim
ing at doing only that is missing the 
target completely. Learning something in advance ab
out the people or policies you are 
voting for, like at the forum Cathy Elkins mentione
d earlier, is the depth behind the ritual. 
Ritual for its own sake can often be empty. Ritual 
that calls us to mindfulness about our 
unconscious rituals is essential in my book. 

 
The second reading from Cricket Potter uses a metap
hor for the Yom Kippur ritual. She 
speaks of the trees in her backyard releasing, lett
ing go of their leaves far earlier than 
usual, because of the rough and dry summer they suf
fered.  She writes: 
Usually, these 
maples turn their bright colors and then stay that 
way for a few weeks to everyone™s 
delight. But, not this year. The trees had suffered
, and now they were letting go. They 
were letting go of what was left from a difficult s
ummer, because those withered and 
brown leaves could no longer serve them well. The t
rees, in their deep wisdom of the 
seasons, could not change what had happened to them
, but they could let go. They were 
turning their tree-energy toward making the new bud
s that would grow next spring. How 
smart is that? 

 
A wise image indeed. Let go. Let go. 

 
Well, there 
are 
rules for spelling in English. I have to admit it. 
They enable clear and 
efficient communication. The spell-check device, wh
ich I have 
not
 turned off, any more 
than I will turn Yom Kippur off, reminds me of that
 everyday, and drags me into 
necessary mindfulness. Spelling rules can be broken
, sure, as anyone who has texted can 
tell you. The English word YOUR is now just two let
ters YR.  But the rules are not 

  ultimately foolish. Look, I have no respect for the
 people who want to put up the Ten 
Commandments in the courthouse. An empty token inde
ed. But I am not against the idea 
of ethical rules per se, 
rationally and mindfully thought out
, instead of dictated by 
Authority, for me to review. Will people cross the 
boundaries of those rules? Sure. But 
they are there, as far as I am concerned, for the s
ame reason that piano scales are there for 
the learning piano player, frames are there for the
 artist™s canvas, referees are there for 
the game, and covenants of mutual care are there fo
r religious congregations. They are 
forms for practicing mindfulness. 

 
And you know what? Honestly, my spelling has improv
ed a lot since the spell-check was 
invented and installed. It keeps me in practice. I™
m letting go of my resentment about the 
mindfulness it calls me to daily. I can communicate
 better because of it. How smart is 
that? 

 
Offering 

We give each other gifts all the time, gifts of tim
e and support and an arm around the 
shoulder, gifts of wisdom and truth-telling. The gi
fts we offer to support our common 
community, whether given electronically on a Wednes
day evening, or given now in this 
ancient form, are of a piece with all such gifts. 

 
Returning: Kol Nidrei  
A Contemporary Kol Nidrei for 2013 
Mark:  

(sung) Kol Nidrei Ve'esarei, Ush'vuei, Vacharamei, 
Vekonamei, Vekinusei....   
All vows we have made to live the unexamined life a
re now cancelled.  
Let go! Let go! Gone are the stuck places, the auto
matic promises we made because of 
pressure or praise. Gone the struggle to hold onto 
the past tightly in order to out-match 
our sense of liberation. Let go! Let go! 

Gone are the promises we made to cover our shame. G
one the sway that affected us 
because everyone else seemed to be doing it. Gone i
s the unreflective mind which habit 
or custom has dulled. Gone are the choices we made 
out of the confusion of information 
in our modern age. Gone they are, vanished! I see t
hem no longer, like a river that flows 
into the deep lake. Gone the excuses I make for why
 I just can™t live within my own truth, 
insisting on orbiting some 
other
 truth instead. Gone the vows I made to confirm my 
identity by jumping through someone else™s hoops. G
one, my vow to forgo my dreams, 
so I won™t disturb anyone else. Gone my vow to not 
face the ways my choices and 
omissions may have pained others. Gone, vanished, j
ust like that! Gone, this seductive 
habit of refusing to live in the freedom of redempt
ive honesty. Let go!  Awaken and let 
go! 

Steve: 
The paper is blank, the field is empty, the map has
 not been made. The pretend 
guarantees are far away now. And thus now I no long
er have to hide in the crumbling 
shelter of guilt, or the cold cave of shame, but I 
can show up, and be more and more 

  present to myself, and more and more present to oth
ers. Now I will no longer define 
myself only by my failings and the strains of my li
fe, but also by my joys and strengths, 
and my willingness to be accountable. 

Mark
: Nishmat hayay tevarykh v™kherev libi yahshir: Kol
 od neshamah bekirbi.
The 
breath of my life will bless, the cells of my Being
 will sing in gratitude, awakening! 
(Marcia Falk) 

Sung Portion: Confession
 For the times when we felt entitled, or felt that t
he world owed us, so we could try and 
keep up like others and not ourselves: 

We forgive ourselves, and each other, we begin agai
n in love.
 For the times when a sense of guilt kept us righteo
us or frozen, or a cultivated shame 
sheltered us from hard reality.   

We forgive ourselves, and each other, we begin agai
n in love.
 For each time we have refused a genuinely possible 
reconciliation so we can nurse our 
hurt. 

We forgive ourselves, and each other, we begin agai
n in love.
 For the times when our discomfort at 
being 
forgiven has kept us apart... 
 We forgive ourselves, and each other, we begin agai
n in love.
 For the times we have been surprised or disappointe
d that other people do not think or 
feel exactly like us: 

We forgive ourselves, and each other, we begin agai
n in love.
 For trying to earn the love of others by working to
 be perfect, and always in control, 
instead of risking the vulnerability of truthfulnes
s... 
We forgive ourselves, and each other, we begin agai
n in love.
 For the times when we speak intemperately, or liste
n to others, only in order to contradict 
or correct.  

We forgive ourselves, and each other, we begin agai
n in love.
 For these, and for so many attitudes, actions and o
missions, both obvious and not so 
obvious, which 
have fostered the illusion that we are truly separa
te from each other and 
completely self-derived... 

We forgive ourselves, and each other, we begin agai
n in love.  

  Hymn: 218 Who Can Say 

Blessing 
 Forgiveness, I always say, is a journey, not a fin
al arrival place. And as the 
poet Mark Strand says, ?If you don™t want to go on 
a journey, better not waste your 
money on shoes.? Journey in peace–
  Go in peace... 

   
 
