Can We Really Agree to Disagree Œ Covenant Respect 
May 5, 2013 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 
Gathering, Welcoming, Centering, Kindling, Opening:
  
We are here, 

after a much warmer week, 

to celebrate our unique lives together, 

to be accountable, both to our ideals 

and to each other, in peace and kindness; 

to live our lives deliberately,   

with self-awareness, self-questioning, and love. 

Grounded in gratitude for the cosmos that is our ho
me, claiming deepening wisdom as our 
authority, and daring to engage joy, burden, loss a
nd insight in a deliberate community of 
many ways and ages, the flame summons us to 
awaken
: to listen with our whole lives, to 
open, to serve. 

#1010 Oh We Give Thanks 

 
Ingathering
 A GREAT Story by Amy Rosenthal
  
Hey, look! A duck! 

That™s not a duck.  That™s a rabbit! 

Are you kidding me? It™s totally a duck. 

It™s for sure a rabbit. 

See, there™s his bill. 

What are you talking about? 

Those are ears, silly. 

It™s a duck.  And he™s about  

to eat a piece of bread. 

It™s a rabbit. And he™s about to eat a carrot.
 Wait. Listen. Did you hear that? 

I heard duck sounds. 

That™s funny. I distinctly heard rabbit sounds. 

Now the duck is wading through the swamp. 

No, the rabbit is hiding in the grass. 

There, see?  It™s flying. 

Flying?  It™s hopping! 

No, the rabbit is so hot,  

he™s cooling off his ears. 

Look, the duck is so hot, he™s getting a drink. 

Here, look at the duck through 

my binoculars. 

Sorry, still a rabbit. 

Here, ducky ducky! 

Here, you cute little rabbit! 

Oh great, you scared him away. 

I didn™t scare him away. 
You
 scared him away. 
You know, maybe you were right. 

Maybe it 
was
 a rabbit.        
Thing is, now I™m actually thinking it was a duck. 

Well, anyway–now what do you want to do? 

I don™t know. What do 
you
 want to do? 
Hey, look! An anteater!           

That™s no anteater. That™s a brachiosaurus!  

 
Affirming:  

 
Our Covenant of Respectful Relations  

We build our church community on a foundation of lo
ve with the goal of promoting justice and 
peace. Toward this end, I covenant to do the follow
ing: 
Accept responsibility for my own actions. 
Be receptive to connecting with others by listening
 with care and compassion.                      
Speak my truth honestly and directly with care and 
compassion.                                        
    
Honor the confidentiality and private disclosures o
f others.                                          
      
Welcome new members and guests within this religiou
s community. 
Embrace our diversity as a source of communal stren
gth, and accept and care for others despite 
our differences. 

Cherish the well-being of the congregation above my
 personal preferences. 
Remain engaged in the process with compassion and r
espect when conflict occurs, knowing that 
truth and sound decisions emerge from an open excha
nge of ideas. 
Use the Conflict Resolution Policy when I believe t
he Covenant has been broken. 
 
Communing 

 (in honor of Tony McDonald™s choir piece setting th
e words of our Mission Statement to music  
...an unpacking of some of the words.) 

 
Mission Statement of First UU: 

We are here 

to learn to practice true hospitality 

to revere the reasoning mind  

and the generous heart 

to claim our diversity as the source of our strengt
h and to relinquish the safety of our 
unexamined privilege for the freedom to engage in t
ransforming justice. 
 
To learn, not with the head alone, but with the hea
rt. With the body. 
To practice, not just by repeating as often as poss
ible, but by going deeper each time. 
True. Not just the opposite of false, but true in t
he building sense...
to bring into alignment
 with 
principle. 

Hospitality. Not just an open door, but a table wit
h bread and flowers. 
To revere...to see something not with the eyes, but
 with the heart, and with loyalty. 
To reason...not to stop at the surface, but to go d
eeper and to pay attention to the context. 
Mind....not just our own individual minds, but the 
conversation of minds.  
Generous...not charity from our abundance, but the 
kind of giving which empowers both self and 
others. 

Diversity...the reality of all that is. 

Strength...the ability to do work for self and othe
rs with power, without shame. 
Relinquish...to let go, to release, to set free, to
 undo. 
Safety...to know for sure, without doubt or questio
n. 
Unexamined....deliberately hidden, as in covering o
ne's eyes and thinking oneself invisible. 
Privilege...the arbitrary assignment of power to so
me and theft of that very same power from 
others. 

Transforming...growing deeper, self and others inte
rtwined for good.  
Silence...the reality that holds all beginnings and
 endings and middles in its embrace.... 
 
silence 

 
Love...the ability to admit that we are not alone. 

Grief...the ability to admit that we hurt. 

In the midst of the silence which embraces us all, 
may we call to mind and heart those whom we 
love, those who love us, those whom we miss, those 
for whom we mourn. For our mission calls 
us to a generous heart, and a generous heart is one
 that embraces it all... 
 
naming 

 
Mission...the focus of our spiritual life...who we 
are and what we do, instead of what we believe 
or do not believe. Let our mission now be made clea
r and empowering by the singing of it... 
 
The First Reading
 is from the book Patience with God, by Frank Schaef
fer, the grown up son of 
one of the most influential conservative evangelica
ls of the twentieth century, Francis Schaeffer, 
whose books plowed the ground for the religious rig
ht in the USA. Frank Schaeffer, however, the 
son, has rejected his parents™ religious beliefs an
d practices, walking a colorful road between 
fundamentalism on one side, and Richard Dawkins' rh
etoric on the other. He is a very strong but 
intriguing writer. 

 
The idea that faith consists of signing onto a seri
es of statements, such as "I believe that Christ 
died for my sins" or "I believe that selfish genes 
rule!" and that somehow, by saying these things, 
I get "saved" or "enlightened" (the secular version
 of redemption), is crazy. Saying words is not 
the same as understanding what they mean, let alone
 living by them. 
 
Because we can never be sure what our motivation fo
r anything is, we don't ever know whether 
we're sincere enough. Am I saved enough? Am I athei
st enough? I may say I believe this or that, 
but do I believe enough? So belief is not the point
. Who is sincere enough? And who has a good 
enough memory? 

 
This is why Pascal's wager, wherein one bets in fav
or of God, rather than risking damnation, is 
one of the stupidest ideas ever articulated. If the
re is a God, God would know you are just 
splitting the odds---insincere, but scared. 

 
The point 
isn't
 belief, but who we are, how we learn to treat the 
bullies we run across in our 
lives. There are extremists in all camps...religiou
s and secular...who have the anger, or worse yet, 
the blind certainty of their correctness. According
 to a parable of Jesus, those most convinced 
they are saved are the most lost.  But the rest of 
us have the numbers.  
The future belongs to the peacemakers. 

 
The Second Reading
 is a poem called Boxes from the great United States
 poet Nikki Giovanni 
from her book Cotton Candy on a Rainy Day (1978) 

 
 
i am in a box 

on a tight string 

subject to pop 

without notice 

 
everybody says how strong 

i am 

 
only black women 

and white men 

are truly free 

they say 

 
it™s not difficult to see 

how stupid they are 

 
i would not reject 

my strength 

though its source 

is not choice 

but responsibility 

 
i would not reject my light 

though my wrinkles are also illuminated 

 
something within demands 

action 

or words 

if action is not possible 

 
i am tired 

of being boxed 

muhammad ali must surely be pleased 

that leon spinks relieved him 

 
most of the time 

i can™t breathe 

i smoke too much 

to cover my fears 

sometimes I pick 

my nose to avoid 

the breath I need 

 
i do also do the same 

injustice to my poems 

 
i write because 

i have to 

 
Sermon 

 
I first started attending the Universalist Unitaria
n Church of Farmington Michigan in 1972. I was 
22- years-old. Back in those days, the word "young 
adult" was not used, so I was just another 
person who attended the service on Sunday. I never 
discussed my sexuality in those days, so I 
don't know how they would have responded to that, b
ut I was surprised at how many people 
commented that my last name "really had a lot of vo
wels in it," and was hard to pronounce, 
which mystified me. Still, we rarely used last name
s, so that wasn't much of an issue either. I 
learned that the simple white meeting house dated b
ack to before the Civil War, and had served 
as a station in the Underground Railroad, and that 
there were members of the church whose 
families had been part of the church for six genera
tions. There was no kindling of a chalice at the 
beginning of the service...that custom had not yet 
been claimed, at least in Michigan. The 
minister at the time, Rick Neff, was also the music
 director...he was a terrific musician and 
composer as well as a preacher.  

 
One Sunday, just before he left to take up another 
congregation, he offered a choral piece he had 
composed as a parting gift to the congregation. A s
mall but talented ad-hoc choir performed it 
during a special afternoon service. 

 
Just after the first movement of the piece, a long 
time member of the congregation showed up 
drunk. I don't mean that he had alcohol on his brea
th, I mean he was blotto: loud and staggering. 
It was not, sad to say, the first time he showed up
 at church this way. Usually, as is often true 
with alcoholics, people made excuses for him..."Oh,
 that's just Al. Yeah, he drinks too much. Pay 
no attention to him."  Yet I don't know how it™s po
ssible to "not pay attention" to someone quite 
that loud, and with a truly uncanny ability to find
 you and corner you every single time during 
the social hour... just when you feel most vulnerab
le.  
 
This time, Al was even worse than usual. He cried o
ut loudly during a quieter movement,   

"Don't you tell me to settle down, brother. I can d
o whatever I want."
   He moaned and 
wailed that he didn't think the minister was a very
 good composer...just as the soprano finished a 
particularly lovely aria. At that moment, the whole
 congregation turned, many of them angrily 
shushing him, but to no avail of course....he 
was
 drunk. Finally, two rather sturdy men got up, 
went back to him, and carted him outside, setting h
im out on the porch as he protested loudly, 
vowing to stay with him until he came down from his
 staggering high.  
 
Of course, the choral piece had already been pollut
ed by his obnoxious behavior. And during the 
coffee hour, there was no talk of the music, (which
 
I 
certainly thought was beautiful in text and 
tune both), but only talk of the drunk's truly awfu
l behavior.  
 
The most senior member of the congregation, an eleg
ant woman of 93 years, with her silver hair 
swept up fashionably, a woman who had grown up in t
hat church and known two thirds of its 
history personally, posted a large sign in the soci
al hall the next Sunday. It read "Our friends the 
Quakers can, as they put it 'write someone out of t
he Meeting.' When are we going to wise up 
and do the same?"  She signed it, and dated it the 
Sunday before, so no one had any real doubt 
that she was referring to Al and his consistently d
isruptive behavior. Her poster generated a huge 
discussion among the members.  

 
A few people spoke up immediately: "But we have alw
ays been a 
Universalist 
church, and we 
have to welcome everyone as a true mark of our heri
tage."  But others said, just as passionately, 
"I'm a Universalist too, as was my mother before me
, and my grandmother, but I am telling you 
right now, people can wear out their welcome...even
 in a church like ours."  
 
The congregation had no process in place to deal wi
th such disruptive behavior. No one knew 
what to do but to talk about it endlessly, clarifyi
ng and re-clarifying their position. Sort of like 
the two people debating whether what they saw was a
 rabbit or a duck in the story this morning.  
Some may have started to change their minds about t
hings from all these conversations...but 
unfortunately, I don't know what they eventually ch
ose to do, since I moved to California to go 
to seminary just a week after that poster went up. 
   
 
Since those days, the practices of every UU congreg
ation I know of has changed. We begin 
worship with a kindled chalice in most places. We o
ffer AA groups for those who are struggling 
with addiction issues....we have one that meets her
e on Monday's at 4, for example. And most of 
our congregations have crafted a Covenant of Respec
tful Relations, like the one we read earlier. 
 
We do not do this just because we recognize that th
ere will be many different kinds of belief and 
unbelief and religious practices among us and could
 be worried about that. No. We recognize we 
will simply have to agree to disagree about great t
heological issues like God or life after death. 
(Agree to disagree. Old phrase. Comes from the Meth
odist divine John Wesley who used it first 
in 1770 to express his differences with the very em
otional preacher, George Whitfield. Wesley 
was more liturgical and liberal in his style of wor
ship, Whitfield more dramatically evangelical 
in preaching and doctrine. Wesley used the phrase t
o express why they could still both be 
authentic Christians.) We also recognize, like John
 Wesley did, that we will express our 
emotions differently, and that some will be more di
rect than others, some shyer, some more 
easily wounded, some with thicker skins. 

 
So we crafted a covenant...that is, a freely entere
d agreement...where we simply state that we 
know that this is so, and that we will do our best 
to make sure the differences between us are 
protected by our mutual commitment to create the sa
fest space we can.  It's about safety, not 
belief or emotional style. After all, "The point is
n't belief," writes Frank Schaeffer in the first 
reading, "but who we are."  He adds another phrase,
 of course...he adds "and how we treat the 
bullies who come across our lives."   

 
Bullies. Anyone who disrupts the peace of the meeti
ng, like that man in my first church. People 
who make physical threats, verbally. Or even pull s
tunts like I mentioned in a sermon almost 15 
years ago...a man our San Francisco church who came
 into the Christmas Eve candlelight service 
with a can of gasoline and a bullwhip. Boy, did he 
ever wear out 
his
 welcome! Another man in 
that church, who was eccentric in every way due to 
the sad practice of frequent lobotomies in the 
mental health field of that era, was welcomed into 
the congregation despite his very many rather 
demanding behaviors. But people went out of their w
ay to be there for him because of his 
undeniably special needs. But one Sunday when he ve
rbally, publicly and loudly attacked a 
married heterosexual couple of differing ethnicitie
s and colors because he personally didn't 
approve of such marriages, we confronted him, and h
e made it clear that he would always have 
that reaction. So we, the leaders of the church, bo
th ordained and lay, asked him to leave the 
church. We valued safety for all people who enter t
he building, and his action, his behavior, 
devalued both that safety and those people. We had 
no covenant of respectful relations written 
down back then...we, the leadership in the church, 
simply took up the tough responsibility to 
protect the vulnerable from someone who, sadly, was
 vulnerable in a different way. 
 
Now of course, these hyper-dramatic events are rare
. Very rare in this or in any of our 
congregations. But the covenant of respectful relat
ions does recognize that sometimes conflicts 
reach that level, and there needs to be something i
n place to help the community to deal with it 
not reactively, but with principle and fairness. 

 
But mostly, the covenant asks us to take responsibi
lity for how we respond to each other in 
ordinary, not urgent, circumstances. It encourages 
us listen to each other carefully, and to speak 
as clearly and directly as we can. It urges us towa
rd an attitude of mutual respect...and to always 
speak to each other 
within
 the context of differences and diversities. Rememb
er, we claim as 
much in our mission statement which makes clear tha
t differences of opinion, belief, doubt, 
culture and understanding form 
the great strength 
of our community. Such differences are not a 
nuisance, but rather, foundational. 

 
The covenant is not a set of commandments, but a re
minder to do as we do best. It acknowledges 
we are not always at our best, but suggests we can 
almost always return to right relationship.  
 
It also asks us to welcome new members and guests w
ithin our religious community. Sounds a 
bit superfluous at first. We 
have 
greeters every Sunday, don't we? Good ones too! We 
begin 
every service with a welcome from the Board, right?
  
But I am thinking about an event from a congregatio
n where I served a fill-in ministry while the 
regular minister was on sabbatical. A woman came to
 see me that Sunday afternoon after the 

service. I was just about to leave my borrowed offi
ce, when she knocked timidly at my door. 
"Pastor, can I speak with you for a few moments?" (
I knew she was a visitor already, since we do 
not use the word "pastor" ordinarily.) I asked her 
to come in and sit down, and she told me her 
name first, and then her story.  

 
She told me that it was her first time to visit the
 congregation that very morning. She told me she 
had heard about Unitarian Universalism in a religio
us studies course she was taking at a local 
university, and that she had nearly leapt out of he
r skin with joy when she heard about our 
principles, our practices and our purposes. She had
 even heard of some of our more famous 
members, like Ralph Waldo Emerson." I read his Self
-Reliance in high school," she beamed. "It 
changed my life."  Then she got serious. She told m
e she had indeed been welcomed by many 
people. With warm smiles. And great sincerity. But 
each of them said to her some form of the 
following sentence after their warm welcome. "Oh, I
 wish more people like you would come to 
our congregation." "Oh," I said. "I'm so sorry." "D
on't get me wrong, Pastor," she said. "I 
understand that they were all thinking that what th
ey said was kind. They all seemed to imagine 
that one day this congregation would look like a mu
lti-cultural paradise. That's fine. But I am not 
here to help create a multi-cultural paradise. I am
 here to come to a church which lifts up the 
spiritual values that changed my life in high schoo
l. I am a person, not a category. I am not here 
to fulfill someone else's dream, but to work on my 
own dreams. Look," she said, "I know you 
can't do anything about this now, but I really thou
ght you should hear my experience." 
 
Now, I am not going to tell you her ethnicity, or w
hat color her skin was. No, I just want to lift 
up that sometimes welcoming takes more than a hands
hake. It takes focusing on the person, not 
the category. Or the box, to use Nikki Giovanni's w
ord.   
"i am tired of being boxed,"
 she 
confesses. 

 
"everybody says how strong i am,"
 she complains. 
"only black women and white men are truly free 

they say...it™s not difficult to see...how stupid t
hey are..." 
  
 
The word stupid is a harsh word, but I understand w
hy she used it in her poem.  I understand her 
anger. Categories...
black women and white men are the only ones who are
 strong?
 She blows up 
those categories with her harsh words and understan
dable impatience. Giovanni's poem made me 
remember the day when someone at my first church ma
de a comment about how many vowels I 
had in my last name. Hardly as serious as the categ
orization...the boxes...the poet has known, but 
still...  

 
The woman who came into my office to tell me her st
ory? Never saw her again. I told her story 
to the regular minister who came back just a week l
ater, but her name never appeared on the 
guest list again. And I'm sad to have to admit that
 I can think of at least one reason why that 
might have been.  

 
This is why I say that taking our covenant of respe
ctful relations seriously means more than 
being warm. It means questioning even the most well
-meaning ways we speak to each other, to 
members and guests, all of whom, I dare say, are pe
rsons, and 
never
, representative categories. 
 
Frank Schaeffer uses the harsh word Nikki Giovanni 
used too: "stupid." He uses it to describe his 
reaction to Pascal's Wager, the idea that it™s bett
er to bet on God and possibly win, than to give 
up on God and certainly lose.  And although I compl
etely agree with his analysis of Pascal's 
wager, I am not sure that Pascal...or anyone sharin
g his theology...would then simply respond by 
quietly dropping such theology in total defeat, jus
t because of Schaeffer's certain judgment 
reflected in the word "stupid."   

 
This is why I think the practices invited by our Co
venant of Respectful Relations actually also 
serve as a spiritual practice that informs life 
beyond this community
 as well. Because, although I 
am comfortable in this community religiously, despi
te wide diversity in religious expression, 
some of which I do not share...I also live in the w
ider world where I am not as comfortable. In 
the sacred privacy of my mind, I sometimes certainl
y do judge certain ideas...both religious and 
political...that I find in that world, as stupid, o
r foolish.  I certainly have all sorts of negative 
emotional responses to religious claims that strike
 me as downright cruel, even after I have tried 
hard indeed to understand them in a more generous w
ay. I am not sure it™s possible, or even 
enviable, to pretend that I will be free of those f
eelings someday.  
 
But I am never in favor of traducing the safety of 
ANY gathered community...not just this one... 
by trotting out such verbal parries as if it was my
 right or even my duty to do so.   
 
To summarize: our Covenant of Respectful Relations,
 along with its conflict resolution 
component, is important to our community...and to t
he wider world...because ultimately it™s not 
lists of beliefs or disbeliefs that are important (
as Schaefer himself says so elegantly), but 
who we 
are
. As persons, not categories. As a community of div
erse individuals, not as a closed club of 
"like minded" people. As a church of people who are
 growing deeper, more understanding every 
single day.   

 
I've come a long way from my first days as a newly 
minted Unitarian Universalist, with a lot of 
vowels in his name, back in Farmington MI.  But bec
ause I have been challenged so much, and 
learned so much, and grown so much in my understand
ing of the importance of persons in all 
their diversity, the journey has been a blessing al
l the way. 
 
Offering 

There are many ways that we contribute to our congr
egation. We thank all those who showed up 
yesterday to work on cleanup day, for example, to w
eed and tend our many gardens. Our 
monetary contributions are also vital. Many of us c
ontribute on a monthly, rather than a weekly, 
basis, however, so it may seem 
awkward
 for us to just pass the baskets. Instead, I invite
 you to 
receive and pass the basket while 
contemplating all the good work
 that comes from our shared 
contributions of time and treasure. 
  
A Litany: Muchos Somos 

 
We who can imagine a just world, who are unashamed 
to dream of a good life for all... 
muchos somos 

We who are part of one earth, sharing its single hi
story east and west, north and south, all 
intertwined, all blended, interdependent 

muchos somos 

We who are all different from each other, yet unite
d in our evolutionary past, our mortality, our 
astonishment that we exist at all... 

muchos somos 

We who gather to celebrate, to take our lives serio
usly, who wave the banners of both our joys
 and brokenness in great assemblies, so that we reme
mber that we are not alone.... 
muchos somos 

 
