The Authority of G-d?  
Sources of a Prophet's Courage
 January 19, 2014 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 
 
Gathering, Welcoming, Centering, Kindling, Opening:
  
  We are here,
  after a week of gray, gray, gray, 

 with a few quick rays of sunlight, 

 to worship, to welcome challenge and joy, 

 to find healing and harbingers of hope 

 amid the realities of life,  

 and to let the light of love be our guide. 

 
And so, bearing witness 
both
 to our world as it is, 
and
 as Love can imagine it, we would 
claim that vision of a just world in our own lives.
 And because of a growing sense of kinship 
with all beings, inviting our compassion, we begin 
in this celebration to engage our mission 
with our whole lives: body, mind, and heart 

 
Singing  #118 This Little Light of Mine 

 
Ingathering: 

 
Eighty-five years ago, a baby was born in a house o
n Auburn Ave in Atlanta, Georgia. His 
parents gave him the name Michael, and he had an ol
der sister named Winnie. Atlanta, where 
Michael was born, is pretty far from here. If you a
nd your family got into your car and drove 
there it would take over eight hours to get there. 
It™s warmer there, because its 500 miles south of 
here. And, eighty five years ago, things were diffe
rent down in Atlanta than they are now. When 
Michael was four and five-years-old, he had many fr
iends that he played with. Some had pale 
skin, like I do, and some had darker skin, like Mic
hael did. But when it was time to go to school, 
Michael was sent to one school with his black frien
ds, and his white friends were sent to another 
school, and were not allowed to come play with him 
after that. His mother, Alberta, told him, 
"Some people will treat you different, but you are 
as good as anybody else...you remember that." 
 
But Michael still played. He played football and ba
seball, and he took piano lessons too, and 
learned to play the keyboard. He wanted to be a fir
eman when he grew up, cause he loved seeing 
the red lights on the trucks go past when they were
 moving to put out a fire.  
 
His father James, and his grandfather, William, bot
h worked as ministers in a local church with 
beautiful green windows that made the whole inside 
look as if you were swimming in a fish 
bowl.  One day, they made a trip to a church conven
tion that was being held all the way over in 
Berlin, Germany. There, they visited places associa
ted with a famous church reformer that you 

will learn about in school, Martin Luther.  Michael
's father James was so impressed with the idea 
that protest was part of what it means to be a chur
ch that he changed his own name from James 
to Martin Luther, and he changed Michael's name to 
Martin Luther too, so from that time on, 
everyone called him Martin, even at school. 

 
When he went to Sunday school at the church with th
e green windows, he had questions. The 
church in which he was raised told him that 2000 ye
ars ago, a famous teacher named Jesus had 
been killed by the government, but that a few days 
later his body came back to life. Young 
Martin said, "I don't think that is true." And he q
uestioned other things the church said as well.  
 
Eventually, Martin grew up and went to high school.
  He joined a club there where he was 
allowed to give speeches. He was so good at giving 
speeches that he competed at other schools. 
But because he was black and other kids were white,
 he had to stand up in the back of the bus so 
white kids could sit down. This made him unhappy, a
nd he went to his mother, Alberta. She 
explained to him about American history, and how hi
s people had once been slaves, and that, 
though they were not slaves any more, the rules of 
the state of Georgia were still very unfair, but 
"Remember," she said, "you are as good as anyone el
se. Don't let anyone tell you otherwise."  
 
Martin was so smart, that he graduated two years ea
rly, and started going to college when he was 
only 16; and eventually, he became a famous man, wh
ose birthday we celebrate every year at 
this time of the year. We know him by his full chan
ged name, Martin Luther King, Jr. and he 
became famous because he believed his mother, that 
he was as good as anyone else, and he 
worked so that people of different colors can all r
ide the same busses and trains and planes, and 
go to the same schools. He called the world where e
verything was fair for everyone, "the dream," 
and we still talk about what he said to this very d
ay. 
 
Greeting 

 
Justice Action Ministry Presentation 
 Good Morning! On the third Sunday morning of each m
onth, our congregation's Justice Action 
Ministry has the opportunity to share with you news
 of the organizations we support through 
your generous contributions to our congregation's A
nnual Operating Fund.  Through our Justice 
Action Ministry, our church provides funding to the
 Naral Pro-Choice Ohio Foundation and the 
Ohio Religious Coalition for Reproductive Choice.  
As you know, a lot is happening in 
Reproductive Justice around the nation. 

What better way to celebrate the 41st anniversary o
f Roe v. Wade than with Freedom of Choice 
Ohio, the coalition that NARAL and Ohio Religious C
oalition for Reproductive Choice 
collaborate and organized for reproductive justice?
  Mark your calendars for the annual Roe v. 
Wade event Tuesday evening, January 28, at the Gate
way Film Center on High Street across 
from the OSU campus.  The evening features keynote 
speaker Robin Marty.  Robin is coauthor 
of the 2013 book, 
Crow After Roe: How "Separate But Equal" Has Become
 the New Standard in 
Women's Health and How We Can Change That
.  The book chronicles the recent legislative 
attacks on access to abortion, contraception, and b
asic women's health care across the United 
States.  New laws deny women, especially those who 
are marginalized, access to making 
decisions about their own health. We hope you can j
oin us for an inspirational evening as we 
look 
back
 at the challenges we have successfully met, and lo
ok 
forward
 to the challenges we 

now face to protect safe, legal, and accessible  re
productive health care. 
And, speaking of health care, the 
Ohio Religious Coalition for Reproductive Choice
 is working 
to prepare a kit called 
Healing the Sick
, designed to give us the knowledge we need to REFE
R 
and CONNECT those in need to the right people, incl
uding phone numbers, paperwork, and 
websites so that they can sign up for health insura
nce and access the high-quality health care now 
available through the Affordable Care Act.  You can
 find a link to 
Healing the Sick
 on the Ohio 
RCRC website. 

"Reproductive Justice: Expanding Our Social Justice
 Calling" is the Unitarian Universalist 
Association's four-year Congregational Study/Action
 Issue. A dedicated group of volunteers is 
presenting a Reproductive Justice Adult Education P
rogram right here at First UU!  We will be 
using our UUA curriculum on Reproductive Justice. 

Explore this subject through six sessions designed 
to deepen the compassionate Unitarian 
Universalist understanding of the personal decision
s made by women and their families, what-
ever their race, religion, culture, gender identity
 or orientation, 
and
 the impact of society on these 
decisions. These sessions begin 
today
 at one o'clock with the topic 
What 
is
 Reproductive Justice
? 
Future topics include 
Sacred Sexuality
; 
Inherent Worth and Dignity for All
; 
Reverence for Life
; 
the 
Right of Conscience
; and to conclude, a session on 
Moving Forward
.   Our comments and 
conclusions will be forwarded to the Unitarian Univ
ersalist Association, to help improve this 
developing curriculum. Child care is available for 
each session. For more information and to sign 
up, please come to the Adult Education Programs' ta
ble in Fellowship Hall today after the 
service. This is our spiritual work, based on our p
rinciples calling us to lives of informed 
conscience, equity, justice for all, and the respon
sible search for truth.
  
Affirmation   
(these words are from the Portuguese poet with the 
unlikely name of Alexandre 
O'Neill.) 

 
The history of morality: the horse thinks one way, 
while striding along, thoughts quite 
different from the one who rides. O where is Love s
ublime? It brings from the night the 
first fingers of dream; your dream, our dream, kept
.   
 
Singing:   #146 Soon the Day Will Arrive v 2 
only     
 
Communing:  The Sequence        

 
I live, you live, in the United States of America. 
We celebrate the life of Martin Luther King Jr. 
on this weekend.   

 
In Taipei, Taiwan, however, a hospital physician na
med Yeh Po Lun, who also treats patients 
with Bach Flower Remedies, is readying his apartmen
t for the lengthy New Year™s Festival at the 
end of the month. He strings lanterns across his li
ving room, and unrolls bedding for the coming 
onslaught of guests.  

 
In Bucuresti, Rumania, a 24-year-old biology studen
t named Ionut Stefan Paun, practices his 
kickboxing at the gym, where his skills and speed h
ave earned respect. Afterward, he reads 
English poetry. He dreams of visiting the States on
e day. 
 
In Melbourne, Australia, Gretchen Thomas is taking 
the tram down Bourke St. to try out that 
new café. Fewer are riding the tram today. She figu
res that it™s because so many are packing the 
venues of the Australian Open at the edge of town. 
She's so glad it™s cooled down so much after 
that heat wave. 

 
In Calgary, Canada, Rev. Debra Faulk is about to pr
each a sermon with her Religious Education 
Director, Ashley Cole. They both know of Martin Lut
her King, but they tend to mention 
Canadian civil rights workers more often. Today the
 title of their sermon is 
Faith Beyond 
Sunday
. 
 
Love, how blest I am to share the breath of life wi
th all the people on the planet, and the silence 
that embraces us all, all beginnings, all endings, 
all things.  
 
silence 

 
Love, how blest I am to have a heart that feels. Lo
ve and grief, tenderness and resistance, 
gratitude and grace. Seeing in my mind's eye the fa
ces of those who embody my love and my 
grief, who call out my tenderness or resistance, I 
put names to their faces in silence, or spoken 
softly aloud, to engage the grace of gratitude for 
them all in this common house of praise. 
 
naming 

 
Love, I live, we live, in the embrace of music that
 stitches together the generations and memories 
of our nation, and for this grace, more gratitude. 

 
Choir Anthems 

 
The First Reading 
dates from 40 years ago, but I still think that wha
t Peter Riga says has a lot 
of truth in it. Even though both clergy and congreg
ations have documentably less respect in the 
world these days than in those. I think the ideal i
s well stated in this book 
Give unto Caesar What 
are God's
, a clear reference in the title to the famous ridd
le of Jesus of Galilee: "Give back to 
Caesar that which belongs to Caesar, and give back 
to God that which belongs to God." 
 
The world today expects more of the church than mer
e expressions of love, or general principles. 
It asks for tangible and concrete proof of this lov
e.  The church must take a stand, clearly and 
courageously, in favor of the poor, and victims of 
injustice. This implies a more forceful stand on 
racial discrimination, medical aid, and the aged in
 all of its forms. The church must rebuke 
public authorities when they fail to take measures 
to alleviate the most urgent social problems of 
the day. In such protest, the church reminds us tha
t we are responsible for each other. 
 
The Second Reading 
is from Barbara Holmes's
  
fine 2002 book 
Race and the Cosmos: An 
Invitation to See the World Differently
. Holmes is both a lawyer and Associate Professor o
f 
Ethics and African American Religious Studies at Me
mphis Theological Seminary. 
 
Fortunately or not, dreaming is a solitary endeavor
.  ?We cannot dream together.?  However, we 
can share visions, which are the collective express
ions of individual dreams, revelations, and 
insights.  

 
Martin Luther King had a dream, but he was not alon
e. Many visions of equality and justice 
merged during his famous speech.  He brought the vi
sion to our attention as a good prophet 
should, and then began to demonstrate the avenues o
f possible fulfillment. We were expecting a 
straight path to unity; instead, like the chaotic m
ovements of subatomic particles, many options 
erupted out of nowhere. According to King, the belo
ved community presupposed empowerment 
of the poor, the cessation of wars, a more egalitar
ian economy, and an end to polite deceptions 
about systemic abuse. 

 
When a bullet finally silenced him, we mourned, but
 also relaxed, nodding off to a less intense 
version of the dream. This beloved community, that 
we envisioned in the aftermath of the 
assassination, differed from King™s vision, as it w
as primarily rhetorical and utopian. But most 
importantly it did not require our muscle, or risk.
 During slavery, those who dreamed and ran for 
freedom paid a high price. 

 
Slaves saw dreams as gift from God that placed one 
outside of time for the purpose of turning the 
universe, oneself and one™s fellow human beings int
o objects for contemplation. 
 
Preaching 

 
"In our theological grammar," writes my friend and 
colleague Jane Rzepka, "we have no passive 
voice." 

 
I remember thinking, "passive voice?? I have to cal
l Jane up and tell her that, when I read that, I 
thought 
?No one
 is going to understand what you mean, since few sc
hools stress grammar 
anymore." Grammar: you know...adverbs, tenses, pron
ouns, clauses, gerunds...etc.  Even as far 
back as 20 years ago, I worked with a seminary stud
ent who had no idea what 
passive voice
 meant. She sported two Master's Degrees, experience
d living in five different countries, and 
served as personal assistant to the famous physicis
t David Bohm. Yet despite her vast education, 
she crammed her sermons with passive voice:   

"It has been said that..." 

"I was invited by Dr. Bohm to consider..."  

"I am made a better person by the very idea of free
dom.."   
All passive voice. No active voice, ever.  

 
But in the end, I think Jane is right, whether it™s
 easy to understand her grammatical metaphor or 
not. In our tradition, we are not chosen, we 
choose.
 
In our tradition, decisions are not made for us the
ologically, we decide. And you will never hear 
me asking you to accomplish G-d's will, since I can
not speak for G-d; and that is true no matter 
what I believe or disbelieve about G-d.  

 
However, this is exactly one of the reasons that Dr
. Martin Luther King decided back in the 60s 
that he could not become a Unitarian Universalist. 
He noticed that we tend to avoid certain 
words a lot, certain texts a lot, and he wasn't sur
e if such avoidance would play in Peoria...or 
more precisely, Atlanta or Selma. Now mind you, he 
and Coretta thought deeply about becoming 
Unitarian Universalists. They liked us. He befriend
ed many, many of my older colleagues. He 
and Coretta attended the Arlington Street Church wh
en they lived in Boston, and it was the 
minister there, Dana Greeley, a former President of
 the Association, who introduced him when 
he gave the esteemed Ware Lecture at our General As
sembly in Hollywood Florida in 1966, 
entitled "Don't Sleep Through the Revolution."  My 
internship supervisor was one of his class-
mates at Boston University. My friend Farley schedu
led him to preach his Installation Sermon in 
Cleveland. 

 
But, in the end, Dr. King decided that becoming Uni
tarian Universalist would not help him to 
accomplish the Civil Rights work he felt called to 
do. Yes, called. By G-d.  
 
Now please, when King said G-d, he was saying that 
word in the context of his doubts, his 
skepticism and his liberal university education. Re
member? He courageously questioned the 
bodily resurrection of Christ even while in his Bap
tist Sunday School. When asked about things 
like family planning, a controversial idea in many 
church circles, then as now, he was 
totally
 in 
support of it, and shared his views with women and 
men in no uncertain terms. His Doctoral 
Dissertation even explored G-d as understood by two
 radical theologians...Paulus Tillich and 
Henry Nelson Wieman. Tillich defined G-d as "the gr
ound of all being" or even "Being itself." 
And Wieman spoke of G-d as "creative interchange," 
where the voices of the oppressed, the 
persecuted and suffering shared 
equal 
authority with the voices of the great prophets and
 
philosophers. He felt that all human beings...the p
owerful and the powerless... had to talk and 
work together... creatively...all voices heard at l
ast....to solve the problems of humanity. 
 
Some critics will surely say, "Well, neither of the
se two supposed theologians is talking about 
God at all.  Everyone knows God is a super-being ab
ove and beyond creation, who made the 
universe, has all power and knowledge, and who has 
no beginning and no end. Many will go 
even further and say: And of course, such a being d
oesn't exist in any way.  And Tillich's ‚Being 
itself™ means nothing at all, it™s a cold abstracti
on; and Wieman, for goodness sake, should just 
have stopped talking about G-d and just gone on tal
king about human community." 
 
Dr. King, although he had his own criticisms of the
 two theologians, did not agree that the word 
"G-d" could only have the one meaning, a meaning to
 be either denied or praised, a word to be 
spoken or avoided.  He felt that the voices of indi
vidual experiences about this word... especially 
the experiences of those who have been systematical
ly bullied by Jim Crow laws, had to be lifted 
up. The nightmare of racialized poverty and segrega
tion, he felt, had to be supplanted by 
a 
dream,
 a 
dream
 inspired by the G-d who IS Truth, as the gospel pu
ts it, and the Love who is G-d, 
as Gandhi put it...the very G-d-given luminous real
ity in narratives that encouraged the runaway 
slaves....stories of Exodus from slavery in Egypt, 
stories of finding manna in the wilderness, 

stories of prophets courageously confronting the ve
ry authorities who had the power to kill them. 
King finally decided that the 
stories 
of G-d, regardless whether they were historical or 
not,  
whether they thrilled Tillich or not, vibrated with
 more liberating power, inspired more courage, 
admitted the reality of evil in the world, and lit 
a brighter light than even those sincere Unitarian 
Universalists in the burbs who found such stories l
argely outside their understanding of religious 
life and who spoke a different jargon.  

 
Oh now, please do not imagine that he thought less 
of Unitarian Universalists because he did not 
join us. Not at all. He highly praised Unitarian Un
iversalists like James Reeb and Viola Liuzzo, 
who stood by him in hard times, and risked and lost
 their lives. He welcomed all to the cause as a 
truly interfaith person. He held a deep understandi
ng of Buddhism and Judaism, for example, 
and a deep gratefulness for such religious traditio
ns, even though Buddhists don't really speak 
about G-d at all, and even though...especially in t
hat barely post-Auschwitz era, many Jews were 
strong atheists..."What kind of Omnipotence would a
llow such a catastrophe?"  
 
No, King never dissed people who did not use the sa
me words and metaphors as he did. But he 
just wasn't convinced that folks like us would find
 it easy or even possible to confront the powers 
and principalities that often left us alone, privil
eged as most of us are, but diminished so many 
other lives.  

 
He personally favored diversity in church styles an
d theologies...but he also knew he needed to 
work first and foremost with those who, like Peter 
Riga, wanted a church that took "a stand, 
clearly and courageously, 
in favor
 of the poor, and victims of injustice. The church 
must rebuke 
public authorities... "   

 
He felt that many of us would find the "rebuking" o
f authorities troublesome, or rude. And 
sometimes, I know, even our own local interfaith gr
oup BREAD has discomforted people...not 
always because of theological differences, but beca
use of the whole notion of standing up to 
public authorities, and having clear expectations o
f them, even though these expectations have 
always been presented to them, clearly, before our 
meetings. The expressions of discomfort 
about making demands of public authorities to suppo
rt moral action, sadly, were mostly found 
among white attendees, not people of color. 

 
But, personally, I think that King would find the U
nitarian Universalist congregations of the 
present era doing a lot more of what he wanted chur
ches to do...justice action, not justice 
discussion. After all, 250 people from this congreg
ation at a BREAD meeting is an astonishing 
expression of "active voice," is it not? And active
 voice not just out there in the world....but in 
also our own hearts. More and more often we have be
en acknowledging that we are not perfect 
ourselves, and that we are not separated from the w
orld, but part of the world, and have to keep 
close watch both on the world AND on 
our
 assumptions and attitudes, which are often 
unconsciously shaped by that world. I have often ob
served with my colleagues that we look in 
the mirror a lot more these days, and ask ourselves
 the harder questions.  
  

But our nation, the US of A itself, has not moved o
n to look in the mirror. At least, not as much 
as some people would like to think. In his Ware Lec
ture, King made three statements, the last of 
which addressed exactly this claim. First, he antic
ipated what Peter Riga would write a few years 

later (King's words from the lecture):  
It has always been the role of the church to broade
n 
horizons, to challenge the status quo, and to quest
ion and 
break
 the 
mores
 (that is, the customs 
and conventions of a community)
 if necessary.  
Wow! Strong words! 
Break
 the mores, not nudge 
them along. 

 
Secondly,
 he said, 
it is necessary for the church to reaffirm over and
 over again the essential 
immorality of racial segregation. 
Yes, exactly...like our Portuguese poet framed it i
n the 
affirmation...too much of the "history of morality"
 in our world has been one group of people 
simply anointing themselves as riders, and others, 
as beasts to ride. I'm talking the slavery era, 
yes, certainly, but today's Bernie Madoff et al as 
well. Segregation can be by color, by class, by 
spurious claims of entitlement. 

 
But third, King concluded his lecture by saying tha
t we had 
to deal with the myth of exaggerated 
progress. The plant of freedom, 
he said
, is only a bud and not yet a flower. 
 
Perhaps you will counter by saying, "But that was 1
966. It™s now 2014. There 
has
 been more 
progress. Our younger generations show far fewer ha
ng-ups about everything, race, same-gender 
love, etc."  Yeah, certainly that has to be noted, 
but note this as well. A 2012 study by 
sociologists at Rice and Notre Dame universities di
scovered realities I personally found deeply 
disturbing. The study was conducted multi-racially,
 multi-ethnically, multi-religiously, and 
multi-geographically. Very thorough. They discovere
d that six in ten whites say that the best way 
to improve race relationships is to stop talking ab
out it. Six out of ten. 
 
Black Americans are five times more likely to think
 about race than white Americans. The 
percentage of folks who think that ?separate but eq
ual? is a good idea has risen almost a hundred 
percent from 2006, when the last such survey was ta
ken. And sadly, this last was shown to be 
true among both people of African AND European orig
ins. 
 
So we still live in a 
very
 divided country. Not just the 1% and the 99%, not 
just political parties, 
but we are still divided as to whether or not to ev
en talk about racial realities. This, even though 
study after study has shown that openly talking abo
ut race with our children and with each other 
...without tiptoeing up to it...is one of the most 
powerful ways to effect change, both in ourselves 
and in society. It's the best way to claim power...
 to hone our capacity to love. But it still 
absolutely frightens many progressives, who tell th
emselves, perhaps, they might say something 
"wrong." So conversation about real issues like rac
e is often pushed to the edge, not greeted with 
gladness. It™s much easier to dream our own dreams,
 than to dream with each other, apparently.   
 
But Barbara Holmes agrees with that. Remember? She 
said, ?We can
not 
dream together.?  
However, she asserts, we 
can
 share visions, which are the collective expression
s 
of
 individual 
dreams...   

 
"King...brought" such a "vision to our attention as
 a good prophet should," she said. According 
to King, "the beloved community 
presupposed
 empowerment of the poor, the cessation of wars, 
a more egalitarian economy, and an end to polite de
ceptions about systemic abuse." 
 
"When a bullet finally silenced him," she continues
, ?we mourned...but also 
relaxed
, nodding off 
to a less intense version of the dream." One that "
did not require our muscle, or risk. During 
slavery," she reminds us, "those who dreamed...and 
ran–for freedom, 
paid a high price
. 
Slaves," she said, "saw dreams as a gift from God t
hat placed them,  outside of time,"  so they 
could "contemplate" their place in the universe...s
o they could see what they saw, feel what they 
felt, not what the ruffians riding their backs told
 them to see, told them to feel. So they could 
actually embrace a future, not just suffer the past
. 
 
That courageous truthfulness to self is G-d, accord
ing to King. That "truthfulness" and its 
companion, "Love," were the sources of his courage 
as a prophet to announce a dream that 
pronounced segregation as an immoral practice. He w
asn't interested in intellectual or 
philosophical debate about G-d. He gave up writing 
essays on Buddhism, and dissertations on 
liberal theology, and started to march, boycott, an
d draw the line with skillful organization. He 
was interested in what could give people the author
ity to move forward and risk claiming their 
freedom, powerfully...yet without violence, and, at
 the same time, risking violence against their 
own person. 

 
I want to be clear Œ for King the voice of G-d, as 
he saw G-d, was a source of his strength. He 
was in NO WAY like Pat Robertson, or Rod Parsley, w
ho claim to listen to "God" daily and 
speak for him. King never did any such thing. About
 such a God, I can only count myself an 
atheist, especially if I am to aim for any kind of 
moral life. If I place myself above everyone else, 
and claim a special post from G-d, I don't see how 
I could possibly live a moral life. 
 
But, I also want to be clear that I take seriously 
the stories I hear of folks who "keep on keeping 
on," because they really do have faith in a G-d who
se temple is truthfulness and whose only 
presence is love, love that can even empower the hu
man heart to overcome self-delusion. People 
who use their own dreams of beloved community, like
 sails, sails to get them moving forward to 
a place that actually feels like home. With the win
d...the spirit...blowing them in the right 
direction. Now I could not become a Baptist any mor
e than King could become a Unitarian 
Universalist. I am wary about a great deal of theol
ogical language, which I think assumes too 
much. But the longer I am alive, I also find that I
 find that philosophizing about G-d one way or 
the other, feeds me less than spiritual and powerfu
l engagement with the "principalities and 
powers" of this world, who have the gall to divide 
the world into haves and have-nots, the in and 
the out crowds. 

 
So I might have to say to Jane...although I am not 
fond of passive voice any more that you are, in 
grammar or theology, I'm not sure that this kind of
 authority, from this kind of G-d, King's G-d, 
the G-d of many radical religious revolutionaries, 
is an example of passive voice at all. It seems 
to me, this is a very excellent example of active v
oice indeed.  
 
Offering 

 
Returning  
Reality precedes dreams. And then dreams upturn rea
lity...I dare to dream. 
         
Kim Sung Hui 
   
Then these words from the top of  
   the page: "The reason civil rights 

   marchers had moral authority is that 

  they were willing to suffer for what       
they believed in. They were tear-gassed, 
   knocked over by fire hoses...but they 

   kept singing, "Oh deep in my heart, 

   I do believe, that we shall overcome 

   some day." That kind of moral 

   authority changed a nation. 

 
Singing  #169 We Shall Overcome 

 
Blessing 

 
