Dia de los Muertos
October 26, 2014
Lane Campbell, Director of Religious Education
and
Rev. Eric Meter
Gathering,  Welcoming,  Centering,  Kindling,  Opening:
We  are  here  
after  a  week  of  both  autumn  clouds  and  sunshine  
to  refresh  ourselves  in  the  warmth  of  one  another
 ?s  company  
and  to  celebrate  the  possibilities  which  arise 
 when  we  remember  the  lasting  promise  that  love
lasts  longer  than  we  can  possibly  imagine.  
And  so,  in  this  common  house  of  life  and  love,  may  we  lead  lives  of  welcome,  wisdom  and  
kindness.  Bestowing  ourselves  bountifully  to  the  common  good,  let  gratitude  and  question  displace
any  easy  assumption.  Knowing  that  we  are  within  this  hurting,  amazing  world,  not  outside  it,  we
approach  our  earth  and  social  equity  mindfully.  Let  each  day  express  our  amen.
Opening  
This  morning,  we  are  here 
 one  room  many  generations.  It  is  our  second  all-ages  worship  service  of  
the  church  year  at  First  UU.  Today  will  be  a  different  kind  of  worship  service.  A  service  where  the  
voices  of  children  can  sometimes  be  heard,  a  service  where  we  may  hear  more  stories  or  may  sing  
more.  The  gift  of  these  all-ages  worship  services  is  that  we  get  to  come  together  on  Sunday,  to  be  in 
one  space.  We  get  to  explore  different  ways  of  worship,  to  experiment  with  things  we  have  not  tried  
before.  Come,  join  us  on  this  Sunday,  in  this  space,  as  we  celebrate  the  Day  of  the  Dead  together.
Praising
  #
1001  Breaths  
Ingathering  
the  story  of  La  Calavera  Catrina  
This  is  a  story  about  the  Day  of  the  Dead,  or  Dia  de  Los  Muertos.  Day  of  the  Dead  happens  each  
year  at  the  beginning  of  November  in  a  country  called  Mexico.  It's  a  time  to  celebrate  the  lives  of  
people  we  know  who  have  died.  On  this  day,  family  members  and  friends  decorate  the  graves  of  the  
people  they  know.  They  gather  together  for  a  big  celebration  with  a  parade  and  with  music.  People  
also  build  altars  in  their  homes.  These  altars  contain  favorite  foods  of  those  we  know  who  have  died; 
they  have  sugar  skulls  on  them  to  bring  bright  color  to  a  day  of  celebration.  See,  Dia  De  Los  
Muertos  is  not  a  day  that  is  sad,  though  some  of  us  may  feel  sad  about  missing  the  people  we  know 
who  have  died.  But  Dia  De  Los  Muertos  is  actually  a  celebration,  a  festival.  It  is  about  remembering  
the  joy  that  people  bring  to  our  lives,  it  is  about  sharing  funny  stories  and  laughing  together,  it  is  
about  singing,  about  our  grieving.
And  it  is  from  that  place  of  joyful  remembrance  that  our  story  begins.  This  is  the  story  of  La  
Calavera  Catrina  (repeat  back).  In  Spanish,  the  term  calavera  means  skull.  Can  anyone  point  out  a  
skull  for  us  all  in  this  room?  See,  La  Calavera  Catrina  is  unlike  any  of  the  other  skulls.  What  do  you
see  that  is  different?  She  is  dressed  in  fancy  clothes  and  she  wears  a  large  hat  with  a  feather  in  it.  I 
wonder  why  she  would  dress  so  differently...

La  Calavera  Catrina  was  created  by  an  artist,  a  painter  named  Jose  Guadalupe  Posada.  This  image  is  
very  old,  dating  all  the  way  back  to  1910.  Catrina  was  drawn  during  a  time  when  people  from  
Europe  were  entering  Mexico  and  were  telling  people  in  Mexico  that  they  were  better  than  them.  The 
Europeans  said  they  were  better  than  Mexicans  because  they  were  more  civilized 
  meaning  they  had  
more  money,  and  they  had  more  political  power.  Jose  Posada  thought  he  would  show  them!  It's  not  
very  respectful  to  come  into  another  culture's  country  and  tell  them  you  are  better  than  they  are.  
Posada  decided  to  answer  this  by  creating  a  silly  print  image 
 an  image  of  a  woman  dressed  in  fancy
clothes,  a  skeleton  dressed  in  European,  
 ?civilized
 ?  clothing.  And  thus  Calavera  Catrina  was  born 
 an  
image  to  poke  fun  at  these  Europeans  who  thought  they  were  better  than  these  Mexican  folks.  That  
way,  the  Mexican  people  would  have  an  image  to  laugh  at  when  these  Europeans  were  making  fun  of
them.  It  turned  a  very  serious  situation  into  a  very  joyous  one.
Has  anyone  here  ever  been  made  fun  of?  Have  you  ever  thought  of  using  art  as  a  way  to  get  back  
at  that  person?  See,  Jose  Posada  is  quite  a  creative  man.  And  the  Mexican  people  knew  they  needed  
to  resist  these  European  folks.  Resist-  it  means  not  letting  someone  else  bring  us  down,  it  means  
saying  we  are  going  to  be  joyous  in  the  face  of  people  trying  to  take  our  joy  or  our  personhood  
away.  We  Unitarian  Universalists  understand  this  when  we  see  injustice  in  the  world.  We  understand  
this  perhaps  when  our  friends  ask  us  about  our  religion, and  tell  us  it  is  not  real  because  we  have  
different  beliefs.
And  now  La  Calavera  Catrina  is  everywhere.  Her  image  has  become central  to  Dia  De  Los  Muertos.  
She  is  a  sign  of  joy,  a  sign  of  laughter,  and  she  is  even  in  your  Order  of  Celebraion today  to  be  
colored  in  by  you!  Keep  your  eyes  open  for  when  you  see  her  next.  And  when  you  see  her,  I  invite  
you  to  give  a  hearty  laugh  her  way!
Please  return  to  your  seats  to  sit  with  your  families  as  we  continue  the  service.
Greeting
  
Singing
  
#359When  We  Are  Gathered  
Communing
We  move  now  into  the  center  of  our  time  together  this  morning,  a  time  marked  by  the  stillness  that  
will  follow  the  sound  of  our  temple  bell.  May  these  words  guide  us  into  this  time  of  reflection....  
Let  Me  Die  Laughing,  by  Mark  Morrison  Reed,  1991
We  are  all  dying,  our  lives  always  moving  toward  completion.  
We  need  to  learn  to  live  with  death,  and  to  understand  that  death  is  not  the  worst  of  all  events.  
We  need  to  fear  not  death,  but  life  
  
empty  lives,  
loveless  lives,  
lives  that  do  not  build  upon  the  gifts  that  each  of  us  has  been  given,  
lives  that  are  like  living  deaths,  
lives  [in]  which  we  never  take  the  time  to  savor  and  appreciate,  
lives  in  which  we  never  pause  to  breathe  deeply.  
What  we  need  to  fear  is  not  death,  but  squandering  the  lives  we  have  been  miraculously  given.  

So  let  me  die  laughing,  savoring  one  of  life
 ?s  crazy  moments.  Let  me  die  holding  the  hand  of  one  I  
love,  and  recalling  that  I  tried  to  love,  and  was  loved  in  return.  Let  me  die  remembering  that  life  has 
been  good,  and  that  I  did  what  I  could.  But  today,  just  remind  me  that  I  am  dying  so  that  I  can  
live,  savor,  and  love  with  all  my  heart.  May  caring  be  the  touchstone  of  our  lives.  
bell  
And  because  we  care,  this  morning  our  concern  stretches  from  this  room  to  the  families  in  Marysville,
Washington  whose  lives  were  forever  changed  in  the  tragic  shootings  there  late  this  week.  Caring  does
not  protect  us  from  grief,  but  living,  even  when  our  hearts  are  broken,  is  still  the  best  way  to  bring  
our  love  into  the  world.  
Let  us  now  make  space,  not  only  to  lift  up  those  we  know,  love  and  mourn,  but  also  the  families  
who  are  injured  and  grieving  in  Marysville:
Naming  
Shaylee  Chucklenaskit,  Gia  Soriano,  Nate  Hatch  and  Andrew  Fryberg.  Jaylen  Ray  Fryberg.
Love  has  so  many  names,  yet  its  reach  is  beyond  our  ability  to  name.  For  this  we  need  music  and  
the  gift  of  song.
Reading  
Bringing  the  Dead  to  Life
  (excerpted)  by  Peter  Morales  
Lane:  The  rich  sound  of  congregant  Sue  Saum
 ?s  flute  filled  the  sanctuary  with  a  soft,  pensive  tune  as 
members  of  the  Unitarian  Church  of  Davis,  California,  came  up  quietly  to  a  simple  but  colorful  altar,  
placing  on  it  photographs  and  mementos  of  loved  ones.  As  part  of  a  regular  Sunday  service,  I  had  
delivered  a  homily  about  death  and  remembrance,  then  invited  the  congregation  to  take  part  in  a  
special  ritual.  I  began  by  placing  on  the  altar  a  photograph  of  my  mother,  Oralia,  who  had  died  a  
few  months  before.  
Eric:  I  was  overwhelmed  by  the  depth  of  feeling  I  had  unwittingly  touched.  It  was  only  the  third  
service  I  had  led,  and  the  ritual  of  remembrance,  which  I'd  adapted  from  the  Mexican  Día  de  los  
Muertos  (Day  of  the  Dead)  tradition,  was  something  of  an  experiment.  I  was  so  worried  it  might  not  
work  at  this  highly  intellectual  congregation  in  a  university  town  that  I  had  made  sure  there  were  
some  shills  in  the  pews.
Lane:  Part  of  the  genius  of  the  Día  de  los  Muertos  is  the  way  it  mixes  celebration  and  mourning.  
Like  a  good  UU  memorial  service,  it  both  affirms  life  and  gives  us  a  chance  to  share  our  grief.
The  Día  de  los  Muertos  is  an  annual  November  holiday  that  combines  the  Roman  Catholic  All  Saints  
and  All  Souls  days  rituals  with  2,000-year-old  Mexican  Indian  traditions.  Unlike  Halloween,  where  the 
dead  are  seen  as  threatening,  the  Mexican  holiday  honors  and  remembers  them  with  two  days  of  
feasting,  processions,  pageantry,  and  religious  rites  that  sometimes  include  fireworks.

Eric:  Yet  if  we  dismiss  the  Day  of  the  Dead  as  pure  superstition,  we  can  easily  miss  the  profound  
spiritual  and  psychological  insight  that  makes  this  tradition  powerful.  A  Mexican  boy  spending  the  
night  at  his  uncle's  grave  has  a  connection  across  time  with  his  forebears  that  our  children  do  not.  
While  we  dwellers  in  a  technological  age  are  connected  to  the  World  Wide  Web,  cellular  phones,  and 
cable  TV,  have  message  machines,  voice  mail,  pagers,  and  call  waiting,  we  have  cut  ourselves  off  
from  the  web  of  time.  Traditional  cultures,  with  their  mediums  and  ghosts  and  reincarnations,  have  
understood  intuitively  something  we've  repressed:  the  dead  don't  die;  they  live  on.
Lane:  I'm  not  speaking  metaphysically  or  theologically.  I'm  talking  about  the  very  real  stuff  of  
memory,  history,  and  molecular  biology.  Look  in  the  mirror.  The  DNA  of  your  ancestors  is  alive  in  
you.  Look  at  your  children  and  grandchildren  and  see  yourself  and  your  ancestors.  Think  of  the  
decisions  made  by  your  parents  and  grandparents.  Their  choices  shaped  your  life.  And  the  choices  we  
make  every  day  shape  the  lives  of  those  to  come.  The  interconnections  stretch  across  time.
Eric:  This  is  what  the  Día  de  los  Muertos  reminds  us  of,  and  this  is  its  power.  A  simple  ceremony  
of  remembrance  puts  us  in  touch  with  our  place  in  time  and  our  mortality,  and  it  reminds  us  that  to  
live  is  to  create  a  legacy  that  endures  for  generations.
The  idea  is  not  to  mimic  the  Mexican  tradition  but  to  draw  from  its  wisdom.  
Watching
  
Dia  de  los  Muertos,  a  short  film  by  
Ashley  Graham,  Kate  Reynolds  and  Lindsey  St.  Pierre,  2013  
Telling
  
stories  of  those  we  have  known   (Eric)
This  year  I  want  to  talk  to  you  about  my  grandmother  Margaret,  who  I  always  called  Gram.  
Gram  was  born  in  Menominee,  Michigan 
 the  southernmost  part  of  the  Upper  Peninsula,  and  was  
the  eldest  of  the  ten  children  in  her  family.  When  her  father  died  suddenly,  Margaret  was  still  in  high
school.  While  she  did  graduate,  classes  took  a  back  seat  to  helping  keep  the  family  going  from  that  
point  on.  She  worked  afternoons  and  weekends,  and  became,  in  most  respects,  the  second  mother  to  
her  younger  brothers  and  sisters.  
Margaret,  and  she  insisted  on  being  called  that,  never  Marge  or,  worse,  Maggie,  was  my  
grandfather
 ?s  second  wife.  Bethel,  whom he  had  married  earlier,  died  giving  birth  to  my  father.  
My  Dad  was  ten  when  Margaret  and  my  grandfather  Clarence  finally  married.  I  don
 ?t  know  how  
long  the  two  of  them  were  dating  before  they  married,  but  from  the  stories  that  were  passed  down  to 
me  over  the  last  several  years,  it  sounds  like  Margaret  finally  had  to  put  her  foot  down,  and  may  
have  felt  the  need  to  say  something  like,  
 ?Clarence,  I  know  you  are  scared  to  marry  again,  but  I
 ?m  a 

strong  woman,  and  you  WILL  make  an  honest  one  of  me.  Either  you  put  a  ring  on  my  finger,  or  I
 ?ll
find  someone  else  who  will.
 ?  
Gram  could  be  direct  like  that.  
After  my  own  father  died,  Gram  and  I  flew  together  from  Minneapolis  to  Nebraska  where  we  
interred  some  of  his  ashes.  It  was  not  an  easy  trip  for  any  of  us.  
On  the  way  back  to  her  home  from  the  airport,  our  taxi  driver  must  have  wished  he  was  on  a  
roller  coaster,  because  that
 ?s  what  he  turned  the  ride  into.  I  had  never  held  my  grandmother
 ?s  hand  
for  any  length  of  time  before,  but,  in  the  back  seat  of  that  taxi,  we  held  on  to  each  other  for  dear  
life,  both  of  us  with  white  knuckles  the  whole  way.  
I ?ve  never  known  if  it  was  that  ride,  or  the  grief  over  burying  her  son,  that  broke  her  heart.  She  
died  the  next  day  of  a  heart  attack.  
But  despite  the  hardship  in  her  life  and  my  grief  from  losing  her,  what  I  remember  most  about  
Gram  is  something  else  entirely.  The  memory  of  her  I  keep  closest  to  my  heart  is  from  her  83rd  
birthday  party,  just  a  few  weeks  before  the  trip  to  Nebraska.  There,  on  her  back  porch,  she  sat  
wearing  robins'  egg  blue  shorts 
 varicose  veins  be  damned 
 eating  ice  cream,  and  loving  every  minute
of  it.  
Every  summer,  I  toast  an  ice  cream  cone  to  her  memory,  and  smile,  but  not  for  too  long 
 she  
never  liked  ice  cream  to  melt.  
Singing
  
#395  
Sing  and  Rejoice
  
Telling
  
stories  of  those  we  have  known   (Lane)
He  was  a  voice  present  throughout  my  childhood,  in  deep,  formative  years.  His  ability  to  be  silly,  his 
sing-songy  comedy,  his  influence  on  my  family's  life  was  joyful  and  boisterous.  In  the  warm  glow  of  
the  television  or  the  movie  screen,  I  learned  what  it  was  like  to  laugh  until  my  sides  hurt.  This  
morning,  I  want  to  share  with  you  all  my  experience  as  a  child,  born  in  the  eighties,  growing  up  
watching  Robin  Williams  and  I  want  to  share  the  impact  he  had  on  my  life.
Each  Friday  for  the  past  six  months,  I  have  volunteered  with  Kaleidoscope  Youth  Center,  a  drop-in  
center  that  serves  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,  transgender  and  queer  or  questioning  youth.  Friday  nights  are  
movie  and  pizza  night,  they  are  the  busiest  night  at  the  center,  and  this  work  brings  me  great  joy.  
About  a  month  ago,  the  program  director  of  Kaleidoscope  rented  the  Disney  movie  
Aladdin
.  If  you  
want  to  know  about  the  impact  Robin  Williams  has  had  on  the  youth  and  young  adults  of  today,  you 
would  need  to  listen  to  all  of  these  voices  joining  in  singing  
 ?You  Ain't  Never  Had  a  Friend  Like  
Me ?  or  
 ?Prince  Ali.
 ?  Robin  Williams  brought  these  songs  to  life.  His  humor,  his  impersonations  

(which  are  hilarious  when  repeated  by  a  crowd  of  15  youth)  and  ability  to  embody  satire,  to  embody  
humanity's  many  quirks,  is  inspiring.  I  had  forgotten  about  all  of  this.
When  I  was  serving  as  a  chaplain  in  a  hospital  in  Kansas,  we  watched  clips  from  
Patch  Adams
  
when  addressing  the  healing  power  of  laughter  and  humor  in  the  medical  arena.  I  remember  watching  
him  play  an  adult  Peter  Pan  in  
Hook  on  a  vacation  to  visit  my  grandmother  in  New  Jersey.  My  
mother  still  does  impressions  of  his  character,  Batty,  from  
Fern  Gully
,  a  children's  movie  that  taught  
me  about  the  need  for  care  of  our  sacred  earth.  And  I  share  older  memories  of  staying  up  late  in  my 
family's  living  room  to  watch  reruns  of  
Mork  and  Mindy
  on  our  old  television  with  the  dial  on  the  
side  to  change  channels.  
There  was  a  depth  and  a  healing  to  Robin's  work.  He  was  an  actor  and  yet  he  was  so  much  more.  
His  work  spoke  to  the  need  for  laughter  and  joy  in  our  lives.  His  work  spoke  to  our  heart's  desire  
for  realness,  authenticity,  and  beauty.
I  wonder  what  your  memories  of  Robin  Williams  are.  I  wonder  what  comes  to  you  when  you  think 
of  his  face  or  his  name.
This  past  August,  Robin  Williams  died.  Today  is  not  a  day  for  focusing  on  the  sadness  of  his  
complicated,  difficult  death, though  that  sadness  is  still  there.  It's  real.
Today  is  a  day  to  celebrate  the  joy  he  brought  into  our  lives.  It  is  a  day  to  celebrate  the  ways  we  
laughed  at  Robin  Williams,  even  if  he  was  acting  too  silly,  even  if  what  he  was  doing  was  ridiculous.
Today  is  the  day  we  say,  remember  how  funny  that  guy  was?  He  was  hilarious!  So  let  us  remember.
Singing  
#395  
Sing  and  Rejoice
Parading
Each  year,  at  this  time,  we  take  a  moment  to  honor  the  people  who  have  gone  from  our  days,  but  
not  from  our  hearts.  In  a  moment,  we  may  come  forward  and  place  a  picture  on  one  of  the  three  
altars  around  the  room  of  someone  we  have  loved  who  has  died.  If  you  have  forgotten  a  photo,  or  
didn't  bring  one,  there  are  marigolds  provided  in  vases  at  each  altar  for  you  to  place  a  flower  on  the  
table  to  honor  your  loved  one.  We  are  also  invited  to  circle  the  altar  closest  to  us,  to  gaze  upon  the  
beauty  we  have  created  together  as  a  community  by  bringing  together  our  memories  and  weaving  them
into  these  gorgeous  altars.  Following  the  service,  you  are  encouraged  to  take  time  to  look  at  all  of  the
altars  throughout  the  Worship  Center,  to  honor  all  the  memories  shared.  We  take  part  in  this  ritual  in  
silence.  Nathan  has  graciously  offered  to  play  some  music  to  move  us  through  this  ritual.  I  want  to  
ask  us  to  take  this  time  to  reflect  on  the  joy  these  people  brought  into  our  lives,  to  embrace  the  joy  
we  feel  in  our  hearts  when  we  remember  them.  Let  us  begin  by  bringing  our  pictures  forward  and  
parading  around  the  nearest  altar  in  silence.

Returning  
Every  face  is  in  you,  every  voice,  every  sorrow  in  you,  
Every pity,  every  love,  every  memory,  woven  into  fire.  
Every breath is  in  you,  every  cry,  every  longing  in  you,  
Every singing,  every hope,  every healing,  woven into fire.  
Every heart is in you, every tongue,  every trembling in you,  
Every blessing,  every soul,  every shining,  woven into fire.
Offering
(Steve)  
Singing
#1051We  Are
 &  
Blessing  

