   Don™t Tell Me 
January 9, 2011 
Rev. Mark Belletini 
 
Welcoming; Centering; Kindling; 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here,
 after a week of cold gray skies 

and sifting snow, 

to worship, by which we honor our limits,
 claim the responsibilities of power
, 
and revere the call of both love and truth. 

 And so, we pledge to journey together along the way
s of truth and affection, as best as we 
can name them now, or may learn them in days to com
e; that we and our children may be 
fulfilled, and that we may speak to our world in wo
rds and lives of peace, justice and 
goodwill. 

 
Story:   Chicken Chuck 

 
Sequence: 

 
Here we are again. Human beings that evolved throug
h the rough and tumble of billions of years. 
Here we are again. Human beings with genetic chains
 binding us to people whose names we will 
never know.  Here we are again. Human beings with a
 shared world, no matter our ancestry. The 
shopkeepers of Jerusalem, the shamans of Lapland, t
he midwives of Samarkand, the rituals of 
families in Tuscon grieving for their assassinated 
loved ones, the Muslims of Cairo escorting 
their Copt Christian sisters and brothers through t
he streets for their Christmas, the singers of 
Singapore, the legends of Mahavira from India, the 
poems of the Kalevala in Finland and the 
tales of the Samurai of Japan belong to us all.  He
re we are again. Human beings who are woven 
into the patterns of music as well as into the patt
erns of the word. The music of Handel and 
Radiohead and  Bulgarian Women™s Choirs and South A
frican rock bands belong to us all. Here 
we are again. Sad and happy, longing and content, g
rieving and joyful, worried and carefree all 
mixed up together into us, on this day, at this mom
ent, as I call upon us to partake of the one 
communion joining all the living and the dead, the 
past and the future and the present: this 
silence. 

 
silence 

 
Here we are again. Each of us individually, with ou
r own stories, our own memories; each of us 
part of this larger community as well. And so, into
 the safety of the shared silence, may we feel 
free to remember the faces and names of our loved o
nes, those we miss, those we struggle with, 

   those who have grace-fully brought us back to ourse
lves. Whispered or within, we bring our 
lives to our common Life. 

 
naming 

 
Here we are again. Breathing. Our hearts coursing 

blood through us. Our aches and pains mixed into 

our glowing health. Our hearts open to music which 

belongs to everyone. 

 
Choir Anthem 

 
The First Reading
 comes from the great feminist icon Elizabeth Cady 
Stanton™s memoir, Eighty 
Years and More, collected in 1897. It shows that sh
e learned from others who came before her. 
The Mrs. Mott she is referring to is Lucretia Mott,
 the Quaker abolitionist. The Friends she 
refers too are the Quakers, for that is their forma
l name, The Society of Friends. 
"In June, 1840, I met Mrs. Mott for the first time,
 in London. Mrs. Mott, in her sweet, 
gentle way, received me with great cordiality. Mrs.
 Mott was to me an entirely new 
revelation of womanhood. I plied her with questions
, and I shall never cease to be 
grateful for the patience and seeming pleasure, wit
h which she fed my hungering soul. 
She had told me of the doctrines and divisions amon
g 'Friends'; of the inward light; of 
Mary Wollstonecraft, her social theories, and her d
emands of equality for women.   
 
On the following Sunday I went to hear Mrs. Mott pr
each in a Unitarian church. Though I 
had never heard a woman speak, yet I had long belie
ved she had the right to do so, and 
had often expressed the idea in private circles; bu
t when at last I saw a woman rise up in 
the pulpit and preach earnestly and impressively, a
s Mrs. Mott always did, it seemed to 
me like the realization of an oft-repeated, happy d
ream.  
One day we visited the Zoo. As we were admiring the
 gorgeous plumage of some beautiful birds, 
one of our gentlemen opponents remarked, 'You see, 
Mrs. Mott, our Heavenly Father believes in 
bright colors. How much it would take from our plea
sure, if all the birds were dressed in drab.' 
'Yes,' said she, 'but (human) beings do not depend 
upon their feathers for their attraction. With 
the infinite variety of the human face and form, of
 thought, feeling, and affection, we do not need 
gorgeous apparel to distinguish us. Moreover, if it
 is fitting that woman should dress in every 
color of the rainbow, why not man also?™   

 
"I found in this new friend a woman emancipated fro
m all faith in creeds, from all fear of 
denunciations. Nothing was too sacred for her to qu
estion, as to its rightfulness in principle and 
practice. 'Truth for authority, not authority for t
ruth,' was the motto of her life. When I confessed 
to her my great enjoyment in works of fiction, dram
atic performances, and dancing, and feared 
that from underneath that Quaker bonnet would come 
some platitudes on the demoralizing 

   influence of such frivolities, she smiled, and said
, 'I regard dancing a very harmless amusement,' 
and added, 'the Evangelical Alliance, that so readi
ly passed a resolution declaring dancing a sin 
for a church member, tabled a resolution declaring 
slavery a sin for a bishop.'? 
The Second Reading 
is edited from a longer essay by historian James Wa
lvin, who wrote the 
following words about the founder of the Society of
 Friends, the Quakers, George Fox. 
George Fox, now in his mid-twenties, embarked on hi
s lifetime's mission. His aim was not to 
create a sect but to persuade his fellow men and wo
men to worship honestly, not through the 
intermediary of the priesthood but from within them
selves. He set out to persuade people to be 
true to themselves and to others, and to be frank. 
Yet we will never fully understand Fox simply 
by scrutinizing his own words. For all his uniquene
ss he was also a man of his time. Fox and the 
Quaker movement established in his wake were, first
 and foremost, creatures of the English 
Revolution.  

Fox was not alone in suffering turmoil in the 1640s
. The entire nation was racked by personal 
and social agitations whipped up by a bloody civil 
war. As the world turned upside-down, 
religious and political groupings of the most varie
d (and sometimes most bizarre) kind sprang up 
across the nation. Unleashed by the collapse of dra
conian censorship laws, books flew off the 
presses in unprecedented numbers, speaking for ever
y sect and radical splinter group.   
As the old restraints melted in a new climate of fr
eedom, there was a parallel blossoming of 
political and religious activity. Men and women fou
nd a voice previously denied them. They 
could be heard everywhere: in homes and alehouses, 
at crossroads and army camps, on the street 
corner and inside parish churches. The old order of
 church and formal worship collapsed before a 
nationwide spiritual agitation. Authority of all ki
nds, whether monarchical or priestly, was swept 
away by an upsurge of theological individualism. Le
vellers and Diggers, Ranters and 
Muggletonians– these and many others flourished in 
proportion to the discomfort of the old 
order. King, lords and bishops were mocked and humb
led, levelled by those of no previous 
consequence.  

The personal anguish experienced by George Fox in 1
643 did not, then, seem out of the ordinary. 
In 1649 he experienced his first imprisonment for r
ising in a crowded church in Nottingham to 
dispute the resident cleric's biblical views. It wa
s to become the first of many similar 
experiences.  
 Sermon 

 
The first congregation I was called to serve was ou
r church in San Francisco. I assisted the 
Senior Interim minister, Diane Miller, for just und
er two years.  
 
We™re in a very beautiful building here, but I assu
re you, the San Francisco church was also 
beautiful, although reflecting the tastes of a diff
erent era. We gathered for worship in the third 
building of that 160 year old congregation, the one
 built in 1889. It was a spacious, gothic 
building, with remarkable floral-design rose window
s in three of the walls. Above the 

   congregation, which was seated in great curved pews
, floated a gorgeous wooden ceiling. In 
front, on the chancel, you found the rather large p
ulpit–in which Thomas Starr King once 
preached, as well as Swami Vivekenanda, Alan Watts,
 Ralph Waldo Emerson, Rollo May, 
Robert Bly, and my mentor, Harry Scholefield. You c
an fairly imagine it was daunting for me to 
climb into the pulpit every week. 

 
The floor, except for the chancel, was carpeted, ye
t the acoustics remained remarkable for a 
building that could seat 900. The building, the sin
gle most popular place for weddings in San 
Francisco, was naturally very well maintained. The 
wood, polished; the carpets vacuumed. No 
food or drink was allowed into the sanctuary, natur
ally. 
 
One day, at the end of a service, as I was talking 
to someone near the chancel, a woman who had 
been sitting in the front pew got up to leave, and 
as she got up, she knocked over a large paper 
cup of coffee she had brought in with her, immediat
ely leaving a dark brown spot on the carpet. 
She looked down, but ignored it, and taking her pur
se, started to leave. 
 
I was pretty new then, and didn™t know who she was;
 but I just had to stop my conversation. I 
went over to her, and introduced myself. She told m
e her name, then I said, ?I hope you are 
going to tell the sexton–(that was our word for fac
ilities manager) about this so he can get this 
cleaned up before it leaves a stain.? 

 
?Oh,? she said, ?he™ll notice it and clean it up.  
It was just a harmless accident.? 
 
Peeved, I decided to tell her that the policy of th
e church was that coffee and food were not to be 
brought into the sanctuary.  She immediately snappe
d back, ?Look, young man, no one tells me 
what to do. I like my coffee, it™s morning, and thi
s can be cleaned up easy. They told me that 
dancing was wrong when I grew up at Shiloh Baptist,
 and that was a bunch of baloney too, so 
don™t tell me–? 

 
Then she waved me off, and ambled down the main ais
le to the exit. 
 
I was floored at her attitude, and talked to the se
nior minister, Diane, about it. ?Ah,? she said, 
smiling with experience, ?the famous authority prob
lem issue in the liberal church. Don™t get too 
upset,? she said, ?you™ll be dealing with it the re
st of your days. It just goes with the territory. 
And, you better go tell James about the coffee stai
n before it sets. They™re notoriously hard to get 
up.? 

 
You can be sure I wondered what I had gotten myself
 into. Back to this story in a bit–
  
Picture yourself now in another gothic building, no
t in San Francisco, but in England. Marvel at 
the high walls, the dark vaults. Notice the scent o
f ancient stones and a beeswax candles. Feel the 
press of the whole town gathered for Sunday worship
, almost 2000 people. As ancient songs fade 
from the choir loft, the minister in his black gown
 climbs into the pulpit and interprets the 
scripture passage he had read earlier. Suddenly, a 
young man stands up. He speaks. He disrupts 
the service by loudly arguing with the interpretati
ons being offered by the minister. The young 

   man shouts at the pulpit with great passion, tossin
g off contradictory scriptures and denying any 
validity to the preacher™s message. 

 
The church I™m asking you to imagine is in Nottingh
am, famous for its stories of Robin Hood. 
And, as in that legend, there is indeed a Sheriff o
f Nottingham, who, as the shouting match 
continues, is immediately fetched by very upset mem
bers of the church. He comes, and arrests 
the young disturber of the peace, whose name is Geo
rge Fox. He spends a good long time in jail, 
?a pitiful place,? he called it in his memoirs. 

 
George Fox, the shouting young man, is usually cons
idered the founder of the Society of Friends, 
the Quakers, a group of people, as you know, more f
amed for their silence than their shouting. 
Now I don™t know what the scripture text was about 
that day. I do know that historian James 
Walvin described George Fox™s central preaching wit
h great clarity and economy in the second 
reading: 

 
His aim was not to create a sect but to 
persuade
 his fellow men and women to worship honestly, 
not through the intermediary of the priesthood but 
from within themselves. He set out to 
persuade
 people to be true to themselves and to others, and
 to be frank. 
 
Sounds good to me. Fox, more explicitly, also denie
d the creeds insisting that God was three 
persons. He denied that the death of Jesus was more
 important than his teachings, and debunked 
the authority of quoting scripture texts about Jesu
s instead of 
living
 a good life like Jesus– and 
so many others. Again, sounds good to me. 

 
However, naturally, I am not sure that standing up 
in church and yelling is a good way to 
?persuade? anyone. I would guess many people there 
that day may have felt frightened, perhaps 
thinking the young man off his rocker.  

 
But Walvin™s words are about Fox™s whole life; they
 are not describing that particular Sunday in 
Nottingham. Maybe on that day Fox was not trying to
 
persuade
 anyone. Maybe Fox™s rant that 
day wasn™t some debate about a semi-colon in the Bo
ok of Revelation. Maybe he was totally 
exasperated. Why? Because George Fox, by law, as a 
citizen of the nation, had to pay taxes to 
support the large, beautiful building in which he w
as ranting. Large taxes for the one true church 
and its bishops, a religious way he did not accept.
 And, he knew that if he didn™t cough up these 
taxes, that would have been reason enough to throw 
him in the hoosegow. 
 
So he decided that if he was going to jail no matte
r what, then why not go to a public arena and 
at least name aloud the source of the problem? Name
ly, the idolatrous misplacement of 
final 
authority
 into the hands of a bible, a bishop, a prince or a
 king? 
 
Even though it was undeniably dramatic, I have symp
athy for Fox™s resentment about misplaced 
authority. I understand why he used the metaphor of
 the ?inner light? to express his more rational 
and deeply spiritual approach to the concept of aut
hority–namely, that we have authority over 
ourselves; no one else has spiritual authority over
 us. 
 
   But I don™t want to 
romanticize 
Fox, the Quakers, or those of us who call ourselves
 Unitarian 
Universalists. Remember that our historian places F
ox and the Quakers in an era where 
all
 traditional authority was being called into questio
n: 
Authority of all kinds
, he writes, 
whether monarchical or priestly, was swept away by 
an upsurge 
of theological individualism. Levellers and Diggers
, Ranters and Muggletonians– these and 
many others flourished in proportion to the discomf
ort of the old order. King, lords and bishops 
were mocked and humbled, levelled by those of no pr
evious consequence.  
The same thing is true of us. We are a small religi
ous association in this nation, of no great 
consequence if numbers matter; and like Fox and the
 Quakers, we too rely more on our own 
inner light, inner reason, and deep questioning as 
the source of our authority. We™ve turned away 
from a hierarchy requiring obedience, or a rigid vi
ew of the bible.  
 
But we are hardly alone in this. The Quakers are st
ill here, as well as liberal Protestants of all 
sorts, and people foolishly lambasted as ?cafeteria
 Catholics.? Progressive Jews, Muslims, 
Buddhists, Jains, Daoists, Yorubans, Neo-Pagans and
 many people claiming to be ?spiritual not 
religious? are kindred, too. Unaffiliated agnostics
 and atheists and humanists of all sorts also 
question the tradition of obeying an authoritarian 
leader who claims to hear the voice of God, 
while holding onto an infallible Book. So I think i
t™s important for us to see our context too. We 
are not ?lone rangers,? or ?a little pack of poor, 
poor us.?  We are part of a whole community of 
communities of free and growing spiritual human bei
ngs–who, although they turn 
from
 authoritarianism
, turn instead 
toward
 a more reliable authority within them that is genu
ine and 
authentic. To refuse traditional and misplaced auth
ority is not, after all, the same things as being 
rudely anti-authoritarian. That, I believe, is only
 a somewhat necessary stage in our teenage 
years, which we hopefully outgrow with maturity.  

 
Now George Fox was a successful guy, if success is 
to be measured in numbers. Quakers almost 
succeeded in becoming the greatest minority religio
us group in England for a time.   
 
And George Fox also traveled eventually to the Engl
ish speaking colonies on these shores, and 
helped to establish a flourishing Quaker presence h
ere. Later, Lucretia Mott claimed this 
Quakerism for herself. She believed that authority 
shone inside each individual, and was not 
found in imposed external forms founded on either t
radition or scripture. 
 
In the words of the children™s story this morning, 
she thought everyone had a blue feather on 
their head–everyone was special, unique and preciou
s, no matter their age, no matter their 
education, no matter their color, and no matter the
ir gender.  If that blue feather, that sense of 
inherent worth, didn™t grow naturally, it could be 
attached.  So, knowing that as a woman she had 
the same dignity as any man, she spoke in a Unitari
an church. Elizabeth Cady Stanton 
remembered this in her memoirs, and it deeply moved
 her. But she does not point out that this 
was LONG before the Unitarians had ordained their f
irst woman preacher. Lucretia Mott, who 
really embodied what I am trying to say this month,
 spoke from her own authority. 
 
   At the zoo, she used the idea of colorful feathers 
in a similar way as our story this morning. 
When she was told that the Father God had made colo
r to adorn women, she opined that 
everyone should wear colors if they want, men as we
ll as women.  
 
She also had been taught by some stricter Quakers t
hat dancing was a bit frivolous, but she didn™t 
think so. I don™t know if she danced or not, but sh
e didn™t think people should avoid it, thus 
questioning aspects of her own tradition. 

 
And this brings me back at last to the woman at the
 San Francisco church who spilled coffee on 
the carpet and was flippant about doing so. She too
 had been taught that dancing was wrong. But 
unlike Lucretia Mott, she was not able to claim her
 own authority.   Her phrase, ?No one is ever 
going to tell me what to do,? is not about authorit
y at all, but about her own anger and wounding. 
She was imposing the bitterness of her own upbringi
ng onto the common life of the community. 
She was showing no respect for the people who had t
o share the building with her, showing no 
respect for the people who had to clean up after he
r. Personal authority, it seems to me, is not 
evidenced by a flippant, self-serving response, lik
e I heard from this woman. Personal authority, 
rather, is steady and strong, and 
reverent toward the truth 
that we all share a world, and the truth 
that we all share dignity–the people who clean up c
offee stains no less than someone wounded 
by her strict upbringing. Reverent toward the truth
–I like that phrase. The truth that we all have 
inherent dignity, that we all wear that  ?blue feat
her,? that we all belong. I especially like the way
 
Lucretia Mott put it in her personal motto, and if 
you get nothing else from this sermon, I hope 
you get this:  Truth for authority, not authority f
or truth. 
  

Offering 
Every day of the week, the rooms of this our common
 house are filled. Hearts are 
encouraged. Minds are taught. Community is woven.  
Though some give in more modern 
electronic ways in support of our center, others li
ke this more intimate way of encouragement. 
The morning offering is now given and received.
  
Winter Prayer for a Time of Cold and Flurries 

 
When clouds spread grey over my head, may they remi
nd me of how little I control, but that it™s 
no sign of weakness for me to gladly admit that.  W
hen the cold bids me wrap myself up with 
layers and layers, may it remind me that I can resp
ond to what I can™t control in several stages 
and with thoughtful deliberation. As the snow falls
 and changes the safety of the landscape, may 
I be reminded that planning ahead is not some const
raint, and that mindfulness as I move is not 
for rarified saints, but for ordinary folks like me
. 
 
O Love, you usually shine your light on human faces
–family and friends, colleagues and 
strangers, and even, a great teacher once said, ene
mies. Shine also now on this lengthy season, so 
that I may love it too– as a summons to wisdom. 

