 12008 March 2nd - Nefertiti 
 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

as children of earth, part of a vast circle of life
 
 which robes our blue-green world in beauty. 

Now is our time to celebrate life in peace,
 to move past the superficial toward the deep, 

letting wisdom™s bright sun illumine our way. 

So we prepare for worship with these words: 

 
Mindful that a growing vision of a just world calls
 us together, that a community of 
commitment, courage and care sustains us, and that 
a life transformed by depth of spirit 
may illumine our way, we have kindled this light as
 the sign of our circle of life and love.
  
Sequence 

 
I am grateful to be alive, here and now.  

 
But I know very well that ?here and now? always sli
des into ?then? eventually. For the 
people who built the pyramids lived then, not now, 
and they are gone. The ancient sphinx 
is cracked and crumbling. The hanging gardens of Ba
bylon? Dust. The Parthenon? A 
ruin, dissolving in car exhaust. The crowns of quee
ns and kings, and the amulets of 
peasants? Both trod underfoot. 

 
But now you and I are alive, children of all histor
y, under this wooden pyramid crowned 
with glass. We breathe, live, and are present. 

 
Here we know we are part of the world, made of the 
same stuff as the bare tree branches 
which now prepare to burst into flame of bud and bl
oom.  Here we know we are in a 
world where all those who breathe in far away place
s, in Kenya and Darfur, in Shanghai 
and Moscow, in Chiapas and Melbourne, live lives as
 important to each of them as ours 
are to each of us. Some are powerful, some defeated
, some are suffering, all of them are 
our brothers and sisters, children of shared and sa
cred procession of evolution. 
 
The empires and villages of old are gone. The ancie
nt centuries have rolled up like a 
scroll that no longer opens with ease. But modern e
mpires and villages spread out around 
us, and new monuments, built of electricity and pla
stic instead of stone, thrive among us. 
All of these one day will join the crowns of queens
 and kings and the amulets of peasants 
in the empire of dust.  

 
But now, look! We are alive! It™s our turn now. Our
 day. Let us be aware, during this 
brief but spacious silence, of where we are in time
 and place.                                        
                  
 
silence 

 2 
I am grateful our hearts join our heads in the risk
 and the gift called living. And I am 
grateful that we, just like our ancestors, do not l
ive our days in isolation. So many are the 
persons who bring us a portion of our joy, a portio
n of our ache, a portion of our longing 
and our love! These we now take time to embrace, by
 remembering their names, aloud or 
in silence.                         naming 

 
I am grateful that music, like silence, is our life
, our breath, and our summons to 
awareness. 

 
Readings 

 
The First Reading
 comes from the book Nefertiti
 by Joyce Tyldesley 1998. It™s a pretty 
comprehensive review of the various historical inte
rpretations about this famous ancient 
woman. The Akhenaten mentioned in this reading was 
Nefertiti™s husband. More later. 
 
As we have seen, Akhenaten™s sun-disc religion has 
been interpreted as the world™s first 
monotheistic one, perhaps even the inspiration for 
Moses, and the forerunner of the 
Christian-Jewish-Islamic god. The sun-disc was neve
r intended to be a god in this mold. 
The sun-disc remained remote and aloof, creating an
d observing, but not intervening in 
events, and certainly did not require his devotees 
to adhere to any moral code. Egyptian 
morality was always separated from religion, and wa
s taught by scribes instead of priests.  
The religion of the ancient Egyptians was the equiv
alent of our modern science. It did not 
intend to teach us how to behave, but to provide ex
planations for the seemingly 
inexplicable. 

 
The Second Reading
 is a half-humorous, half-serious essay by Thomas Ha
yden, a writer 
for 
Wired
 magazine. (I™ll let you decide which part is serio
us, which humorous.) It comes 
from this month™s issue. It™s risky to read things 
which walk the line between irony and 
proclamation, but I am feeling daring this morning.
  
Morality, spirituality, the meaning of life–science
 doesn™t handle those issues well at all. 
But that™s cool. We have art and religion for that 
stuff. Science also assumes predictable 
cause and effect in a world that is a chaotic bubbl
ing stew of randomness. But that™s OK 
too. Our approximations are usually good enough. Bu
t, the reason so many people these 
days marginalize science is that it does make us lo
ok bad. It makes us bit players in the 
Big Story of the Universe, and it exposes some key 
limitations of the human brain. Look 
at it this way: before science developed, we humans
 had dominion over the earth, the 
center of the universe. Now we™re just a bunch of h
airless apes on a wet rock orbiting a 
minor star in a marginal galaxy. Even worse, the sa
me brains that came up with science 
can™t really embrace it fully. Science describes th
e world with numbers like pi and with 
abstractions, like the words ?waves? and ?particles
.? But our brains evolved on a diet 
of campfire stories. Fantastic explanations (angry 
gods hurling lightning bolts) and rare  
events (saber-tooth tiger attacks) make more of an 
impact on us than statistical norms. 
Evolution gave us brains that seem to crave certain
ty, but with irrational fears, like the 

 3fear of crashing in an airplane haunting us. Meanwh
ile, the true wonders revealed by the 
scientific method--- 

species that change into new species over time, con
tinents that drift around the planet, a 
quantum mechanical world where nothing is for sure–
are worse than counterintuitive. 
To a depressingly large number of us, they are down
right threatening. In other words, 
thanks to evolution, half of all Americans don™t be
lieve in evolution. That™s the universe 
for you: impersonal, uncaring and–ironic. 

 
Sermon
  
Don™t worry. This will not be an ancient history le
sson, per se. But I am choosing to walk 
a less familiar path today, a road not usually take
n, to approach my concerns this 
morning. You may not figure out at first how I am g
oing where I am going, but I promise 
to get us all there. 

 
When I was visiting Berlin last April, one of the h
ighlights was clearly my visit to the 
Altes Museum,
 in the eastern part of the city.  
 
There were many fine works of art there to be sure.
 You expect such excellence in a 
major world capital like Berlin. A lovely Vermeer, 
an excellent Matisse. But I strode 
quickly past many such masterpieces, with determina
tion in my eye. You see, there was 
one work of art I wanted to see above all else. It 
was the famous bust of Queen Nefertiti, 
the elegant, beautiful face magnificently crowned, 
the splendid eyes, the long neck. Her 
image was simply beautiful, more beautiful than I c
ould have imagined. I spent over an 
hour admiring her, and the artist™s superb craft. A
fterward I understood why only the 
pyramids themselves are more emblematic of that anc
ient African civilization, that 
remarkably steady culture, which endured more than 
15 times longer than our own 
United States has so far been around. 

 
The bust was found in 1924 in the ruins of an artis
t™s studio in Amarna, Egypt. We even 
know the artist™s name, Tjehuti-mes, or in its more
 familiar Greek form, Thutmose. The 
so-called Amarna era in Egyptian history encouraged
 artists to portray their subjects with 
greater freedom and honesty. Nefertiti™s husband, f
or example, Akhenaten, was portrayed 
so accurately that modern physicians have been able
 to diagnose him as a man dealing 
with Marfan™s Syndrome, a congenital condition whic
h effects joints and bone structure. 
 
I used to love to read about ancient Egypt, especia
lly about Nefertiti and Akhenaten, 
when I was a child; those big picture books from th
e Benjamin Franklin branch library in 
Detroit always grabbed my attention. They were so c
olorful and exotic, those two. I 
wasn™t the only kid reading about Nefertiti and Akh
enaten, however. In many Unitarian 
and Universalist Sunday schools back in the 50s and
 60s, these two were touted as our 
ultimate ancestors, the first Unitarians, the first
 champions of an honest theology 
replacing the strange collection of gods and goddes
ses, tricksters and sacred beasts that 
signified religion in those days. 

 
 4Their sole deity was called The Aten, and it was qu
ite simply the visible disc of the sun in 
the sky. It was not a statue created by an artist, 
nor was it housed inside a dark temple, 
but it appeared to brightly stride the heavens from
 dawn till dusk with predictable 
elegance. It was real. You could see it, feel its w
armth, and actually watch the very 
flowers move through-out the day following its ligh
t with their face. This was a reality 
you could see with your eyes, and feel on your skin
. It wasn™t something that could be 
manipulated by the priests, or used for clerical ga
in and power. It was not something that 
needed miracle stories to buoy up the belief. The w
onder of the grain, seemingly pulled 
up from the earth by the very hands of the sun™s ra
ys, was wonder enough.  
 
And, the Aten also transcended the concepts of male
 and female too, and was not prone 
to temper tantrums and other emotional outbursts as
 were the other deities. 
 
Nefertiti and Akhenaten replaced the priests of the
 old gods and goddesses–.with 
themselves. 
They
 conducted worship in their new open-air temple. Th
ey even wrote the 
ceremonial words for their celebrations. The Hymn t
o the Sun, which was found inside 
the tomb of Aye, an official from that era (and eve
ntually ?an interim king?), is attributed 
to them. This famous hymn to the sun was written ov
er 3200 hundred years ago, and was 
so beautiful, so memorable, that 600 years after it
 was composed, a Hebrew songwriter, 
scholars say, plagiarized its gorgeous text as a so
ng to his or her own god. A version of 
which psalm, psalm 104 in the Bible, was sung as th
e opening and interlude music this 
morning. It™s in our hymnbook in a modern translati
on. But what™s important about that is 
that it™s still around, after well over three mille
nnia. Whatever else you can say about 
these ancient religious revolutionaries, their frag
ile verbal art has lasted almost as long as 
those other Egyptian wonders, the pyramids, built o
f enduring stone. 
 
The new and only god, The Aten, obviously did not m
ake the traditional priests happy, to 
be sure. They were critical and obstructionist, moc
king the new religion. Fearful, I 
suppose, about losing their authority and influence
. And many of the peasants were 
unhappy too–they sometimes compared their new gover
nment to a pack of monkeys 
merely imitating human behavior. So Nefertiti and A
khenaten simply got up and left. 
They spent the vast budget of the state to build a 
new capital far to the south, with 
gorgeous open-air temples of superior design. It wa
s to be a utopia of sorts, with wide 
streets and pools, parks and schools and plenty of 
work for all–
  
It was also, by all descriptions, a totalitarian st
ate. That is, if you happened to want to 
worship in the old way, you had to do it undergroun
d, secretly, furtively. There was no 
multicultural approach to urban life in the new cit
y. And there was no multicultural 
approach to family life either. Nefertiti and Akhen
aten spoke of themselves as the 
daughter and son of the Aten, the daughter and son 
of god. They allowed themselves to 
be worshipped by the people when they appeared at h
igh noon in the Appearance 
Window in their palace. No other family could be wo
rshipped or touted. They claimed to 
be right about all their decisions, their critics u
tterly mistaken. They alone embodied the 
truth, or Maat, as they said in their language. Eve
ryone else was living a lie. 
 
 5As I see it, digging up history, archeology, is not
 only physically demanding, it™s 
disappointing. It always only leads to a partial di
scovery. Our archeologists only find 
fragments, and from these fragile small things, the
y try to recreate pictures of whole 
seamless civilizations. But new discoveries cause t
hem to revise their pictures and change 
their minds. For example, when I was a child, peopl
e used to say that the reign of 
Akhenaten and Nefertiti was a time of peace, an ant
i-war era. But new evidence in the 
dust tells us that this was simply not true. The tw
o of them spent so much of the national 
income building their utopia they seemed to have ne
glected the military. But they were 
hardly Gandhi™s predecessors–they were only humorle
ss true believers who spent all of 
their money on their religious needs. We have even 
found wall paintings of Nefertiti 
herself dressed in the blue helmet of a military ge
neral, and wielding the kind of mace 
they used to use to bash in each others™ heads, so 
they were hardly anti-war. 
 
Now again, this is not an ancient history lesson. T
his is a cautionary homily asking each 
of us in this room who are Unitarian Universalists 
to reflect on how we do theology. 
 
I suppose I am not the only one in the room who fee
ls downright annoyed when some 
modern preacher tells me that he is right, I am wro
ng, and that I am on the path diverging 
straight to hell, eternal torture and abandonment. 

 
Downright annoyed. Irritated. And, to be fair, just
 a little pitying and superior. After all, 
I™m
 the one who is totally right, not that fool preach
er. I know that the Bible is hardly a 
perfect authority, that evolution is real, and that
 an honest theology is not based on 
ancient words in dead languages written in an ancie
nt book, but only on the sensible 
methods of science, which use sight, touch, measure
ment, mathematics, experiment, 
humility, and patience to unravel the mysteries of 
the universe, piece by piece, molecule 
by molecule. 

 
Yes, I am right, they are wrong. Evolution is the o
nly sensible ?cause? that arrives at the 
?effect? we call life. It™s the only explanation th
at makes any sense to me. 
 
But do you remember what Joyce Tyldesley wrote in t
he First Reading? 
?The religion of 
the ancient Egyptians was the equivalent of our mod
ern science. It did not intend to teach 
us how to behave, but to provide explanations for 

the seemingly inexplicable.?  

 
Now you may tell me that there is a great differenc
e between a microscope or a telescope 
and the animal-headed statues of the Egyptian god T
hoth, or the feathered crown on the 
Egyptian goddess Isis. And you would be right, of c
ourse. But what Tyldesley is saying is 
not that this ancient religion 
was 
science, but that this ancient religion was trying 
to 
answer, albeit in a very different way, some of the
 questions 
posed
 by ancient 
science–questions like ?Why does the sun look like 
it does??  ?Why is the moon shaped 
differently every night??  ?Why do some of the star
s seem to fall from the sky?? ?Why 
does the Nile River flood like it does every year??
 etc. 
 
 6As she said, the ethical life of persons was not a 
part of Egyptian religion. The scribes, 
that is, the cultural leaders, established the do™s
 and don™ts of Egyptian morals, and 
outlined their spiritual life, as opposed to their 
religious life. 
 
But then our second reading proclaims the same thin
g about modern science. Thomas 
Hayden says, pretty playfully, that it too doesn™t 
concern itself with things like morality 
and spirituality. 

 
Morality, spirituality, the meaning of life, 
writes Hayden
, –science doesn™t handle those 
issues well at all. But that™s cool. We have art an
d religion for that stuff. Science also 
assumes predictable cause and effect in a world tha
t is a chaotic, bubbling stew of 
randomness. But that™s OK too. Our approximations a
re usually good enough. 
 
But, he suggests, this is why there is so much resi
stance to science in America these days.  
Why the whole idea of evolution makes some religiou
s types nervous. So nervous that 
more than half of the American population think Dar
win™s grand idea is downright 
frightening. 

 
Don™t get me wrong. Some of the anti-evolution blow
hards trucking around these days 
are simply deranged, by my lights at least–either s
ick fanatics at the same level as David 
Khoresh, or dangerous with arrogance, like Pastor H
agee down in Texas with his bizarre 
grand schemes.  

 
But I think Mr. Hayden explains the reason why evol
ution disturbs many Americans 
quite well. After all, he says that evolution™s ans
wer to the question ?Am I important? 
Does the universe or even God care about me?? is si
mply ?No.?  We are ?just a bunch of 
hairless apes on a wet rock, orbiting a minor star 
in a marginal galaxy,? that™s all.   
 
He™s saying that science™s New Story isn™t about lo
ve any more than the Egyptian 
religion was about morality. I like the New Story p
ersonally, the Big Bang and all that. I 
like knowing that there is nothing ultimately impor
tant about me as a human being on 
this wet rock. I like being a small part of the lar
ger great Story of the Universe. My real 
importance is in my unimportance, so to speak. 

 
But many religious people are not asking the questi
on, ?How did things come to be?? but 
rather, ?Who loves me? Who will comfort me when I n
eed comfort? Who will hold me 
when I need to be held??   

 
Some natural stoics among us might reply to such qu
estions, ?Oh, grow up. The world 
does not revolve around you. So the world is tough!
 You simply feel too much, and are 
too soft, so the solution to your problem is to thi
nk more and feel less.? 
 
But personally, I don™t think there is anything wro
ng, weak or pathologically soft in 
wanting be held, in wanting intimacy and love, in w
anting warmth and acceptance and 
grace and joy. In wanting justice on this earth, an
d a bit of compassion. I don™t think that 
such feelings and needs are selfish, either, but ve
ry, very human.  I think it™s 

 7understandable that some folks might find the coldn
ess and silence of the Universe a little 
empty. 

 
And so these folks come up with answers that I don™
t personally share. Jesus loves them, 
God the Father loves them, the Universe of its own 
accord bends in sympathy toward 
them and toward justice. Personally, I answer the q
uestions about love and tenderness 
differently. But just because I don™t like the answ
ers that some other people give to such 
questions does not invalidate those questions for m
e. The questions are still deeply and 
beautifully religious. 

 
Akhenaten created a god many modern progressive peo
ple would understand. A god of 
the senses–a god you can see and test. A god you do
n™t have to imagine, but one you 
can observe. I only believe in what I can see, and 
hear and taste and touch, many moderns 
say. Angels, ghosts, gods and devils? All imaginary
.  Not subject to the majesty of 
scientific scrutiny.  Well, sure. Of course. 

 
But lately, I™ve come to think there is a terrible 
temptation that flirts with folks who are 
so certain about their beliefs, and that™s the temp
tation to totalitarianism. The temptation 
to say, ?Because I am utterly right, you are wrong.
 In fact, you shouldn™t be you. You 
should be me.? 

 
It™s easy to find examples of this on the religious
 right end of things. The aforementioned 
Texas Pastor Hagee for one, or James Dobson perpetu
ally pouting on the radio. But since 
this is a liberal congregation, a progressive churc
h, I want to take a look at us, not the 
religious right.  

 
Nefertiti and Akhenaten thought they alone knew the
 truth. They alone could see and feel 
reality. They accused the priests of foisting imagi
nary gods on the people. And they 
outlawed the old religion, and said that to worship
 Thoth or Isis or Ptah was simply 
wrong. Criminal. Perverted. Stupid. 

 
But some folks back then, as now, were not asking ?
cause and effect? questions about 
God. They were not asking questions about omnipoten
ce and authority. Instead, they 
were asking questions about the source of honest lo
ve, honest healing for their hurt, 
honest compassion for their condition, honest justi
ce in an unjust world. 
 
They were asking different questions, in other word
s. Questions for which Nefertiti and 
Akhenaten didn™t have any answers, since their god 
Aten was not a loving or kind god, 
just a bright one. They were the children of their 
bright god. But they died and their 
bright religion did not survive them. 

 
I just read a book this week called 
Irreligion
 by the excellent thinker and writer, John 
Allen Paulos. The subtitle of the book ?A Mathemati
cian explains why the arguments for 
God just don™t add up? pretty much explains the the
sis of his essay. He does a good job 
too, knocking down all the traditional and non-trad
itional arguments for God.  
 
 8But I ended up thinking ?So what?? I wonder if anyo
ne really thinks that divinity has to 
do with arguments of the logical kind, or mathemati
cal proof? I know many progressives 
who are not impressed by such things. I think of a 
former parishioner in Hayward, named 
Doug, as progressive as anyone in this congregation
. He said to me once, ?You know, 
I™ve read all the arguments made by philosophers ab
out why the proofs of God offered by 
people like Thomas Aquinas are just foolishness. I™
ve read Bertrand Russell™s critiques 
etc. I agree with them all. But they are answering 
a question I simply do not ask. At the 
supper table every night my wife and kids and I beg
in our supper with ?‚Dear God, this is 
what our lives looked like today.™ Then we talk abo
ut our days, our ups and downs. God 
for me is that which holds them all together, holds
 them all in an embrace of 
understanding and love. God is the empty bowl into 
which I pour my life day after day, 
week after week.? 

 
And this is why, I think, in order to be honest abo
ut theology, whether it be the theology 
of an honest atheist, an honest agnostic, an honest
 theist, an honest skeptic, an honest 
mystic, you have to acknowledge that totalitarian a
rrogance is too much of a risk and 
danger to imagine that one answer responds to all q
uestions. It does not. No answer does. 
No answer even can. 

 
Can I be critical of theologies I do not share? Sur
e. Watch me. I think Pastor Hagee is 
wrong about almost everything. But before I begin m
y critique, I had better be sure that 
my critique isn™t responding to a question I have n
ever asked. Because, such a response is 
neither a critique nor a communication of any hones
t sort. Just arrogance and self-
congratulation.  

 
Nefertiti and Akhetaten were remarkable, certainly,
 in many ways. But they were not the 
first Unitarians by any means, as we sometimes used
 to teach in our Sunday Schools. 
They were brilliant, but they were totalitarian. I 
would hope religious liberals are not that. 
And their god, the sun? As the children™s story sai
d this morning– it™s lovely– it shines 
on puppies and frogs. But it is not in any way a go
d, or ultimacy. And that™s honest 
enough theology for me. 

 
 
Offering 

 
We are a congregation of different people. 

Scientists, artists, teachers, factory workers. sec
retaries, people retired from every kind of 
work imaginable. We are the unemployed, the writers
, the computer experts and the 
singers. 

We believe, we doubt, we question and sometimes lik
e or don™t like the answers. 
But we do it together. We support this our common h
ome together. We breath together. 
We congratulate each other together. And 

thus we cultivate the love and honesty and joy 

that brings meaning to each of our lives. 

The morning offering will now be given and received
. 
 
 9Prayer 

 
Where are You, Truth? 

In the light of the sun? Sometimes, I guess. 

It sure is beautiful in any case. 

In the light of the ballot box come Tuesday morning
? Absolutely, when the ballot box 
spills over with the brilliance of justice. 

In the light of red flowers, green candles, 

yellow papyrus, blue oceans, black crows? 

Of course. 

In my struggles and doubts, my tears and 

worries. Naturally. 

In the gnarled hands of the 90-year-old 

held in the grip of a baby™s perfect fingers? Sure.
 In songs and stories, and in psalms like this one? 

When they accomplish what they intend to do, I™d sa
y. 
O Truth, you are found everywhere, 

both hidden and in plain sight. 

But come now and hold us, 

for sometimes, oh yes, sometimes, we just need to b
e held. Thanks. Amen. 
 
 
 
