 1 2007-10-28 Leadership 

WF and MLB 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

as a warm October begins to cool, 

and as the Autumn holidays approach, 

to worship, to examine our lives with honesty, 

to challenge our assumptions courageously, 

and to weave a community of care together. 

 
And so we begin this way: 

 
Mindful that a growing vision of a just world calls
 us together, that a community of  
commitment, courage and care sustains us, and that 
a life transformed by depth of spirit may 
illumine our way, we have kindled this light as the
 sign of our circle of life and love.
  
Sequence: 

 
A mask does not really make us into someone else. 

A tree losing its leaves is still a tree. 

A carved pumpkin with a scary face can still be per
fectly suitable for a pie. 
A graying sky is still the sky. 

A browning garden is still a garden. 

A hard lesson is still a lesson. 

A mistake is not the apocalypse, just a mistake. 

A span of silence is not an escape, but a moment™s 
rest in the midst of it all. 
 
silence 

 
Naming those we love in silence or in a still, smal
l voice does not whisk us away from this moment, 
but it does remind us that we have come to this day
 holding hands with many others, and that we are 
not now, nor have ever been, alone and outside the 
circle of communion. Let us remember. 
 
naming 

 
A song, even when it is over, still sings within. 

 
Readings 

 
The First Reading
 is called This Is How We Are Called. It™s a poem by
 Kimberly Beyer-Nelson, the 
Director of Religious Education at our congregation
 in Lincoln, Nebraska. 
 
In the hours before the birds  

stream airborne 

with chiming voice, 

a silent breath rests in the pines, 

and upholds the surface of the lake 

as if it were a fragile bubble 

 2 in the very hand of God. 

 
And I think, 

this is how we are called: 

 
To cup our hands and hold this peace,  

even when the sirens begin,  

even when sorrow cries out, old and gnarled, 

even when words grow fangs and rend. 

 
Cupped hands gently open, 

supporting peace 

like the golden hollow of a singing bowl,  

like the towering rim of mountains 

cradling this slumbering and mist-draped valley. 

 
The Second Reading
 comes from a posthumous work by the great Edwin Fri
edman. It™s called 
A Failure of Nerve, 
and it was put together from his surviving writings
 by both family & friends. 
  

When any relationship system is imaginatively gridl
ocked, it cannot get free simply through more 
thinking about the problem. Stuck systems cannot be
come unstuck simply by ?trying harder.?  For a 
fundamental reorientation to occur, that spirit of 
adventure which optimizes serendipity, and which 
enables new perceptions beyond the control of our t
hinking processes, must happen first.  This is 
equally true regarding families, institutions, whol
e nations, and entire civilizations. 
 
But for that type of change to occur, the system in
 turn must produce leaders who can both take the 
first step and maintain the stamina to follow throu
gh in the face of predictable resistance and sabota
ge.  
Any renaissance, anywhere, whether in a marriage or
 a business, depends primarily not only on new 
data and techniques, but on the capacity of leaders
 to separate themselves from the surrounding 
emotional climate, so that they can break through t
he barriers that are keeping everyone from ?going 
the other way.? 

 
Sermon 

 
Wendy 

 
It's worth noticing that I'm not wearing a sparkly 
silver tiara as the character did in our story this
 
morning.  Nor is my colleague, Mark, sporting a cro
wn, though I suppose the chairs we sit in each 
Sunday 
would
 make nice thrones somewhere. 
 
We won't be talking about "tiara" kind of leadershi
p, top down leadership, or waving-a- wand-and-
making-great-things-happen kind of leadership.  Tha
t's not our style. And it's certainly not the 
Unitarian Universalist way.  So you can set aside a
ny worry on that score.  
  

No, our main message here today is that there are 
lots
 of ways to exhibit leadership. That the tiara-kind
 
is the least exciting. And that we become more full
y ourselves as we get to know, and 
embrace
, our 
complete selves  -- including the dormant, untried,
 rusty, awkward or well oiled leadership parts of o
ur 
being.  We're also saying that stepping up, steppin
g forward, or speaking out can be a form of what 
some people like to call ?the spiritual life.? And 
just so you know what we mean by that slippery word
 
this morning, we offer you a definition blended fro
m the words of writers Patrick Love and Tom 

 3 Harpur. "Spirituality is the process of contin-uall
y transcending our own egocentricity, with our 
purpose focused on our future, as we grow at the in
tersection of 
what we do
 with 
what we are
." 
 
Now some of you, like me, may have a whole section 
of your bookshelves set aside for books on 
leadership.  There's certainly a lot written on thi
s subject, good material for us to digest over time
 and 
make our own.  One person that both Mark and I and 
most of our colleagues return to again and again 
in this field is Edwin Friedman. Friedman, who died
 in 1996, spent 35 years of his professional life a
s 
a rabbi offering consultations on leadership styles
 in religious communities, and the congregational 
conundrums sometimes found in those communities. 

 
Friedman defines leadership this way: "Leader-ship 
can be thought of as a capacity to define oneself t
o 
others in a way that clarifies and expands a vision
 of the future." 
 
What does it mean "to define one's self to others??
  Well, certainly a first step for all of us is com
ing to 
know ourselves, so that we 
can
 present what we know to others.  Who am I? What do
 I trust?  Where 
can I find meaning?  What matters to me?   We don't
 answer such religious questions separate from our 
relation-ship to others; to be human, after all, is
 to be in relationship.  So all of us, in some mann
er or 
another, go about the work of defining ourselves in
 relationship to others. And in doing so, we lay th
e 
groundwork for what Friedman calls ?clari-fying and
 expanding a vision of the future.?  And as we see 
it, that means we 
all
 have the capacity for leadership, in some form or 
another. 
 
There may be some among us who are charis-matic lea
ders, some who are inspiring leaders 
(?breathing spirit into others? is the literal mean
ing of leadership), or some who have a quiet, but 
persistent leadership style.  There are as many sty
les of leadership as there are people in this room.
 
And probably as many names by which to call those s
tyles.  Terminology isn't what matters here.  
Self 
discovery and empowerment does.  

 
I want to use an example from our own church commun
ity.  Many of you have heard the name 
Slowter.  We speak of Slowter Lounge nearly every S
unday in the beginning of our Sunday service. Ed 
Slowter was a beloved member of this church communi
ty, and it is, in part, Ed whom we honor with 
the name of that room. (It was originally named for
 his first wife, Betty, who died some years before 
him. When Ed himself died, the room was dedicated t
o both of them, and you can see portraits of both 
in the room right now.) Ed earned the respect and t
rust of his fellow parishioners over the five plus 
decades he was a part of this community.  He actual
ly paced this land before we developed it as a 
home for our buildings.  He crafted budgets, told t
he truth about risks he thought we should, and 
shouldn't, take, and he was a loyal, dedicated memb
er of our Finance Committee for over twenty years. 
 
He knew and loved this institution with all his hea
rt and mind.  He left us a legacy, a reminder, of 
stewardship . . .  

 
Mark 

 
Ed used to say with quiet certainty, "You can't spe
nd what you don't have," at Finance Committee 
meetings. He was not wearing a crown when he said t
his, nor was he speaking from a pulpit, or from 
behind a desk. He was sitting around a table with o
ther members who had come to know him over the 
years–at potlucks, at worship, at coffee-hour, over
 lunch at the Faculty Club on the OSU campus. 
And, the Finance Committee didn't always respond th
e way he wished to his simple assertion. A good 
leader is not, after all, in the business of winnin
g, but of leading. The competitive and egocentric i
deas 
of winning and losing have no place in real leaders
hip, which is spiritual, not self-serving.  But, 
nevertheless, Ed, in his quiet way, was a leader pa
r-excellence. Ed presented himself exactly as 
someone who was, in Friedman's definition, trying "
to clarify and expand a vision" for the church's 

 4 future. 

 
Ed was a member here back when 30 people met in a s
mall house. The amount of sheer change 
Ed witnessed during his years was tremendous. New m
inisters, new buildings, new people, new 
approaches, new voices. But Ed remained steady, lik
e leaders are. In Friedman's words from the 
reading, Ed had stamina. And he was not worried whe
n there was resistance to changes. His 
faithfulness to a vision of the future remained pat
ient and steady. Again, in Friedman's excellent wor
ds, 
he kept himself separate from the "surrounding emot
ional climate."  If there were upheavals of some 
sort, or disappointments, or worries in the congreg
ation, he never let that dissuade him from his visi
on 
and support for the congregation. 

 
As Wendy said, leadership only has meaning within t
he context of a community where one 
gains respect over time. Through relationships. I t
hink of Marge, in my former congregation. Marge 
was not one to run for office, although she did sit
 on the board once. But this does not mean she was 
not an excellent leader. When a student came to the
 board and requested to intern at the church, the 
board was hesitant. This student was in a wheelchai
r. Multiple Sclerosis kept her rolling, not walking
. 
Now you should know that our simple, homespun build
ings were 
mostly
 accessible, and far more so 
than other Unitarian Universalist churches in the B
ay Area. But this student, an excellent leader 
herself, offered the easy suggestion that for our b
uildings to be 
totally 
accessible, the door of one of the 
bathrooms had to be re-hung to open in the other di
rection, and a small ramp had to be built to let he
r 
chair negotiate a single step into the office. 

 
"We don't have that money in our budget," opined on
e board member. "I don't know, "warned another, 
with that doubtful tone in his voice. But Marge, wi
thout a tiara on her head or even an elected positi
on 
as board chair (or as we said, ?president?), said, 
"It seems to me that if we meant it when we espouse
d 
our Unitarian Universalist principles of justice an
d fairness, then the simple solutions Jean just 
suggested might best have been put into place 
twenty years ago
. I think the ramp and the door need to 
be in place by Friday at the latest." 

 
And they were. And the student interned with us wit
h great success. Note, Marge didn't hammer a 
single nail, or even organize the work party. She j
ust spoke the truth, and let the truth do its work.
 Note 
that in this case, patience and stamina were 
not
 the way leadership looked. Urgency was part of the
 
truth Marge expressed, and she was right. 

 
Telling the truth, and attaching that truth to the 
religious principles by which we say we live our li
ves, 
is quite simply, a spiritual act. For leader-ship, 
in Kimberly Beyer Nelson's words, is the way "we cu
p 
our hands and hold the peace" we say we affirm, "ev
en when the sirens begin," "and words rend." But 
whether expressed by one voice or many, leadership 
is the spiritual practice which makes a 
congregation thrive, and reach out to the world it 
serves with power. 
 
wendy 

 
"Cupped hands gently open," Kimberly Beyer- Nelson'
s image, is foundational in building a 
community.  Communities do need to be held gently t
ogether. Yet to thrive, they need to encourage the 
new - both people and ideas - to enter. Otherwise, 
they stagnate, grow closed-minded and end up 
worshipping the familiar as the best, which can be 
a form of idolatry.  
 
Now individuals, like Marge and Ed, breathe both in
tegrity and patience into their communities.  But 
in order to effect greater changes, you sometimes n
eed more than an individual. You need a whole 
group acting as an agent of change through shared l
eadership. 

 5  
Many of us received an email this week saying it wa
s time to open the champagne!  The County 
Commissioners passed a $300 thousand dollar appropr
iation for a pilot truancy project that members of 
BREAD---our interfaith social justice organization-
-- have been working diligently on for about a year
 
and a half.  Bill Miller, a member of our congregat
ion, has been active on the subcommittee which 
helped make this happen.  They followed this propos
al through winding governmental paths all the 
way to fruition.  As a leadership group they have b
een the change agents, squeaking at times, building
 
motivation, telling the truth with integrity, havin
g a purpose, choosing hope.  Like Marge holding the
 
congregation accountable for how they embody their 
stated beliefs, this subcommittee has been 
holding the Franklin Commissioners accountable to f
und action in the county, which Jobs and Family 
Services approved long ago.  Truancy was selected b
y the BREAD organization as a focus because of 
the far-reaching possibility for systemic change.  
Reduced truancy would benefit the whole 
community. Again, the BREAD subcommittee was not ac
ting from the top down, nor were they 
dramatically going to the barricades. Theirs was ne
ither tiara-leadership nor romanticized leadership,
 
but rather steady truth-telling, 
parallel
 to the power base, to set things on the right trac
k.  It's an 
example of one group leading another, both of which
 are part of the larger metropolitan community. 
 
Other examples come to mind right here in our congr
egation: those who led us into a greater welcome 
by bringing American Sign Language interpreters int
o Sunday worship for example, or placing the 
power-assist door-opener in a prominent place, or h
aving a rainbow symbol greet members of a 
community who rarely find a welcome in other religi
ous communities.  Groups can lead other groups.  
And the individuals who make up those groups can be
 seen as pioneers on the spiritual path we all 
travel together. 

 
One other story we'll share today involves the work
 of another member of our congregation, Michael 
Greenman.  Michael has stepped out, not only within
 our congregation and our Columbus community, 
but has brought a group from this church into conti
nental leadership.  
 
mark 

 
And that™s because individual leadership and group 
leadership, you see, often blend, deepening our 
spirit all the more. Michael, along with other memb
ers of this congregation, helped organize an 
international conference examining the need to move
 from a view of the world as empire, to a view of 
the world as community. Michael had already been re
viewing the extent to which the corporations of 
the United States, through sly interpretations of l
aw, have managed to find airtight ways to legally 
escape almost any ethical accountability for their 
actions in our world. The conference helped to 
underscore the work of CIRCA (Citizens Intent on Re
forming Corporate Accountability), which is an 
organization Michael has been helping to lead for a
 few years already, and one which impacts several 
nations. No small feat that. This, all stemming fro
m meetings held first in this building under the 
leadership of Michael Greenman, and local leaders h
e inspired. 
 
But maybe you are saying to yourself: "But 
I am not that kind of leader. I don't have those kin
ds of 
skills." I understand. Because, believe me, that's 
exactly what I thought when I was first asked to be
 a 
leader in a larger context than the one familiar to
 me. 
 
Twenty-one years ago, when Drusilla Cummins of the 
Unitarian Universalist Board of Trustees (our 
Associations governing board), called me up and ask
ed me to chair the Hymnbook Commission, to 
lead its six-year process, I didn™t have to think a
bout it for a moment. I said, "No thanks. I don't h
ave 
very good organizational skills at all, and I don't
 sight-read music. You have the wrong man. But 
anyway, thanks for asking."  Then I hung up. Click.
 
 6  
Apparently (I found out later from other sources), 
you never say 
No
 to Drusilla Cummins. She called 
back in an hour and said, "Look, you assumed we wan
t you for your musical skills. We do not. We are 
well aware that you are not musically educated. We 
think your verbal skills would benefit the 
committee, which right now consists mostly of music
ians. Secondly, we are aware you don't tend to 
have organizational skills for paper and filing and
 things like that. But just because you are chair 
doesn't mean you have to do everything. You have a 
whole committee which you can trust to do some 
of that work. And, you can sit on the hiring commit
tee to bring on a staff person here at the UUA who 
will do all the filing and computer work. Leaders t
rust others," she concluded, "and we trust you to d
o 
that. And to learn as you go, mistake by mistake. W
e think you're the one for this work." 
 
So, deeply moved by what she said, I said "Yes."  D
rusilla knocked that tiara-idea of leadership right
 
off my head, and introduced me to styles of leaders
hip which are 
not 
impossible for anyone in this 
room: the leadership of trust, the leadership of co
operation, the leader-ship of speaking up and telli
ng 
the truth, the leadership of steadiness, reliabilit
y, faithfulness. The leadership Drusilla herself 
demonstrated, by calling me back, and kicking my ow
n negative self-assumptions out from under me. 
There™s the kind of leadership which Ed exemplified
: enfolding and protecting an inner peace even 
when there is upheaval all around. The leadership w
hich Michael™s conference exemplified: the 
reframing of the questions when the usual answers a
re just taking us around and around in circles 
forever. The leadership which has the faith, the tr
ust, or "the sense of adventure," in Friedman' term
s, 
to say "Yes."  Leadership, as you can see, is a goo
d example of spiritual practice. Like yoga, 
meditation, prayer or dance. Like journaling or wor
ship. Like showing up at a BREAD meeting, or 
going on a retreat. Leadership is not bravado, supe
rnatural talents, or magic. It's not a Halloween 
costume party with tiaras and scepters. It's a way 
of saying a whole lot of ?Yes? in a world too often
 
distorted by ?No.? 

 
Offering 

 
No walls without a foundation. 

No earth without sky. 

No thirst when there is water. 

No defeat when there is hope. 

No church without gifts from 

those who agree to be a church.  

 
Welcome of New Members 

 
