 Hospitality for Self 
September 25, 2011 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
  
Kindling 

Opening Words 
 
We are here 

after a week of grey, wet skies 

to celebrate our whole lives, 

both as distinct persons of intrinsic worth 

and as a whole community of spirit 
  
rooted in mission, self-reflection and love. 

 
And so, without guarantees, we lean into joy, and b
end toward a just way of 
life, both for our own sakes, and for the sake of o
ur children and everyone 
with whom we share the earth. We would engage our m
ission 
wholeheartedly, with courage, self-questioning, com
passion, vulnerability 
and honesty. 
 
Story  
Small Saul does things differently from the other, 
more gruff pirates, and is rejected by 
them, but because he accepts himself as he is, he i
s eventually welcomed back and appreciated 
for who he is.
  
Sequence for Rosh Hashanah 

 
I open the Torah, I open the book of nature, I open
 every scripture, and poem, and almost every 
song worth singing, and there I read what has been 
written in a thousand ways: 
Kamokha 
lôreôakha veahavtah
 As you love yourself, so love those around you.
 As my Jewish friends prepare to welcome the new yea
r with the sound of the shofar, with the 
sweetness of apples and honey, with the privilege o
f self-examination, I join them in wondering   
how I may best love others as I love myself.  Espec
ially when sometimes I am not very loving to 
myself.  Sometimes I donôt sleep or exercise enough
, trying to be perfect at work instead of 
allowing myself to be human and intrinsically suffi
cient.  Sometimes I tuck away my formidable 
anger about things like the execution of that man i
n Georgia, Troy Davis, to avoid such a harsh, 
hot fire within me while I am trying to work.  Some
times I refuse to admit that my stomach 
churns when I read about plunging stock markets or 
hurtful political debates.  Sometimes I spend 
too much time regretting that roses have thorns ins
tead of being glad that thorns have roses.  And 
so now I stand here naming my anger and my avoidanc
e so I can begin to love myself just as I 
am.  I begin to open my tight fist, closed around t
he image of ?who I think I should be,? and 
release myself into the embrace of acceptance and l
ove all that I actually am, human, fragile, 

 strong, wounded, powerful, enough.  And when I ente
r the silence as I am, instead of as I should 
beñhow quiet the silence is, how soothing, how swee
tñ like honey and apples. 
 
silence 

 
Kamokha lôreôakha veahavtah 

As you love yourself, so love those around youñhuma
n, fragile, strong, wounded, powerful, 
enough.  On the altar of this moment, may we place 
our loving concerns, our grief, our hopes, 
our compassion for those in our life, near or far, 
whose lives are, or were, woven into our own. 
Whispering their names aloud, or letting them echo 
quietly within, we bring their 
indispensability into our time of worship together,
 knowing that without them, none of the rest of 
this makes as much sense. 

 
naming 

 
Kamokha lôreôakha veahavtah 

Coming home to ourselves, coming home to wisdom, co
ming home to rejoicing, to love of self 
and others and gratitude that thorns have roses, we
 receive the blessing of music to sweeten the 
length of our journey and to provide our portion of
 nourishing joy. 
 
Choir Anthems 

 
The First Reading 
is a 2007 poem called The Door by the great Canadia
n poet and novelist, 
Margaret Atwood. 

 
The door swings open, 

you look in. 

Itôs dark in there, 

most likely spiders: 

nothing you want. 

You feel scared. 

The door swings closed. 

 
The full moon shines, 

itôs full of delicious juice; 

you buy a purse, 

the dance is nice. 

The door opens 

and swings closed so quickly 

you donôt  notice. 

 
The sun comes out, 

you have swift breakfasts 

with your husband, who is still thin; 

you wash dishes, 

 you love your children, 

you read a book, 

you go to the movies. 

It rains moderately. 

 
The door swings open, 

you look in: 

why does this keep happening now? 

Is there a secret? 

The door swings closed. 

 
The snow falls 

you clear the walk while breathing heavily; 

itôs not as easy as once. 

Your children telephone sometimes. 

The roof needs fixing. 

You keep yourself busy. 

The spring arrives. 

 
The door swings open: 

itôs dark in there, 

with many steps going down. 

But what is that shining? 

Is it water? 

The door swings closed. 

 
The dog has died. 

This happened before. 

You got another; 

Not this time though. 

Where is your husband? 

You gave up the garden. 

It became too much. 

At night there are blankets; 

Nonetheless you are wakeful. 

 
The door swings open: 

O god of hinges, 

god of long voyages, 

you have kept faith. 

Itôs dark in there. 

You confide yourself to the darkness. 

You step in. 

The door swings closed. 

 The Second Reading 
comes from the remarkable recent memoir One Day It 
Will All Make 
Sense by Common, whom his family calls Rashid, shor
t for Lonnie Rashid Lynn, his birth name. 
He is a socially conscious rapper whose lyrics have
 been cruelly misrepresented recently by 
folks on the televised far right. He is also a poet
 and an actor in film and television, and is a 
member of Trinity Church in Chicago where the power
ful minister Jeremiah Wright served until 
his retirement.
   

Acting is one of the deepest forms of artistic expr
ession Iôve ever experienced.  To take pieces of 
yourselfäsome of the most vulnerable, painful piece
s of yourselfäand explore them is a deep 
form of healing.  You go to some of the most painfu
l places of your life.  You open the locked 
rooms of your soul.  You open a door to find a room
 that someone may have died in, and you can 
still feel his or her presence hanging in the air. 
 You open another door, and youôre flooded with 
a feeling of abandonment.  Youôre a child again on 
the basketball court, wishing that your dad 
were there to coach the team.  Youôre a lover stran
ded in a place where love doesnôt live 
anymore.  You donôt visit those rooms without a rea
son.  Acting forces you to visit those rooms, 
forces you to feel the pain, and then gives you a s
afe way of releasing it.  Itôs a tool for life if y
ou 
use it right. 

 
Sermon 

 
As I have been studying our theme word for this mon
th, ?hospitality?, Iôve noted that the word 
hospitality often goes with the word industry. As i
n ?The Hospitality Industry.? Hotels, 
concierges, restaurantsñwelcoming guests who journe
y far, often thousands of miles.  Putting 
them up in comfy beds. Spreading out a breakfast bu
ffet.  (And yes, offering them ?special 
deals? on line for the rest of their life.) 

 
The word hospitality, even when itôs personal and n
ot an ?industry,? always seems outward 
lookingñyou 
receive
 guests from elsewhere; you shake their hand or emb
race them and 
welcome them into your place; you say, ?Have a seat
;? you ask, ?How was your trip??  Itôs about 
othersñyou fluff the towels in the guest room, not 
for yourself, but for your guest. You cook a 
special meal with truffles and rare purple artichok
es for your guests, not for yourself. When 
Abraham, in the Torah (the Bible), in an often told
 story, welcomes the three strangers to his 
tent, the text says he and his wife not only washed
 their dusty feet, and had them rest on cushions 
in the cool shade of a 
terebrinth
 tree, but he and his wife baked a very special mea
l of bread for 
themñusing three seahim, of fine flour which transl
ates into 22 liters, or about 40 pounds. That 
would have been some loaf!  Enough to feed dozens t
o the point of gluttony, not just three 
guests.  

 
Clearly, hospitality is lavishness. 

 
And really, this lavishness is not just some ancien
t Bedouin practice, as biblical scholars often 
describe it. Think about your own holiday meals, if
 you happen to have guests overñarenôt you 
rather lavish in what you provide? Donôt you pull o
ut all the stops? And when hospitality is 
shown to you at some holiday fete, arenôt you alway
s blown away by the abundance of the 
offerings? The number of dishes spread out across t
he table? 

  
Today I am going to wonder out loud why it seems so
 difficult to show 
that
 kind of hospitality 
...to ourselves. Weôre ?people? too after all. And 
on the model of the famous dictum from the 
Torah, 
kamokha lôreakha veahavtah,
 ?As yourself, those around you shall you love,? I 
want to 
say this morning, ?As you are hospitable to yoursel
f, so show hospitality to others.?  If opening 
the door to a stranger is a good thing, isnôt it al
so good to open the door to yourself?  
 
What does that mean? 

 
I think Margaret Atwood begins to explore the meani
ng very beautifully. 
 
The door swings open, 

you look in. 

Itôs dark in there, 

most likely spiders: 

nothing you want. 

You feel scared. 

The door swings closed. 

 
These lines grabbed me. Sometimes in the middle of 
the night, when I suddenly wake up, or 
when Iôm driving alone some distance (like this aft
ernoon, when I make my way to Cleveland), 
or standing alone in the shower, or sometimes just 
sitting on a bench over at the Topiary Park, I 
start to think about my life, and my goals, and my 
deeper feelings.  I start to think about the 
mystery of life and death. And sometimes, when I lo
ok inside, I worry that there is ?nothing that 
I want,? as Atwood says. ?Most likely spiders? she 
offersñcertainly for me, an arachnophobe of 
the first order, a symbol for something creepy, des
pite Charlotteôs Web. Maybe Iôm afraid of 
some suppressed feelingñ
some anger, some resentment, or some unanswered que
stion or self-
doubt and Iôm afraid if I look inside, it might com
e trampling out and make me look foolish. 
 
Maybe youôve had an experience like this too.  And 
experience of avoiding whatôs churning deep 
inside. For good 
or
 ill, suppressed joys as well as suppressed sorrows
. Even suppressed 
uniqueness. 

 
So, says Atwood, we shut the door to ourselves. We 
deny ourselves lavish hospitality. We refuse 
to welcome ourselves with all of our hidden wounds,
 rages, or disappointments or even our 
uniqueness and joys. We have to smile to the world 
after all, and say OK! when someone asks 
?How are you.? Social custom doesnôt often smile on
 people who are transparent about what 
they are feeling. Not on the street mind you when p
assing by, but in real heart to hearts. In my 
family of origin, the command ?Donôt be sad! Smile!
? was often bandied about as if it was a 
crime to feel sad or even just thoughtful. But not 
just sad or thoughtful, anything short of 
downright cheerful was criticizedñ after a while, I
 stopped recognizing any other feelings than 
the approved ones. In fact, when I look at one of t
hose lists of feelings the psychologists often 
print up, Iôm always surprised at how small my voca
bulary of feelings actually is. 
 
 But hospitality, I think itôs fair to say, can, at 
the very least, be described as the act of 
opening 
the door, not slamming it shut
. Atwood used her poem to tell the story of a woman
ôs lifeñshe 
marries, she shops, her dog dies, she grows older, 
she gives up gardening. All the time the door 
swings openñand she refuses to reflect on her life,
 refuses to look inside her soulñshe lives a 
life without any hospitality for herselfñwhich is n
ot, the poet suggests, really living at all. The 
door swings open, she says, many timesñitôs dark in
 there, sheôs afraid of finding something 
that will make her uncomfortable, like the drudge o
f having to clean up water leaking into the 
basementñso she slams the door shut and refuses to 
find out whatôs there so she doesnôt have to 
do the work. But in the end, when the door opens fo
r the last timeñshe canôt slam it shutñshe 
has to, at last, ?confide herself to the darkness.?
  
The poet suggests that not to show hospitality to o
urselves is to die before we die, to lose the 
opportunity to really live our lives deeply, to gro
w comfortable with the parts of us we resist. If 
we donôt allow ourselves to do that, how can we rea
lly welcome the stranger who is different 
from us? If we are comfortable only with life on th
e surface, with the superficial, with what we 
already know, with the fool deadlines and calendars
, and not the deep mystery of life and death 
that transcends time; if we ignore the deeper quest
ions and the attention to feelings and wonder 
and spiritual hunger, life can simply pass us by, a
nd not be actually lived, except visibly. 
 
Attention to feelings does not mean expressing them
 without care or without kindness. Anger is 
an important emotion, clarifying; but when someone 
simply blows up at me, all I feel is attacked 
and wounded, not invited to open myself to clarity 
or a deeper truth. Iôm not sure itôs very 
appropriate or helpful to express anger by blowing 
up. It 
is
 appropriate to express anger with 
care. Naming loneliness is important too, but there
 are ways of expressing it that are 
inappropriate, ways which literally drive others aw
ay, not invite them in.  Unless I admit that 
there are parts of my heart that suffer shame, or e
mbarrassment, or mistrust, or fatigue or 
hostility, then I cannot express them appropriately
, or learn what lessons they have to teach; all I 
can do is shut the door on life itselfñmy life.  

 
My life is about 
all
 of me, not just the surface with my calendar, duti
es, habits and tasks. As 
theologian Matthew Fox once famously wrote, 
all spirituality is about living a deep, rooted, an
d 
therefore radical and non-superficial life.
 To live a deep life means not defaming myself, or 
denying myself, but claiming myself in my uniquenes
s, with all my idiosyncrasies and 
particularities. I may indeed benefit from addressi
ng some of my faults and bad habits, but unless 
I name them, look at them from a place of receptivi
ty and honesty, I canôt even begin to do that. 
You can only address something thatôs thereñif I de
ny anythingôs there, there is nothing to do.  
 
 
The spiritual practice of true hospitality outlined
 by Nanette Sawyer in the affirmation this 
morningñ
receptivity, reverence and generosityñ
applies to myself as well as others.  I have to 
receive and accept who I am, especially since I can
ôt be anyone else. I have to reverence myself 
ñthat is, treat myself as Abraham treated his guest
sñwith compassion for the length of their 
hard journey, and offerings of lavish peace, nouris
hment and kindness. I have to be generous to 
myself, not hard on myself all the time, which usua
lly amounts to me feeling some stupid shame 
that I am not someone else whom I deem better than 
me.  

  
The hip-hop artist Common is also an actor in film 
and television. While there are similarities 
between singers and actors, or ministers in pulpits
 for that matter, there are significant 
differences. What Common says about acting is most 
instructive, I think. He refers to the 
preparation the actor does as the process of lookin
g at his or her own life with courage and 
honesty and yes, reverence and generosityñeven, he 
says, the difficult parts. He even uses 
Atwoodôs metaphor of the door.  
To take pieces of yourself
ähe suggests, some of the most 
vulnerable, painful pieces of yourselfä
and explore them is a deep form of healing. You ope
n the 
locked rooms of your soul.  You open a door to find
 a room that someone may have died in, and 
you can still feel his or her presence hanging in t
he air.  You open another door, and youôre 
flooded with a feeling of abandonment.  Youôre a ch
ild again on the basketball court, wishing 
that your dad were there to coach the team.  Youôre
 a lover stranded in a place where love 
doesnôt live anymore.  You donôt visit those rooms 
without a reason. 
Then Common clarifies 
beautifully 
what that reason is
.  
Acting forces you to visit those rooms, forces you 
to feel the 
pain, and 
then gives you a safe way of releasing it.
  Itôs a 
tool for life
 if you use it right. 
 
A tool for life. For the living of life. For not dy
ing before we die by shutting all the doors to our 
depths. Itôs a tool for being alive inside as much 
as outside. For accepting ourselves, and then 
accepting that we are accepted, to quote the wry ob
servation of theologian Paul Tillich. 
 
And a mature, deep and good life is a form of actin
g, of improvisational acting no less, of 
moving through the world ?as if.? Just because, as 
one of your ministers, I can offer you no 
spiritual guarantees it doesnôt mean that justice, 
kindness and love need to be abandoned. We can 
enact
 them ourselves as best we can, flawed as we may be
. There is no ultimate script, after all. 
Oh, true, some have tried to get us to live by thei
r scripts. I know that. But I say this: the scripts
 
we were given from the unhealthier parts of our pas
tñ
distrust one another, be suspicious of 
whatever is strange or new to you, grab everything 
you can for yourself and to hell with the 
other guy, let authority be your truth, never use t
ruth for authority, kindness and compassion are 
for weaklings and wimpsñ
need to be torn up into confetti and thrown in the 
trash. Such scripts 
offer no tools for life, only shovels to dig our gr
aves. 
 
When I look at the idea of hospitality to ourselves
 as the model for hospitality to others, I can 
also include the idea of hospitality to ourselves a
s a community. We will open the doors to our 
community, yes, and welcome the stranger, the guest
, the visitor, the seeker through those doors; 
but we can also look at how we welcome ourselves, i
ncluding those of us who have been here a 
long time. How are younger people, say of college a
ge, welcomed?  Or single people?  Or 
families with small children?  Or seniors who live 
in assisted living?  What does hospitality look 
like for those whose spiritual lives are enriched b
y distinct theological languages?  Might there 
be a service in the evening sometime for those of u
s whose life makes no sense in the morning?  
 
Oh, weôve been working on such things, but only bec
ause we 
have
 been looking deeply at 
ourselves.  The senior luncheon we had this week we
nt very well, and work on a Soulful 
Sundown service on some Sunday evening is afoot. Bu
t none of these things happens without 
self-examination. Marguerite Turnbull first raised 
the questions about the senior elders in the 
congregation, and our answer was the Senior Gatheri
ng, even though it took a while to figure out 

 and implement. You have to be hospitable to the que
stions first, hospitable to the questions and 
openings before you can move forward. You have to o
pen the door, not nail it shut. 
 
I had lots of feelings this week.  Feelings about t
he economic plunge.  Feelings about the 
injustices in our capital punishment system as evid
enced by the Troy Davis execution.  Feelings 
of rage when that gay soldier, Stephen Hill, who is
 from Columbus and whom I know, was 
jeered by people at the debate in Orlando when he c
ame out.  Feelings of frustration because of 
expensive and lengthy fix of pipe leaks in my loft 
at home that ate my time and money like 
bonbons.  Feelings of sadness about my mother and h
er deep pain and confusion.  I tried to avoid 
looking at some of them since I had so many commitm
ents to fulfill this week.  But preparing 
these words reminded me of what my Jewish friends l
ike Richard are doing right now as the 
season of Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur are upon the
m.  They call it the days of 
Sôleichot
, the 
days of self-examination, of inward reflection, of 
opening the door to the places we avoid 
looking at and facing it all, and openly naming wha
t we find there without shame or avoidance. 
Itôs not a bad idea at all.  Even when itôs a deman
ding time. Especially, maybe, when itôs a 
demanding time. Like a great 
rebbe
 once said, ?I pray an hour each day, except on esp
ecially 
busy days. Then I pray two hours.? And remember tha
t the Hebrew word for prayer, 
tefillah
, is 
the noun of the verb that means ?to examine oneself
.? 
 
The hospitality industry spends plenty on its welco
me of guests. Lavish tile in the restrooms, 
lush towels, fancy food in the eateries, exquisite 
suits on the people behind the desks, great 
lighting, comfy beds. The new Hilton being built in
 the Short North will even build a bridge to 
the convention center so no guest has to walk in th
e rain or snow. Thatôs a lot of hospitality. 
 
All I am saying this morning isñlavish hospitality,
 true hospitality, is wonderful, a real spiritual 
strength. But, I say, letôs begin with ourselves so
, as we offer hospitality to others, itôs not just 
another duty on our calendars, but the pure, compas
sionate, receptive offering of healing, healed 
human beings that know what it means to be welcomed
 and accepted. And like the story of Small 
Saul made clear this morning, if we learn to accept
 ourselves for all we really are, in all our 
uniqueness, yes, others may at first try to get us 
to conform to their scripts of how life should be 
lived, but eventually, they too may very well be tr
ansformed. 
  

Offering 

 
Together we make a community.  Together we make a c
ommunity that blesses the world inside 
of our hearts and outside of these doors, a communi
ty that both raises and shelters the questions 
and both names and douses the fears.  Together we s
upport such a community as best we can, in 
many ways, through our human presence, our gifts be
hind the scenes and through this ancient 
and thoughtful way of supporting what we love. 
  
Hospitable Psalm 

 
I open my heart to you, Love, 

center of my own capacity for love. 

I rejoice that you are not afraid to welcome 

 every single part of me. 

Even the parts that are in pain. 

Even the parts that simmer. 

Even the parts that wander. 

Even the parts that claim to know so much. 

Even the parts that are afraid to know. 

Even the parts that pretend. 

Even the parts that worry and fret. 

Even the parts that react in fear.   

Even the parts that feel as if they have failed. 

Even the parts that reel from loss. 

Barukh atah, Ahavah,  

osey hashalom lehayim tovim 

Blest are you, Love, 

shaper of peaceful good lives. 

 
