
A Great Miracle Happened There.

Haneirot hallalu kodesh haym
  veyn lamu r'shut
  l'hishtameish ba hem
  Elah lirotam bivad
  K'dei l'hodot u-le-layl.

  Decades after a man leaves the Church,
  Still he is called the priest.
  
  Many years since she set down her bow,
  a woman remains the cellist.
  
  The one who seduced so many is content
  now to sip her tea, and still she is looked at with envy and hatred.
  
  The one who held life and death
  in his mouth no longer speaks at all, yet still he is feared.
  
  The unmoving dancer rehearses her steps.
  Again, perfection eludes her.
  
  Fate loosens its grip. The bruises stay.
  

  1) When the United States has been branded as an enemy in a cosmic war, it
  has been endowed with superhuman - or perhaps subhuman - qualities, ones
  that have had little to do with the people who actually live in America.
  It is the image of the country that has been despised -not its people. Individual
  Americans have often been warmly accepted by those who hate the collective
  image that they hold as cosmic enemy. This was brought home to me in Gaza
  when I talked with Dr. Abdul Aziz Rantisi about the Hamas movement's attitude
  toward America and its pro-Israeli stance. As Dr. Rantisi offered me coffee
  in the comfortable living room of his home, he acknowledged that the United
  States was a secondary enemy because of its complicity in Israel's oppression
  of Palestinian Arabs. From his point of view, it deserved to be treated as
  an enemy. What about individual Americans, I cautiously asked him, raising
  the example of America professors. Would such people be targeted? "You?"
  Rantisi responded, somewhat surprised. "You don't count. You're our guest."
  
  2) Activists such as McVeigh and Abouhalima - and for that matter, Abdul
  Rahman, Rantisi, Bhindranwale, Asahara, Kahane, Lerner, Bray, and Hill -
  have imagined themselves as defenders of ancient faiths. But in fact they
  have created new religious forms: like many present-day spiritual leaders,
  they have used the language of traditional religion to build bulwarks around
  aspects of modernity that have threatened them and to suggest ways out of
  the mindless humiliation of modern life. It was vital to their image of religion,
  however, that it be perceived as ancient.
  
  The need for religion - a "hard" religion as Abouhalima called it, an "ancient"
  one as Pierce imagined it - was a response to the soft treachery they observed
  in the new societies around them. The modern secular world that Abouhalima,
  Pierce, and the others inhabited was a dangerous, chaotic, and violent sea
  for which religion was an anchor in a harbor of calm. At some deep and almost
  transcendent level of consciousness, they sensed their lives slipping out
  of control, and they felt both responsible for the disarray and a victim
  of it. To be abandoned by religion in such a world would mean a loss of their
  own individual identities. In fashioning a "traditional religion" of their
  own, they exposed their concerns not so much with their religious, ethnic,
  or national communities as with their own personal, imperiled selves.
