  Hope
  
December 7, 2008 
Mark Belletini 
 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

after the first snowfall of the season, 

to worship together,  

to climb high, 

that we might regard our world 

and our lives  

from the lofty perspective of hope. 

 
And so, though our ways of thinking and feeling abo
ut the meaning of our days may 
differ, we agree to journey together, side by side,
 face to face. Within this circle of 
strong spirit, mutual care, and ethical vision, may
 we ourselves remain open to 
being transformed by a welcoming heart and emerging
 justice. 
 
Affirmation:
  
I know you can't live on hope alone, but without it
, life is not worth living. And you, and 
you, and you and you have got to give them hope."  

                       Harvey Milk 1978 

Sequence 

 
Singing in me. Singing in you. 

Singing voices tempered by December. 

The voices of memories past  

drifting through the silent snow  

to fall into human hearts–
 echoes in the kitchen,  

the clatter of cookie sheets, 

noisy bustle in the market,  

a wooden box of clementines, 

and barely vocalized worries  

about paying the bills. 

Singing in me, singing in you, 

voices in carol and candelabra 

surrendering to the mystery of great things:  

like a babe nesting in an unlikely cattle-feeder 

or oil glistening within an empty jar 

or light glittering from a thousand small candles 

that replace the waning sun for a while. 

Singing in me, singing in you, 

worries about getting through, 

  and hopes for transformation on the other side; 

passions for what is possible 

quickening our pulse, 

and a warm welcome to this silence 

around which all of December wheels. 

 silence 
 
Singing in me. Singing in you. Singing within. 

Voices of loved ones present and gone, 

voices forever woven into our own 

tapestry of memory. 

Voices of love, of challenge, 

of hope and sorrow, 

voices singing with and without words, 

and voices speaking with and without music. 

And now, voices of remembrance 

and honor and thanksgiving 

as we name these other voices 

within us, either aloud or silently within. 
 
naming 

 Voices of December, singing in concerts and 

caroling in congregations. Voices of December,  

kindling candles of hope in human hearts 

through the power of music, jazzing our colder days
 with singing warm as a hearth. 
 
Readings 

 
The First Reading
 this morning comes from the book 
Who Are We
 by Jean Bethke 
Elshtain, a professor of ethics and political polic
y at the University of Chicago. 
 
What does it mean to live in hope?  Reaching a new 
millennium ?concentrates the mind 
wonderfully.?  We take stock.  We look back in orde
r to peer ahead.  We ask ourselves:  
Do we dare to hope, having looked back, having surv
eyed the shipwreck that is so much 
of the twentieth century?  Taking stock honestly an
d forthrightly, refusing to avert our 
eyes, it is clear that optimism isn™t warranted.  B
ut then, optimism never is.  Hope, 
however, is something else. While optimism proffers
 guarantees that everything will turn 
out all right and that all problems are solvable, h
ope, that great theological virtue, urges 
us to a different stance, one aware of human shortc
oming but aware also of our capacities 
for stewardship and decency and our openness to gra
ce.   
 
The Second Reading
 is from the first chapter of the Book of Shmu™el, o
r Samuel, in the 
Hebrew Scriptures. We date the written form we have
 to the year 621, but the stories 
were first crafted orally as much as 400 years earl
ier than that. 

   
There was a man from Ramahthaim in the Honeycomb di
strict, there in the hills of 
Ephraim, whose name was Elkanah, of long and noble 
lineage. 
 
Elkanah had two wives, Hannah and Penninah. Pennina
h had children; Hannah was 
childless.  

 
Elkanah used to go up from his town every year to o
ffer sacrifice to, and bow to, the 
ground before the Eternal at Shiloh Shrine. Hofni a
nd Finehas, the two sons of Eli, were 
priests of the Eternal there along with their fathe
r. 
 
One such day, Elkanah offered a sacrifice. Afterwar
d, he used to give many portions of 
the meat to his wife Penninah and all of her sons a
nd daughters. But to Hannah he would 
give but one portion only, even though he actually 
favored Hannah; but her womb was 
closed up. 

 
All the worse, Penninah rivaled with her, mocking h
er, taunting her by pointing out her 
childlessness. This went on for years. Whenever the
 family went up to offer sacrifice, 
Penninah would jeer at Hannah so much that she even
tually stopped eating and just cried 
all the time.  Her husband, Elkanah, would say thin
gs like ?Hannah, why are you sobbing 
so, and why are you refusing to eat? Why are you so
 depressed? Am I not more devoted 
to you then even ten children would be?? 

 
After suppertime, Hannah rose and went to the shrin
e. The priest Eli was sitting at the 
doorpost on a seat. In her misery, Hannah went past
 him, and sought justice from the 
Eternal inside the shrine, weeping the whole while.
  
Now as she poured her heart out, praying for a preg
nancy, she moved her lips, but 
otherwise remained silent. She did not vocalize her
 concerns, but expressed them only 
inside her heart. So the priest, Eli, seeing her li
ps move in that way from his perch at the 
doorway, decided she must be drunk. So he went up t
o her and said:  ?How long will you 
make a drunken spectacle of yourself? It™s time for
 you to sober up.?  But Hannah 
responded ?No, sir. I am 
depressed
, not drunk. I have not had so much as a single gla
ss of 
wine. I have just been pouring myself out to the Et
ernal. Do not dismiss me as someone 
on a binge of some kind. I am in a state of deep an
guish and distress.? 
 
?Then, go in peace,? said the priest, ?and may you 
be granted your prayer.?   ?You are so 
kind,? responded Hannah. So Hannah left in a better
 mood. She began to eat regularly, 
and was no longer downcast all the time. 

 
Sermon 

 
Some weeks ago, Bishop Bill Polley, one of the cler
gy I work with in our local interfaith 
social justice organization, BREAD, emailed me. He 
asked if I would give my 
interpretation of a biblical reading, his choice, a
t our regularly scheduled meeting on the 
First Thursday of the month.  Two other clergy woul
d also offer be offering their 

  comments. All of my BREAD colleagues know that our 
Unitarian Universalist practice is 
mostly not centered on the Scriptures, but they see
m to get a kick out of my particular 
way of reading things. So I get asked to do this fr
om time to time. Bill gave me the 
passage by chapter and verse, and I took it down. 

 
Next day, I read the passage. It was just the first
 half of the one you heard just a few 
minutes ago, but with a whole lot of added genealog
y, which I kindly removed for this 
morning™s reading.  Vs. 1-10 just like he said. So 
I emailed Bill.  ?There must be some 
mistake,? I wrote. I see at most a half of a story,
 and not a terribly useful one at that. Are 
you sure you gave me the right verses, 1-10?? 

 
?Yes, that™s it. 1-10? So, even though I was mystif
ied, I decided to give it a go. I went to 
Hebrew lexicons and looked up every important word.
 I read up on my Shiloh 
archeology. I found out some fascinating things not
 really apparent to anyone on a 
surface reading. For example, we justly are proud, 
here in the US of A, of our melting pot 
culture, what we now call multiculturalism. The tex
t of Samuel suggests we are Johnny 
come-latelys–.the melting pot was already hot three
 thousand years ago. For example, 
according to the text, Eli, the Hebrew priest of th
e shrine at Shiloh, had two sons with 
entirely Egyptian, not Hebrew, names, Hofni and Fin
ehas. 
 
But this first story in the Book of Samuel is not a
bout multiculturalism. It™s not about 
religious ritual and shrine worship. No, it seems t
o be entirely about hopelessness. 
Hopelessness that hurts and pains the spirit, causi
ng a serious depression. The Hebrew 
words in the story are all strong: distress, misery
, and even the word 
beliyaal
, which 
means 
a feeling of utter worthlessness.  
 
Who feels worthless and depressed?  

The woman Hannah. 

Why does she feel worthless and depressed? 

For many reasons. 

 
One, she does not have a child in a patriarchal cul
ture which has determined that her 
worth as a woman is only determined by her capacity
 for bringing babies into the 
world–preferably male children. 

 
Two, she is being constantly put down, quite cruell
y, by another woman who happens to 
have plenty of children. 

 
Three, she has a narcissistic husband who thinks th
at she should just be glad he™s around. 
He neither sees her misery, nor takes it seriously 
when he does. Nor does he reprimand 
his other wife, the mother who is tormenting Hannah
. 
 
Four, her local clergyman, although a liberal (we k
now this because he lets her enter the 
shrine, ordinarily a place reserved for men alone) 
is so out of touch with womanhood that 
he thinks she™s just tied one on, and cannot see he
r misery until she tells him plainly: ?I 
am depressed.? 

   
All good reasons to feel good and miserable, it see
ms to me. 
 
The Hebrew text tells us that Hannah goes into the 
shrine to ?palal?–which is often 
translated as ?to pray.? But as far as I can tell, 
it does not really mean to pray in the 
ordinary sense of that word, but rather, 
to seek justice
. In other words, although she feels 
terrible, she knows, up here in her head, that she 
is
 worthy. She knows that she is a fine 
person. She has come to realize that it™s the socie
ty around her who is feeding her the 
malarkey that she can only be a good woman if she p
roduces children. It™s the people 
around her who are invested in making her miserable
. 
 
Now please, don™t imagine for one moment that becau
se this story is situated three 
thousand years ago that we brilliant moderns have l
eft this pattern of living. Twenty years 
ago I read a convincing study demonstrating with co
mpelling evidence that women who 
were a part of cultures, families or religions that
 relegated them to second-class 
citizenship were far more likely to experience disc
omfort during their monthly periods, or 
during the menopausal time when such periods cease.
 Why? The sociologists interpreting 
the data came to the conclusion that if your worth 
is not in your intrinsic personhood, but 
in your reproductive capacity only, then a monthly 
reminder of your captivity to this 
ideology would be painful; and the cessation of thi
s monthly reminder would be all the 
worse. 

 
But after coming out of the shrine, Hannah begins t
o eat again, to smile, and not be so 
downcast. What happened? 

 1.
 She 
named
 her misery. She described its awful pain. When the
 spoke to the 
priest, she used only the strongest words.  But in 
naming it, refusing to avert her 
eyes, or pretend that she™d be better off not feeli
ng such things, she actually felt 
them. 
 
2.
 Next, she showed up and spoke up. When the priest a
t Shiloh tried to define her 
as a drunk, she refused to accept it, and told him 
what was really true instead. 
 
As a woman in a patriarchal culture, she did not ha
ve a right to speak in such a 
way to the authority in the shrine, but she knew if
 she didn™t speak up for herself, 
no one else would in such a culture, including her 
husband. 
 3.
 In seeking justice, 
palal
, in the shrine, she re-organized her thinking abou
t 
herself. She decided that she was the one who knew 
who she was, and that others 
were simply mistaken. 
 
From that moment on, she was living in hope, not ho
pelessness. 
 
She ate. She smiled. She refused to be put down whe
n she was put down. She lived in 
hope. 

 
  But she did not become an optimist. 

 
Oh, I know, for many writers, hope and optimism are
 synonyms. But not for me. 
I rather agree with Jean Bethke Elshtain in the fir
st reading who sees optimism as very 
different from hope. She describes optimism like I 
describe magical thinking, a form of 
denial and ?let™s pretend.?  

 
Hope, however, she says, ?urges us to a different s
tance, one aware of human 
shortcomings but aware also of our capacities for s
tewardship and decency and our 
openness to grace.? 

 
So Hannah became aware of her capacities for decenc
y and her openness to grace. 
Grace? I™ll talk about that in a sermon another tim
e, but suffice it to say here that 
openness to grace for me means to be open to the po
ssible. And hope is not optimism, 
pretending that everything will be OK, ?somehow.?  
Hope, rather, asks that we first 
name
 both the systemic and emotional reality of sufferin
g and oppression (all that depression 
and distress) so that we can get unstuck, and free 
ourselves to be enlivened by 
a passion 
for the possible.
 The words are the late Bill Coffin™s words, but I 
think they paint a 
terrific picture for the word 
hope.
 A passion for the possible. 
 
Note, a passion for the possible is not a sense of 
entitlement. That™s optimism, which 
pretends, at least Elshtain says, to offer guarante
es. And it™s not magical thinking either, 
the belief that if I do such and such a thing, my w
ishes will come true automatically. No, 
hope, a passion for the possible, is nothing like t
he game of four-year-olds, who, at their 
developmental level, might think they are invisible
 because they have covered their faces 
with their hands.   

 
I saw a film about hope on Friday night. I went to 
see Gus Van Sant™s film about Harvey 
Milk.  I went to see it because I am part of that s
tory.  Not because I had met him once 
briefly on Castro Street. But because I was working
 as a bank teller two blocks away 
from City Hall in San Francisco when he was shot. I
 was one of the earliest to know what 
happened. I marched among the 30,000 carrying candl
es down Market Street in silence 
that very night. (Our Association, in Boston, is as
king me to write a Study Guide on the 
film for their Website, partially because I was the
re at the time, and I will probably do 
that.) 

 
The film is true to my memory of those days.  And a
s I have said to a few of you already, 
Sean Penn™s performance was not so much a performan
ce as a transformation. Penn was 
gone. Milk was there instead. I have never seen any
thing like that in film in my life 
before. 

 
But the point is, it was a film about hope. Why? Be
cause, like Hannah, Harvey Milk grew 
up in a culture where he could be hurt just by bein
g who he was–in his case, he could 
have been arrested just for being alive and holding
 hands with someone among the streets 
of the city. The film shows twenty such filmed arre
sts in New York City during the 
opening credits. Harvey could be beaten, locked awa
y in a mental hospital, and certainly, 

  insulted and demeaned daily. Not just by a few othe
r people, like Hannah, but by many, 
many people. He lived in fear and trembling, as Han
nah did. 
 
And yet, little by little, he too sought justice–
 he too wanted to 
palal
. Oh, he didn™t go 
into a shrine–after all, though he was Jewish by bi
rth, he had become a non-theist as a 
young man. But just like Hannah, he poured himself 
out before what was Eternal in his 
own life–his inherent dignity. It slowly dawned on 
Harvey that he was not what other 
people said he was. He was the person 
he himself said he was. 
 
And so he began to live in hope for the first time 
in his life. He began to develop a 
passion for the possible. He opens a camera shop on
 Castro Street, and when the local 
business association refuses to let him in, he star
ts his own business association. Then, 
when he hears of a young man who is beaten to death
 for being who he is, a murder 
without any response from the law, Harvey realizes 
he has to get acquainted with the law. 
He organizes and creates relationships with people 
who share his concerns. Our BREAD 
practice could very well have been modeled on 
his way of doing things 
had not Saul 
Alinsky invented it first.  

 
Milk runs for City Council three times. And is defe
ated, three times. He does not give up, 
even then, though he is counseled by most everyone 
who loves him to do just that. (And 
he is a loved man.)  So even though no gay man had 
ever been elected to office before, 
anywhere in America, he lives in hope, and he runs 
again. But, like the renewed Hannah, 
he eats. He smiles. He is no longer downcast. And h
e wins. 
 
And, yes, yes, he dies. Shot by another City Counci
l member. He knew he would die 
young. We 
all
 knew he would die. I was a bank teller in November
 of 1978, the year he 
died. Two blocks away from city hall at Golden Gate
 and Hyde. When the police teller at 
the bank who worked next to me got the call on his 
walkie-talkie, he blanched, and then 
said, ?O my God. Someone just shot and killed the m
ayor. And that guy.?  I knew who 
?that guy? was without having to be told. We all di
d at the bank that day. 
 
But Milk had 
lived
 in hope all the way to his death. And living in ho
pe means not 
necessarily getting all the results you dream about
. But to live in hope 
is
 to go forward 
with confidence, facing your very real fears. You g
o forward because you know in your 
heart that who you are is not determined by others,
 but by yourself. It™s not determined by 
spouses or lovers or clergy or systemic prejudice a
nd cruelty in our societies. It™s 
determined by ourselves. Look, I know my value as a
 person is intrinsic, not because it is 
a Unitarian Universalist principle, but because whe
n someone tries to demean me for who 
I am, I feel hurt and distressed. My deepest deep i
s trustworthy, and knows that I am who 
I am, not what others think I am, so it responds wi
th hurt and anger. Those feelings, and 
my naming of them, are a confirmation of that. I am
 becoming who 
I am becoming. I will 
be what I will be, not what others want me to be. T
hat phrase–I will be what I will be 
(ehyeh esher ehyeh, or YHWH in Hebrew) is translate
d as The Eternal in some Bibles. 
But that is why a theist like Hannah and a non-thei
st like Harvey can 
both
 claim the 
power of pouring their troubles out and naming thei
r pain before the Eternal, for the 
eternal is nothing less than that which will be wha
t it will be. In a shrine or in a human 

  heart, it makes no matter.  So for me, naming it YH
WH/God, or naming it the human 
spirit, makes no difference, since what is importan
t is not theological niceties or worse, 
theological conformity, but hope, the passion for t
he possible. The power to go forward 
in our lives to do what is right and honest and pos
sible not because we are guaranteed 
ultimate success, but because we will be what we wi
ll be, not what others want us to be. 
We will be the sure flame of what we know and do, a
nd what we know and do will ignite 
other lights, and together we can create a bright p
ath for justice on this earth. We can, if 
we will, give off hope the way the stars give off l
ight. Harvey and Hannah are both good 
examples. 

 
So I am glad that the good Bishop made a little mis
take. You see, he did send the right 
verses, 1-10, just the wrong chapter. The other pre
senters lifted up a different text 
entirely. But the mistake was fortuitous. It led me
 to the Hannah passage, and her 
transformation from hopelessness to hope. And it he
lped me to see the connection 
between an ancient text and a present day film that
 crosses my own life history.  
 
So now, it will make sense to you that I can end my
 sermon with the very words that end 
the film, Harvey™s best known words, words for all 
of us, no matter our sexuality, gender, 
age, ability, ethnicity, color or spiritual practic
e, words you know because you said them 
earlier: ?I know you can™t live on hope alone, but 
without it, life is not worth living. And 
you, and you, and you and you have got to give them
 hope.? 
 
Offering 

 
It takes many little lights to light up a great roo
m. 
It takes many people to accomplish great things. 

It takes many committed men and women and 

teens and children to make a congregation 

like this thrive and sing. 

The morning offering will now be given and received
. 
 
Closing Prayer: Song For Those who Persist 

 
Let patience and impatience hold hands. 

Let organization and passion hold hands. 

Let realism and vision hold hands. 

Let feelings and honesty hold hands. 

Let persistence hold hands with persistence. 

Love, guide us each and all as we run this race. 

