Becoming Fit for Service
 Joseph Pierce, Seminary Student 
January 27, 2013 
 
 
Wow. Let™s start there...I can™t help but think 

that some of you remember me when I was about 

this tall–and now–here I am–
this tall–
 Some of you remember me, buzzing 

through the old hall of worship–
I remember the 
wooden marble playset–
I put the marble in 
the slide–then ?plink?–then slide–
it™s still 
there, by the way. I remember a tree house where I 

could climb and crawl in and out–
to my little 
heart™s content. 

 
And so here we are–and I am so nervous–
 When Mark told me that I would be given the 

opportunity to preach, I responded eloquently–
 ?eyes wide–u–
mmm–? 
What could I say–? 

Why should I say–? 

I stressed long and hard about a perfect sermon. 

I went to Eric with the grand plan of giving the 

greatest sermon ever written. Silly as it is, I fee
l like 
I owe that to you. 

Luckily, Eric replied: 

?Um, Joe, not that you don™t have a lot you 

could say, but you have a story to tell  It is your
 story–maybe you should start there.? 

Sweet– there is nothing I am more qualified to 

talk about than this man! 

 
So I am coming today with my story, and I am 

telling it because, very soon, I will be asking thi
s 
congregation to endorse me for candidacy as a UU 

minister. I‚d like to be known by you before I ask.
  
With that in mind, let us begin 

with my first religious experience. 

When I was young, we had a pet guinea pig 

named Squirmy. He was a beautiful little animal, al
l 
brown and furry. And–like many other things in 

my life, I didn™t appreciate him until he was gone.
 One night, my younger brother had taken Squirmy 

into the bathroom with him when he took his bath. I
 had done this many times as well, it was–
normal. 
I heard a scream from the bathroom–
and 
that–
that was not normal. It was the first time I had 
ever heard pain. Heard anguish. Squirmy had fallen 

into the tub. Squirmy had drowned. My brother was 

crying, my mother was comforting him, and–there 

was Squirmy. I picked him up and took him into my 

mother™s room. I laid him on the bed and did chest 

compressions and mouth to mouth–
  
I had never prayed before. I don™t remember 

ever having asked God for anything. I begged God 

that day...I told God that I would do anything to g
et 
our precious Squirmy back! 

God did not give Squirmy back. 

We buried Squirmy in a box in our back 

yard. I hated God. I had asked, I had begged, I had
 pleaded, and God was–absent. I remember looking 

at the sky that day, with tears in my eyes, and 

rejecting God. I became an Atheist that day. 

As I grew older, my increasingly rational 

mind wanted to be able to say more than just ?I 

reject God because God hurt me.? 

 
So, during my High School years, I became 

a qualified Atheist. There were several reasons for
 this. Perhaps the most important was that my father
 was an Atheist. I have always idolized my father. 

Some of my favorite adolescent moments are of 

when we would talk about the silliness of the 

Christian God. I strove to please my father with 

logical arguments that disproved a Christian God, 

and he always seemed so passionate when he taught 

me new ones. 

 
Notice the scope of our rejection: ?Christian 

God.? 

 
Another reason I became such an ardent 

professor of Atheism is that it annoyed many of the
 Christians in my High School. Oh, and did I 

mention that I loved to argue. A match made in a 

heaven that I didn™t believe in. 

 
Let me summarize my reasons for being an 

Atheist thus far: Father veneration; it annoyed 

People; I love to argue. Perhaps, if I am honest he
re, 
I may have been–
seeking some attention. 
But I think there is another reason for my 

atheism: I loved religion. This may seem counter- 

intuitive, but stick with me. As an Atheist, I was 

allowed to be critical and evaluative of religion a
nd 
religions. I had the freedom to speculate and 

examine–without all the suppositions and 

assumptions that a religious person might begin 

with. As an Atheist, I was able to marvel at the 

beauties and oddities of religion, and much to my 

surprise, I fell deeply in love with it. The proces
s I 
have just described took a little while though. I s
till 
had a lot of growing up to do. 

 
When I look back at my adolescence, I 

sometimes smile at the things I did and what I 

valued. And sometimes I™m ashamed. What 

motivated me at that time was gaining social power 

and being perceived as ?right.? 

In hindsight, my actions revealed a highly 

narcissistic young man. 

I thought that I could make people do things, 

think things, and believe things, and that made me–
 happy.  Perhaps I could have stayed that way, a 

happily self-centered little manipulator–if not for
 a 
few bad break-up experiences. 

 
The next part of my story stars my first 

love.  We were both seventeen when she got 

pregnant and that–
was a problem for me. In my 
own mind, I had always been the ?golden boy.? I 

wanted to be an example that my mother could take 

to her family and say, ?See, I didn™t screw up.? I 
was 
going to go to college, have a career, make lots of
 money, and do everything right. 

I told my mom about the pregnancy and she 

cried. I didn™t tell my father for a very long time
. 
Reacting out of fear, I asked her to get an 

abortion. She declined. I had no choice but to own 

up to my responsibility as a father. Life would be 

tough–
but we would make it. I began to want this 
child more than anything. 

 
She had a miscarriage about three months 

in. To help me grieve, my friends built a little 

wooden boat; we placed a yellow toy duck on it and 

burned it in a pool. I have a yellow duck tattooed 
on 
my chest–
over my heart. I feel that that child 
sacrificed itself for us. The tattoo reminds me of 
that 
sacrifice–
and my responsibility to it. 
The pregnancy-miscarriage kept us together 

for a while, but then the relationship got bad agai
n, 
and we broke up.  

 
The amount of emotion that this 

caused in me was terrible and overwhelming. I had 

never felt anything like it, and I didn™t know how 
to 
handle it. I started to cut myself. I believed I co
uld 
trade one kind of pain for another. I was right, at
 first, but each time it brought less relief. It als
o 
brought me a new problem: shame.  Shame  

when others saw the scabs. Shame when 

I had to explain them. Shame that I knew that I cou
ld 
not control my self or my emotions. 

I didn™t. I started dating another girl. In 

the end, I tried to do the same things to keep her 

with me.  However, there was one key difference wit
h this 
relationship: I learned from it. 

 
In the months that followed, I started to work 

seriously on finding out what I believed and what 

mattered in life. Throughout these relationships I 

had failed to appreciate the feelings of these wome
n, 
and, more importantly, I deliberately tried to hurt
 them. This led me to another crucial realization: t
he 
pain I felt was–in some way–
deserved. 
In this moment, this beautiful moment, I 

knew that my actions had consequences. I was 

developing a conscience–
  
It could not have come at a better time. Our 

relationship ended during my sophomore year of 

college.  I was struggling academically for the fir
st time. 
I was also struggling to find meaning in what I was
 doing, and that–
was new. 
 
One day, in the middle of a physics lecture, 

I got up and walked out. I couldn™t do it anymore. 

Something deep inside of me had been telling me 

that this life path was not for me. As I walked in 
a 

sort of horrified haze of uncertainty, I asked myse
lf 
what was important to me. The first thought that 

entered my mind was ?helping people.? This 

thought moved me deeply. 

I decided on a new major:  psychology. I had 

been helped previously by psychologists, and it 

seemed a practical and positive application of the 

abilities and gifts that I had. It also gave my lif
e a 
purpose and meaning that it had not had before. 

 
I also began to volunteer for the Suicide 

Prevention Hotline.  For two years, every Friday at
 12:01 a.m.,  
I would begin a six-hour shift at North Central Men
tal 
Health on High Street. 

This experience taught me many valuable 

lessons and skills. It taught me how to pour 

compassion into my voice, to make it resonate over 

a phone line, and how to be present with a person i
n 
a highly stressful situation. I learned to listen 

attentively, to hear emotions and anxieties. I also
 learned that I cannot help everyone. Although this 

realization was painful, it is a reality that must 
be 
understood if one is to maintain their sanity in th
e 
helping professions. 

 
Over countless phone calls, one subject 

came up continually and unexpectedly: religion and 

spirituality. At first, I was reluctant to engage i
n this 
kind of discussion. However, over time, I 

discovered that, not only was I able to have these 

sorts of conversations, but that they were an 

important and effective tool for walking people bac
k 
from...the edge. Religion became a place where I 

could connect with a caller, and reestablish their 
link 
to their own self-worth. 

 
I would like to say that I saved people–
I 
now realize that these stories, these people, their
 plights and anguish, their hopes and dreams, were 

changing me, teaching me, and developing my 

understanding of what it is to be human. They were 

saving me. 

 
Something inside my own heart was building. I 

was becoming more spiritual. This came to a climax 

one day when I was delivering pizzas. I was musing 

about karma and theology when 

a small warmth began behind my shoulders, and 

moved throughout my body. The feeling grew to 

something indescribable. It was total, and the grea
test 
gift I have ever been given. 

I had to pull over it was so intense. One thought 

entered into my mind: Intent. It was both loud 

and soft. Accusatory and consoling. Beautiful and 

terrible.  And that my friends, is my conversion 

experience. I wanted something from God and I 

didn™t get it, I didn™t want anything from God and 
I 
got something profound. 

 
In that moment, some part of the divine became 

evident in my life. I didn™t deserve it. I still do
n™t. 
But, for whatever reason, it happened and my life h
ad 
changed.  I started going back to the church of my 

childhood, here. I began to teach our Sunday School
 classes for the 3rd Œ 4th graders. I have taught ou
r 
High School OWL and Coming of Age classes for 

the last three years. It has been rewarding in ways
 that I would never have imagined. 

 
Do you want to hear new and profound ways of 

understanding the world? Try asking our youth what 

they believe, and you may find yourself surprised a
nd 
challenged. I know I was. I still am. 

 
And this brings us to a special story, the moment 

of my Call.  One day, sitting in the back row of th
is 
church, I considered what I wanted to do after 

college. What kind of psychologist did I want to be
? 
Where would I go for graduate school? Could I 

leave my family, my friends? What was I going to 

do with my life?  I looked up at the pulpit and mus
ed, ?I 
could do that, I could be up there preaching.? 

I rejected that idea immediately. 

You see, my mother had told me, at a very young 

age, that I would be a minister some day. The irony
 of my many years of Atheism, coupled with the 

absurdity of my mother ever being right, caused me 

to want to laugh out loud. 

And I might have, if I hadn™t almost 

emptied the contents of my stomach onto the 

parishioner in front of me. 

Yes, someone in this congregation was this close 

to wearing my breakfast! 

My rejection of ministry caused a visceral 

reaction in my body. My rejection felt wrong on a 

level that I can only describe as total. I have com
e to 
understand this moment as my blessed moment of 

calling, although at the time it terrified me. 

 
This was my Call. 

and so, in some strange way, it was decided 

that I was going to go into ministry. 

The terrifying thing for me was that I did not 

feel in any way worthy of this Call. I knew that I 
had 
not experienced enough in my life nor lived into 

my own beliefs long enough, to presuppose that I 

could minister to anybody. 

With my work on the Suicide Prevention 

Hotline, my RE work, and other volunteer 

experiences, Service, as a concept, had grown deep 

roots within me, and I didn™t think that I had 

performed enough service to be a minister. 

 
I have a memory of my father talking about 

the Peace Corps. I do not remember the context, but
 my father had said that he had always wanted to joi
n 
the Peace Corps. He had even filled out the 

application.  I would join the Peace Corps. I would
 do 
something that my father had always wanted to do. 

In 2007, I became a volunteer for the United 

States Peace Corps. in Ghana, After training, I was
 placed in Portripor, an extremely rural village wit
h 
no running water or electricity. 

When I got on the plane to leave, I had 

never felt so alone in my entire life. 

I remember looking back at the people who had 

come to see me off, and smiling–with tears in my 

eyes–and walking away. 

 
In the village I didn™t have instant access to 

all of the amenities I take for granted here. If I 

needed water, I would take buckets to the water 

hole. If I needed groceries, it was a 45 minute bik
e 
ride to Bonakye. If I needed money, it was an all 

day commute to Nkwanta on a dirt road in a 

crowded van. 

 
Thank goodness for it. I don™t think I ever 

understood how good I have it here. For nothing 

other than luck, I am white, middle class, American
, 
male, heterosexual, and well educated. The benefits
 I receive from these descriptions are so underserve
d 
as to be close to criminal. I am still coming to gr
ips 
with the perspectives I gained from my experience, 

but I try hard everyday to be thankful for what I 

have. 

 
Thankfulness is just one of many things I 

learned in the Ghanaian bush. I learned how to 

organize communities in a multi-cultural setting. I
 learned how to coordinate resources, write grants, 

and develop programs and events centered on 

education and development. I have taught in multi- 

lingual schools, established Moringa farms, and 

participated in customs and practices of a non-nati
ve 
culture. In short, I became a much more dynamic 

person than I had been before this experience, and 

not a day goes by that I don™t miss being who I was
 in Ghana. 

 
Does Moringa ring a bell for anyone here? 

About six years ago, I wrote our church asking for 

money for a fairly audacious Moringa planting 

project. Moringa is a fast growing tree. Its leaves
 are 
like a multi-vitamin with protein. Our church sent 

about $200 dollars which I used to purchase the 

seeds. Over the life of the project, we planted ove
r 
10,000 of these trees. Through the money given by 

this church, food has been grown and people have 

been nourished.  I am not the only one who thanks y
ou now. 
Thank you. 

 
I came back from the Peace Corps ready to 

move on with my plan for ministry. I went directly 

into seminary. I began with two emotions: wonder 

and anxiety. The wonder arose from the feeling of 

being able to study, academically, the subjects of 

theology, ethics, and pastoral care. The anxiety 

arose because I was attending a Christian seminary,
 and I was not a Christian. 

 
Experience has proven my anxieties were 

exaggerated. Not only did I find my ideas and 

beliefs to be, for the most part, accepted, they we
re 

also encouraged and engaged by my colleagues and 

professors. 

 
Also during my seminary experience, I 

added two more titles to my name: Sifu and Father. 

Sifu is the proper title of an instructor in the Sh
ao- 
Lin Do system. I have been practicing martial arts 

for over 10 years now and am currently the 

assistant instructor at our school in Hilliard, und
er 
Sifu Max Watkins. 

 
I also became a father. On August 24th, 

2011, my wife gave birth to Apollo Brayden Pierce. 

He is simply amazing. The first time I held him is 

the most proud I have ever been. Everyday he 

surprises me, and to hear him laugh–
it puts a giant 
smile on my face. 

 
This brings us to where I am now: I am in 

my last semester of seminary. Four classes to go, a
nd 
I will walk with a Master of Divinity in May. In on
e 
week I will have completed one unit of Clinical 

Pastoral Education at Nationwide Children™s 

Hospital. I am also serving on our Pastoral Team 

and doing my field education requirements with this
 congregation. 

 
My time as a Chaplain at the hospital has 

been truly formative for me and given a new 

direction to my call. I went into my training as a 

chaplain believing that I was already good at 

providing pastoral care, and I had very little to l
earn. 
I am trying to think of a good way to describe that
– some Greek word–oh yeah–hubris–
that™s what 
that was. 

 
My time at Children™s hospital has left me 

feeling exposed, vulnerable, and humbled–
which 
is the exact foundation I now believe necessary to 

build up a good chaplain. 

I was once asked what I thought it took to 

be a good chaplain. I replied that it was the abili
ty to 
put the events of life into a spiritual context and
 to 
relieve spiritual angst. 

And surely that is a part of it. But now, I 

understand that to be a chaplain, to provide 

meaningful pastoral care, requires the willingness 

to be truly present with another human being–
and 
the strength to let your heart break–
over and over 
again. 

 
I have come to find out that I am a chaplain, 

and it is my place to be present in the midst of 

crisis. 

 
Over time, and with many experiences, I 

believe I have become–able to be a 

spiritual resource to people in crisis, and to be a
 spiritual leader in my community. I tested the wate
rs 
with the suicide hotline. I immersed myself with th
e 
Peace Corps. I learned how to swim at Children™s 

Hospital. So what is next? 

 
The call to service has become ingrained in 

Me, and I have decided to become a chaplain in the 

United States Army. I find it deeply meaningful to 

be a spiritual resource to people whose mortality 

and lethality are constantly in play. I know that I
 can 
be relevant in that theater, in that ethos, to thos
e 
men and women who serve, so I will seek active 

duty as soon as it is available to me. 

 
Many in this congregation and our 

denomination are apprehensive about the military, 

its history, and its current use in the greater wor
ld. 
Me too. But I ask of you, how does one change the 

way our military operates? It takes two things: 

outside pressure and inside pressure. Who speaks to
 the inherent worth and dignity of all people on the
 inside? Who raises the voice of justice, equity, an
d 
compassion as a three part harmony? Chaplains do. 

And I wish there were a thousand more 

Unitarian Universalist chaplains serving in the 

military. Even one more makes a difference. 

 
In summation, I want to say that my heart 

truly wants to comfort people. I have built my life
 around it. I believe that the position of chaplain 
is 
unique in that it has the possibility of offering a
 powerful spiritual outlet to those who desperately 

need it. Chaplains can be healing and restorative i
n a 
way that no one else can be. Chaplains can also 

speak truth to power in a way that no other 

profession can. 

 
I have come to the conclusion that my Call is to 

be a chaplain in the Army and I will fulfill that c
all 
to the best of my abilities. 

 
And finally, I would like to say that I appreciate 

you taking the time to listen to me. If all goes as
 planned, I will ship off to basic training in June.
 I will not be going alone. I will take the love 

of my friends and my family. I will take all the 

experiences that have made me who I am now. And 

I will be taking all of you with me, and I am deepl
y 
appreciative of the love I have received from this 

community. 

