Religions, Families and War 
May 27, 2012 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 Greeting, Centering, Kindling, Opening: 

We are here 

on the Memorial Day weekend 

to worship, to be honest about reality, but also 

to knock at the door of hope and healing 

that we might bless our future  

with the vision and practice of peace.  

 
 
And so, without guarantees, we lean into joy, and b
end toward a just way of life, both for our 
own sakes, and for the sake of our children and eve
ryone with whom we share the earth. We 
would engage our mission wholeheartedly, with coura
ge, self-questioning, compassion, 
vulnerability and honesty. 

 
Naming Ceremony for Violet Elaine Carey 

Unison Affirmation:  

 
Though free to think and act, we are held together,
 like the stars in the firmament, with ties 
inseparable. These ties cannot be seen, but we can 
feel them. I cut myself in the finger, and it 
pains me: this finger is a part of me. I see a frie
nd hurt, and it hurts me, too: my friend and I are 
one. And now I see stricken down an enemy I care le
ast for, and it still grieves me. Does this 
not prove that each of us is only part of a whole? 
   
                   
Nikola Tesla, June 1900 
 
Sequence 

The day is hot. The sun bright. 

Our gardens are thirsty.  

At night they are lit by fireflies. 

The summer is near. 

Yet it is not so everywhere. 

Some places it rains and clouds thicken. 

Some streets in Tasmania  

know the cool wind of coming winter. 

In some homes, young children learn to toddle. 

In other rooms across our own nation,  

especially on this weekend, 

you will see tears wet on cheeks, 

tears signing memories for those 

who died either in Asian wars 30 years ago,  

or family members weeping for family members who pe
rished in the recent massacre  

in Syria 30 hours ago. 

A Unitarian Universalist chaplain  

holds a soldier™s shaking head on her shoulder 

in Kabul Afghanistan right now, where it is night, 

where there are no fireflies,  

where it is only 54 degrees. 

Come Monday, some people will visit graves,  

and leave flowers that will wilt soon  

in the relentless sun of late May.  

And yet after this weekend,  

more days,  

more months,  

more years.  

And children born on this very day will grow up and
 learn to toddle, and read and run. 
They too will watch the generations around them ris
e and fall, but they will know even more 
than we do that the world is not now what once it w
as,  
for the numbers do not lie–there is less war now th
an in any other era of human history. There 
is  

less violence, even less cruelty.  

But their days are to come. This is our moment now,
 our singular moment in the flow of 
moments from more violence to less. Let us receive 
the gift of this moment in peace, and in 
silence. 

 
silence 

 
The day is hot. The sun bright. 

And like any other day, our lives are tied 

to other lives, lives which we bring with us 

into this room with memory, and love, and grief. 

Let us remember them now, naming them 

in our hearts as part of this day, this moment, 

as a part of our living equal to our heartbeat, 

or our breathing in blessing. 

 
naming 

 
The day is hot. The sun bright. 

The song is classic. The circle it sings 

the very circle of our lives. 

 
(This song you're about to hear was written by Pete
 Seeger, who is a Unitarian Universalist, a 
long time member of the Community Church of NY, UU,
 on the island of Manhattan. The text for 
this song was Seeger™s riff on a Ukrainian folksong
 lyric found in the novel by Mikhail 
Sholokhov's Nobel winning novel, Quiet Flows the Do
n–the melody is entirely his own.) 
 
The First Reading
 is taken from the Banquet Speech when Mikhail Aleks
androvich Sholokhov 

received the Nobel Prize for literature in 1965, fo
r his great novel 

 
 --Quiet Flows the 
Don.
  
Humankind is not divided into a flock of individual
s, people floating about in a vacuum, like 
cosmonauts beyond the pull of Earth's gravity. We l
ive on Earth, we are subject to its laws and, 
as the Gospel puts it, "every day has troubles and 
trials enough of its own, and its hopes for a 
"better tomorrow." Vast sections of the world's pop
ulation are inspired by the same desires. They 
live for common interests that bind them together f
ar more than they separate them. 
 
The era we live in is full of uncertainty. Yet ther
e is not one nation on Earth that desires a war. 
There are, however, forces that hurl whole nations 
into war. Is it not inevitable that the ashes of 
the Second World War should move the writer's heart
? Is not an honest writer bound to stand up 
against those who wish to condemn humankind to self
-destruction? 
 
What, then, is the vocation and what are the tasks 
of an artist like me who sees himself, not as an 
indifferent god above the battlefield, but as one s
mall particle of humanity? 
 
To be honest with the reader, to tell people the tr
uth - which may sometimes be unpleasant but is 
always fearless. To strengthen human hearts in thei
r belief in the future, in the belief in their own 
ability to build this future. To be a champion of p
eace throughout the world.   
 
The Second Reading
 is a poem by the great Polish poet Anna Swirszczyns
ka (pronounced 
Sphere-sh-
chin
-ska  or just say Anna Swir) who, after a long peri
od of silence and literary 
paralysis, decided to write about her experiences o
f the Second World War, which, of course, 
happened all around her, not in some faraway land. 

 
A Conversation Through the Door 

 
At five in the morning 

I knock on his door. 

I say through the door: 

In the hospital on Sliska Street 

your son, a soldier, is dying. 

 
He half-opens the door, 

does not remove the chain. 

Behind him his wife 

shakes. 

 
I say: your son asks his mother 

to come. 

He says: the mother won't come. 

Behind him the wife 

shakes. 

 
I say: The doctor allowed us 

to give him some wine. 

He says: please wait. 

 
He hands me a bottle through the door 

locks the door, 

locks it with a second key. 

 
Behind the door his wife 

begins to scream as if she were in labor. 

 
The Sermon:  
War, Religion and Families 
 
How do I begin a sermon with the words 
war
, and 
religion
 and 
families
 in its declared title? 
Three such spacious and evocative words with many d
ivergent meanings and nuances! You 
begin to wonder if communication is even possible w
ith such a hefty vocabulary.  
 
War is an especially complicated word. For example,
 conservative political pundits use it faith-
fully at Christmas time. They decry the use of the 
greeting ?Happy Holidays!? since the only 
proper greeting is ?Merry Christmas.? Not say "Happ
y Holidays? instead of Merry Christmas is 
to declare 
war
 on Christmas, or even, 
on all Christians.
 No guns or bombs are used in this war, 
as far as I know, and no one is killed, but they in
sist on that word. It seems a bit much to me, but 
I suspect the word is used there to deliberately dr
amatize.  
 
President Johnson declared a 
War
 on Poverty, which didn't involve gunfire or bombs 
but rather, 
massive legislation. The aim of this 
War
 was to 
prevent 
death, actually: the death of body, 
culture, families– death due to the effects of pove
rty; the purpose of this 
war 
was not to kill 
people but to bring life. 

 
The Civil 
War
 in our nation, however, 
did 
involve guns. Many young soldiers died, many 
families were ripped apart, and together we faced t
he near destruction of a nation. So let me be 
clear this morning that when 
I 
am talking about 
war
, I am talking about this last meaning instead 
of the others. 

 
But when I use the word 
family
, however, where the definitions clearly spread out
 just as widely, 
I guess I'll have to say, for the purposes of my se
rmon this morning, that I mean 
all
 families
. 
However shaped or defined. 
Families
 with parents and children, whether born into a par
ticular 
family or adopted into it. 
Families
 without children. Single moms, single dads, same-g
ender 
couples, with or without children. Even metaphorica
l 
families
– church 
family
, choir 
family
, the 
multi-cultural 
family
 group in the church, chosen 
families.
 Clusters of people where there are 
particular connections of love, or culture, or trad
ition or shared effort or even memory. 
Mere blood connection is not sufficient. 

 
Then there is the word 
Religion
, and the word 
Religion
 may be the most difficult of all, and 
here™s where I may have the most push-back.  When s
ome folks use the word ?
religion
? they 
mean only ?conservative, mostly Christian religion?
 with clear doctrines, and a worshipful 
attitude toward received scripture, always perceive
d as completely authoritative, at least as 

interpreted through a conservative lens. They espec
ially like to offer as examples, say on 
television or YouTube, the 
louder 
preachers shouting, screaming and knocking people o
ver with 
"the spirit." Or they're referring to the people bu
ilding Creationist theme parks in Kentucky, or 
the righteous fast-talkers like Kirk Cameron findin
g easy marks on the street and fooling them 
with his relentless questions into thinking they mu
st be 
religious 
like him after all. 
 
Or they list certain popes, right-wing rabbis, or o
pinionated imams who have said silly, or 
controversial or disturbing things; or still infamo
us preachers like the late Rev. Falwell who 
stepped into politics with a muddy religious splash
. 
Religion
 for such folks is defined as always 
frightful, downright stupid, the territory of the g
ullible and uneducated, and the source of a great 
deal of evil in history and in the present day worl
d. 
 
People whose opinions I tend to enjoy most of the t
ime, like comic Bill Maher, will even tell you 
with great passion that ?
religion
? is the source of most of the war in human history
. But in my 
experience, this is usually tossed-off at me as an 
?of 
course
 its true? proclamation. It's simply 
stated with a knowing smirk, and if you ask for evi
dence, they'll come up with three words "the 
crusades, the inquisition, and the witch-burnings,"
 which are large historical categories, not 
evidence. 

 
Other folks are less panicked about the word 
religion
, and are willing to suggest that 
fanatics
 are 
best named just that...
fanatics
, or simply ?rigid reactionaries.? They can find no
 compelling 
reasons to let them claim the title as the pure, em
blematic or even sole representations of the 
word 
religion.
 A Zen practitioner sitting quietly; a Catholic nun
 running a soup kitchen in a 
pretty troubled neighborhood; rabbi Rami translatin
g the Hebrew book of Qoheleth to reveal its 
authentic humanism; the lesbian Bishop of Los Angel
es preaching a sermon on the gospel that is 
pure universalism; the Muslim author, Evoo Patel, w
riting an interfaith best-seller, the Unitarian 
Universalist minister conducting her 200
th
 same-gender ceremony, this time legally, because 
she™s in Iowa–these folks represent the word 
?religion?
 too. 
 
I'm more in the last category, not just for the sak
e of this sermon, but most of the time. And OK, 
yes, I'll admit it™s hard for me to embrace both th
e liberal and the conservative elements in wide 
embrace when I use the word 
religion,
 but it seems dishonest about the complex reality o
f the 
world around me not to do at least that. But even a
s I do that, I admit I will keep the corrective 
offered by the great Vivekenanda in my pocket as a 
touchstone to finger as I offer my words this 
morning: ?
To devote your life to the good of all and to the h
appiness of all is 
religion.
 Whatever 
you do for your own sake is not
 religion.
? 
 
Now that the initial wrestling-match with verbal me
anings is at least partially out of the way, let 
me get down to the main themes of the sermon, despi
te the burdensome trinity of words in my 
title. 

 
On Memorial Day, we remember all who suffered and d
ied in wars. Soldiers yes, and civilians. 
Men and women and children. People speaking any lan
guage, people brought up in a thousand 
distinct cultures, poor or well-to-do. We remember 
them all. But we remember them 
in the 
context of war.
  
Wars are fought for what appears to be a variety of
 reasons. Territory. Outrage. Resources. 
Anger. Finding cultural differences to be completel
y horrifying. Tribalism. Greed. And yes, 
sometimes in part for religious reasons, understood
 in all of its forms, as I said.  
 
Now certainly, some who fight wars claim to be reli
gious. For example, there can be no doubt 
that both conservative Southern Baptist chaplains, 
and liberal Unitarian Universalist chaplains 
serve in the military of our nation. And there are 
those who carry their bibles into battle. But I 
really cannot find, as I read history, any evidence
 to support that religion 
per se
, either 
conservative or liberal, 
is the principal source or origin of war throughout
 human history. 
Sure 
the crusades had some bishops offering theological 
reasoning, but the rank and file who fought 
the war, as far as I can determine from the records
– did it for themselves–they were largely 
mercenaries who wanted money and wealth at the expe
nse of others' lives. Yes, the men who 
fought the Crusades were filled with the ordinary i
gnorant and stupid prejudices of the time–
 against Jews, against Muslims, or as they called th
em then, Musselmen, believing they were 
some sort of Christian heretics. But, as historian 
Karen Armstrong brilliantly put it, for the 
Muslims, the Crusades were just a ?remote border in
cident? at the edge of their territory. 
Certainly the anti-Islamic prejudice of certain bis
hops had religious associations, but such 
prejudices also had to do with grabbing up the very
 real wealth of the well-governed Muslim 
territories. The mercenaries who murdered the Jews 
and Muslims along the way to Jerusalem 
always confiscated every bit of wealth and every po
ssession left by those they murdered. Yes, 
there were the so-called ?Wars of Religion? in Fran
ce, the Lebanese Civil War with its religious 
factions, and the wars between the various princes 
after Martin Luther's late-life nervous 
breakdown in Europe. But again, you can find nation
alistic, economic, racial, tribal, and political 
reasons dominant in each of these histories. Northe
rn Ireland is divided between Catholics and 
Protestants historically, yes, and the historic con
flict there is significant to both religions. But 
more significant is the economic differences betwee
n the two religious groups, which until 
recently was quite severe. To ignore such a distort
ing economic realities by pointing only to the 
spittle-mouth rhetoric of Protestant divine Ian Pai
sley or the bombings placed by the Irish 
Republican Army is simply irresponsible. Religion i
n the Vietnam War, the two World Wars, or 
the Korean War? Not an easy sell there. And frankly
, even though a lot of pretty ignorant 
fundamentalist preachers express their idea that th
e recent wars Œ in Iraq, and in Afghanistan for 
example Œ have been wars of Christianity vs. Islam,
 the idea is simply without foundation. 
Again, fanatics are just that, fanatics. They are n
ot agents of truth and light, nor the true 
representatives of the rather abstract word "religi
on." 
 
The most recent book by the famed biologist E. O. W
ilson suggests that group loyalty has been 
the principle evolutionary engine of human civiliza
tion, and that war has been part and parcel of 
this engine. Not the family. Not friendships, or th
e love of children. But groups larger than 
families or friendship circles...i.e., nations, eth
nicities, clans, the cultures of religion, and now,
 
God help us, the fool international corporations wh
o claim for themselves the dignity of 
personhood. 

 
But this morning I would like to join the cultured 
questioners of Dr. Wilson, and ask two things, 
namely, "Why can't 
the family
 Œ the way I defined it earlier, which includes fri
endship circles Œ 
be a greater metaphor for evolutionary good than ei
ther 
nation, ethnicity, tribe, race 
or 
religious 
creed?  
And
 two, why can't the truest expression of good religi
on -- or good secularity for that 

matter -- be to lift up the universal family of all
 humankind as our primary concern. Not faction, 
not race, not language, or culture, but the 
family of 
all
 humanity, 
to which we might devote 
ourselves. I finger the touchstone of Vivekenanda I
 kept for this moment: 
?To devote your life to 
the good of 
all
 and to the happiness of 
all 
is religion. Whatever you do for your own sake is n
ot 
religion.? 

 
In my years of ministry, I have attended to the pas
toral issues in many kinds of families. Illness. 
Loss. Depression. Addiction. Etc. But only three ti
mes have I experienced the most difficult 
pastoral event of all:  the death of children in th
e war, and the impact of that death on their 
families. In all three cases, the poem of Anna Swir
czszynska you heard earlier expresses with 
painful clarity 
exactly
 what I experienced. The heart-rending cry Œ from bo
th mothers and fathers 
and other family members Œ a  cry that will never l
eave my soul as long as I live.  
 
Those who make wars might tell me that such wails a
re the cost of war, and that everyone needs 
to accept that and do their duty. The needs of the 
clan, the tribe, the nation, the group, the creed 
or the identity are greater than the cries of fathe
rs and mothers, sisters and brothers, children and 
grandparents. Toughen up. 

 
I really have a hard time believing that I need to 
toughen up. I'd rather believe that others might 
better soften a bit. I really have a hard time beli
eving that children Œ in any nation, race, clan, or
 
creed Œ are worth so much less than some pure ident
ity, some plot of land, some stated belief, 
some corporate profit, some resource, 
or any claim for self, and self alone.
 As Sholokhov put it 
in his moving address when he accepted his Nobel Pr
ize: ?Humankind is not divided into a flock 
of individuals, people floating about in a vacuum, 
like cosmonauts beyond the pull of Earth's 
gravity. We live on Earth, we are subject to its la
ws and, as the Gospel puts it, 'every day has 
troubles and trials enough of its own, and its own 
hopes for a 
better tomorrow
.' Vast sections of 
the world's population are inspired by the same des
ires. They live for common interests that bind 
them together far more than they separate them.?   

 
And I find myself remembering the moving words of o
ur affirmation this morning too. 
?And 
now I see stricken down an enemy I care least for, 
and it still grieves me,?
 writes the great 
Serbian electrical engineer Nikola Tesla. Indeed. W
hy must grief itself be only tribal, racial or 
dogmatic? Why wouldn't grief for the loss of anothe
r member of the human family be universal? 
Why would anyone think peace is even the remotest p
ossibility unless that WERE so?  
 
I don't get it otherwise. 

 
Both of these great thinkers, Tesla and Sholokhov, 
join our Polish poet, Anna Swirszczynska, in 
recognizing that feelings, the human heart, rooted 
in the love of all of our families, has the power 
to be greater than identity politics or identity re
ligion for that matter, the false religion that is 
entirely self-serving...
my
 salvation, 
my
 personal relationship with God. 
 
Do I think all wars can be avoided? No. I recognize
, sadly, that psychopaths like Adolf Hitler, 
Pol Pot, or this brutal wildman in Uganda right now
, Joseph Kony, who thinks of himself as a 
spirit medium, with both fundamentalist Protestant 
and reactionary Muslim elements thrown in 
for good measure, will always pop up. Sometimes soc
iopathic personalities with leadership 

charisma simply have to be stopped, and that is a t
ragic, but realistic state of affairs. 
 
Still, there are less wars now, less violence on ea
rth than there ever was before. The fact that we 
can see everything on our computers when it happens
 may seduce us into thinking this is not 
true, but I assure you, every indicator says that i
t is, and I, at least, take some comfort in that. 
 
How do I end a sermon on 
war
, and 
religion
, and 
families
? By quoting Sholokhov again. In my 
preaching, I want to do what he did with his writin
g, namely, in his words:  To strengthen human 
hearts in their belief in the future, and to comfor
t them "in the belief in their own ability to help 
build this future." Let your hearts be lifted!   

 
Offering 

In this late May in late spring, I remember the say
ing: the fragrance always remains in the hand 
that gives the rose. So may it be for this time of 
offering, even if we give at other times, that what
 
we give remains with us as a glow within our heart.
 The morning offering is now given and 
received. 

 
Memorial Day Prayer for Peace 

Not peace on paper alone with fancy signatures, 

Not formal surrenders and ashes where houses were. 

Not flowers on graves, or ribbons on chests. 

But  I pray in the presence of Love 

for real peace. Children who look totally different
 from each other playing with each other. 
People of different religions but the same gender 

dating each other to the joy of their families and 
friends; health care for those who can™t afford it,
 food for those who are hungry; peace that is not ab
sence but presence, not truce but trust, 
not something that™s left after everything has been
 destroyed,  
but something that transcends greed,  

like the stubborn, spacious, singular Love I hold m
ost dear, symbolized for some at least by the 
word holy, or even G-d. For that peace I pray–not t
hat it descend, or rise up by power, but that 
we ourselves might slowly and steadily play it forw
ard. Amen 
 
 
 
