Personal Accountability 
October 6, 2013 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 
 
Gathering, Welcoming, Centering, Kindling, Opening
: 
 
 We are here, 
8after a week of humid, warm days, 
 and sad and difficult news from Washington, 

  to worship, to link our lives to ideals 

 to which we are accountable: 

        truthfulness, compassion and courage 

 so that we might live lives that matter,
  
       and ground our days in wisdom. 

And so, bearing witness 
both
 to our world as it is, 
and
 as Love can imagine it, we would 
claim that vision of a just world in our own lives.
 And because of a growing sense of kinship 
with all beings, inviting our compassion, we begin 
in this celebration to engage our mission 
with our whole lives: body, mind, and heart.
  # 1002 Comfort Me vs 1-2 

Ingathering  
based on Marc Brown's Arthur's      
 Computer Disaster 

"Mom, can I use your computer to play Deep Dark Sea
?" 
"What's Deep Dark Sea?" his mom asked. 

"Mom, it™s the greatest video game in the whole wor
ld, so can I play it on your computer? Puh-
leez." 

"What is the game about?" 

"A haunted ship that sank to the bottom of the sea.
 It™s got sharks in it, and swimming skeletons 
and everything! Please, please, please, please, PLE
ASE?" 
"Oh, alright,? she said. ?But finish your dinner fi
rst OK?"  Arnold finished his dinner amazingly 
fast! 

Once Arthur started to play Deep, Dark Sea 

he couldn't stop.  

"Time for bed, Arthur," said his dad. 

"But Dad, I almost found 
the thing
!" 
"You can find the thing, whatever that is, tomorrow
, young man. It™s bedtime. Right now."  
So Arthur went to bed. Went to bed with a frown on 
his face. He really LOVED this new game. 
Next morning, Arnold's friend Buster came over to p
lay Deep Dark Sea with Arnold. But 
Arnold's mom 

said, "Sorry boys. I have to use the computer all d
ay for my job."  But just then, the phone rang.  
It was for Mom. "Oh dear, I have to run to the offi
ce for a while anyway. But that does not mean 
you can use my computer. Don't touch it, OK?" 

Arthur and Buster both frowned, but shook their hea
ds Yes.  After Mom left, Arthur and Buster 
stared at the computer. "I was so close last night 
to finding 
the thing
," he said. Buster said, "I bet 
you could find it before your Mom gets home." So th
ey got onto the computer and started 
playing the game.  

"Look out for that squid!" said Buster. "I'm runnin
g out of oxygen," said Arthur. Then he saw it. 
Look, the treasure chest. That is where 
the thing
 is!"  
"I saw it first!" said Buster. They both tried to b
e first to get it, but they went so fast, they 
knocked the whole keyboard onto the floor. "Oh oh. 
Now you're in BIG trouble," said Buster. "I 
don't know. Maybe I can fix it before Mom gets home
.? Arthur got the book that talked about the 
game, and looked through it. They couldn't find any
thing. Arthur called up his friend who had 
the nickname "The Brain" because he was so smart, a
nd knew so much. He came over, but The 
Brain couldn't do anything either. They even went t
o a computer store. When he found out how 
much it would cost to have someone come out to fix 
the problem, Arnold said, "Oh no! That's 
more money that I will get for my next ten birthday
s! I'm am doomed. Doomed. Mom will lose 
her job because she can't use her computer, and the
n we won't be able to keep our house, and 
then we'll all have to live on the street, and it™s
 all my fault. It™s the end of the world." 
Arthur and Buster went home from the store, but as 
soon as they got there, they could see Mom 
had come home, and she was already walking to the c
omputer desk. Arthur felt sick. Buster left 
for home in a hurry. He didn't want to see what was
 going to happen. Arthur went into the room 
where his mother was, and just as she was about to 
turn the computer on, he said, "Stop! I was 
playing Deep Dark Sea, and the screen went blank. I
 wrecked it. It™s all my fault." 
"That happens to me all the time. Did you jiggle th
is switch here?" Mom jiggled the switch and 
the computer...and the game...came on. "Why didn't 
you call me?" Mom asked. "I thought you 
would be very mad."  "I am not mad, I am disappoint
ed. You should always call me with your 
problems, no matter what." 

"Am I going to get punished?" asked Arthur. 

"Of course," said Mom. "No computer games for a wee
k. Now get ready for bed. I'll be up to say 
good night in a few minutes.?  Arthur got his PJs o
n and went to bed. Mom took her time coming 

up to say good night. He called out to her "Are you
 coming up Mom?"  "Give me a minute, 
Arthur. I need to blast these sharks and skeletons 
away from the treasure chest." 
"Good night, Mom," said Arthur with a smile. 

Greeting 
Affirming  
 We are a profoundly interconnected species, as the 
 global economic and ecological 
crises reveal in vivid and frightening detail. We m
ust embrace the  simple fact that we 
are dependent on and accountable to, one another.  
              
Parker Palmer, 2012 
Singing 

Communing 

Oh Love far deeper than my own,  

I've discovered this week  

that I am not a fan of being held hostage 

by people in a chamber far from here.  

Oh Love, I don't know what else to call it. 

I'm not so clever with words that can 

accurately describe what's going on in my heart. 

And I know that others are affected by this event 

so much more than me.  After all, I still work.  

Get paid.  And have no plans to visit Yosemite any 
time soon or attend a Head Start school. 
I do think the feisty civil rights worker Fannie Lo
u Hamer, born 96 years ago today, expresses 
my heart today much better than I can:  
With the people, for the people, by the people. I c
rack up 
when I hear it; I say, with the handful, for the ha
ndful, by the handful, 'cause that's what really 
happens. 

But for now, oh Love greater than my own, I am goin
g to have to keep on going forward, step by 
step right here. In Columbus. Hospital visits, craf
ting weekend weddings, writing sequences like 
this one, doing laundry, noticing the leaves slowly
 get dusty, then take on colors that defy my 
imagination, folding ravioli for a Thursday dinner 
with Geoff and Karie, having morning coffee 
with Christian at that place on High St, talking wi
th Bernie in NY, until I drain my cell-phone 
battery. Step by step. Moment by moment. And while 
moving forward a bit at a time, I suddenly 
recall it was Mohandas Gandhi's birthday this week,
 Gandhi who faced far more difficulty in his 
time than we do in ours. So, much is possible. 
So much
 is possible. So much 
is 
possible. And so 
now, remembering that the whole universe rose out o
f a deep silence 13.8 billion years ago, may 
we immerse ourselves in the emblem of that silence 
now. 
silence 

Oh Love, my heart experiences more than frustration
 with stand-offs in Washington. It reaches 
out in care and gratitude all over the world. The l
ove I feel for others, the forgiveness I both 
work to offer, and desire for myself; the heart str
etching to those who live far away, or whom I 
struggle to love, the grief I feel for all whom I h
ave lost...these too have been part of my week. 
And so I remember those who find shelter in my hear
t by naming them, either silently or aloud. 
 
Reading
 The First Reading comes from John G. Miller's book 
Outstanding! written in 2010 
 
 
Certainly there are situations in life where we pul
l out the swords of Facts and Logic and wield 
them mightily in our defense.  But when we are temp
ted to do so in front of anyone we call 
?customer,? we might want to remember the country s
ong that says, ?Here's a quarter, call 
someone who cares.?  Never forget:  The customer do
es not care to hear our reasons and 
excuses.  Just ask Alan Farnsworth, head of custome
r service worldwide for Bausch & Lomb.  
He's been on the receiving end of the better approa
ch, and shares it in this story: 
 Connecting through the Paris airport, I was on a bu
s full of travelers heading out 
for a remote boarding on a distant tarmac.  When we
 reached our plane, we 
weren't allowed to get out.  Instead, an Air France
 person came onto the bus to let 
us know the airplane cabin wasn't ready.  I wasn't 
concerned about the delay since 
I was not in a hurry, but I could see other passeng
ers getting increasingly 
annoyed as the minutes passed. 

 
Once we were finally on the plane and settled in, f
orty minutes behind schedule, 
the captain came over the speaker.  Honestly, I exp
ected the standard, canned, 
insincere airline spin such as, ?Sorry for the dela
y, but it's due to the late arrival 
of the incoming aircraft,? or some other routine ex
cuse.  Instead, here's what the 
captain said:  ?I'd like to personally apologize fo
r this delay.  It was due to our 
failure to get the cabin ready on time, and as capt
ain, I am responsible for that.  I 
didn't get the job done.  This is inexcusable.  Our
 practices will change to ensure 
this never happens again, at least not with any tea
m for which I am responsible.  
This is not typical of Air France, and I hope you w
on't hold this against us, 
because we can do better Œ and you deserve better. 
 Now, please sit back and 
enjoy the flight.  We may be late, but we'll make i
t as pleasant as possible for 
you.? 

 
I have never heard such honesty like this in circum
stances like these.  You should 
have seen the passengers' response.  It was fascina
ting to observe.  Nodding 
heads, smiles, and faces that clearly said, 
OK, that's pretty nice.  I feel better now
.  
People's agitation and irritation seemed to be repl
aced by acceptance and 
relaxation.  While observing all of this, it occurr
ed to me that candor and 
accountability like this are exactly how every orga
nization ought to deal with 
their customers.  After experiencing it Œ after fee
ling it myself Œ I know it works! 

 
The Second Reading comes from 
Elizabeth Cady Stanton
 Speech to Senate
 1892. 
Elizabeth Cady 
Stanton was a force of nature, and the speech she g
ave before the Senate in support of women's 
right to vote was different from all other such spe
eches in support of suffrage. Stanton's best 
friend was Susan B. Anthony, the Unitarian firebran
d from Rochester NY. 
 
 Nothing strengthens the judgment and quickens the 
conscience like individual 
 responsibility.  Nothing adds such dignity to char
acter as the recognition of one's self-
 sovereignty; the right to an equal place, everywhe
re conceded Œ a place earned by 
 personal merit, not an artificial attainment by in
heritance, wealth, family and position. 
Preaching 

Some of you may remember that I sometimes point out
 that I never offer these sermons to any 
particular person or group. I offer these sermons t
o myself, and pray you get some benefit from 
overhearing me. Well, this morning, I am really fee
ling the heat of what I have prepared, since I 
am challenging myself even more this morning than u
sual. 
Back in Hayward, where I served my former congregat
ion for 18 years, I had the pleasure of 
working with Phyllis Perry in the office. She was a
 remarkable person in skill, character and 
spirit... 

cheerful but direct in her speech. I loved her, and
 everyone in the congregation loved her. She 
was what the Germans call a "mensch..." that is, sh
e was a person of integrity and honor. Sadly, 
she died the year after I left Hayward, and I mourn
ed deeply. 
Phyllis kept a neat desk, and structured her papers
 well. She had a bulletin board above her desk 
where she put small cartoons she had cut out of 
The New Yorker
 and other places which offered a 
humorous take on her own work. But above them all w
as a very large and clear sign: "Lack of 
planning on your part does not constitute an emerge
ncy on my part." 
And she meant it too. When a member of the board ca
me in and asked Phyllis to make so many 
copies of an article on policy for distribution and
 at that evening's board meeting...only two 
hours away...Phyllis had no hesitation invoking the
 sign above her head. The person may have 
offered a great excuse: "I was so busy this week at
 school, because of accreditation papers I had 
to fill out, and I put this on hold until now."  Ph
yllis was never impressed by excuses...from 
board members, or from me, for that matter. She had
 plenty of commitments already she 
intended to fulfill, and she was not willing to dro
p everything because of circumstances. She 
would point to the copier and say, "There's the mac
hine. I have other things I promised to do 
first." 

Sometimes folks got upset with Phyllis because she 
drew this clear boundary. Because she didn't 
think excuses excused anything. Because she was so 
direct and clear. Sometimes folks would 
quietly bristle, basically blaming 
her, 
because she didn't drop everything to serve 
their 
needs.  
I use to applaud her, however, and often told her t
hat I thought she should be a role model for 
me. Of course, when I didn't plan ahead, she gave m
e the same treatment...there were no double 

standards. I was alarmed how fast I would have to w
restle myself away from wanting to blame 
her...after all, it was I who calculated my time wr
ong. If I had a sudden inspiration about 
something that would be good to do, or changed my m
ind about what picture might make the 
best impact on the printed order of celebration, sh
e would help me right away. She understood 
that ideas themselves don't always arrive at conven
ient times. But she had no patience for folks 
who looked upon her as some sort of convenient slav
e whose life goal was to support their 
mismanagement of time. 

I often mismanage my time. Which is why this sermon
 is so hard for me. I got into the bad habit 
years ago of never allowing enough time between eve
nts or commitments to actually travel there. 
It can take anywhere from 12 minutes to 25 to get f
rom my place to this place, depending on the 
signal lights alone. Not to count the frequent traf
fic snarl-ups that have blossomed during all the 
freeway interchange work down near my loft. It once
 took me 12 minutes to get here...the lights 
were all green, the traffic freely flowing. So I of
ten leave 12 minutes before a meeting. Wishful 
thinking, you could call it. A single traffic slowu
p can make me late, because I failed to plan for 
the frequent contingencies which have made the 12 m
inute trip between home and here an 
infrequent achievement. 

There are many other times in my life when I don't 
plan well, and it affects my schedule. By 
now, you would think that I would know that certain
 things on my calendar schedule are simple 
things which have to do with time, 
chronos. 
Tick tock. Tick tock. The time we tell by a clock. 
I 
promise to attend a BREAD meeting at 1:30, or a com
mittee meeting at 7. I promise to get a 
marriage ceremony crafted by a certain afternoon. I
 promise to cook a meal for our church 
Auction on a certain date at a certain time. I have
 a form to fill out for my continuing education 
session. These are all concrete things. 

But I do other things too. Less concrete. Things wi
thout clear beginnings or endings sometimes. I 
listen to people's stories. I hear them speak of th
eir struggles or sorrow or even share their joys. 
These are most beautiful aspects of my work...but t
hey are not at all like filling out a form. They 
move through my heart, they engage my sympathy, or 
tutor my compassion, they raise emotional 
questions about boundaries or forgiveness. The Gree
ks referred to the time in which such events 
for the heart take place as 
kairos, 
not the tic-toc clock time of
 chronos. 
The kind of time where 
two minutes might feel more like two hours, so deep
 are the concerns and compassion which 
rush from the vulnerable places of my being. And of
 course, anyone can, and does what I do... 
you hardly need ordination or counseling classes to
 be there for others...ministry is ministry. 
Period. Most of you, I wager, have felt this way wh
en you help a friend sort through a crisis, or 
lend an ear to a tough story, or hold a grieving ha
nd in your own hand. You don't want to be 
anywhere else. You want to be right there. But that
 "there"...as it should...does stay with you for 
a while, doesn't it? Matters of the heart simply we
igh more than matters of the head. 
So I am still learning how to plan my time more spa
ciously so that I don't show up late...not in 
time...but in spirit. I want to be fully present. I
 don't want to be living within the circle on the l
ast 
conversation. 

But I also don't want to go around blaming myself f
or being a bad planner, any more than I want 
to blame traffic jams or lights for making me late.
 I want to learn more how to be accountable to 

myself, and not engage in blaming anyone or anythin
g else for my mistakes. I want to claim my 
own native power as a human being, and not wallow i
n any quicksand of excuses which, I have 
to admit, usually ends up leaving me feeling powerl
ess. I am not powerless.  
Are there circumstances in my life which have affec
ted me? Sure. My father's jack-in-the-box 
anger. The bullying I experienced as a child from n
eighborhood kids. And, all this 
last 
week I 
was simply broiling on the inside because of this g
overnment shutdown event. I was in a sour 
mood all week, imagining myself flying to Washingto
n and slamming open the doors as I burst 
into chambers to shout "Are you kidding me? Are you
 out of your minds?"  
But I cannot do such a thing. The fantasy may make 
me feel righteous for a while, but the point 
is not to feel righteous about anything, but to mov
e through the world as it is with my principles 
and values steadying my gait along the path. Blamin
g others for 
my
 feelings, exalting myself as 
blameless over others, is a kind of spiritual delus
ion, and not either honorable or useful for the 
living of a life. It simply is not honest. It does 
not tell you who I most honestly am and am 
coming to be. 

What I like is what the pilot on the Air France fli
ght says about who he is. I almost fell over 
when I read this story you heard earlier in the rea
ding. He actually held 
himself
 accountable for 
the delay. 
?I'd like to personally apologize for this delay.  
It was due to our failure to get the 
cabin ready on time, and, as captain, I am responsi
ble for that.  I didn't get the job done.  This is 
inexcusable.  Our practices will change to ensure t
his never happens again, at least not with any 
team for which I am responsible.  This is not typic
al of Air France, and I hope you won't hold 
this against us, because we can do better Œ and you
 deserve better.  Now, please sit back and 
enjoy the flight.  We may be late, but we'll make i
t as pleasant as possible for you.?
 I have been fortunate enough to fly many times in m
y life, and I have never heard that. I do hear 
excuses however.  On my way to England last month, 
for example, I flew out from Columbus an 
hour late because of a storm. That is not an excuse
, that is a hard 
reality
 airlines have to deal 
with, and I can understand that completely. When I 
got to Dulles, however, there was another 
delay, not based on a storm. I got onto the plane t
o Manchester UK. They shut the doors, and 
then I sat on the tarmac for 
one full hour
. No explanation, no nothing. After 45 minutes, the
 pilot 
got on the intercom and proclaimed this brief state
ment, "We are still filling out papers."  Not an 
apology. Not an explanation. A worthless excuse. It
 takes an hour to fill out some forms? The 
passengers were none too happy, I'll tell you that.
 One man close to me said aloud, "Is he filling 
out his income tax forms now?" after which there wa
s rueful laughter nearby. 
I found myself wincing. Have I ever done something 
like that? Do I know how to accept 
responsibility and apologize? 

Personal accountability has what I would call a "sp
iritual" dimension to it. Elizabeth Cady 
Stanton spoke about it when she spoke on behalf of 
women getting the vote to an all-male Senate 
panel considering the issue. 

Nothing strengthens the judgment and quickens the c
onscience like individual responsibility.  
Nothing adds such dignity to character as the recog
nition of one's self-sovereignty; the right to 

an equal place, everywhere conceded Œ a place earne
d by personal merit, not an artificial 
attainment by inheritance, wealth, family and posit
ion. 
Powerful words. Being accountable for what we do an
d say, she says, 
quickens the conscience, 
and strengthens our judgment
. She uses the expression "self-sovereignty," that 
is, taking 
responsibility for our own actions. These were the 
spiritual reasons supporting women voting as 
human persons along side men. That everyone should 
have an equal place "everywhere 
conceded," she says, is just basic. But that is not
 the final reason that women should have the 
right and privilege to vote. Equity has the power t
o deepen character and judgment and 
conscience. To deprive women of that opportunity, s
he is suggesting, is without any merit 
whatsoever. 

My office manager, Phyllis Perry, got it right. She
 kept her promises, was sovereign over her 
own life, and claimed her dignity, even though othe
rs wanted her to sacrifice it for their own lack 
of planning, and wanted to blame her for their flus
tering and their mistakes. Phyllis never 
accepted any of that blame. She was accountable to 
herself first. 
Oh, we all make mistakes, and use bad judgment, as 
our story this morning about Arthur™s 
computer disaster pointed out plainly. And there ar
e consequences...in Arthur™s case, no video 
games for a week. But Arthur™s mother did not beat 
him down, call him worthless for disobeying 
her, or humiliate him with blame and finger-pointin
g. She was gracious, and even light hearted 
about it. So was Phyllis. She never yelled at anyon
e. She smiled kindly as she sent people to the 
copier, asking them to be accountable for their own
 lives.  
I miss you, Phyllis. Did I ever tell you that you w
ere one of the best teachers I ever met? 
Offering 

To give of our livelihoods during the morning offer
ing is to form a circle with the world that 
gave us our lives, and this religious community whi
ch nurtures our spirit and our vision, and 
calls us to our mission. Along with all of us who h
ave long loved this place and who give 
electronically and in other ways, we therefore now 
complete that circle and give and receive the 
morning offering. 

Returning  
Accountable Prayer 
Love, let me blame neither others nor myself, but s
imply be honest about what I do and 
say. Where I do not know, let me say, I do not know
. When I have not followed through, 
let me say that, and not shield myself in the armor
 of excuses. Let me apologize, and 
learn from my mistakes, and then do better.    

Oh Love, the ancient scripture puts it so beautiful
ly: 
As you love yourself, so love your 
neighbor.
 Thus, I want to make sure that it™s my real self t
hat I love, not a make-believe 
self I create to please others. In this way I can l
ove my neighbor more freely. Oh Love, 
let sun and moon and stars bear witness now that I 
have spoken these words, that I may 

be held accountable, and be lifted up to be who I r
eally am, without shame or blame, and 
find some measure of peace. 
Singing  #1057 

Blessing 
 
