Resisting Being Co-Opted 
Martin Luther King Jr. Sunday 
January 15, 2012 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 
Greeting, Welcoming, Centering, Kindling, 

Opening: 

 We are here 

after winter cold has finally arrived, 

freezing our breath, icing the waters... 

to worship, to receive the gift of this moment 

to thaw what has been frozen in our lives, 

and let the icy rivers of spirit within warm,  

and flow, like justice, in a mighty stream. 
 
And so, without guarantees, we lean into joy, and b
end toward a just way of life, both for 
our own sakes, and for the sake of our children and
 all beings with whom we share the 
earth. We would engage our mission wholeheartedly, 
with courage, self-questioning, 
compassion, vulnerability and honesty. 

 
Sequence for the Day 

 
Rivers of it. Torrents of it, the prophet proclaime
d. 
Torrents of what?  

I'm guessing he wasn't just longing to be soaked in
 the word justice, when he said that, justice, 
a two syllable loan from the Latin meaning equity. 

I'm guessing he wasn't talking about an abstract fe
el-good word, nor that blindfolded woman 
holding the scales in her trembling hand. 

I think he was talking about torrents of sisterhood
 and brotherhood and the freedom to be a 
somebody instead of a nobody. 

I think he was talking about torrents of women and 
men and children, of many colors working 
side-by-side together on the same issues without wh
ining "this takes too long," and "aren't we 
there yet?" 

I think he was talking about torrents of gladly str
uggling people of all kinds sitting around a 
common table, sharing culture, sharing food, but no
t sharing assumptions about each other of 
any kind. 

I think he was imagining torrents of neighborhoods 
and communities where children admire each 
other's faces without any needed build-up, or where
 differing ways of worship and differing 
ways of skepticism can all stay in the same room ha
ppily.  
I imagine he was imagining being part of a communit
y and never having to hear someone say 
aloud "I don't like those people," without noticing
 the blood dripping from the souls of those who 
hear. 

Spirit of love, be the bright sun now that melts me
 too, for the frigid winds of a bullying culture 
have frozen me hard at times. Let me flow like wate
rs, like a mighty stream, or even like this 

silence that spills from the end of my final word..
.. 
 
silence 

 
Let all hearts flow together into this moment of me
mory and care, where we name aloud, or 
name silently within, the beautiful names of those 
we love, those with whom we struggle, those 
who are far away, and those whom we remember with l
ove.... 
 
naming 

 
Let the music gather our spirit, restore our dreams
 and hopes of a world growing more just and 
fair each and every day, a justice signed by the ha
rmonies of music. 
 
The First Reading 
comes from a book from the early seventies I just r
ediscovered on
 my shelves, 
The Religious Experience of Revolutionaries
 by Eugene Bianchi.
 In it, he explores the liberal 
religious development in the lives of Che Guevara, 
Daniel Berrigan, Malcolm X,
 Franz Fanon, 
Abbie Hoffman and yes, Martin Luther King.
  
The whole dynamic of Martin King's inner religious 
experience is directed toward the goal of 
freedom within human life. By freedom, King means t
he state of having options for self-
determination, of being able to make self-initiated
 decisions for action, and the capacity to take 
responsibility for self and neighbor. He perceives 
freedom as the ability to deliberate, decide and 
respond. Freedom is the chosen fulfillment of our h
uman nature. But since ours is a finite 
freedom, anything that unjustly deprives us of libe
rty is morally wrong, and an abuse of our 
nature. Racism therefore, is a form of slavery, for
 King, the paramount form of 
un-
freedom.   
  

The Second Reading
 for this morning comes from a poem by Joy Harjo, of
 the native Mvskogie 
Nation on these shores. Some of you have the correc
t spelling as she offers it, with a v instead of 
a u. The Milky Way is a Mvskogee image for paradise
. 
 
In the flickering mirror of time, 

all events quiver in layers. 

Each tree, each trigger of grass, 

each small and large wave of water  

will reveal the raw story. 

We climb and keep climbing,  

our children wrapped in smallpox blankets  

to keep them warm.   

Spider shows us how to weave 

a sticky pattern  

from the muddy curses of our enemy 

to get us safely to the Milky Way. 

We had to leave our homes behind us, 

just as we were left behind by progress. 

We do not want your version of progress. 

There are other versions, says Spider  

(who does not consider making 

webs to sell to the highest bidder 

but keeps weaving and thinking 

and including us in the story.) 

 
Sermon 

 
Do you notice? Do you notice when out and about, wh
en you're walking down the street, how 
many kinds of faces there are? It startles me every
 time. When I pause to think that faces are but 
two eyes, a nose, a mouth, some cheeks and a chin, 
I grow amazed beyond words. Not vary 
many elements there, but the variety of the faces t
hose elements make constantly delights me. 
Wide faces, long faces, round faces, blue eyes, haz
el and brown and green eyes, brown cheeks, 
pale foreheads, cleft chins, bushy eyebrows, plucke
d eyebrows, long lashes, short lashes, lips 
like almonds, or rose petals. So many types of face
s. So many types of people. 
 
When I was a child, the blond and redheaded faces d
own the street didn't look like anyone in my 
family. My family all had a 
very
 different look. I figured out what that "look" was
 when I visited 
Bologna, Italy, once, land of my ancestors. Everyon
e looked just like me, or members of my 
family, and that startled me down to my toes. I'm n
ot sure if I liked it, or didn't like it. It was ju
st 
unusual.  And I suddenly understood what genetics m
eant for the first time: namely, that in this 
world of a million utterly distinct and different f
aces, I was part of a circle of people, a family we
 
say, with faces that resembled each other. 

 
But faces outside our family are usually all differ
ent, and somehow we have to figure out what 
that means. Here's how that happened to me. Once wh
en I was almost five, I came indoors after 
playing in a mud-puddle created by a recent rain. M
y mother shrieked as soon as she saw me. 
"You take your clothes off right there, young man, 
right now, and you get into the shower 
immediately. You are 
filthy
!"  Then, a few seconds later, and a bit more amuse
d, she chuckled 
and said: "You look like somebody rolled you in mel
ted chocolate."  
 
Now remember, children are much more concrete than 
adults. Stories like we heard this morning 
will engage smaller children in different ways than
 they will adults. So when I heard my mother, 
I heard her as a child. 

 
So, later that week, my mother and I took the stree
t-car downtown to the Penobscot Building in 
Detroit to see Dr. Summers for my eye check up. He 
dilated my eyes, which meant raw sunlight 
was irritating to me.  To reward me for not complai
ning, my mother took me to the counter at 
Woolworth's to get a hot dog all slathered with rel
ish, the only typically "American" food I liked 
as a kid. The gentle smiling woman who served us wa
s African American. She served us the hot 
dog, but I sat there, folded my arms, and I wouldn'
t eat it. "Why?" my mother asked, incredulous. 
I whispered to my mother: "She's filthy, and now my
 hotdog will taste like chocolate." 
 
You see, I had never seen a face like hers before, 
and I had to figure out what it meant with the 
only tools I had as an almost-five-year-old in 1954
. My mother, however, was duly mortified, 
and pulled me off my stool and took me aside. "Peop
le are just people," she said to me. "They all 
have different colored faces, just like they have d
ifferent eyes. Your sister has brown eyes and 

you have hazel eyes, and you're still part of the f
amily. Differences in color and size and shape 
don't mean anything. Everyone is part of the human 
family. Now you get back up on that stool 
young man, and eat your lunch." 

 
I tell that rather embarrassing story because I wan
t to make clear that when people notice 
different faces as children, they often, in their c
oncrete fashion, separate individuals with the 
tools they have: the colors they are learning by na
me in kindergarten, the images from Dr. Seuss 
stories. That is 
not
 any kind of racism. 
 
But nevertheless, racialization, the notion that pe
ople of different colors and cultures should be at 
odds, is planted in us very early, even by the most
 conscious parents in the world. Double-blind 
studies conducted recently confirm that assertion. 
In the USA, racialization has been part of the 
atmosphere for centuries, and although it has dimin
ished, the atmosphere is still polluted, even in 
2012. As some of you may have read, George Lucas, t
he touted film director, made a movie 
about the Tuskegee airmen, the first African Americ
an aviators in American history.  Titled 
Red 
Tails
, it has an all-black cast.  Despite his vaunted re
putation, no studio in Hollywood will agree 
to market the film, or show it in their theaters. W
hy? An all black cast, with no major white 
roles. I'm happy to say President Obama showed exce
llent leadership by screening the film in the 
White House this week. 

 
The big studios seem to be saying: "Why support a f
ilm about people who are not like 
us
, who 
don't have 
our
 faces?"   
 
This sounds like classic social bullying to me. You
 know: 
"You're not part of our group, the in-
group. We hurt you. We expel you for being differen
t from us. We are superior to you. You walk 
and talk funny to us, so you are less than us. We h
ave all the options open to us; you have no 
options. And whatever we do to you to keep you in y
our place and humiliate you, it™s all your 
own damn fault. You brought it on yourself." 

 
In the last few years, I have seen, heard and read 
a lot
 about bullying. Maybe you have too. I've 
seen public service announcements about it. I've se
en editorials, books, and even movies about 
bullying.  It almost seems like its something that 
just popped up. Something that suddenly 
cropped up against tormented gay teenagers, or adol
escent girls who are not part of the in-crowd 
because they read books on physics Œ or because the
y read at all. 
 
Mind you, I'm glad people are catching on to it, bu
t I assure you, it™s been going on for a lot 
longer than a decade. I was bullied, certainly, bac
k in the 50's. 
Many
 times Œ no make that 
constantly Œ for about a five year period in my ear
ly adolescence.   
 
But most of the bullying that goes on, and has been
 going on in our country for hundreds of 
years, is between one in-group, and other groups. E
ver since the Bacon Rebellion of 1676, our 
nation, as you know, has been racialized, so that s
o-called "whites" (a word that did not exist 
until after the Bacon Rebellion) have all the optio
ns, and people of other colors and cultures are 
co-opted, that is, their culture is neutralized and
 their worth is determined by how they 
assimilate, that is, dress, act, speak, sport, eat,
 and worship like the in-crowd.  But with many 
fewer options. 

 
The tremendous work of the civil rights era began t
o address some of the bullying tactics:  
voter suppression, lynching, and the systematic den
ial of post-war housing loans to African 
Americans who returned home to poverty after servin
g their country in totally segregated 
regiments, like the Tuskegee Airmen.  

 
Native Americans were bullied too. And blamed for i
t. The Protestant settlers from Northern 
Europe are often touted as having come here for rel
igious freedom, so they could worship as they 
wanted without persecution.  Their children however
, did not permit the Natives to celebrate as 
they wanted. They were consistently being likened t
o the biblical Amelekites, who were 
slaughtered without mercy for being the wrong kind 
of people at the wrong time. Some of the 
slaughter was done outright. Others, like Lord Amhe
rst, actually planned to give smallpox- 
infested blankets to the natives, since he believed
 it was his duty, and these are his words in 1763 
"to try Every ... method that can serve to Extirpat
e this Execrable Race." In case these rather 
antique words are unknown to you, 
extirpate 
means to wipe out, and execrable means "extremely 
inferior." We have no documentary evidence that he 
actually did give out the blankets, but his 
words of intention were recorded faithfully, and it
's to this terrible sentence Joy Harjo refers  
when she talks about her kids "wrapped in smallpox 
blankets." Wrapped, that is, not in warm 
rectangles made of wool and germs, but in something
 far more contagious and deadly: consistent 
information from the bully world that they are infe
rior, worthless, shiftless, with parents who are 
drunk all day long, and practice a silly religion a
ll dressed in feathers and stupid spider stories. 
 
Your options are taken from you when you are bullie
d. You are independent, self-reliant, self-
determined, and all of a sudden, you are lumped by 
bullies into a fantasy category called "race? Œ 
a biologically empty concept invented in 1775 by Im
manuel Kant Œ and suddenly your 
confidence, your courage and even your will may wel
l wither into nothing. You'll wonder if the 
word freedom can ever have any meaning for you. 

 
Bianchi echoes what Joy Hargo wrote when he describ
ed Martin Luther King Jr.'s attitude 
toward freedom. Remember? He wrote: 
The whole dynamic of Martin King's inner religious 
experience is directed toward the 
goal of freedom within human life. By freedom, King
 means the state of having options 
for self-determination, of being able to make self-
initiated decisions for action, and the 
capacity to take responsibility for self and neighb
or. 
   

Having options for self-determination. Freedom mean
s resisting being co-opted by bullies, and 
resisting being determined by the system rigged and
 re-rigged by the in-group over 300 years. 
Freedom means having the important option of taking
 responsibility for self and neighbor. I 
agree fully. 

 
But then Bianchi interprets King's second idea: 
since ours is a finite freedom, anything that 
unjustly deprives us of liberty is morally wrong, a
nd an abuse of our nature. Racism therefore, is 
a form of slavery, for King, the paramount form of 
un
-freedom.   
 
I like how Bianchi phases that. The racialization o
f our nation means we're 
all 
enslaved, not the 
chattel slavery of the 18th and 19th centuries, but
 a true slavery of the spirit. A slavery of the 

spirit where we are all unfree Œ the bullies, the b
ullied, and even those who don't get it, and think 
all of this talk of racialization is too much ado a
bout nothing.  
 
When the congregational leadership offers us variou
s workshops or classes on this topic, like 
Paula Cole Jones coming this March, I'm proud. I'm 
proud because its part of our spiritual work 
to engage, to look at this, to grow more self-deter
mined and less determined by others.  And yes, 
even though that's always going to be happening in 
some way, as our story this morning made 
delightfully clear. The artist's mother loved his p
icture even though her face was distorted. All of 
us are lovable. It™s no crime to be caught up in th
e system of racialization Œ all of us are.  But our
 
religious duty, it seems to me, is to resist racial
ization, resist systems that distort, resist the 
slavery of being determined by others. How? Through
 learning; by going deep within our own 
life stories, and uprooting much of what was plante
d there by the un-self-critical culture many of 
us grew up in. All of us, no matter what color or b
ackground, have some unshackling to do.  
 
The outright racialization I talk about is known in
 this world primarily in the Americas, 
especially in the USA; and also in South Africa. My
 grandmother Carmelina, having been raised 
in Italy, was not subjected to this racialization, 
and was baffled when she came here, and 
watched white people demeaning black people.  She n
ever allowed herself to be assimilated into 
its unconscious practices and attitudes. But even s
he had work to do, similar to the work we are 
called to do. She had been raised, as a Northern It
alian, to believe that Sicilians and Southern 
Italians were not worthy of spitting on. They were 
awful people. But then she made some 
friends, these brothers from Naples, on her immigra
tion trip to these shores, and she realized she 
had been sold a bill of goods. My grandmother was a
ble to say to the modern American world, 
eventually, with Joy Harjo, that "We don't want you
r version of progress. There is another 
version, where Spider (a Native American image of C
reative Wisdom) 
does not consider making 
webs to sell to the highest bidder, but keeps weavi
ng and thinking
 and including us in the story.  
 
And that's exactly what my mother was trying to do 
too, at that Woolworth's. I had seen a face 
different from my own, and using inadequate tools, 
I had come to a foolish conclusion. My 
mother gave me a one minute workshop that changed m
y life for the better. 
 
It™s really amazing how different and delightful ou
r faces all are. It™s even more amazing when 
we allow ourselves, like Spider, to find the tools 
that help us to resist being co-opted, and 
instead, to include all the faces we encounter into
 the multicolored, multi- cultured Story of 
Humanity, the story of Spirit, the story of Freedom
, Life and Love. 
 
Offering
 Kathleen, please compose an offering. Thanks.
  
Closing Charge: 

Everything is Waiting for You,
 David Whyte
 (After Derek Mahon) 

 
Your great mistake is to act the drama 

as if you were alone.  As if life 

were a progressive and cunning crime 

with no witness to the tiny hidden 

transgressions.  To feel abandoned is to deny 

the intimacy of your surrounds.  Surely, 

even you, at times, have felt the grand array; 

the swelling presence, and the chorus, crowding 

out your solo voice.  You must note 

the way the soap dish enables you, 

or the window latch grants you freedom. 

Alertness is the hidden discipline of familiarity. 

The stairs are your mentor of things 

to come, the doors have always been there 

to frighten you and invite you, 

and the tiny speaker in the phone 

is your dream-ladder to divinity. 

 
Put down the weight of your aloneness and ease into
 the conversation.  The kettle is singing  

even as it pours you a drink, the cooking pots  

have left their arrogant aloofness and 

seen the good in you at last.  All the birds 

and creatures of the world are unutterably 

themselves.  Everything is waiting for you. 

 
