 12007-11-25 Immigration  

Mark Belletini 

 
Opening Words
 We are here 

to breathe together for a time on a Sunday 

after a demanding holiday schedual. 

Now we journey through a territory of time, 

past a deep lake of words and singing hills 

on a silent path leading to a city of peace 

May we set forth in joy with these words:  

 
Mindful that a growing vision of a just world calls
 us together, that a 
community of commitment, courage and care sustains 
us, and that a life 
transformed by depth of spirit may illumine our way
, we have kindled this  
light as the sign of our circle of life and love.
  
Affirmation
  
(From Black Elk, Lakota Nation, 
and the Sutta Nopata from the Pali Canon of 

Theravada Buddhism) 

 
tune to 181 

 
Then I was standing on the highest mountain 

of the them all, and while I stood there, I saw  

more than I can tell. And round beneath me was the 
whole hoop of the 
world. 

 
tune (or verse depending)
 of 181
  
For I was seeing in the sacred manner 

the shape of all things of the spirit, and while 

I stood there, I saw more than I can tell, 

and I understood more than I saw.  

 
tune (or verse, depending) of 181 

 
And I saw that the sacred hoop of my people, 

which was one of many hoops that make one circle, w
ide as daylight and 
starlight. And they must all live together as one b
eing, for in their 

 2center grew a flowering tree to shelter all the chi
ldren of one mother and 
father. And I saw that it was holy. 

 
#181  (either last verse, or whole hymn) 

 
Sequence 

 
And now, we in the northern hemisphere are approach
ing the gate of winter, 
though the air is still warm and the yellow leaves 
still cling tenaciously to 
their branches. Unaware of us, the great earth belo
w our feet turns, giving us 
the gift of the morning, and the gift of the evenin
g, every day. 
 
And now, the planning and scheduling crowds our cal
endars with the round 
of get-togethers, special dinners, holiday lunches,
 and concerts. Unaware of 
us, the great earth below our feet  turns, giving u
s the gift of the morning, 
and the gift of the evening, every day.  

 
And now the memories of the holidays past, whether 
we stood within them, 
or outside of them, whether we loved them or hated 
them, rise up inside us 
like amazing fountains.  

Unaware of us, the great earth below our feet turns
, giving us the gift of the 
morning, and the gift of the evening every day.  

 
And now, the time for restful silence has come at t
he center of our worship. 
Unaware of us, the great earth below our feet turns
, giving us the gift of the 
morning, and the gift of the evening every day. Whe
ther we speak or are 
silent, it moves and we are moved. Praise for the w
onder of it all. 
silence 
 
And now, the love in our hearts takes shape as we r
emember those who have 
blest our days with their caring, or who have left 
us legacies of honesty and 
intelligence and wisdom. These we name, gratefully,
 aloud or in the silence, 
as the earth below our feet turns without ceasing. 
naming 
 
And now, music comes into the world, rising out of 
the silence like the 
universe once rose from the primeval mystery. Prais
e for the wonder of it all. 
 
Readings: 

 
The First Reading
 consists of actual quotations from the 1911 Immigra
tion 
Commission of the U.S. 61
st
 Congress. This was a huge document, and was 

 3very influential in discussions of immigration in t
hose days. Note that a 
Protestant minister of some sort was sitting on the
 Commission. This is not 
easy to listen to. 

 
Reverend Lichliter–I appear before you to represent
 the Junior Order 
United American Mechanics. As an organization, we a
re non-sectarian and 
non-partisan, founded on patriotism, the love of co
untry being the chief 
cornerstone. 

 
The question of restricted immigration has been inc
reasing before our order 
for twenty years. In fact, we were among the first 
to call the attention of the 
American Congress to the evils of the ?open-door? p
olicy of the 
Government, resulting particularly from its recent 
changed character, by 
which the ?undesirables? from foreign countries hav
e been entering our 
portals by the millions. We are receiving a differe
nt kind of immigrant now. 
We protest against the admission of those who come 
into this country whose 
habits and manner of life tear down the standard of
 American life, I mean 
races possessed of a low intelligence and inferior 
standard of life. 
 
Early immigration to this country consisted of peop
le of Teutonic or Celtic 
blood. They came of their own initiative to better 
their condition.  They were 
the better part of the nations from which they came
–morally, mentally and 
physically. They were intelligent, industrious, fru
gal, law respecting and 
liberty-loving. They belonged to that independent r
ace of men of the Aryan 
blood. By contrast, the latest wave of immigration 
has sent undesirable 
people into large cities, reinforcing their slum po
pulation.  They are hotbeds 
of vice and corruption. They tax our assimilating p
owers. New York City 
alone has over 500,000 Italians, for example. 

 
I have seen our own people at the mill office askin
g for work, and were told 
there was no opening. The next minute an Italian wo
uld come into the office, 
the smell of steerage still on his clothes, and he 
would get the job for mere 
asking. The vast majority just come to accumulate a
 good bank account. 
Then they depart. 

 
The Second Reading
 is a poem by Maria Mazziotti Gillan, the daughter o
f 
an immigrant Italian. It™s caledl 
Arturo. 
 
I told everyone your name was Arthur; tried to turn
 you into the imaginary 
father in a three piece suit that I wanted instead 
of my own. I changed my 

 4name to Marie, hoping no one would notice my face w
ith its dark Italian 
eyes.   

 
Arturo, I send you this message from my younger sel
f, that fool who needed 
to deny the words (Wop! Guinea! Greaseball!) slung 
like curved spears, the 
anguish of sandwiches made from spinach and olive o
il and roasted peppers 
on homemade bread, the rice pies of Easter. 

 
Today I watch you, clean as a cherub, your ruddy fa
ce shining, closed by 
your growing deafness in a world where my words can
not touch you. 
 
At 80 you still worship Roosevelt and JFK, read the
 newspaper carefully, 
know with a quick shrewdness the details of revolut
ions and dictators, the 
cause and effect of all wars, no matter how small. 
For the children you carry 
chocolates wrapped in gold foil, and find for them 
always your crooked 
smile and a $5 bill. 

 
I smile when I think of you. Listen America.  This 
is my father, Arturo, and I 
am his daughter Maria. Do not call me Marie. 

 
Sermon 

 
A few years ago, a man from Vedbaek, Denmark, came 
to our Morning 
Celebration.  The man was John Hertz, a Unitarian U
niversalist from Europe 
who happened to come to Columbus for business. He a
nd his wife Gevene 
have been part of the European group of Unitarian U
niversalists for a good 
long time, and I have known them ever since my firs
t trip over to Europe to 
preach back in the early 90™s. 

   

He was here on business, but he was also here to ta
lk with me about the 
lecture they wanted me to give at their next retrea
t. 
 
They wanted me to talk about immigration issues ove
r in Europe. I said to 
him quite clearly, ?I don™t know anything about imm
igration issues over in 
Europe, John. Not one thing. Really.? He said, ?I k
now, but you 
do
 know 
something about immigration per se, I think. Weren™
t your grandparents 
immigrants from Italy?? ?Well, yes, of course,? I s
aid. ?But what does 
that–?? And all of a sudden it occurred to me that 
I did indeed have some 
powerful feelings about the word 
immigration. 
And it was those personal 

 5stories that I used to frame my talk over in at the
 Guesthouse in Oberwesel, 
Germany, where they held the retreat that year. 

 
But, I also realized as John and I talked in my off
ice back there that I 
did
 know a few choice things about European immigration
 issues. To wit: the 
last time I had been in Europe, I was staying with 
my friend Hans in 
Hilversum, just outside of Amsterdam. While I was t
here, and just a few 
blocks away from where I was staying, a man named P
ym Fortuin was 
assassinated. Mr. Fortuin had been running for offi
ce in Nederland on a 
platform of immigration reform. The Muslim immigran
ts from Morocco and 
Algeria had been building mosques in every single D
utch town during the 
preceding years. This seemed to threaten the Dutch,
 who also resented that 
many of these immigrants bitterly complained in eve
ry newspaper about the 
loose way of life they felt the Dutch people were e
njoying–looseness about 
sex, looseness about drugs, looseness about the rol
es of women and men. 
Mr. Fortuin had told these immigrants: ?You can go 
home if you don™t like 
it. We welcomed you, but that does not give you the
 right to question the 
way we do things.?  He was doing very well in the p
olls, Mr. Fortuin, right 
up to the day he was assassinated. Every indication
 we have insists that had 
Mr. Fortuin not been assassinated, he would have be
en elected handily by a 
wide margin. In the notably very liberal Nederland.
  
 
With this experience under my belt, I had to conclu
de that at the very least, 
new immigration patterns in Europe were generating 
strong feelings on both 
sides of the fence. After all, neither furious elec
tion platforms nor 
assassinations can be called subtle.  

 
And as I read as many European documents as I could
 find, in preparation 
for my European lecture, I learned that the Europea
n experience of recent 
immigration was not as dissimilar from the experien
ce we once had here as 
some would like to make it. 

 
When I read European newspapers and magazines and w
ebsites excoriating 
the new immigrants from Morocco and Algeria and Tur
key as being 1. 
people who are consistently dirty and lazy and self
-segregated 2. people who 
are prone to criminal behavior and violence 3. peop
le who only immigrated 
to get rich personally 4. people who were in the th
rall of an evil religion 
from overseas which would one day take over the who
le area with its 
authoritarian and pernicious teachings, 5. people w
ho were both oversexed 
and sexist at the same time, the men keeping their 
women on pedestals like 

 6the Madonna while being lewd and obnoxious to all t
he women who were 
already in the cities to which they had immigrated.
 And finally, 6. people 
who just weren™t very intelligent, and thus ?undesi
rable.? 
 
It became clear to me that the anti-immigration fee
lings in Europe are based 
squarely on these 6 perceptions. But then, when I c
ontinued my study, and 
went on to read what was written in the New York Ti
mes, The Atlantic 
Monthly etc. about folks like my Italian immigrant 
grandparents, who 
arrived here early last century, I realized that th
e exact same 6 perceptions, 
expressed almost word for word, colored US immigrat
ion issues back then. 
 
The Italian immigrants were looked upon as dirty cr
iminals, purveyors of 
terrorist death, riddled with anti-woman attitudes,
 and totally obedient to the 
evil pope in Rome, whose purpose was clearly seen a
s the Catholicization of 
the world. Modern attitudes toward Muslims found in
 Europe and America 
repeat this ancient diatribe almost word for word, 
substituting the word 
?imam? for pope. I have even heard people who call 
themselves liberal in 
both theology and politics making statements sugges
ting that they are not 
too far off from this assessment. Oh not to the ext
ent of the late Mr. Falwell 
of course, or Franklin Graham, Billy™s son, who hav
e both specialized in the 
cultivation of anti-Muslim bigotry. But still, I ha
ve to say that this kind of 
prejudice does not seem to mind whether it™s associ
ated with liberals or 
conservatives. It simply wants to thrive. 

 
Why? Because our American culture teaches, in a var
iety of steady ways, 
that differences are to be feared, and caricatured 
and fenced off by innuendo. 
For example, and I know I have said this before, on
e percent of all the Italian 
immigrants had anything at all to do with the fable
d Mafia. The Mafia, 
certainly, I admit, is a very real organization wit
h true murderous ability. Yet 
the main cultural depiction of Italian immigrants i
n Hollywood is a 
godfather film, a Mafia movie. Not families eating 
supper. Not adoring 
grandparents giving gold wrapped chocolates to thei
r children. Not hard 
working miners like my father™s father, or hard wor
king Chrysler plant 
employees like my other grandparents. Not peasant i
mmigrants who never 
went to school a day in their life learning to read
 and write on their own. 
Both English and Italian.  Not people with the thri
ft and money management 
skills to buy a house after only a couple of years 
of being in this country. 
Not about skillful gardeners who could bring dead t
hings back to life. No, 
the media portrayal of many immigrants, and not jus
t Italians, was to affirm 

 7them as murderous rascals bent on, ungratefully, de
stroying ?the American 
Way of Life.? 

 
Ten million Italians came over here, mostly from th
e South. ?To the land of 
opportunity where the streets were paved with gold,
? as some pundits like to 
put it. What you don™t hear is that five million we
nt back; and many more 
wanted to–for a long time, but held out till they f
inally adjusted. Just like 
Yoon wanted to go back to Korea in this mornings st
ory. Why? Oh, 
partially, as for Yoon, it was simply that the cult
ure here is very different. 
The trees, the plants, the foods, the geography, an
d the climates–all odd to 
the stranger. The language, difficult, full of coll
oquialisms it would take a 
lifetime to learn. But that was the small stuff. Mo
stly the 5 million Italians 
left because they found bigotry and violence here, 
the very violence they 
themselves were accused of. For example, the number
 of Italian immigrants 
that were lynched in Louisiana, back in the twentie
s would surprise you. It 
wasn™t much less than the number of young black men
 that were lynched in 
those days. Italy actually broke off diplomatic rel
ations with the US of A 
because of these assaults on Italian immigrants. Th
e anti-Catholic 
propaganda was fierce too; the mockery in the newsp
apers, including the 
New York Times, was crude. The Times in fact sugges
ted that Italians could 
be more welcomed if they just converted away from C
atholicism and 
became Protestant of some sort, the American religi
on. This conversion 
strategy is exactly what is going on today with Fra
nklin Graham types, who 
are trying to convert all Muslims to Evangelical pi
ety. And some of that, I 
sometimes think cynically, is because most Jews sim
ply won™t put up with 
such Evangelical nonsense any more. 

 
Many immigrants, of course, as you might suspect, b
ought into this pressure 
to conform. Maria Mazziotti Gillan writes of wantin
g to become Marie, of 
wanting her father to be that dad on 
Leave It To Beaver
 always wearing a 
suit. She was ashamed not to be Anglo. She no longe
r wanted to be cursed as 
?Greaseball? or called ?Wop!? (And ?wop?, please, d
oes not mean ?without 
papers?, (I remain aghast at the ignorance of moder
n pop culture) but which 
comes from a Spanish-rooted word in the Italian dia
lect spoken in Naples, 
guapo
, which means ?good-looking.? The immigrants were o
ften heard to 
comment on the beauty or handsome-ness of their fel
low immigrants–?Ma, 
che guapa la donna la!?)   

 
Then, over time, this blushing daughter of an Itali
an immigrant began to see 
her father not as an ethnic embarrassment, but as a
 kind human being, a man 

 8who loves children, a dedicated man who knows his r
adical politics, a 
thoughtful man who understands the sociological und
er-pinnings of any war. 
In her moving last lines, she reclaims her heritage
, no longer ashamed, and 
re-introduces her father to America as Arturo, not 
Arthur, and herself as 
Maria, not Marie. 

 
When I read about immigration issues today, with an
gry tirades on both 
sides, with debates about building fences and walls
 (as if the Berlin Wall, the 
Great Wall of China, or Hadrian™s wall worked for a
 minute!) I often have to 
pause, take a breath to soften my anger, and remind
 myself that everyone in 
this room has immigrant blood in their veins. Even,
 as you™ll see in a 
moment, people with Native American ancestry. Yes, 
some of the 
immigration patterns were forced.  For economic rea
sons–the slave trade, 
or the Chinese laying railroad tracks across the mo
untains for next to 
nothing, things like that. But then, as the nasty f
irst reading opined, some 
think all immigration has to do with money-grubbing
 somehow. ?Those 
damn immigrants just want to get rich on our backs 
and take our jobs.? 
Right. As if folks whose families had been here for
 generations were lining 
up to take the dangerous, often lethal mining jobs 
my grandfathers ?took? 
along with Lithuanians, Poles, Hungarians and Ukrai
nians. According to the 
first reading, these Eastern and Southern European 
newbies to the 
immigration scene were apparently not like the earl
y English speaking 
immigrants to this land–those ?liberty loving Aryan
s? in the words of that 
young man talking to the Immigration Commission in 
the First Reading. 
(And do note, please, how this young man convenient
ly leaves out all the 
Spanish colonial immigrants, who got to the America
s first.) Apparently the 
anti-immigrant lobby in those days assumed that the
 early English speaking 
immigrant colonists were coming here to take up pov
erty as a life-style, like 
a bunch of monks, and had no interest in prosperity
. My God, I don™t 
remember when I have ever read such drivel.   

 
And finally, I find myself thinking of the story cu
ltures found at the center of 
the Jewish and Christian traditions, our tap-root t
raditions, which seem to be 
largely based on immigration. Cain immigrates to th
e land of Nod, Abraham 
immigrates from Ur of the Chaldees to Haran, and th
en later, immigrates 
again to settle three hundred miles southward. Abra
ham™s grandchildren 
immigrated to Egypt and stayed there 500 years, whi
ch is a lot longer than 
any immigrant line ever lived here. Ruth, the great
 grandmother of King 
David, was an immigrant from Moav. Simon Peter in t
he New Testament 
supposedly immigrated to Rome where he died, and Pa
ul apparently was 

 9killed before he could fulfill his dream to immigra
te to Spain. And look, 
anthropologically, all of us, including those nativ
e to these American 
continents, like the Cherokee, Lakota, Maya and Ink
a, immigrated from the 
ultimate warm meadows of central Africa. Without im
migration there would 
be no humanity, no civilization as we know it. 

 
What am I saying? Only that in order to come up wit
h any solution to the so-
called problems of immigration, either legal or ill
egal, we are going to have 
to come up with a solution to the more serious prob
lem of bigotry and 
caricature first. Present practices are tied up ent
irely with fears, cheap 
burlesque, unconscious bigotry, conscious distortio
n and a sense of 
entitlement. Look, I am not saying open the doors w
ide, nor am I saying 
close them until we figure this all out–together. A
ll I am saying is that no 
one can honestly expect either satisfaction or just
ice until we face the real 
issues, which I think are spiritual in nature. Faci
ng these issues means 
getting honest about fear, and about any terror of 
difference.  These are 
spiritual issues. Facing these issues means getting
 honest about our 
impatience and our deep capacity for bigotry–every 
one of us. These are 
spiritual issues. Facing these issues means getting
 honest about how many of 
us imagine catastrophes where there are none docume
nted or able to be 
documented. ?Those immigrants are taking our jobs.?
 This is a spiritual 
issue. 

 
I am the grandchild of immigrants. I am a Unitarian
 Universalist, a religion 
that doesn™t exist in Italy per se, although they d
o have freethinkers galore. I 
do not speak as my grandparents spoke. I am far mor
e school-educated than 
they were–easily, since only one of them graduated 
from 8
th
 grade. I love 
music they would not understand as music, enjoy Chi
nese food, something 
they never tasted, and have been lucky enough to tr
avel from Moscow to 
Tierra Del Fuego to Jerusalem, whereas they never l
eft Detroit once they 
immigrated there, nor did they ever see Florence or
 Rome when they lived in 
Italy. 

 
But I am not, because of these things, any better t
hen they were. Better off, 
maybe, but not better. And that, I suppose, is real
ly the point of my sermon 
this morning. Until all human beings can be seen as
 just that, human beings 
who are each and every one worthy to be part of the
 circle, the great hoop of 
the world, then any impetus toward social justice r
emains merely self-
serving charity–?Gosh, ain™t I a good person, helpi
ng out those undesirable 
folks?? Until any one of us can accept that we migh
t be changed for the 

 10
better by a real welcome to what scripture calls ?t
he stranger in a strange 
land,? changed both personally and nationally, then
 our hopes for a just 
world are mere cotton candy. And until we can admit
 that, whether we are 
talking about Europe, or the Americas, or China or 
Arabia, we are each and 
every one of us the children of immigrants, we are 
deceiving ourselves about 
both our importance and our permanence. 

 
When I go to Europe again to preach, I will have to
 thank John Hertz for 
asking me to think about such things. For in doing 
so, I have once again 
strengthened my own understanding of the broad natu
re of our religious 
tradition. And I have once again come to the place 
where I am not ashamed 
to imagine that the world might indeed grow just.  

 
Offering 

No walls without a foundation. 

No earth without sky. 

No thirst when there is water. 

No defeat when there is hope. 

No joy without facing reality first. 

No church without generosity from 

those who agree to be a church.  

 
Prayer for Peace 

 
O Love, beat with my heartbeat, 

steady, steady, steady, 

until I come to understand that 

there is no peace without justice;   

until I come to understand that there is no peace w
hich can exist with any 
bigotry whatsoever; 

until I come to understand that there is no peace w
hich can exist without 
looking into my own heart before I look into the he
arts of others, 
until I come to understand that there is no peace w
ithout a home hearth, and 
food and sleep and work and play and love.  

O Love, beat with my heartbeat, and in the 

rhythm of this song: 

 
 
 
 
