   Like-Minded, Like-Hearted, Like-Storied 
March 2, 2014 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 ?I don™t think you can be empathetic and ?know? you
 are right.  If you already know you are right then
 just 
declare moral victory and be done with it.  Instead
 engage with the other, feel their worries and pain
s.?       
                                                   
                                                   
                                            
Doug Trombom 2014 
 
?I would like to see us welcome newcomers so that t
hey are being welcomed not into a clan that sets it
self apart 
from the wider religious community, but into one th
at humbly and deeply knows its place in that commun
ity, is 
grateful for it, and seeks to help . . . individual
s find their own ministry within it.?           
Victoria Weinstein 2011
  
Gathering, Welcoming 
  
 
Opening
 please rise in body or spirit
     Joe Pierce, Shane Roussi, Rev. Mark Belletini 
 
We are here 

on yet another snowy morn,   

to worship, to weave a community that is deep, 

to enter into relationship with both far stars 

and near strangers, and to find ways to open our he
arts, 
and to claim our diversity as a source of our stren
gth.  
 
(all) And so, bearing witness both to our world as 
it is, and as Love can imagine it, we would claim t
hat 
vision of a just world in our own lives. And becaus
e of a growing sense of kinship with all beings, in
viting 
our compassion, we begin in this celebration to eng
age our mission with our whole lives: body, mind, a
nd 
heart.  

 
Praising 
 #1023 Building Bridges 
 
Ingathering  On the Playground 

 
(acted out by our coordinators, Joe Pierce and Shan
e Roussi) 
 
There on the playground behind the old brick school
 on Springgarden, the children, younger and older i
n the 
neighborhood, played together each and every Saturd
ay. Lamar liked to play baseball with some friends 
who 
always came from over on Maplegrove Street. The sou
nd of the bat hitting the ball gave him a thrill al
most 
nothing else did. But his best friend Doug never jo
ined in. He didn't like baseball at all. He didn't 
like basketball 
or football either. He simply liked to sit in the s
hade under the oak tree in the corner of the play y
ard and read 
Green Lantern comic books. Sometimes he would bring
 a notebook, and try and draw the characters in Gre
en 
Lantern. Parallax for example. Off the playground, 
Doug and Lamar were inseparable. Always together. 
 
Jerica loves to play board games, and she and her f
riend Tabitha always tried to win as hard as they c
ould. They 
would sit under the shade of the big pine trees in 
the corner and play both Scrabble and Boggle until 
they were 
exhausted.  Off the playground, Jerica and Tabitha 
didn't see each other much. Jerica was always fasci
nated by 
math equations. Her mother taught her how much fun 
math could be. She was way ahead of her class in 
arithmetic and math. 

 
   Tabitha HATED math, and preferred to play video gam
es and listen to music, but she preferred classical
 music, 
especially by a fellow named Bach, which many of he
r friends thought was weird.  
 
"That's what grandpa listens to. Ewww."   

 
"That's what I listen to, and I 
like
 it."  
 
A girl named Darlene, when she heard Tabitha refuse
 to be teased by her friends about her taste in mus
ic, asked 
her if she could come over and listen to some of th
is "Bach"; and when she did, that Wednesday, Darlen
e realized 
that she really hadn't known what Bach meant, and t
hat she kind of liked it. 
 
Richard and Kim were friends, and they liked to kic
k a soccer ball around together on the playground. 
But only 
later in the day. Around sunset. Richard was Jewish
, and didn't do anything on Saturday until after su
nset, since 
Saturday was a holy day for him. They didn't have m
uch time, but that time was precious to them. Kim w
as 
raised in a Buddhist family. She spent a lot of tim
e trying to understand what Richard meant when he t
alked 
about G-d, and he, who had always attended a Method
ist Church, tried to understand why G-d wasn't impo
rtant 
in Kim's family, but that sitting in silence was. 

 
Eventually, they visited each other's homes. Kim wa
s invited to help light the candles on Friday night
, and 
Richard was invited to sit on a small cushion and k
eep quiet as some Korean words were hummed. She lik
ed the 
candles, especially as she watched the other women 
at the table bringing the light close to their hear
ts with their 
hands.  Richard liked the bells and chanting Kim's 
family did. It reminded him of when his grandfather
 David 
would chant the 
kaddish. 
 
Finally, everyone went home to their own apartments
, or houses, or trailers or cottages. But they were
 never quite 
the same after a Saturday at the playground.  
after which children and teachers leave for their a
ctivities, while 
our accompanist, Nathan Hamm, plays You've Got a Fr
iend in Me by Randy Newman. 
 
Greeting 
 news of the congregation 
  

Affirming
  
 
I affirm that for every human being there is a dive
rsity of existences. Single existence is itself an 
illusion in 
part. I affirm that these many existences signify s
omething, tend to something, fulfill something; it 
promises us meaning, harmony, and even justice
.   
 
Saul Bellow 1976 Nobel Lecture (arranged) 

 
Singing   1017 Building a New Way 

 
Communing
   
 
One last snowfall, I guess.  One more blast of wint
er cold, channeled by the sweep of the jet stream, 
a flow of 
wind over which I have no power, nor does anyone fo
r that matter.  Some green shoots are up in the cou
rtyard; at 
least maybe the snow will keep them warmer than the
 air itself. But I confess that weariness with roug
h winter is 
real in me now. Can't deny that. Can't deny that ev
en if that old scolding voice inside my head, left 
over from my 
younger years, doesn't let up. "Oh, buck up, Bellet
ini. I know you™re weary but let™s look at proporti
on here.  At 
least you're alive. And you know something about ce
ntral heat. At least you're not in Ukraine, bleedin
g on the 
street, watching everything fall apart. At least yo
u understand that voting bigotry into law would be 
a moral 
injustice. And at least you're not in a sleeping ba
g in a doorway along the streets of Columbus. Snowf
lakes weigh 
little indeed compared to the weight of a bloody up
rising, legislative chicanery, or crushing poverty.
 Let it go 

   man. It™s been a tough winter yes. But it™s not the
 end of the world."  And so I find once again that 
many things 
can be true at the same time.  My feelings 
and
 my grounding principles. Both true.  My honesty wi
th myself and 
my wrestling with what is beyond myself. Both true.
  The vision lifted up in word, and the solace foun
d in a few 
minutes of silence.  Both true. As I now make clear
.   (strike bell) 
  

The Great Silence 

 
One last snowfall day, but many days to come of lov
e and loss and joy and sorrow, as there have been m
any such 
days in the past, our lives filled with experiences
 which we bring with us into this place. Setting as
ide time for 
finding the intersection between the communal and t
he personal, let us call to mind and name, silently
 or audibly, 
the folks who have loved us through to this day, th
e folks for whom we are always thankful, the folks 
we find 
disagreeable, the folks we miss because they are fa
r away, the folks we mourn. 
 
The Naming 

 
One last snowfall day, but the power of music, like
 the realities of the world, balances our interior 
perspective, 
calls us to feelings greater than weariness, and fo
rges ligaments of spirit that bind a community in g
ratitude. 
 
Anthems 

  

The First Reading 
comes from
 Ignazio Silone's 1938 novel, Bread and Wine (Pane e
 Vino).  Silone's novels were 
very important to me in the first part of my minist
ry. 
 
?Well, Cardile, you and I know each other,? said th
e doctor.    
 
The carriage left the national road and entered a s
ide road, full of puddles, running between fields o
f beans and 
peas. 

 
?True,? responded Cardile, ?but nevertheless, peopl
e have many ways of knowing one another. We peasant
s 
know ‚the better kind of people™ through the land t
hey own, and from their reputations.  But is that a
 way of 
knowing anyone?  You work, you buy, you sell, you r
ent, and you need papers and reputations.  But is t
hat a way 
of knowing anyone?  Once when I was working at Esta
que, near Marseilles, where a big tunnel was being 
built, 
someone said to me: "There™s another guy from your 
neck of the woods, from the Marsica area, an educat
ed 
man."   

 
Oh
, I said to myself
, it™ll be someone wanting to get something out of 
me. 
All of my papers and certificates were 
in order, I had paid all my dues, so what could he 
possibly want?  So anyway, the man comes to me and 
tells me 
he had not been to the Marsica for several years, a
nd he started asking me about the people there, and
 about their 
lives, and he spoke of his own village, Fucino.  We
 went on seeing each other in the evenings after th
at. We used 
to go and sit on the dock, and we would talk till l
ate at night.  
 
After a few evenings, when we had told each other e
verything and knew each other well, we started talk
ing about 
things that neither he nor I had ever thought about
 before, simple things, and we started thinking abo
ut them 
together. Sometimes I said the more interesting thi
ngs, and sometimes he did.  It would be impossible 
to repeat 
them aloud here now, because you would probably lau
gh at me, Doctor. Anyway, during the daytime I work
ed in 
the tunnel. It was an eight-hour day, but everybody
 worked two or three hours extra, to earn more. But
 after eight 
hours I used to stop, because I knew that the man I
 enjoyed talking to, was waiting for me.  We talked
 about 
humanity, about the earth, and about life. 
And then
 I thought to myself, 
here is a person from whom I get nothing 
whatever in a practical way, either for work, or fo
r my testimonials, or for any of the other papers. 
 Nor does he 
come to me as a priest or as a schoolmaster or as a
 propagandist. He is not one of those people who kn
ows 

   everything and are paid to convince others. Here is
 somebody who comes to me like a human being.  
One day he 
went away and I heard no more of him.   

  2.  The Second Reading 
comes from Anne W. Schaef and Diane Fassel's The Ad
dictive Organization, 1988.  They 
are using the metaphors of addiction and recovery i
n talking mostly about companies, and even non-prof
it 
organizations, like congregations. 

 
We do not intend to give a blueprint for how organi
zations will look as they leave the addictive syste
m; but there 
are several implications for organizations as they 
take our information seriously. 
 
1. The mission of the organization would be support
ed by the structure, and there would be an awarenes
s that the 
ways of organizing the work are integral to the mis
sion. 
 
2. The organization would be moral. The products an
d services would not be destructive to the universe
, 
debilitating to the users, or exploitative. There w
ould be no context for dishonesty at any level of o
perations. 
 
3. Organizations would develop permeable boundaries
. This can happen only if the company can know who 
it is 
and still be responsive to information from the out
side. Organizations with permeable boundaries do no
t pretend, 
or protect themselves from data that challenges the
ir most fervently held beliefs. They are constantly
 in the 
learning posture.  Their identity is firm enough no
t to be engulfed by new information. 
 
4. Communication would be characterized as multidir
ectional. People would be, first of all, encouraged
 to 
communicate with themselves by listening carefully 
to their feelings and becoming clear about what the
y know. 
Out of this inner clarity, communication with other
s would flow. 
 
5. Leadership would be diffused and more situationa
l.  Persons with executive and management responsib
ilities 
would model effective leadership by functioning as 
learners, by sharing their uncertainties and mistak
es, by 
creating an environment in which it™s safe for othe
rs to be themselves. 
 
6. Organizations would alter their view of change. 
They would neither be resistant to change, nor try 
to elicit 
change for the sake of change. We know from experie
nce that such organizations become more alive, and 
this 
aliveness would evolve as a source of change. 

 
Preaching
  
              

When I was a child, I have to admit, I was certainl
y 
not
 the most popular kid on the block.  
 
For one, I simply refused to roughhouse with the ot
her boys on the street. I found it unnecessarily pa
inful. And, I 
had been raised not to curse or swear for any reaso
n, so I didn't. Not even in Italian, which has some
 of the 
world's best curses.  

 
Two: For some reason, I just didn't like baseball a
t all, and in the 1950s in Detroit's East Side, to 
publicly say you 
did not want to play on a little league team was th
e 
exact
 equivalent of walking onto the field during an OSU
 
rally, wearing a U of M pullover waving a U of M pe
nnant of some sort. In November. It was like painti
ng a 
bull™s-eye target on your shirt.  

 
Three: I was an altar boy, and got up at 5:30 to wa
lk through the snowdrifts to get to the church for 
first service at 
6:30 a.m. Everyone thought that made me 
way 
too devout. Or for spending months away from everyo
ne learning 
the Latin responses: Ad Deum Qui Laetificat Iuventu
tem Meam. 
 
   I just didn't fit in. I was not ?like-minded? with 
my peers. I was not like-hearted with them. And my 
story was 
just different. 

 
When I grew older, living out on the edge of things
 with my particular uniqueness set me to feeling lo
nely. Oh, I 
made new friends when former friends and I parted b
ecause I didn™t fit in, but there was loneliness ev
en in that. 
 
As time passed, I learned to accept myself, but it 
was hard. So many cheers, so much applause when I c
onformed 
to others' wishes, only frowns when I did what made
 sense to me.  
 
I wondered what it would be like to be with people 
who were more like me, who felt out on the edge. I 
found 
friends eventually who didn't like baseball much, b
ut who ALSO didn't like either the music I liked, o
r the 
religious sensibilities I had...even the new fresh 
progressive ones who bid me leave the embrace of th
e church of 
my youth. I learned to curse with the best of them.
..even in Italian...but I found folks who felt on t
he edge for 
entirely different reasons than I had for feeling o
ut on the edge. One first-year-student at my univer
sity was 
convinced that she was too plain in the face, and a
ctually asked her friends to contribute, as she put
 it, to her 
"plastic surgery fund."  (Twenty years later, she d
id indeed have her nose bobbed.)  Others felt on th
e edge 
because they were Jewish in a Gentile world, or hat
ed going to movies which everyone else seemed to li
ke, or 
hated the taste of beer in a beer-guzzling campus, 
or were pregnant out of wedlock which, once upon a 
time, I 
assure you, was a Big Deal. 

 
So in the first two and a half decades of life, I d
iscovered two realities which to me seem pretty har
d edged. 
 
1. Diversity is all there is. 

2. And thus, there really is no such thing as like-
minded, or like-hearted, or like-storied whenever t
here is more 
than one person in a room.  

 
Diversity these days is often a code-word that only
 gives attention to the externals: skin color, hair
 color, eye 
color, height, weight, build, IQ indicators (as cre
epily culture bound as they are) and cultural aspec
ts of ethnicity. 
But externals are but one part of the great word ?d
iversity,? our theme for the month. 
  

And externals conceal a lot of inner diversity from
 person to person in every community, even the ones
 that 
appear on the surface to be the more culturally con
formist. A group of Greek Orthodox Catholics, for e
xample, 
may share a lot of cultural norms because of their 
Greek rootedness.  You don't expect to see many peo
ple named 
Chang or Lopez standing under the dome of the sanct
uary of a Greek Orthodox church.  Yet diversity, as
 I 
learned, is all there is...some Greek Orthodox men 
I know have little theological interest at all, and
 are hardly 
concerned about either God or creed, while others a
re deeply emotional during the chanting. (Is it the
 music, or 
the doctrine?) Some are Republicans politically, ma
ny are Democrats and, still more, Socialists, and s
ome don't 
even vote. 

 
Different educational matrixes exist within a Greek
 Orthodox church, artist and engineer, poet and gro
cer and 
physicist and teacher and cement truck driver...all
 dissolved into the common and glittering Orthodox 
liturgy 
under the golden dome. Different economic realities
, too. Different tastes, skills, health, emotional 
approaches.  
 
There is nothing 
but
 diversity. Uniformity, in almost every community I
 can think of, is ritual fiction. 
 
And this is true of every other community I can thi
nk of: secular, religious, political, educational, 
legislative. 
Look, just because we as a congregation claim in ou
r mission statement "diversity as our strength" doe
sn't mean 
we have the corner on diversity. Our distinction as
 a spiritual body is that we name it and welcome it
 openly.  
 
Or do we? 

 
   Over the years, it™s a phrase I hear often. I've sa
id. I heard it said around here, at General Assembl
y, and at 
District meetings. ?I come to this church because I
 want to be around like-minded people."  
 
"I've been an outsider all my life, lived on the ed
ge, and now I want to be with like-minded people, p
eople who 
think like I do, so I don't have to explain myself 
all the time. I want to be at home, comfortable, no
t always 
having to painfully explain myself."  I understand.
 Remember, I felt like an outsider all of my life. 
  
Yet as I understand it, the phrase "like-minded peo
ple" seems to chafe against the whole idea of diver
sity. And 
even though it™s not a phrase I've heard anyone use
, the phrase ?like-hearted," which I invented for t
his sermon, 
would equally tug away at the dignity of diversity.
  
All of our stories are different. Unique. Diversity
 is all there is. And it™s a strength, we say.  But
 what does that 
mean? 

 
Take the story from Silone's great novel, 
Bread and Wine (Pane e Vino). 
The man Cardile tells his doctor friend 
about meeting a person from the same part of Italy 
that he was from. This was up in Marseille, while h
e was 
working on a big tunnel project. He is suspicious a
t first: ?Italian.? Then, most dialects were mutual
ly 
unintelligible 
?We peasants know the better kind of people through
 the land they own, and from their reputations.  
But is that a way of knowing anyone?  You work, you
 buy, you sell, you rent, and you need papers and a
 good 
recommendation.  But is that a way of knowing anyon
e?"  
They did speak the same dialect, which made 
communication easier, certainly. Especially in 1938
, which was before Italians were all forced to spea
k 
Florentine, which we now call simply ?Italian.?
 Before then, almost all dialects on the Italian pen
insula were 
mutually unintelligible.
  It was really comforting to find someone, especial
ly if you were out of the country, who 
could actually understand you. 

 
And they really talked. 
"After a few evenings, when we had told each other 
everything and knew each other well, 
we started talking about things that neither he nor
 I had ever thought about before, simple things, an
d we started 
thinking about them together.?  

 
They talked about 
"humanity, about the earth, and about life."
 Cardile then reports: "
And then I thought to 
myself, here is a person from whom I get nothing wh
atever in a practical way, either for work, or for 
my 
testimonials, or for any of the other papers.  Nor 
does he come to me as a priest or as a schoolmaster
 or as a 
propagandist. He is not one of those people who kno
ws everything and are paid to convince others. Here
 is 
somebody who comes to me like a human being." 

 
Wow.  

 
All the ways people know each other... by their han
dles, their labels, their papers, their diverse tit
les, their 
reputations...mean nothing at all. Everything is di
versity, yes, but real diversity doesn't consist of
 people saying "I 
am an agnostic. I am a Buddhist Unitarian, I am a J
ewnitarian, I am a Christian Universalist, I am an 
atheist, I am 
an Italian American, I am Chinese, I am half Africa
n American and half Korean, I am a Republican, I am
 a 
Socialist, I am Cherokee, I am a lesbian, I am deaf
, I am arthritic." Those are just stopping points. 
They invite, 
God help us, 
assumptions, 
if folks don't go further. What does it mean to be 
both a Unitarian and a Buddhist? 
How does atheism guide your ethical decisions? How 
does deaf culture differ from hearing culture? (It 
does, you 
know.) Does the Cherokee spiritual language of your
 grandmother still speak to you? What does it tell 
you?  
 
Tell me your story. Tell me your story. Tell me you
r story.  I want to listen, engage, go deeper, not 
stop at the 
labels, identities. Tell me about your other identi
ties too...for not one of us is totally singular.  
 
Maybe you are not always agnostic, but sometimes sa
y, ?God, what a sunset!? and you don™t rush to take
 it back. 
Maybe you change your mind several times each day, 
saying with pride, and quoting Emerson, "A foolish 

   consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds."  May
be your ten years of marriage to an alcoholic husba
nd changed 
you in ways that still affect you. Maybe you are dr
awn to Buddhist meditation, sure, but you find that
 reading the 
Gospel of Luke seems to lead you deeper than the si
lence.  Maybe you wanted to be an artist but your s
tepfather 
scared you away from that decision, and you've been
 at odds with yourself ever since. Maybe you both l
ove and 
hate your mother at the same time. 

 
You are not crazy. You are complex, like every othe
r human being living on earth right now. There is n
othing but 
diversity, inside and outside, just like Saul Bello
w said in his Nobel speech. It™s ok. It™s a source 
of our strength. 
You are safe here. Safe to be who you are...unless,
 of course, you threaten the safety of others. We a
re not fools, I 
hope. We can draw necessary lines. But we will alwa
ys try to make this a safe and open place. 
 
At least, this is the kind of organization we've be
en working on creating and deepening for years. Ann
e Wilson 
Schaef and her friend talk about healthy and unheal
thy organizations. Schaef has been writing books us
ing the 
reality and the metaphor of addiction for years, an
d her co-written book, 
The Addictive Organization
, has helped 
me understand, better than anything else, the wisdo
m of our covenantal form of organization. What does
 that 
mean? It means simply, 
we
 agree to be together, not believe together
. We don't pretend conformity of identity, 
and say so openly. 

 
The addictive organization 
does 
pretend that, however, asserts Schaef. She describe
s organizations, for example, 
where the expression of feelings is seen as inappro
priate. She sees this as a sign of an addictive or 
unhealthy 
organization. "Get control of yourself." 

 
There is a loss of corporate memory, a culture of f
orgetfulness. Dualism rules...it™s a culture where 
there are 
enemies, and either/or constructs throughout the sy
stem. Dishonesty and denial are encouraged: "This p
roduct 
won't hurt the environment. My boss says so."  Judg
mentalism comes to the fore. As Schaef puts it, "Th
ere is a 
great deal of difference between saying 'I don't li
ke that' and 'That is bad.'  Perfectionism rules at
 the unhealthy 
organization, as does seduction, as Schaef defines 
it, "luring people away from their own perceptions.
"  ?You 
don™t see what you see. You don™t hear what you hea
r.? 
 
But then Schaef describes a healthy, or in her meta
phor, 
recovering
 organization. I was heartened when I read it, 
because I recognized aspects of our own congregatio
n in the beautiful outline she offered us in the re
ading.   
 
Sometimes people tell me they come to services, not
 because of what I say in the sermons, but because 
they feel 
it™s safe to cry here. No one is telling them to "g
et control of yourself."  Some people never cry...s
ure, it™s not 
how they express their emotions. But both participa
te here. 
 
The Archives group systematically help us remember 
things.  Forgetfulness is beginning to fade (althou
gh it was 
stronger here once, I admit). Our progress is forwa
rd. Proposals for streamlining our governance struc
tures, so 
that our mission is served, are being studied and a
re moving forward, and it™s clear to me that we are
 organized 
more and more around our mission. 

  

The whole Capital Campaign is our attempt to create
 a more moral organization, which Schaef asserts is
 a sign of 
health.  The LED lighting, the insulation, the new 
windows are all making us less destructive of our c
ommon 
environment and universe, and our commitment to tha
t vision has inspired me. 
 
More and more, we are developing what Schaef calls 
?permeable boundaries.? We have initiated many chan
ges 
which were inspired by other UU congregations, whic
h have taught us things and which we have learned. 
We 
also lend our ideas outside these walls. (Example–w
hen Jolinda helped create little green stoles for o
ur children 
to wear when they light the chalice, that was a uni
que feature of this congregation. Now, others are u
sing this 
delightful symbol.) Again, a sign of health. We are
 not self-sufficient, but grateful for what we lear
n from other 
congregations. We are constantly in ?the learning p
osture,? to quote Schaef. 

    
Over the years we have developed many ways for peop
le to listen to themselves first, so they can then 
listen to 
others. Various groups, where themes and readings a
nd stories help us unpack our own journeys, have be
en 
enlarging our sense of community and making our com
munications more ?multidirectional.?  
 
I have heard many of us share our uncertainties and
 not feel embarrassed by doing so. Very healthy.  
 
Lastly, Schaef says healthy "Organizations would al
ter their view of change. They would neither be res
istant to 
change, nor try to elicit change for the sake of ch
ange. We know from experience that such organizatio
ns become 
more alive, and this aliveness would evolve as a so
urce of change.? 
 
And indeed, you will hear me say this all the time:
 this is one alive place! More things are going on 
here than I 
have a clue about. It™s electric and vital. This a 
playground where diversity is our strength, and lik
e the children 
on the playground in the story this morning, we're 
never quite the same at the end of the day because 
of all the 
strength in our diversity.  

 
I was lonely when I was a kid, but now I have joine
d my self to a congregation of folks who ?speak my 
dialect? 
about many things, but who are not so much "like-mi
nded" as "diversely-minded,? not so much "like-hear
ted, as 
?diversely-hearted,? each with a different, totally
 unique story, deeper and more wonderful than any l
abel, title, 
claim, paper, identity, reputation or name.   

 
Tell the stories, in all their distinct beauty. 

 
Diversity, after all, is all there is. 

 
Offering
   
How wonderful is the privilege we claim, to support
 a congregation where there can be no fencing of th
oughts 
and no denial of dignity to any human being. Such a
 congregation has an important role to play in a wo
rld that 
grows stingier every day in love and peace. May we 
always offer support for this community that suppor
ts us...by 
electronic means if you like, or in this ancient wa
y of sharing common responsibility. 
 
Returning
 New Member Ceremony: The Cardamom Seed 
 (see insert in order of service) 

 
Singing  #1018 Come and Go with Me 

 
Blessing 

 
 
 
 
   
