    Authority and Democracy 
January 23, 2011 
Rev. Eric Meter 
 Opening  
 We  are  here   

      
despite  the  cold  at  this,  the  heart  of  wint
er  
 to worship  as  we  come  together  once  more, 
to  bring  our  doubts  and  challenges,  our  drea
ms  and  hopes   
into  the  care  of  this  community  of  faith  an
d  commitment   
And  so,  we  pledge  to  journey  together  along 
 the  ways  of  truth  and  affection,  as  
best  as  we  can  name  them  now,  or  may  learn
  them  in  days  to  come;  that  we  and  
our  children  may  be  fulfilled,  and  that  we  
may  speak  to  our  world  in  words  and  
lives  of  peace,  justice  and  goodwill. 

 Praising
  #298  
Wake,  Now,  My  Senses
  v. 1-3   
Ingathering
  
Ron™s  Big  Mission
  
Greeting   

Affirming
   #648  
Beginners
   by  Denise  Levertov
   
But  we  have  only  begun  to  love  the  earth.  
We have only begun  to  imagine  the  fullness  
of  life.   
How  could  we  tire  of  hope?  Œ  so  much  is  i
n  bud.   
How can  desire  fail?  Œ  we  have  only  begun  t
o  imagine  justice  and  mercy,  
Only  
begun  to  envision  how  it  might  be  to  live  
as  siblings  with  beast  can  flower,  not  as  
oppressors.   

    Surely  our  river  cannot  already  be  hastening 
 into  the  sea  of  nonbeing?   
Surely  it  cannot  drag,  in  the  silt,  all  tha
t  is  innocent?   
Not  yet,  not  yet  Œ  there  is  too  much  broke
n  that  must  be  mended,   
Too  much  hurt  that  we  have  done  to  each  ot
her  that  cannot  yet  be  forgiven.   
We  have  only  begun  to  know  the  power  that  
is  in  us  if  we  would  join  our  solitudes  in
  
the  communion  of  struggle.   

So  much  is  unfolding,  that  must  complete  its
  gesture,  so  much  is  in  bud.  
 When  the  cold  descends  and  cuts  to  the  bone
,  what  else  can  we  do  save  stand  
stupidly  shivering,  but  to  bundle  up  and  hud
dle  together  for  warmth?   
Cold,  such  as  we  have  known  this  week,  arri
ves  on  quiet  wings  and  demands  a  degree  
of  stillness  not  possible  at  other  times  of 
 year.   
The cold asks:  Who are we?  What is it that animat
es our hearts?  From what do we draw  our  
warmth?  With  whom  do  we  choose  to  share  the
  warmth  we™ve  found?   
To  take  up  these  questions  is  to  embrace  th
e  heart  of  winter,  so  it  is  with  these  
questions  that  we  enter  together  a  time  of  
stillness,  and  in  the  embrace  of  these  warm 
 
walls,  respond  to  what  the  season  asks  of  u
s.   
bell   
In  the  continuing  stillness,  we  pause  to  rem
ember  our  larger  lives.  We  recall  those  
who  helped  make  us  the  people  we  are.  Now, 
 either  silently  or  softly  aloud,  let  us  lif
t  
up  the  names  of  those  in  our  lives  whom  we
  miss,  whom  we  love  or  struggle  to  love,  
those  who  we  hold  with  tenderness  and  sympat
hy,  those  we  long  to  see  again  soon.   
naming   
From  stillness  to  the  names  of  those  in  our
  lives,  now  to  the  celebration  that  is  musi
c,  
the  celebration  that  is  the  gift  of  song.   

Readings 

    Our  first  reading  is  from  Aftershock,  Robert 
 Reich™s  book  which  was  published  last  year. 
 
Reich, you may  recall,  was  Labor  Secretary  und
er  President  Clinton.  A  prolific  author  
and  commentator,  Reich  now  is  on  the  faculty
  of  the  Goldman  School  of  Policy  at  the  
University  of  California,  Berkeley.   

A virtual pendulum underlies the American  politica
l  economy.  We  swing  from  eras  in  
which  the  benefits  of  economic  growth  are  co
ncentrated  in  fewer  hands  to  those  in  
which  the  gains  are  more  broadly  shared,  and
  then  back  again.  We  are  approaching  the  
end  of  one  such  cycle  and  the  start  of  the
  next.  The  Great  Prosperity  of  1947  to  1975
  
was  followed  by  three  decades  of  retrenchment
,  ending  in  the  Great  Recession.   
The question is not whether the  pendulum  will  sw
ing  back.  It surely will.  The  question  is  
how
  it  will  swing Œ whether  with  reforms  that  w
iden  the  circle  of  prosperity,  or  with  
demagoguery  that  turns  America  away  from  the 
 rest  of  the  world,  shrinks  the  economy,  
and  sets  Americans  against  one  another.   

Our  second  reading  today  is  from  Sue Halpern™
s  collection  of  essays  from  1993  titled  
Migrations  to  Solitude.  While short, her piece  
speaks  well  for  itself. 
Trusting  each  other  is  the  beginning  of  a  c
ertain  secular  faith,  a  faith  that  allows  us
  to  
live  in  families  and  communities  and  nations.
  Democracy, above all  other  forms  of  
government,  requires  this  faith.   

Sermon   
In  a  suburb  of  Johannesburg  I  met  with  thre
e  women  who  had  all  been  active  in  the  
liberation  struggle  there:  a  black  African,  a
  woman  who  had  been  born  in  England  and  
a  woman  of  Indian  descent.   
While  we  were  introducing  ourselves,  the  Indi
an  woman  changed  gears  by  asking  me, 
?What™s  the  population  of  the  United  States??
   
Puzzled, I replied, ?Just  under  300  million.?  T
his was in 2003.  We™ve passed that milestone 
now.   
?That™s  the  size  of  our  middle  class  in  Ind
ia,?  she  said,  looking  rather  satisfied.   
Okay,  this  might  be  interesting,  I  thought  t
o  myself. She wants a pissing contest, one  
about  national economies.  What fun.   I  was  goi
ng  to  reply  in  kind,  saying  something  

    about  how  our  middle  class  is  70%  of  our  p
opulation  while  theirs  was  a  third  at  best. 
 
But  then  I  realized  that  I  didn™t  know  what
  our  percentage  really  was,  and,  even  so,  I
  
was  pretty  sure  that  in  India  their  middle  
class  was  growing while  I  knew  ours  was  
getting  smaller  every  day.   
I  don™t  think  I  was  aware  of  it  then,  but 
 something  about  being  so  far  from  home  and 
 
hearing  the  U.S. criticized put me  on  the  defe
nsive.  I wasn™t used  to  defending  America.  I  
was  used  to  being  the  one  criticizing  how  w
e  had  let  our  promise  slip  away.  Thankfully 
 
one  of  the  others  at  the  table  steered  us  
gracefully  back  to  the  safer  topic  of  South 
 
African  liberation.  Even  so,  the  memory  of  t
hat  brief  exchange  has  stayed  with  me.   
When  I  was  growing  up  we  learned  the  evils 
 of  the  Gilded  Age,  the  age  of  Robber  
Barons  and  ugly  smoke  billowing  from  endless 
 industrial  smoke  stacks.  Of  fat  cat  
bankers  and  all  those  who  fled  to  the  citie
s  looking  for  work,  giving  up  everything  in 
 
the  process  only  to  find  they  had  accepted  
a  devil™s  bargain.   
We were told such profiteering was un-American and 
 certainly  undemocratic.  We  had  
righted  those  wrongs  and  things  were  back  on
  track,  and  were  going  to  stay  that  way.  
History never repeats itself, we were told.   
And  those  of  us  whose  parents  were  able  to 
put  food  on  the  table  believed  it.   
Now  we  have  those  who  have  speculated  reckle
ssly  held  up  as  Too  Big  to  Fail,  Wall  
Street  bailouts  and  taxpayer  funded  ?temporari
ly  decreased?  bonuses.  Of  course  what  lead  
to  all  that  was  the  eradication  of  protectio
ns  put  in  place  in  the  aftermath  of  the  
Depression.  The jobs that  have  been  lost  will 
 not  come  again.  And  salaries  that  had  been 
 
effectively  flat  for  decades  are  now  but  a  
dream  away, as  those  who  have  been  out  of  
work  can  almost  be  certain  that  if  they  do 
 find  new  work,  it  will  not  be  at  the  rate
  
they  were  paid  before.  Our  beloved  middle  cl
ass  has  taken  more  than  a  body  blow  this  
time  around.   
History  may  never  repeat  itself,  but  it  sure
  can  rhyme,  Mark  Twain  reminds  us.   
And still, the American dream  persists.   

E  pluribus unum.  Out of many, one.   

    These  were  the  words  with  which  Daniel  Herna
ndez,  the  brave  volunteer  in  Rep.  
Gabrielle Giffords office,  began  his  remarks  at
  the  memorial  service  in  Tucson  a  week  
ago  Wednesday.   
Hernandez  called  on  our  nation  to  unite,  and
  in  the  aftermath  of  the  senseless  violence 
 
there  two  weeks  ago  yesterday,  we  have,  to  
a  degree.  He  may  not  wish  to  consider  
himself  a  hero,  but  he  ran  forward  toward  t
he  sound  of  gunfire  of  his  own  volition.  
Instinct, even.  He  stayed  with Giffords, tending
  to  her  wound, and  holding  her  hand  until  
the  ambulance  drove  her  away.  What is not hero
ic about that?   
We  know  that  there  are  moments  in  our  natio
n  when  citizens  simply  shine.  Hernandez  
shone  that  day  and  did  so  again  during  the 
 memorial.   
We  learned  of  another  such  shining  American  
moment  in  the  story  of  Ron  McNair  
which  Ruby  told  earlier.  A  precocious  young  
man  who  jumped  up  on  a  counter  of  the  
library  when  the  librarian  wouldn™t  let  him  
check  out  books  on  his  own.  Blacks  didn™t  
get  library  cards  back  then  in  Lake  City,  S
outh  Carolina.  Well,  until  Ron™s  act  of  civi
l  
disobedience,  that  is.   
And  in  another  case  of  reality  being  harder 
 to  believe  than  fiction,  those  books  he  
checked  out  on  airplanes  inspired  him  more  t
han  anyone  could  have  imagined  back  then.  
Ron grew up  to  become  a  real  live  astronaut. 
 But  then  an  accident  took  his  life  and  
everyone  else  aboard  the  Space  Shuttle  Challe
nger,  twenty  five  years  ago  this  coming  
week.   
The brother of a friend of mine knew Ron McNair.  A
frican  Americans  were  not  exactly  
common  at  NASA  then,  and  those  who  were  the
re  made  sure  to  connect.   
The  library  in  Lake  City  is  now  dedicated  t
o NcNair,  and  libraries  everywhere  in  our  
nation  check  out  books  to  future  astronauts, 
 teachers,  nurses  and  even  circus  performers. 
  
While  this  may  have  seemed  like  a  diversion 
 from  my  topic  earlier,  my  hope  is  to  
remind  us  that  there  is  something  in  the  Am
erican  dream  that  is  still  alive,  there  are 
 
chords  of  it  we  still  respond  to.   
Remember  Sue  Halpern™s words  earlier,  ?Trusting
  each  other  is  the  beginning  of  a  
certain  secular  faith,  a  faith  that  allows  u
s  to  live  in  families  and  communities  and  
nations.  Democracy, above all  other  forms  of  g
overnment,  requires  this  faith.?   

    It  is  that  faith,  secular  or  not,  that  I  w
ant  most  to  talk  with  you  about  today.  It  
begins  
with  finding  and  building  upon  the  ways  we  
can  trust  one  another.   
Yet  it  can  be  hard  to  feel  trusting,  united
  in  common  cause,  when  the  deck  seems  
stacked  against  you.   
The  promise  of  our  nation  is,  in  the  immort
al  words  of  Abraham  Lincoln,  ?that  
government  of  the  people,  by  the  people,  for
  the  people,  shall  not  perish  from  the  
earth.?   
These  days  a  government  of  the  people  for  t
he  people  feels  like  a  distant  dream  to  
me,  let  alone  how  long  one  might  last.   
I  was  crying  tears  of  joy  along  with  Jesse 
 Jackson  in  Grant  Park  the  night  Barack  
Obama  was  elected  President.  And  while  I  kno
w  that  politics  is  the  art  of  the  possible,
  
I  was  hoping,  like  so  many  others,  for  more
  backbone  from  him,  especially  in  economic  
matters.   
And  here  I  have  to  pause  to  offer  a  caveat
.  What  I™m  saying  is  based  on  how  I  see  
things.  I  neither  expect,  or  even  necessarily
  want,  any  of  you  to  agree  with  me.  What  
I  
hope  for  is  that  these  reflections  will  fost
er  a  respectful  and  honest  conversation.  We  
are  
all  citizens of  this  republic  with  equal  righ
t  to  our  opinions. 
Robert  Reich  again:  ?A  virtual  pendulum  under
lies  the  American  political  economy.  We  
swing  from  eras  in  which  the  benefits  of  ec
onomic  growth  are  concentrated  in  fewer  
hands  to  those  in  which  the  gains  are  more 
 broadly  shared,  and  then  back  again.  We  
are  approaching  the  end  of  one  such  cycle  a
nd  the  start  of  the  next.?   
Really?  I  hope  so,  but  I™m  not  sure  I  see 
 it,  or  signs  leading  that  way.   
In  their  book,  
Winner-Take-All  Politics,
  authors  Jacob  Hacker  and  Paul  Pierson  take 
 a  
painfully  clear-eyed  look  at  the  state  of  ou
r  economy  over  the  last  several  decades.   
They  show  that,  from  shortly  after  the Second
  World  War  to  the  early  1970s,  incomes  
grew  across  the  board  for  all  wage  groups,  
and  wages  grew  at a slightly  faster  rate  at  
the bottom  and  middle  of  the  scale  than  at  
the  top.  That started changing, however,  before 
 
the  end  of  the  decade.   

    According  to  the  Congressional  Budget  Office, 
 from  1979  to  2006  average  after-tax  
inflation-adjusted  incomes  rose  11%  for  those 
 families  in  the  lowest  of  the  five  income  
groups,  18%  for  the  next  fifth,  21%  for  the
  middle  group,  55%  for  the  next  group,  and 
Œ get  this Œ 256%  for  those  in  the  top.   
  And  that  is  during  a  time  when  many  more  f
amilies  had  more  than  one  wage  earner.  
Without  those  extra  hours  worked  per  househol
d,  middle  incomes  would  have  barely  
budged  and  ?incomes  of  households  at  the  bot
tom  would  have  fallen.?      
Additionally,  the  period  from  2001  through  20
07  ?was  the  first  economic  expansion  on  
record  in  which  the  typical  non-elderly  house
hold  lost  economic  ground.?      
As  they  put  it,  ?Recessions,  it  turned  out, 
 were  for  suckers,  not  bankers.?      
And  ?Where  the  conventional  wisdom  confidently
  declares,  ‚It™s  the  economy,?  we  find,  
again  and  again,  ‚It™s  the  politics.™?      
Elsewhere  in  his  book  
Aftershock
  Reich  speaks  to  this  when  he  writes,  ?Perh
aps  the  
most  convincing  evidence  that  the  game  is  ri
gged  is  the  deafening  silence  about  all  of  
this.?      
In  a  helpful  image  of  the  scale  of  the  pro
blem  he  adds,  ?America™s  rich  did  take  a  hi
t  
in  the  Crash  of  2008.  According  to  Forbes  m
agazine,  the  nation™s  four  hundred  
wealthiest  people  lost  about  $300  billion  tha
t  year.  That  still  left  those  four  hundred  
enough  to  live  on Œ a  total  of  $1.27  trillio
n  (more  than  the  estimated  cost  of  achieving
  
universal  health  care  for  the  entire  nation  
for  the  next  decade).? 
Any  system  that  would  allow  such  a  thing  is
  one  that,  as  far  as  I™m  concerned,  is  
practicing  slash  and  burn  economics.   
And  in  case  you  think  that  I™m  making  a  pa
rtisan  claim  in  all  this,  I  want  to  be  cle
ar  
that  I  understand  that  the  changes  to  our  r
egulatory  practices  actually  began  under  
President  Carter.  The  responsibility  for  all  
this  rests  with  Republicans  and  Democrats  
alike.   
Reich  states  at  one  point  that,  ?Losers  of  
rigged  games  can  become  very  angry.?      
And  yet  the  only  angry  voices  I  hear  these 
 days  are  those  from  the  Tea  Party.   

    Where is the wider outcry?  Where are the angry mod
erates?  Where is the  angry  left?  
Or have we given  up  on  crying  out?   

I  can  only  imagine  that  many  of  us  are  too
  scared  to  rock  the  boat  that  has  served  u
s  
well  enough  before.  We  can™t  help  but  think 
 that  things  will  turn  around  and  we™ll  be  
able  to  get  back  on  that  boat  again.   
To  those  whom  our  economy  has  not  served  as
  well,  well  I  hear  them  saying,  
?Welcome  to  the  party.  We™re so glad you™ve  ch
osen  to  join  us.  Now  do  you  understand  
what  we™ve  been  trying  to  say  to  you  for  s
o  long??   
This is a time  to  listen.  This  is  a  time  for
  coming  together  in  common  cause,  of  sharing
  
our  stories  despite  our  fear  of  shame.  This 
is  a  time  for  humility  and  honesty.  This  is
  a  
time  for  either  building  or  retreating, and  I
  am  not  advocating  retreat.   
I  was  disheartened  in  all  the  reading  I™ve  
done  on  this  subject  in  recent  weeks  to  fin
d  
so  many  authors  talking  about  a  way  forward 
 as  simply  muddling  through.  While  that  
may  be  an  honest  fall  back  position,  I  hope
  we  can  strive  for  more.  I™m  not  sure  I™m 
 
ready  to  let  go  of  the  hope  that  more  is  
possible  for  us.   
We™re  the  land  of  Ron  McNair  and  Daniel  Her
nandez  and  Christina  Taylor  Green,  
after  all.   
As President Obama said  in  Tucson  a  week  ago  
Wednesday,   
?I believe we can  be  better.  Those  who  died  h
ere,  those  who  saved  lives  here Œ they  
help  me  believe.  We  may  not  be  able  to  sto
p  all  evil  in  the  world,  but  I  know  that  
how  we  treat  one  another  is  entirely  up  to 
 us.  I  believe  that  for  all  our  imperfection
s,  
we  are  full  of  decency  and  goodness,  and  th
at  the  forces  that  divide  us  are  not  as  
strong  as  those  that  unite  us. 
?That's  what  I  believe,  in  part  because  that
's  what  a  child  like  Christina  Taylor  Green 
 
believed.  Imagine:  here  was  a  young  girl  who
  was  just  becoming  aware  of  our  
democracy;  just  beginning  to  understand  the  o
bligations  of  citizenship;  just  starting  to  
glimpse  the  fact  that  someday  she  too  might 
 play  a  part  in  shaping  her  nation's  future.
  
She  had  been  elected  to  her  student  council;
  she  saw  public  service  as  something  
exciting,  something  hopeful.  She  was  off  to  
meet  her  congresswoman,  someone  she  was  
sure  was  good  and  important  and  might  be  a 
 role  model.  She  saw  all  this  through  the  

    eyes  of  a  child,  undimmed  by  the  cynicism  o
r  vitriol  that  we  adults  all  too  often  just
  
take  for  granted.? 
May  Christina  Taylor  Green  and  Daniel  Hernand
ez  and  Ron  McNair  help  us  believe  as  
well.   
India  having  a  middle  class  larger  than  ours
  is  not my  primary  concern.   
My  concern  is  that  we  be  the  best  United  S
tates  we  can  be.  And  in  that,  we  have  our 
 
work  cut  out  for  us.  
We need to see  things  clearly  as  they  are.  

We  need  to  find  and  be  reliable  allies  in  
the  work  of  making  justice  more  the  norm.  
May  our  efforts  in  the  days  to  come  inspire
  others  of  the  same  accord.   
Remember Daniel.  

Remember Ron.  

Remember Christina.  

They and our children deserve  no  less.  

Thank you. 
Offertory   
We  sit  together  in  a  space  built  by  those  
willing  to  stand  up  for  their  beliefs.  We  
gather  in  a  hall  made  for  celebration  and  w
onderment,  for  giving  care,  for  speaking,  for
  
singing  and  listening  for  themes  not  yet  ima
gined  and  yet,  somehow  still  familiar.   
We  give  and  receive  the  morning  offering  now
  in  support  for  the  work  of  this  house  
of  care  and  vision  and  learning.   

Returning
     
Only brief words before  we  sing  again:   

    Together  may  we  find  our  hope  rekindled  and 
 may  the  hope  in  our  hearts  become  
the  hope  of  our  hands,  and  may  we  discover 
 that  out  of  many  we  may  still  be  
one.   
Singing
  #318  
We  Would  Be  One
   
Blessing   

