
  We are here
  to ponder our lives freely
in the embrace of a warm September day.
Word and music, image and silence
  all come together in this place
in the service of our peace and unrest.
  May we find in this time and place a deep home
in the middle of this remarkable Alleluia 
  we call the universe. And throughout this day
  
(together) may our reason and our passion
  keep us true to ourselves, true to each other
  and true to those shared visions of what we can together
  become?.

  A few crisp oak leaves fall early,
  and blow noisily along the sidewalk,
  
  A few feathers from birds now looking southward flutter onto the drying grass.
  
  And I too imagine free falling today,
  letting go of all that I've clung to so tightly?images of myself, 
  images of others,
  memories that have shaped me too long,
  insights that no longer serve,
  grudges that are more about me
  than about anyone else.
  
  I too imagine looking in a different direction, facing those warmer directions
  of the spirit
  where some of the coldness
  I have allowed in my heart can thaw.
  I too imagine lightening my self
  a bit so I might fly, molting and dropping
  everything extra and unnecessary for a while.
  
(the following sung to the tune: Hashiveinu) 

  turning, turning, turning, turning,
  flying free unburdened.
  
  Free, free, flying free,
  let me, let go?.
  breathing free, breathing free,
  yes, breathing to live free..
  
(silence)
  
  Remembering here all those we have loved
  and who have loved us, we set aside a portion of our time together to remember
  and savor the gifts we have been given from others, that our lives might
  be glad and free.
  
  Aloud,, or in silence, we name those who have blessed us with their lives?.
  
(naming)

Y'varech'cha Shalom v'yishm'recha,

  and may all children in the world, whether they live along the Olentangy
  or the Euphrates, live to inherit a world of peace, not war, of love, not
  hate, and may it be in our own days, veimru, Amein.

  "Where are you from?" asked Yusef.
  
  "From the Low-lands up north (Heb. Kanaan) to buy food," they answered. "Frankly,
  I think you are spies, you Lowlanders," said Yusef harshly. "I think you
  are here to check out the lay of this land."
  
  "No, No! Your Highness," they protested. "We are only a large family from
  the Lowlands hungry for food. Our aging father and our youngest brother are
  back home, and the rest of us have come just for food."
  
  "You may have your food," said Yusef, "but not until you bring me your younger
  brother.
  
  If you are really honest people, one of you has to stay in prison here as
  a ransom. The rest of you have to go back to the Lowlands and then return
  with your brother. This will prove to me you are telling the truth, and I
  will not have to execute you all for being spies."
  
  They agreed to do so. But they spoke among themselves in their own language:
  "This is happening to us because we are all guilty for selling our brother
  into slavery. He pleaded with us for mercy, and we just looked upon him unmoved."
  
  Reuven spoke up then. "Didn't I tell you this would happen?" he cried. "I
  warned you. You didn't listen, and so now comes this reckoning for his blood."
  
  Now since they had been speaking to Yusef through a translator, they did
  not know he knew what they were saying. But he did, of course, and having
  heard what they said, he turned from them and wept.

  The buzzard never says it's to blame.
  The panther doesn't have a clue about scruples.
  Piranhas do not doubt the rightness of their course.
  If snakes had hands, they'd claim they're clean..
  
  A jackal doesn't understand remorse.
  The locust, bottle-fly, alligator and lice
  don't waver in their work. Why should they? They know they're right.
  
  The hearts of killer-whales weigh a ton,
  but in every other way, they're pretty light.
  
  On this third planet from the sun,
  there is nothing more animal like
  than a clear conscience.

  I preached on the idea of Shame a few years ago. And so I think it best to
  be clear, right off the bat, that this is not a repeat of that sermon. For
  guilt and shame are not the same thing. No, not at all, although I admit
  they can exist side by side in the same person. So can love and hate. But
  no one confuses those two feelings, like they do guilt and shame.
  
  So let me try to be as clear as can be?.guilt is the awareness of, or
  the fact of, or the responsibility for, wrongdoing. It is not necessarily
  a negative emotion (though it can be, certainly).
  
  Shame, on the other hand, is always a negative emotion. It's an emotional
  state which combines feelings of personal dishonor or worthlessness. In some
  ways, it resembles ordinary embarrassment. But with shame, you're not embarrassed
  because of what you've done, but because of who you are.
  
  You are ashamed to be shy, or boisterous. You are ashamed of your weight,
  your height, your looks, your hair, your clothes, your level of education,
  your success level, however defined, your sexual prowess, your abilities,
  or lack of them, your personality. But you don't feel guilty for such things.
  
  Guilt, on the other hand, is most often a feeling or stabbing recognition
  that you have done something wrong. You don't feel ashamed about it necessarily,
  you simply are aware that you did something wrong.
  
  Now I have never taken a scientific poll, but I would wager I hear about
  guilt at least five times more often than I hear people talking about shame.
  Actually, I hear people offer what sounds like bragging to me about how much
  guilt they feel. "I was raised in a Jewish family, so naturally, I feel guilty
  all the time." Or, "I was educated by strict nuns in Our Lady of Lourdes
  where, no matter what I did, it was wrong, and I felt guilty day and night.
  I constantly went to confession so I could feel less guilty." Or, "I was
  raised in the Southern Baptist Church (or Church of Christ, or Presbyterian
  Church, or Methodist Church, you name it), where I was told that I was born
  guilty, and was a totally depraved creature from birth. Since then I live
  and breathe guilt day and night. I feel guilty to breathe, practically."
  
  Well, I wonder after hearing all these claims, which guilt really is the
  pre-eminent guilt of the world? Jewish guilt, Catholic guilt or Protestant
  guilt? I don't remember any of my Hindu, Muslim or Buddhist friends making
  these claims, but then, maybe I just wasn't around when they were talking
  this way. Come to think of it, my old friend Radhovan, who was raised in
  a Muslim family, told me he is not religious anymore because "religion does
  nothing but make people feel guilty." This is a truism I have heard often,
  from many, many a mouth.
  
  Since I don't know of any studies which have put all of these claims to the
  test, I decided that the very least I could do would be to check the scriptures
  themselves and see how often guilt is splayed across the pages. Now since
  I had a busy week, I decided to save time by just checking out the Western
  scriptures and leave the Muslim Qu'ran, the Indian Bhagavad Gita and the
  Buddhist Pali Canon for another day.
  
  Well, here's the story. In the Tanakh, the Hebrew scriptures, the word "guilt,"
  in any of its grammatical forms, is used a grand total of 16 times. And in
  every case but one, it means "guilty" in the legal sense, that is, so-and-so
  is guilty of such-and-such a crime. In the New Testament, the Christian
  scriptures, the word "guilt," in any form again, is used a grand total of
  six times, and in one case it's a bad translation of the Greek word opheilo
  which literally means "to be indebted."
  
  Now this surprised me. The word "shame" appears hundreds of times. But "guilt?"
  Hardly ever.
  
  So where does all this sense of feeling guilty I hear about all the time
  come from? Certainly not from the Scriptures themselves.
  
  So it must be that churches and synagogues have traditions that go well beyond
  the scriptures. For example, in the book of Exodus there is a rule which
  says: "You shall not boil a baby goat, that is, a kid, in its mother's milk."
  Frankly, it's never something I was tempted to do in the first place, but
  I wondered what it meant. So I looked it up in a Jewish source book. Originally,
  this was a form of animal sacrifice used by the indigenous people in the
  country called the Lowlands, or Canaan. Like almost all the other dietary
  or kosher (kashrut) rules found in the scriptures, this rule originally had
  to do with cultural boundaries?you know, something to do with not behaving
  like the Canaanite Jones family next door. "You don't want to be like they
  are, do you, eating sacrifices of wild boar, boiling a kid in its mother's
  milk? Those guys are weird. Don't be like them. Be different."
  
  But later, some of the rabbis enlarged this scriptural sentence. They enlarged
  this rule to mean "No mixing meat with milk products." No more Beef Stroganoff.
  Some Jews, as some of you know, even keep two sets of plates, to avoid mixing
  meat and milk, even in the tiniest possible proportions. But none of this
  is in the scriptures. It's all ?well? expanded.
  
  So obviously, religious teachings grow beyond their origins, and religious
  people become obsessed with things their founders never imagined. This doesn't
  strike me as surprising, nor, in all cases, as a terrible thing.
  
  Jesus never said a word about sexuality. Not a word. But some of his followers
  certainly think he must have. Believers like Mr. Graham and Mr. Kellog, of
  cracker and cereal fame respectively, were so caught up with the sexual
  wrongdoing they called "self-pollution" that they invented finely ground
  grain products to feed to teenagers so as to soften their sexual needs aimed
  at self-pleasure. And, even so late as our own era, a courageous and outspoken
  Surgeon General was sent packing faster than lightning, for just suggesting
  that it's OK to actually mention such things to our youth without embarrassment
  or shame. Not a word in the Bible about such things, mind you. But how many
  millions of young people have been tormented, in both their religious faith
  and their sexuality, with guilt because they didn't know that?
  
  But there you have it?plenty of folks walk around feeling guilty about
  all sorts of things not found in the Bible.
  
  So the first problem having to do with guilt stems from this. Three quarters
  of the things we are told are "wrong-doing," or sins, by some of the religious
  communities we may have been raised in, are just foolish ideas to begin with.
  
  We are taught often to feel guilt about things that are really quite
  inconsequential. It may be a fine discipline to not eat meat on Fridays,
  but to call a bite of bacon on Friday a "mortal sin worthy of hell," as they
  used to do, is just plain foolish. Disciplines are fine. There is nothing
  at all wrong with skipping meat on Fridays, or Tuesdays, or everyday for
  that matter. The discipline of vegetarianism is superb. Those who keep a
  Kosher kitchen or eat Hallal meats are doing fine things. But eliciting guilt
  in children about not following such disciplines, as was done with me when
  I was a child, is simply wrong, in my book.
  
  It's this kind of thing that many religious institutions have excelled at,
  unfortunately. I am sad when I see a reduction of something as beautiful
  as the contemplation of the wonder of life and death (which is what religion
  is at its best), into a sordid little calculation of guilt over a thousand
  inconsequentials.
  
  However, neatly blaming "religion" universally for one's feelings of guilt
  is a little over-blown to me, and reveals a little laziness in the thinking
  department. Plenty of folks were raised without religion in this country,
  and some of them still feel plenty of guilt about certain things that are
  foolish to feel guilty about. You see, far more central than religion in
  this guilt business is the effect of the family and the clan. Family systems
  can twist shame and guilt into nooses that it takes forever to get off from
  around one's neck. It's because of difficult family systems, almost always
  involving guilt as a means of control, that some folks confuse shame with
  guilt. Some family systems wind and bind these two forces together into a
  tight knot, acting out generations of patterns. Sometimes they do this with
  such finesse that it really is difficult to see guilt and shame as distinct.
  They are almost fused.
  
  But hear me. Just because a million false reasons for guilt clog up our hearts
  does not mean a guilt-free life is the goal. Not at all. Not at all.
  
  I see it this way. Guilt, in and of itself, is no more worse than pain. Pain
  is the system shot through our entire body to let us know that something
  is wrong. If I stepped on a rusty nail and didn't feel it, my foot might
  get infected before I even noticed that something was in it and pulled it
  out and disinfected it. Pain is simply a wiring in our system that warns
  us. Admirably. And when we get that warning, we are supposed to do something
  to make the pain stop.
  
  Constant, or what is called chronic, pain is no good, of course. It's a sad
  reality we are only learning now how to treat. I know plenty of people with
  bad backs or joints who have had to learn to live with such pain. I stand
  before them dumbfounded that they have to live with such a burden. But that
  kind of pain is a sad thing, not a good thing. One day we will find pain-killers
  that alleviate such pains. That will be a glad day.
  
  But pain, in the short run, is a very helpful reminder that something needs
  to be done quickly, some change has to be made right now.
  
  Guilt, good guilt, is no different. It reminds us we have done something
  wrong. It reminds us that we had best make amends, or change our behavior,
  or do something. But if the guilt lasts and lasts ("beyond thirty three seconds,"
  is what I usually say), and we don't start to look for ways to change our
  behavior, then I submit we have a serious problem. Long-lasting guilt is
  foolish. It is neurotic guilt. It is just as sad and as useless as enduring
  chronic pain. Except in this case, something can be done about it, unlike
  with chronic pain.
  
  This constant, chronic guilt is of no positive use. A person can hide behind
  such massive quilts of guilt. A person can avoid responsibility forever behind
  them. Guilt becomes a way of denying reality after a while. When folks brag
  about how guilty they feel, I confess I am often not terribly sympathetic.
  "Do something about it," I want to say to them. "Do you think you should
  get a prize for feeling guilt? I don't. I think you are throwing some of
  your precious life away. Please don't ask me to thank you or praise you for
  doing so."
  
  On the opposite end of the spectrum, we have guiltless people. These folks
  are like piranhas or jackals, Szymborska tells us. Such folks are conscienceless.
  Sociopathic or psychopathic, in modern psychological parlance. Frankly, I
  don't want to be in the same room as a guiltless person. I would eventually
  find it quite scary, no matter how charming they were. I used to work with
  such people in an institution and, believe me, my experience was a chilling
  education.
  
  And you know as well as I do that whole cultures have been based on this
  idiotic ideal of guiltlessness. You don't have to be sociopathic to become
  a killer. Reducing your guilt will allow you to cross all sorts of boundaries
  you had never thought you could cross. For example, the Nazis knew that if
  their people thought that their enemies (Jews, Gypsies, gay people, communists,
  Christian critics, Unitarians, Jehovah's Witnesses, the disabled etc.) were
  actually human beings with real lives, then no one could bring themselves
  to pull the levers in the gas chambers. But, if you tell people these human
  beings are not really human beings, if you tell them they are vermin, mere
  bugs, you relieve people of their guilt, and they will do anything you want,
  because who goes into ethical convulsion about giving the Orkin Man a call?
  No one except a few Jains from India, those amazing religious people who
  often sweep the ground in front of them to avoid accidentally stepping on
  a bug. And I'd wager that even some of them mindlessly swat flies on bad
  days.
  
  So no, guiltlessness does not impress me, it scares me. And the overly
  guilty?they annoy me?I think they may be hiding something from
  themselves and don't want to deal with it. Which means I often have to deal
  with it in disguise. And I don't relish doing that, personally.
  
  And the fabled "white guilt?" A waste of time, if it continues without
  self-examination. Better to do something?work on understanding the
  institutionalism of racism in this country for example. So, by God, if you
  are white and feel a generalized "guilt," then work on ending that feeling
  by addressing its source. Try to note if you are being patronizing to people
  of color. Make real friends with folks different than you. Stop talking about
  wanting the comfort of being around "like-minded people" all the time. Try
  to make assumptions less, and ask questions more. If you do all of these
  undeniably difficult things, I assure you, your guilt will fade quickly because
  you are turning to face the issues it itself is raising.
  
  The one place in the whole Bible where guilt is associated with deep feeling
  is the story of Yusef (or Joseph, as we say in the English Bible). Yusef
  weeps, clearly a sign of deep feeling. What is he feeling? Guilt. Why? Because
  he is tormenting his siblings to get back at them for tormenting him. He
  is being cruel, spiteful and vengeful. But he overhears one of his brothers
  confessing his guilt over what they had done as a team. And he knows that
  they have felt remorse too. And so he weeps in guilt, and begins to face
  the uselessness of getting revenge on people. It's a beautiful story, really,
  that has a happy ending with the whole family restored, all the guilt thrown
  away.
  
  But the restoration happens, clearly, because everyone feels guilty, admits
  their wrong-doing, and then makes peace. Real peace, not "make-nice" peace
  where nothing is really on the table.
  
  And it's this feeling of guilt that's one of the things Yom Kippur and its
  famous Kol Nidrei is about. It's about feeling what we really feel for a
  few moments, getting in touch with what needs to be done to restore relationship,
  and then promising afresh to do it, dropping the guilt by the wayside when
  it's done being useful.
  
  It's about turning and weeping, or whatever form our remorse takes. For I'd
  wager there are few of us who have escaped a broken relationship at some
  time in our lives?or in the last year, for that matter. Yom Kippur is
  about many things?how to forgive, about which I have preached many sermons,
  and how to feel less shame and more joy, which is another sermon I've given.
  This year, I am preaching on the dread word "guilt," which so many hate,
  but which so many feel. Next year, who knows what topic will seize my heart.
  For this is a rich, rich, rich feast, that's for sure. Inexhaustible.
  
  But a wise one.
  
  So here's a small toast to guilt. Not too much now. Just a little. Effective
  guilt. Helpful guilt.
  
  Yes, yes, we will have to spend a lot of time refining our consciousness
  so that we are not feeling guilty for stupid things?that goes without
  saying.
  
  But that's good, satisfying work, I think, no? I can't imagine not wanting
  to do such work.
  
  And there will never come a day when we are done with wrongdoing forever
  and live perfect, unhurtful, unhurting lives. I've lived long enough to know
  that's a fairy tale if there ever was one. And that's why this feast comes
  around every year?
  
  May we welcome its wisdom this year and next, and may all of our names still
  be written in the book of life when this day comes around again.

  Gone are the promises we made 
  because of pressure or praise.
  
  Gone are the promises we made
  because of shame or guilt.
  
  Gone are promises and vows we made
  because of habit, because of custom, or
  because of confusion.
  
  Gone they are, vanished! I see them no longer.They are no more.
  
  Gone the excuses for why I can't.
  
  Gone the vows I made to confirm my vanity.
  
  Gone the dreams I dreamed that cut me off
  from everyone else's dream.
  
  Gone my vow to never have dreams,
  so that I could carry my future in my dark little pocket.
  
  Gone, vanished, just like that!
  
  As magically as sunset, as wondrously as moonset,
  it disappears, this habit of refusing to live on the edge.
  
  The paper is blank, the field is empty, the map has not been made. The guarantees
  are gone. And, thus, now I can begin to set down my burdens, and define myself
  no more by my failings.
  
Nishmat hayay tevarykh v'kherev libi yahshir: Kol od neshamah bekirbi.

  The breath of my life will bless, the cells of my Being sing in gratitude,
  awakening!
  
