 Mission 
January 24, 2010 
 Rev. Mark Belletini 
 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

as a grey but warmer week holds Central Ohio, 

and as quakes continue to shake our island neighbor
s, 
to worship, to approach our whole lives 

with thoughtfulness and open hearts, 

and to revere all that sets us free to serve. 

 
And so, mindful that we share a common world, but a
pproach that world in different ways, we 
begin our celebration together by kindling our prom
ise of mutual honesty, attentiveness, and deep 
courtesy. May we become more proficient at gratitud
e and awareness, that we might more deeply 
embody the kind of justice and peace which embraces
 everyone on earth. 
 
Sequence 

 
Every night and every morn, 

you teach me, oh Love. 

By never offering me more or less 

than reality, as it is, not as I might want it to b
e. 
By never granting me anything more or less 

than myself as a response. 
Me with my doubts and fears,  

my hesitations and faltering. 

Me with my knowledge and ignorance, 

me with my sorrow and excitement, 

me with my late night transports 
where I am struck like a bell 

by the inescapable fact that everything is: 

dark night, bright day, door sill and window-frame,
 carpet and scent of supper 
lingering in the kitchen, eyes to see and skin to f
eel the cool air. 
Every night and every morn, 

you teach me oh Love. 

By refusing to sit still and suffer my definitions;
 by escaping from my need for secure answers; 

by pressing yourself close in 
every
 encounter–
 with friends, with strangers, with the hurtful and 
hurting, and yes, with every song whatever the 
style, and even, at last, with this silence–. 

 
silence 

 
 Every night and every morn, 

you teach me, oh Love, in a thousand ways, 

that I can never go it alone. 

Surrounded on all sides by my life, 

I am woven into a great tapestry of communities, 

with you, some known to us, others barely seen. 

These we recall now, as we strive to name them–
 either quietly or in a whisper, 

that we might learn the teaching that springs 

from every connection, conflict, courtesy and coura
geous communion in our lives. 
 
naming 

 
Every night and every morn, you teach me about your
self, oh Love, by every expression that 
rises from the human heart: the colors of paint and
 photo and fabric, the wisdom of lyric, the joy 
of singing, and playing, and creating beauty togeth
er. 
 
The First Reading
 comes from two sources, one from the Hebrew scriptu
res, and one from the 
Gospel of Thomas, which was written originally in G
reek. It is not found in the New Testament, 
but since its discovery in mid-last century, it has
 been regarded by scholars as an important 
document with some authentic stories apparently tol
d by Jesus but not found in the four 
canonical gospels. But first, the legend from the H
ebrew Scriptures about the prophet Elijah, or 
Eliyah. 

 
So the prophet Eliyah went out to the territory of 
Fisherland, where he found the town of Metal-
forge. When he ambled up to the town gate, a widow 
was there, gathering tinder branches off the 
ground. He called to her and asked: ?Do you have an
y water I might drink??  She nodded, and 
went off to get some water. Then the prophet added:
 ?Got any bread you can spare??  She then 
said to him ?Look, I swear, I have no baked goods i
n my house to share with you.  All I have is 
some flour in a clay pot, and a little jar of olive
 oil. I am gathering tinder here to make my last 
meal. My son and I will eat the bread I bake from t
he flour and oil. After that, we™ll probably 
starve to death.?  Eliyah said to her: ?Don™t be fr
ightened. Go and bake your last bread. Then 
bring me some, and feed yourself and your son. For 
so says the Eternal: your clay pot will never 
be empty of flour, and your jar of olive oil will n
ever run out of oil until the very day this 
drought ends and rain falls so we can grow grain ag
ain.? So she followed his directive, and just 
as he foresaw, together they survived for many days
 on the food of her household.  The pot was 
never emptied.  The jar of oil never ran out. 

 
Now, #97 from the Gospel of Thomas, which is clearl
y a springboard reflection, what rabbis call 
midrash,
 on this ancient tale. 
 
This is what (God™s) sovereignty looks like: 

A woman is carrying a clay pot filled with flour.  
While she was journeying down the road, and 
was still some distance off, the handle of the jar 
broke, and the flour spilled out behind her. She 

 had no idea.  She didn™t notice any problems. But w
hen she reached her house, and put the clay 
pot down, she discovered it was empty. 

 
The Second Reading
 comes from an interview with the late and controver
sial author, Mary 
Daly, with who died last week at age 81. Her radica
l books, like Gyn/Ecology, were published by 
our own Unitarian Universalist Beacon Press–nobody 
else was willing to, apparently. 
 
It's a strange phenomenon to become an icon. There'
s nothing of 
you
 in it. I try to 
en
courage 
women to think for themselves.  I don't care if the
y like my words. I mean, I love that it they like 
my words–.but make
 up
 some
 of
 your
 own
. 
You know, it seems to me that if you spend a lot of
 time criticizing rather than creating, that 
suggests a lack. True, I do have critiques of Frenc
h feminist author Simone de Beauvoir. There 
are a lot of ways in which I think she's wrong. But
 I don't spend a lot of pages on that; I respect 
her for what she's done.  

So I think that a focus on criticism is just a way 
of leaning on me, or on any village guru -- and 
that's not what I ever want to be.  Instead, branch
 out! My intention, say, in writing 
Gyn/Ecology,
 was for it to be a springboard.  And instead I get:
 
You didn't do it perfectly; there's something 
wrong with what you did. 
 Oh go to hell! It's just a springboard! 
You
 carry on, when you have 
more specific knowledge. 

Sermon 

I™ve been thinking about our mission statement ever
y since we created it together last year.  It 
made me proud when I remember how excited our natio
nal Association Moderator, Gini Courter, 
was when she first read it. 

I™ve been thinking about our mission statement all 
this last week. I™ve been thinking about how 
all of its phrases flow together into an articulate
 whole. It really seems to fully embody this 
month™s theme word, justice. Elegantly, too. 

And, I™ve been thinking about our mission statement
 these last few days as I have been 
remembering professor Mary Daly, who died last week
, at age 81. 
Now, as one might expect about such a polarizing fi
gure, much of what I™ve read about her on 
line this past week is simply nonsense. Pure parano
id fiction. Some said that as a radical 
feminist, she didn™t speak to men. Ever. 
Not true.
 She tutored men one on one. She welcomed 
them into 
some
 of her classes, just not all of them. She was clea
r about her reasons. She was 
strong and unbending, which always makes folks feel
 uncomfortable. I understand that. Strength 
and clarity are often frightening in this modern wo
rld of ours where deception, innuendo, greed, 
deviousness and outright denial have successfully c
laimed center stage. 

 Others claimed that she warned her students only to
 read women™s works, women™s philosophy. 
Not true. She taught Thomas Aquinas and Aristotle, 
openly admiring their complex ways of 
reasoning. 

But there is no question she was quite radical in h
er views, despite the pissy and paranoid 
exaggerations I can easily find on the free-for-all
 internet. 
Mary Daly™s difficult books were alive when I was i
n seminary. We all read them. Some of us 
trembled as we did. They made a lot of men mad, and
 some women too. Her language is a form 
of true fury. 

Having said this, I want to be clear about somethin
g. Some of the statistical figures that fueled 
her rage in 1978, when her work 
Gyn/Ecology
 came out, have proven erroneous; that is, they 
have not been supported by facts uncovered by histo
rians totally sympathetic to radical feminist 
critiques of society. Hear me now. I™m not saying t
hat even accusing 
one
 woman of being a 
witch and burning her is anything less than evil, b
ut Daly™s figure of 9 million is too high, recent 
scholars affirm, by about 8 1/2 million. 

That™s exactly why I had Sydney offer her words abo
ut such criticism in the second reading. 
?My intention,? she said, ?in writing 
Gyn/Ecology, 
was for it to be a springboard.  And instead I 
get: 
You didn't do it perfectly; there's something wrong
 with what you did. 
 Oh go to hell! It's just 
a springboard! 
You
 carry on, when you have more– knowledge.? 
In other words, she is not concerned that anyone ac
cept her word on her authority, but that we 
each engage in figuring things out ourselves. With 
more accurate information, if applicable. But 
each person has to claim their own authority. Exact
ly. Even if Mary Daly was brilliant–and she 
was–you still have to figure things out for yoursel
f; female or male or anything else–
you
 have 
to experiment with the way things really are. As I 
said last week, Gandhi promoted this 
approach. And King. Experimenting with the truth, n
ot listening to any man or woman tell us 
that they have final access to the truth, directly 
from the Almighty, or worse, because they are 
internationally famous or own half the world. 

I was lucky enough to see the astonishing musical 
Spring Awakening
 recently. One of the leads 
in it sings these lyrics:  
All they say is ?Trust what is written.? Thought is
 suspect, and money is 
their idol, and nothing is Ok unless it™s scripted 
in their Bible. But I know there is much more to 
find---just in looking through myself, and not at t
hem. I know to trust my true mind, and to say: 
?There is a way through this–? 

So I think experiential learning–experimentation– i
s important for figuring out who and what I 
really trust. I think this is true because I experi
mented one day– with one of Mary Daly™s 
practices, and I learned a lot. She did indeed keep
 men out of one of her classes because she felt 
that many, if not all, of them would dominate the c
onversation and silence women in the 
classroom unconsciously–by talking over, talking do
wn, talking out of turn, interrupting. Some 
would fill the room with their voices, and offer no
 spaciousness which could draw out the voices 

 too often stifled by sexist culture. She had experi
enced this in her life too many times to suspect 
her own thought on this observation. So, one day I 
was in New Haven, at Yale, at one of our 
religious conferences, called General Assembly. Tho
usands gathered there at the famous 
campus. Lots of large meetings, yes, but lots of sm
aller workshops too. I attended one. 23 others 
attended too. But I was the only man.  

I don™t remember the topic now. Only that I thought
 it was the most interesting topic scheduled 
for that hour. I had lots of ideas, many observatio
ns to make about that topic when I entered the 
room. I was ready to speak. A woman presented for a
bout ten minutes, and then opened things 
up for a conversation on the topic. As the discussi
on began, I most certainly had something to 
say. Wisdom. Nifty quotations to offer. But then, f
or some reason, I don™t know why–I thought 
of Mary Daly. And so I decided to experiment with o
ne of her approaches.  I asked myself to be 
quiet, so that others in the room could speak. No o
ne knew I did this. I just sat in the back of the 
room, and tried my best to be as invisible as possi
ble. Every time a woman spoke, I indeed 
immediately found a response forming in my head, a 
clever comment, or a decisive question. But 
I bit my tongue and kept quiet. And I mean, I bit m
y tongue. It was hard work for me, not just as 
Mark, but as a man, I discovered. I wanted to say a
ll sorts of things, but then I asked myself 
?Why??  I stayed in that room for an hour and a hal
f and didn™t say a word. I think I actually 
sprained my tongue that day. 

But I also learned something. Mary Daly was not a m
onster for keeping men out of a classroom 
where a particular subject was being discussed. She
 understood something about our 
unconscious social conditioning and responses, some
thing which I hope I have not forgotten 
after my little experiment.   

Now, I use this story to begin to explain why I thi
nk the four points of our Mission Statement are 
so powerful. As I see it, their power stems from th
e fact that they blend into a seamless whole. 
They are not so much a list of four distinct ideas,
 but rather, four facets on a single jewel. 
So let me unpack what I mean for a moment. Here is 
our Mission Statement:
 We are here: ? To 
learn and practice true hospitality ? To revere the
 reasoning mind and the generous heart ? To 
claim our diversity as a source of our strength, an
d ? To relinquish the safety of our unexamined 
privilege for the freedom to engage in transforming
 justice. 
 
Now, regarding my story, you might suggest, right o
ff, that I was clearly ?relinquishing 
privilege? by keeping so quiet. Yes, I suppose I wa
s. That was the original point of the 
experiment. But, listen, I think I was 
also
 struggling to practice what our statement calls 
true 
hospitality
. ?But you weren™t welcoming anyone into the room,?
 you may say. ?It wasn™t even 
your workshop!? Precisely. That would be a good, 
traditional
 form of hospitality, but not by far 
the deeper, truest one. Traditionally, I can welcom
e anyone I want into the home I own. But, 
I do 
not own ideas
. And I do not own circles of community
. I was simply one part of that community 
on that particular day. And I felt called to a true
r hospitality, by which I mean this: true 
hospitality is not 
me
, one who belongs, welcoming others, who do 
not 
belong. A truer, deeper, or 
if you want, more radical way to view hospitality i
s that it is utterly 
mutual
. If you go up and 

 welcome a visitor into our building for the first t
ime, you hopefully are not doing this as some 
club member welcoming an outsider. No, if you welco
me someone, true hospitality suggests that 
you 
are also being welcomed, 
welcomed
 into that other person™s life as much as you are 
welcoming that person to share community with you, 
you who may have been coming here for 
20 years. Visitors are making themselves vulnerable
 enough to enter into a circle of what, to 
them, are 
all 
strangers. That™s quite remarkable when you think o
f it. They are opening up their 
door as much as you might be opening ours.   

And, I was also 
reasoning
 in that room in Yale. 
We are here to revere the reasoning mind,
 we 
wrote together. I reasoned that it would be benefic
ial to my soul to experiment with one of Mary 
Daly™s demands. And my reasoning proved sound. Now,
 our spiritual history touts reason a lot. 
But it does not lift up what I like to call ?tinker
 toy? reason. In the story of Eliyah and the magic 
claypot, for example, ?tinker-toy reason? can only 
assert that such things don™t happen in the 
present world, so they didn™t happen in the biblica
l world. ?Tinker-toy reason? deals with ?yes? 
and ?no,? only, and says ?There are no magic claypo
ts anywhere, so there weren™t any in biblical 
times either.?  But our tradition asks us to reason
 more deeply, ask more and notice more. So 
notice that the woman in the story is a widow and a
bout to starve to death, since there was no 
social network in those days. Notice that the proph
et, who speaks out of a deep spirituality, 
doesn™t work a wonder to dazzle but to feed. His ma
gic pot of flour is not to convince people of 
his power, or God™s power, but to help a woman in d
eep trouble survive. Could the fable be only 
an ancient and beautiful way of asking ?If religion
 is not at least about service to those suffering 
social injustices, what is it about?? 

So, yes, in that room at Yale, I was reasoning. Rea
soning that my life might grow deeper, and 
maybe more generous and kind, if I tried some radic
al shifts in my behavior. I figured out that 
experimenting with Mary Daly™s practice might 
get me through this hour spiritually 
much more 
reliably than would my 
often unconscious
 habits as a privileged man of many words who talks
 to 
think. 

And, I was also, looking back, trying to be serious
 about the deeper meanings of diversity.  I was 
trying to find ?strength? in that diversity. Again,
 diversity in that room was not simple biology–
 that is too much of a surface understanding. But, i
n that room of women, some were married, 
some were divorced, some were remarried, and some w
ere living in stated partnership with a 
man or woman.  Some were grieving deeply for a loss
, some were in love, some did not know if 
they ever were in love; some were suffering chronic
 pain, others just ran a marathon and won 
painlessly. Some were mothers. Some couldn™t get pr
egnant no matter what. There were some 
who experienced very powerful ethnic cultural-shapi
ng in their home of origin, and others who 
had no idea that they even had any roots at all. Wh
en the women started to comment on the topic 
at hand that day, while I sat silently by, 
all
 of these diverse realities surfaced in one way or 
another. And as I listened, silently, I felt empowe
red and grateful. The revelation of this diversity 
strengthened me. 

What I am saying is that our mission statement is n
ot a sober portrait of what we are right now, 
but what we are practicing to be and do in the worl
d. It™s about our own transformation as well as 
the world™s transformation. In short, it™s a summon
s to practice our religious way of life in four 

 distinct but completely united ways, each flowing i
nto the other. 
But why read those two biblical stories? What do th
ey have to do with anything?  The first story 
is one of a series of folk legends about the prophe
t Eliyah, (Elijah) whom for the ancient 
Hebrews was almost a Paul Bunyan-like character, a 
folk hero around which many tall tales 
gathered. As I said, it™s more of a story about soc
ial justice than it is about any bona-fide miracle,
 
or God™s intervention in history. 

But the author of the gospel of Thomas is worried a
bout how easily such stories 
can
 be 
interpreted in a magic way. So the author recalls a
 contrasting story of Jesus, which turns that 
story upside down. A woman has a clay pot of flour,
 but the pot is cracked, and it all leaks out. 
The poor woman doesn™t notice a thing. The author s
ays this twice, just to make sure you get the 
point. And so when she gets home, her clay pot is e
mpty.    Call this story an ?unmagic? story if 
you want. Her pot is 
not
 magically filled to the top. In fact, it quite un-
magically 
empties
 out
 because of a crack she doesn™t notice.   

For me, the story is saying two things: One. Forget
 any 
get-off-the-hook
 interpretation of the 
story where a greater power simply supplies your ne
ed by a finger snap. Really.  Just forget it. It 
doesn™t happen. Wonders and signs won™t help Haiti.
 Mere human beings will. But, two: The 
needs of the world–for nourishment, and home, twin 
symbols of justice–are still real.  The 
woman is on a journey, the story says. As are we al
l. But the storyteller reminds us that she 
didn™t notice the crack in the clay pot of flour, t
he vessel of nourishment, she was carrying home. 
The storyteller doesn™t tell us why she doesn™t not
ice. It doesn™t matter. It™s just a fact. And the 
author is saying if you don™t notice cracks in the 
system, if you are not mindful, if you don™t pay 
attention to injustice, if you don™t live deliberat
ely, or radically, instead of merely habitually, yo
u 
might lose your very means of keeping yourself and 
your children alive and thriving. Not just 
biologically, but spiritually too. Alive in your he
art, alive in your mind. Reasoning generously 
and relinquishing any power you have that tends to 
keep both you, and others, in the mud. When 
you live deliberately, experimentally, you might fi
nd strength among others in community, like I 
did that day at Yale, growing a bit more human.   

Our mission is also beautifully revealed in the sto
ry I told this morning about two fishing 
families. If you are looking through the lens of ca
tegorical diversity, one is a black family. Both 
members are female. Different ages. The other is a 
white family. Different ages. Both of them 
are male. And 
both
 families are depicted as living in a culture where
 diversity is not a strength, 
but a terror; where true hospitality–that is 
mutual
 hospitality–
is forbidden; where the generous 
heart and reasoning mind are unwelcome, and where t
he privileged family in the story has no 
intention of relinquishing any aspect of the system
 that keeps both families in the mud of Jim 
Crow. But the little girl in the story 
feels
 for the boy who didn™t catch any fish. In other wo
rds, 
she pays attention to her generous heart. She allow
s herself to reason more deeply. Suddenly, she 
sees a potential friendship that is not wrong just 
because they are different, or diverse, as we say. 
She knows that she isn™t 
supposed
 to be talking to that potential friend. But she wa
nts to be 
hospitable to him, to teach him a trick she knows t
hat fetches fish each and every time. So, 
without any magic, without any super-natural power,
 she breaks from the pattern that keeps 
everything and everyone in place. She teaches the b
oy a new and helpful way to fish. And at the 

 end of the story, the little white boy relinquishes
 ever so slightly his position in society, so 
clearly articulated by his father– by waving back a
t her. And smiling. 
That™s not much, you say. That™s just a little thin
g. So is an atom, I say. Hard to see even with the 
best of microscopes. And yet we are built of them. 
And justice, I say, is built on small things. On 
the simple mission claimed by ordinary people like 
us. Ordinary people? Oh yes. For in the 
words of poet Adrienne Rich– yet another radical fe
minist who, along with Mary Daly, taught 
me a great deal back in seminary–we
 are the ordinary people who, with no extraordinary 
power, 
reconstitute the world.
 And I would finally add, reconstitute ourselves; fo
r after all, are we not, 
each of us, part and parcel of the world? 

Offering 

Every night and every morn 

the rooms of this our common house are filled.  

Hearts are encouraged.  

Minds are taught.  

Community is woven. 

Though some give in more modern 

electronic ways in support of our center, 

others like this more intimate way of expressing 

support and encouragement, one woven 

into the art-form of our Sunday celebration. 

The morning offering is now given and received. 

 
Closing in Unison: the Mission of the Church 
We are here: 
· To learn and practice true hospitality 
· To revere the reasoning mind and the generous heart
 · To claim our diversity as a source of our strength,
 and 
· To relinquish the safety of our unexamined privileg
e for the freedom to engage in 
transforming justice 
  
 
 
