Experience 
April 22, 2012 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 Opening Words 

 
We are here 

on a cool gray April Sunday, to worship, 

to celebrate that we are part of the circle  

of all beings---
roses and robins,  
the homeless and hurting, the jailed and free, 

rebuilders and visionaries, lovers and loners 

and that each being on this circle, without excepti
on 
is worthy of restoration and respect.  
  
And so, without guarantees, we lean into joy, and b
end toward a just way of life, both for 
our own sakes, and for the sake of our children and
 everyone with whom we share the 
earth. We would engage our mission wholeheartedly, 
with courage, self-questioning, 
compassion, vulnerability and honesty. 

 
Sequence:
  
Earth Song 
 
Like a river moving through space and time, 

the path of our planet and its parent star, 

curving through the galaxy, a great spiral of warm 
life in the midst of the cold. 
Like waves in that vast river we rise and fall just
 like all the other current, not by our will, for t
he 
river flows forward unaffected by our fears or perc
eptions. We rise and we fall, we humans, 
like many species before us or perhaps after us Œ s
ome of them cresting for fifty million years or 
more, our species for four million years or less. 

So many currents in the river Œ moth and mulberry, 
oxygen and nitrogen, salt and rock, apes and 
sea urchins, coconut palms, apple trees, lilacs and
 roses, 
centipedes and tunicates, beryl and iron, silicon a
nd charcoal, passion-flower vines and viruses, 
granite and mud, the music of Brahms and  

and drummers in Lagos or Columbus, 

and films of Spike Lee and Ozu and Yen Tan, 

the taste of curry leaves and lemon grass, 

the swell of love and crack of heart-break, 

all
 part of an interdependent system that can 
be ruined, all part of an interdependent system tha
t can be restored, all part of an interdependent 
system that can kindle our wonder and gratitude  

no less than single match can kindle our chalice fi
re. In the silence that follows Œ let all the 
names I spoke give way to the namelessness of this 
moment, 
for names can fool us into thinking we can understa
nd it all, and namelessness reminds us, thank 
Love, that it™s not very likely. 

 
silence 

 
But all the names of beings and strata on earth are
 real in their own way, personal, our roots and 
wings.  Therefore now, in continuing silence, may w
e feel free to bring to mind, bring to our 
tenderness, bring to our forgiveness, bring to our 
embrace the names of all whom we love, 
struggle with, remember and  receive in gratitude. 
In our private hearts, or whispered aloud as is 
our pleasure, we name them. 

 
naming 

 
Oh Earth, our home, our holy home, our only home, 

flowing river of names and namelessness moving  

through space and time, we sing of you. 

 
Readings
  
1.
 Yisayahu/Isaiah (Trito-Isaiah p. 515 BCE) 
    
Unknown authors and editor. Jewish tradition. 
 
We are sent to comfort all who grieve.  To give the
m bouquets of roses instead of a handful of 
ashes. We are sent to uplift them instead of offeri
ng messages of doom, praising their hearts 
instead of shoring up their depressed spirit. Renam
e them sturdy Oaks of Justice. Remind them 
they show forth the divine glory. Then they will re
build everything fallen into ruin, and raise a 
new city out of the wreckage. Immigrants will join 
you in husbandry and agriculture, and all of 
you will be ministers of God. 

 
2. 
Gospel of Luke  c. 95 CE unknown author, but based 
on earlier material by another unknown 
author.  Christian tradition. 

 
You don't have to be a genius to understand these t
hings. Just use your common sense, the kind 
you would use if, while being taken to court, you d
ecided to settle up with your accuser along the 
way, knowing that, if the case went to the judge, y
ou'd probably go to jail and pay every last 
penny of the fine. This is the kind of decision I a
m asking you to make. 
 
3. 
Mahdi ibn abi Dharr al-Naraqi  c. 1810
   
commentator on Quranic ethics, Shia Islamic traditi
on 
 
The Prophet  said: "One 
moment
 of justice is better than seventy years of worship
 in which you 
keep fasts and pass the nights in offering prayers 
and worship to God." (
Jami'us  Sa'adat
, vol. II, 
p. 223)
  
4. Judith Sargent Murray  
Quoted in Our Women Workers 1882 by a Universalist 
biographer 
named E. R. Hansen, a woman celebrating the greatne
ss of her own Universalist tradition. 
Murray was the first radical feminist of letters in
 the USA, and the spouse of John Murray, 
founder of Universalism in the English colonies bef
ore the Declaration of Independence. 
 
Were I to personify Justice, instead of presenting 
her blind I would denominate her the goddess 

of fire; her broad and never-closing eye should sta
nd conspicuous; she should possess the power 
to unravel the knotty entanglements of the most sop
histicated web; she should disclose at a 
single glance the secret... windings of the most pr
ofound labyrinth, while patient and unerring.  
Justice should feel, hear and see, but truth alone 
should be the polar star by which she should 
shape her movements, and equity only should constra
in her determinations. 
 
Sermon 

 
A few years ago, after decades of reflecting on the
 path my life has followed, I finally came to 
accept something. Namely, that most children are si
mply wiser than most, if not all, adults. What 
I mean is this: When I was a child, and somebody in
 the car in front of our family car threw trash 
out their window so that it splattered down the fre
eway next to us, I already knew that this was 
not a good act. I knew that before Earth Day was in
vented. I knew that in my bones before I ever 
heard the word "ecology." I trusted my previous exp
erience of seeing tossed-away trash tangled 
in tree roots or choking rosebushes in the school y
ard I played in. As I grew older, I lost that 
wisdom as I grew to believe what the adults around 
me were telling me
..."It™s ugly yes, but you 
don't need to worry about the trees and roses.  Nat
ure can take care of her herself."
  I lost the 
wisdom I had as a child.  

 
And when I took the streetcar to downtown Detroit a
nd saw the homeless men talking to 
themselves, or wildly waving their hands in the air
 to beings invisible to me as they sat near their 
tarry sleeping bags, I knew in my heart they were a
bandoned, pushed away by society. I trusted 
my eyes, which told me they were suffering, and tha
t it made no sense that anyone 
chose
 to be 
out of their mind like that, or to live on icy stre
ets. I could feel in my bones they needed help in 
safe places. But when I grew older, my attentive ex
perience of the world was to be re-shaped by 
what the adults around me told me: 

"No one can do anything about those people. They wo
n't live long. It™s sad, but you have to be 
realistic you know. Besides, it costs money to take
 care of people like that. And we have more 
important things to spend tax money on." 
 I once again lost the wisdom of my childhood heart
, 
and gave in to being an adult who could live with i
nequities and not flinch quite so hard in 
sympathy coupled with a desire to do something. 

 
Unfair access due to the color of a person's skin? 
 "That's too big to solve. It™s been this way for a 
long time. You can't change people's prejudices...t
hey were raised in ignorant families, that's all. 
Nothing can be done. Just don't cause trouble. Don'
t make demands that people change. It only 
irritates them when you bring it up."
 Again, my trust in my own childhood experience, my
 own 
wisdom crumples, replaced by the blindfold restrain
ts of adult fear.  What fear? Fear of upsetting 
any apple carts. Fear of asking for something to be
 done to restore the world to a place where 
everyone, no matter their color, or origin or cultu
re, can be counted on as an important voice in 
the chorus of love and life. 

 
So the nun in my eighth grade class points out some
 facts and figures one day. So, most people 
in our prisons are persons from some minority group
? Children in Bangladesh are dying of 
starvation?  Our city of Detroit is full of abandon
ed and burned-out ruins that used to be houses
?  
What a handful of ashes instead of a bouquet of ros
es.
 The adult response to those questions 
when I share my horror: 
"Nothing can be done about those things. Life is no
t fair...get used to it. 

The problems are too big for you to get upset about
. You live in a good neighborhood, in the 
greatest country on earth. You are lucky to live he
re. You're too sensitive, you know. Toughen 
up." 

 
So my native trust in my own experience of sympathy
 and childhood wisdom withers one more 
time, and I accept that I am lucky enough to have w
hat I need, so I don't have to do anything.  
Adulthood seals the deal by regarding everything ab
out childhood something to be transcended, 
not the least of which is the attentiveness and sen
sitivity to others I am calling wisdom. 
 
And so I yielded and became an adult. Cut off and i
nsensitive to the world that I used to see quite 
clearly. Growing accustomed to the hard realities b
y blindfolding myself against their pain. I 
walked past the homeless, turned the page when edit
orials decried the inhumaneness of our 
prison system, ignored the blowing trash along the 
freeways, gave up on thinking that folks 
could be people a lot like me if they were already 
judged to be in the category of those nasty 
"law-breakers." I protected myself with a thousand 
"oh so reasonable" excuses. These 
handily allowed me to live unbent by the reality th
at many people have to die young, many 
people have to be locked away because of who they a
re as much as because of what they do, and 
that everything falls into ruin eventually, and is 
buried in trash.  
So just get used to it. The earth 
is ours to use and cannot be hurt by us anyway Œ it
™s so much bigger than we are.
 And so forth, 
and so forth....my child's heart experienced the un
fairness, and felt the impact of it keenly in my 
bones; my childhood urge to want to respond with at
tention and understanding to the state of 
unfairness around me got shelved as immature. My ad
ult "sensibleness" won out. 
 
No wonder the impatient teacher Jesus is recorded a
s saying, "Unless you become like 
children...."   

 
How grateful I am this morning to be able to announ
ce that throughout history, some people 
have decided to forego standard patterns of adultho
od, and have sought to recapture the sensitive 
wisdom of their childhood experiences of sympathy, 
care and heart. I love it, for example, that 
Rosa Parks, when she sat on that bus did not make a
dult excuses for the folks who were pushing 
her around. No, she felt the pain of it in her hear
t, like any child feels when she is pushed around, 
and she sat down, admitting to one and all that she
 was sick and tired of all the baloney that 
hemmed her in. Inspired by her action, and brick by
 moral brick, others joined her in restoring 
her home city to a center with some sense of human 
dignity. 
 
The anonymous editor of the last third of the Hebre
w book of Isaiah writes: "Then they will 
rebuild everything fallen into ruin."  Big task, no
 doubt. He was talking not about moral bricks, 
but actual stone blocks. Such restoration takes lon
ger than a bus-ride and arrest, and is physically 
tough.  Makes no difference whether we are talking 
about rebuilding a war-devastated Jerusalem, 
rebuilding the ruins of Detroit, or removing or res
toring dangerous or abandoned ruined houses 
here in Columbus. Yes, restoring cities is tough wo
rk, a big task. Why would anyone want to do 
such work? The text answers it this way: 
"We are sent to comfort all who grieve.  To give th
em 
bouquets of roses instead of a handful of ashes. We
 are sent to uplift them instead of offering 
messages of doom, praising their hearts instead of 
shoring up their depressed spirit. 
 In other 
words, we are not called to say to those who live i
n the ruins "It can't be done!" but rather "You 
can do it."  Ours is to offer praise. Ours is to of
fer encouragement.   

 
And who is the "we" who do all the encouraging and 
praise so that this can be accomplished? 
For me, Unitarian Universalists, Jews, Muslims, Chr
istians of all stripes: Protestant, Evangelical, 
Catholic, Pentecostal and Anabaptist Œ working toge
ther to do the work of justice Œ thousands of 
adults trying to reclaim the sensitivity and feelin
gs they experienced as children before it was 
drummed out of them, and then to work together to g
et something done in response to those 
feelings. 

 
Of course, as most of you know, I am talking about 
BREAD, the acronym for our interfaith 
justice organization here in Columbus, with 54 cong
regations participating. This morning we 
read from the scriptures of each of these tradition
s... including our own...after all, scripture only 
means "anything written." And though I didn't read 
it, I also 
told 
our children this morning the 
story of Nehemiah, the Nehemiah who gives his name 
to our annual large Action Meeting, which 
this year is Monday May 7th at 7 PM at the Celeste 
Center at the Fairgrounds. Nehemiah is the 
one who not only physically rebuilt the walls and b
uildings of a ruined city he loved, but who 
also had to deal with the local leaders who felt he
 was upsetting the apple cart of their privilege 
by doing so. Nehemiah also found out that he also h
ad to deal with social issues of income 
disparity, starvation and political manipulation br
ought about by this privilege. He had a lot to do 
all of a sudden, this eunuch who had once lived a m
ore privileged life himself in the courts of 
Persia. 

 
But, open-eyed, he recognized that he wasn't the on
ly one in town who was outraged by 
both
 the 
social issues, and the heartbreak of a city left in
 ruin after a war. So he linked up with all of thes
e 
others and organized a meeting to demand justice fr
om the privileged and local powerbrokers. 
Nehemiah brought thousands together to confront the
 folks profiting off the misery of others and 
restored not only the brick-and-mortar of post-war 
Jerusalem, but the self-worth and dignity of 
all the people.   

 
I find that BREAD has been echoing much of the Nehe
miah Story. For instance, BREAD, after 
researching the practices of other cities our size,
 realized the virtue of the Land Bank practice 
found in such cities. Due in large part to BREAD re
search and our Nehemiah action meetings, 
the Franklin County Commissioners have approved 3.5
 million in annual funding for a County 
Land Bank that will address vacant and abandoned ho
using in the area. 
 
The BREAD Jobs committee has made another compariso
n with cities our size in the area of 
employment. Columbus comes in dead-last among 16 ci
ties for its attention to small business, 
and their capacity to create jobs. In other similar
 cities, small businesses account for 66% of all 
new job creation, but in Columbus, small businesses
 account for only 50%. Why? Because the 
city focuses on larger businesses and corporations,
 which, perhaps surprisingly to some, bring in 
disproportionately fewer new jobs into communities 
like ours. A number of us will be talking 
with Mayor Coleman about these issues on Tuesday af
ternoon. 
 
The Christian writing from the gospel of Luke prefi
gures another issue raised and supported by 
BREAD, in concert with the NAACP. This is the idea 
of Restorative Justice, lifted up in a co-
sponsored conference on the last day of last month.
  BREAD brought to this conference many 
community leaders associated with the juvenal justi
ce system, including members of the Ohio 

Supreme Court and Judge Elizabeth Gill.  

"Crime," said one speaker, "is more than law-breaki
ng. Crime harms victims, communities, and 
offenders, and damages relationships. If crime is h
arm," he said, "then justice should be healing." 
This healing approach involves everyone involved, a
nd is primarily aimed at "doing justice by 
repairing the harm that has been caused by the crim
e." 
 
This echoes the story of Jesus you heard earlier wa
rning the marginalized people of his own day 
that the court system is not about healing, but str
ict fines whether they're just or not. He tells 
them that it would benefit any of them to try and e
nter into a healing conversation with their 
opponent before they end up ground to dust in the l
egal courts of the day, courts with judges who 
could easily be bribed by the well-to-do. He recomm
ended relationship, not revenge, coming to 
terms instead of coming to blows in the courthouse.
 In this 1900 year old story, we find the roots 
of present day, and entirely evidence-based, restor
ative justice practices which BREAD and the 
NAACP are lifting up.  Yes, evidence-based Œ again,
 Columbus is just now approaching this 
practice which has been so successful in other citi
es Œ a practice based on community-based 
reparation instead of revenge, a practice that has 
had far greater success in restoring lives than 
our present practice of imprisonment. 

 
And frankly, Universalist Judith Sargent Murray's v
ision of lady justice that is 
not
 blind, like that 
famous statue portrays her, but rather seeing, is a
 bold scripture from our own Universalist 
tradition, one which supports and shares BREAD's un
derstanding of justice. 
 
Let me read her text again. "
Were I to personify Justice, instead of presenting 
her blind, I would 
denominate her the goddess of fire; her broad and n
ever-closing eye should stand conspicuous; 
she should possess the power to unravel the knotty 
entanglements of the most sophisticated web; 
she should disclose at a single glance the secret..
. windings of the most profound labyrinth, while 
patient and unerring.  Justice should feel, hear an
d see, but truth alone should be the polar star 
by which she should shape her movements, and equity
 only should constrain her 
determinations." 

 
I agree with Judith Sargent Murray. I think that ou
r interfaith work, illumined by a variety of 
scriptures, but rooted in our own sensual experienc
es, is not best served by the image of a blind-
fold across the eyes. Justice needs to see, to perc
eive Œ like I did as a child Œ the real inequities 
in 
the world face to face.  My childhood heart saw, an
d heard, and felt the ache of the those pushed 
to the margins, those given a death sentence by the
 unwillingness of my adult eyes to notice, the 
unwillingness of my adult soul to identify and feel
 the plight of those struck down by fortune, or 
systems of oppression. I know that the blindfolded 
statue of lady justice is supposed to imply 
impartiality, but I think taking the blindfold off 
requires a more honest self-questioning, a more 
demanding spiritual work by us. I want us not just 
to see the misery of abandoned human beings 
on the street.  I want us to see our own socialized
 partiality and find ways to root it our the hard 
way. Justice work, you see, grows from the depth of
 our own heart, not in the clockwork of good 
and bad, the righteous and the unjust.  Equity and 
truth should help shape our vision, Judith 
Sargent Murray insists, and I certainly agree. That
's exactly why research and evidence-based 
approaches are the 
discipline
 of BREAD; the urgency of BREAD, however, rises fro
m hearts 
that have restored some of their childhood vulnerab
ility before this troubled world. 
 
Open eyes that see the ruins of a once great city a
nd hurt because of it. Open eyes that pay 
attention to 
visible
 inequities in work, in access, in restoration.  Op
en eyes that are like a child's 
open eyes... 

 
Unless you become as children...unless you become a
s children... 
 
The Muslim passage will conclude my sermon this mor
ning:  I join with the organizers of 
BREAD who would like each congregation, with their 
divergent scriptures and theologies and 
worship styles, to consider the words of the Prophe
t as offered by al Naraqi: "
One 
moment
 of 
justice is better than seventy years of worship in 
which you keep fasts and pass the nights in 
offering prayers and worship to God.? 

 
What would happen if we could get today's attendanc
e at worship out to an action meeting for 
justice in Columbus area? What would happen if numb
ers of citizens from 54 congregations 
ignored their differences for a while, and banded t
ogether to rebuild, and restore our city, county 
and outlying areas to greater justice? What would h
appen if we could trust the experiences that 
we once had as children, but have had to recover in
 our latter days by deliberate and intentional 
attentiveness. What could happen if we saw earth da
y holistically Œ greater justice for, and 
attention to, all beings on earth. 

 
Offering  
  
 
Closing New Scripture 

"The Circle has healing power. In the Circle, we ar
e all equal. When in the Circle, no one is 
above you. No one is below you. The Sacred Circle i
s designed to create unity. The Hoop of Life 
is also a circle. On this hoop there is a place for
 every species, every race, every tree and every 
plant. It is this completeness of Life that must be
 respected in order to bring about health on this 
planet." 

~Dave Yakima .Chief, Oglala Lakota~ 

 
