
  We are here
following a week of mostly rainy skies, 
  to worship, to see ourselves and the world
from a perspective of compassion,
  wisdom, wit, and unconditional love.
And so we open ourselves to the flow of time
  and beauty and music and word by saying
  
And at celebration's end, may our reason and our passion keep us true
  to ourselves, 
  true to each other, and true to those shared visions of what we can together
  become.

  And now, with the striking of the bell,
  it is all transformed.
  Like wizardry.
  Like magic.
  Something like presto changeo and hocus pocus,
  but without the rabbits 
  or infinitely deep black hats.
  The transformation is almost upon us.
  Time measured by the hands of clocks
  is not changed into time measured by breath,
  in and out, in and out.
  Time measured by memories and worries,
  is not changed into time crafted 
  by the next heartbeat and the next.
  Time's shadow stretching on a sundial
  now changes into time's unsurpassed brightness 
  shining on the present second.
  It's almost here,
  a magic trick no different 
  than the first second of creation..
  I am pulling the curtain back.
  I am turning the card.
  Look, it's the one you guessed?
  
(silence)

  From one ancient second, 
  13 billion years ago, all others seconds.
  All stars and all people and all calendars
  and all clocks and all seasons?
  knowing we share a common origin,
  we can embrace those we share this world with?those we love, those who
  have helped us, those who have challenged us, those we struggle to love,
  those we miss. May we embrace them all by naming them tenderly in the quiet
  of our hearts, or aloud in the sanctuary of this place.
  
(naming)

  Time flows in all of creation, 
  the very stuff of hope and memory,
  the powerful magic that separates yesterday from tomorrow with the present
  moment.
  But I wonder, who hopes in us now?
  And I wonder, who will remember us in
  in a thousand years? In a hundred? In ten??
  

  The hour between night and day. 
  The hour between toss and turn.
  An hour for thirty-year-olds, not me.
  
  The hour that's swept clean 
  for the crowing of roosters. 
  The hour when the earth takes back
  it's warm embrace. 
  The hour of cool breezes
  left over from extinguished stars. 
  The hour when we ask 
  "Will-we-too-vanish-without-a-trace?" 
  An empty hour. Hollow. Wasted.
  Rock bottom of all the other hours. 
  No one feels fine at four a.m.
  If ants feel fine at four a.m.,
  we're happy for the ants. 
  But I say let five a.m. come
  since we've got to go on living.
  

  It was after dinner. 
  You were talking to me across the table 
  about something or other,
  a greyhound you had seen that day
  or a song you liked,
  and I was looking past you
  over your bare shoulder
  at the three oranges lying 
  on the kitchen counter
  next to the small electric bean grinder,
  which was also orange,
  and the orange and white cruets 
  for vinegar and oil.
  
  All of which converged
  into a random still life,
  so fastened together by the clasp of color,
  and so fixed behind the animated
  foreground of your
  talking and smiling,
  gesturing and pouring wine,
  and the camber of your shoulders
  that I could feel it being painted within me, 
  brushed on the wall of my skull,
  while the tone of your voice
  lifted and fell in its flight,
  and the three oranges
  remained fixed on the counter
  the way stars are said
  to be fixed in the universe.
  
  Then all the moments of the past
  began to line up behind that moment
  and all the moments to come
  assembled in front of it in a long row, 
  giving me reason to believe
  that this was a moment I had rescued
  from the millions that rush out of sight
  into a darkness behind the eyes. 
  Even after I have forgotten what year it is,
  my middle name,
  and the meaning of money,
  I will still carry in my pocket
  the small coin of that moment
  minted in the kingdom
  that we pace through every day.
  

  In mid-June every year, when I was growing up we had a big family dinner,
  very fancy, come mid-June. At that supper we celebrated Father's Day, both
  for my two grandfathers and my own father. My grandmother Anna and I also
  got a cake for our birthday, which fell on the same day. It was like a miniature
  Christmas.
  
  Now it's changed. No fancy dinner any more. My grandparents are all buried,
  and my father is four hours away. Things are simpler in the year 2003, Common
  Era. I'll call my dad later today, and we'll talk for a while. He's sent
  me his typical sweet birthday card, which always gets here about five days
  before my actual day. This year he wrote me this note inside the card.
  
  "Hope to pay you a visit soon. Have a great day and don't count the years
  because they sure pass fast."
  
  "Don't count the years."
  
  Ah, but we do, here in the Western World. We count them with Birthdays. Birthdays
  are especially big here in the States, more than in any other country. But
  they are not big everywhere. Or even known. My grandmother Carmelina, an
  Italian peasant, told me that she didn't really know the day she was actually
  born. Her mother gave her the purported day of her conception to celebrate
  instead. And in many areas of the world, the counting of years from the day
  of one's birth is simply unknown. Billions of folks on this earth have absolutely
  no idea how old they are, and have no idea why this birthday idea is considered
  important elsewhere.
  
  Same thing is true of the commonly expressed idea over here of a day consisting
  of "morning and evening." In parts of Central Asia, for example, the day
  is divided up into five distinctly named parts. And Jews the world over will
  tell you that "tomorrow" begins at sunset tonight, not at the far hour of
  midnight. Also, for Jews everywhere, New Year begins in the middle of September,
  not January. And a hundred million Muslims celebrate their own New Year day,
  thank you. But their version of the calendar is so fluid that their central
  holiday month, Ramadan, may be a summer holiday when you are a child, and
  a winter holiday when you are a grownup.
  
  Obviously, time itself has no divisions. Time is just time. Only human beings
  busy themselves with calculating the beginnings and endings of things based
  on clocks and holidays and calendars and ideas, all of which are different
  around the world.
  
  Of course, in this first decade of the twentieth century, I am not sure exactly
  what is being divided up into all these days, hours, minutes and seconds,
  into all of these new years and leap years and holy times and secular
  measurements.
  
  After all, I usually don't even have any time to divide up into arbitrary
  bits. Do you?
  
  "I don't have any time."
  
  Have you ever said that?
  
  I certainly have. Over and over again. And I often still say it? to
  friends who ask me to visit them, to family members who ask me to dinner,
  to denominational leaders who ask me to lead a committee, to acquaintances
  who ask me to do their wedding on a day I'm doing two others, to folks I
  just meet who assume that I can get together with them on Sundays for a nice
  10 o'clock brunch.
  
  "I don't have any time." It's a common phrase these days, along with its
  twins? "I'm busy. I'm drowning. I'm buried."
  
  But, of course, I do have time. So do you. Twenty-four hours a day of time,
  every single day. You and I have 365 days a year of time. It's what we do
  with the time we have that's really the issue.
  
  Ah, but if time itself has no divisions, and all such divisions are arbitrary,
  and if my father is right that it's best not to count the years because they
  go by so fast, then what is time anyway?
  
  When St. Augustine was asked that very question, he thought about it for
  a moment, and then quite rightly said, "If you ask me what time is, I don't
  know. But if you don't ask me, then I'll know." I'm not usually fond of what
  St. Augustine has to say, but I have to give him a high five on this one.
  
  But of course, riddles like St. Augustine's are not satisfying to everyone.
  So, according to what I understand from my physicist friends, time, if you
  really want to know, is part and parcel with the whole universe, which can
  be accurately called "the space-time continuum." Physicists put a dash between
  the words "space" and "time" to make them into one new word, and to show
  that without space, there is no time.
  
  Thus, the universe as we know it has four dimensions, length, width, breadth
  and duration, that is, time. Time and space, therefore, are one, inseparable
  reality. But as soon as I start to talk about time in this way, I begin to
  wonder which riddle is better, the one offered by the physicists, or the
  one offered by St. Augustine. Suddenly, the saint snaps back like a stretched
  rubber band, released. "If you ask me what time is, I really don't know.
  But if you don't ask me, then I'll know."
  
  It's not like I've tried not to know. I actually have gone to the best minds
  on earth to try and figure out the answer to this question. I once had the
  opportunity to hear Stephen Hawking, the great physicist, lecture on the
  subject of "time" at the University of California, in Berkeley. He gave his
  talk at Zellerbach Hall, which easily holds three thousand. He was also televised
  into three other halls, each seating thousands. And finally, his words were
  piped out to where I was sitting, one of five thousand packed onto the square
  in front of Zellerbach. Speakers the size of my car broadcast his amazing
  lecture with stunning clarity, the strange voice created by his computerized
  speaking mechanism resonating with great clarity over thousands of attentive
  heads.
  
  At one point, a group of ragged men crossed over from Telegraph Ave, extremely
  high on something other than knowledge. They started to interrupt the lecture
  with wild shouts and curses. The entire crowd of five thousand, as if they
  were one single person, turned toward the noise-makers, put their fingers
  in unison to their lips, and made the sound Shhhhhhhhhhh----. This immediately
  terrified the small group of troublemakers, who ran away at once.
  
  Now Dr. Hawking used perfectly clear English. He did not use a single word
  that any high school graduate wouldn't know. No grand multi-syllable words
  that have not yet found their way into the dictionary. Yet I found his talk
  on time hard to follow anyway. I could understand every word in the sentence,
  but as soon as he came to the end of the sentence, it was as if my inner
  foot hit the brake pedal in my brain, and I came to a complete stop.
  
  But there was one sentence he used that I shall always remember word for
  word. "It's possible that one day, time will flow in such a direction that
  we shall remember the future."
  
  "Remember the future." What a wonderful phrase!
  
  I know that as I grow older every year on my birthday, it's actually something
  I wish I could do. I wish I could "remember" what my godson Ben will be doing
  in twenty years. I wish I could remember what my friends' children will be
  doing in 2063.
  
  I wish I could know what will happen once I am gone, by "remembering" it.
  But good Dr. Hawking really wasn't exactly talking about such a thing, as
  far as I can figure out. So in my present lifetime, there's no way I can
  "remember" tomorrow. I can only remember yesterday as usual.
  
  I do remember having a hard time sleeping one day this week. I had so many
  things I promised to do, so many letters I had to get out, so many chores
  I had to complete before I fell asleep one night. I lay there awake, my eyes
  open like the full moon. It was a l-o-n-g night, it was.
  
  Of course, it wasn't really long. It was an 8 hour night as usual. The hours
  and even the minutes were the same length they were on the nights I slept
  soundly, the same length they have been ever since the ancient Babylonians
  decided to cut free flowing time into these little segments called minutes,
  with 60 in an hour.
  
  But it felt like a long night. And, at 4 AM, it was exactly as Szymborska
  says it is in her poem. It's the very hour between night and day, the hour
  between toss and turn. Thirty year olds can stay up that late, she reminds
  us. But she and I can't stay up that late any more and not be done-in the
  next day.
  
  4 AM, she says, is an empty hour. Hollow. No one feels fine at four a.m.
  If ants feel fine at four a.m., we're happy for the ants.
  
  But certainly not for ourselves.
  
  And yet the 4 AM hour is exactly the same length as the 7 PM hour earlier
  that day when I was having a joyous dinner with friends. That hour passed
  by in a second. The 4 o'clock A.M. hour passed by in a week.
  
  The ancient Greeks knew what St. Augustine knew?namely, that it's impossible
  to accurately define time because the experience of time is so often personal
  and subjective. They knew that sometimes human beings experience time as
  painfully slow, like Szymborska and me in our respective beds. They knew
  that sometimes human beings experience time as fast, like my father looking
  over his life from the vantage of 81. But the Greeks also knew that the
  subjective time which stretches into slow and concentrates into fast, is
  quite different from the cool shadow of objective time which moves across
  the sundial at exactly the same speed each and every day. Sundial time they
  called "Chronos," from which we get our English word "chronometer." But
  experienced time they called "kairos"? the right time," it's some times
  translated, or "the fullness of time." And of the two kinds of time, chronos
  and kairos, our spiritual ancestors revered the second, kairos the fullness
  of time.
  
  And it's Billy Collins' poem which, for me, really seals the deal for me
  about this idea of "the fullness of time." I think he really conveys to me
  the power of a moment that is not counted, divided, or x'ed off on a calendar,
  but simply experienced. He describes a perfectly ordinary moment after supper,
  where he catches sight of his wife's bare shoulder, and three oranges on
  the counter behind her, and all of a sudden
  
    "all the moments of the past
    began to line up behind that moment
    and all the moments to come
    assembled in front of it in a long row, 
    giving me reason to believe
    that this was a moment I had rescued
    from the millions that rush out of sight
    into a darkness behind the eyes."
  

  No more years and months, birthdays and holidays, anniversaries or clocks,
  just the moment, the eternal now, the one thing that is not a thing, which
  can never be divided, split or pieced. The now, the present moment, kairos,
  which is neither past nor future. And no blade is sharp enough to separate
  the past from the future except the present moment, the present second. And
  that moment?that flash of a second, complete with oranges, love, and
  ordinary life, becomes his prayer for the day, his connection with reality,
  his appreciation for being alive, his thanksgiving. It is his blessing on
  the length, width, breadth and duration we call space-time, the whole future
  and past of the universe, all wrapped up into the present. The present which
  he perceives (maybe for the first time, I don't know), as a present, a gift,
  a wonder, a perfect rose blossoming in his hand.
  
  Such time, such a moment, cannot be calendared or clocked, or in the poet's
  words, paced. It can only be experienced in the twinkling of an eye.
  
  Life is blessed by such moments, when the ordinary reveals itself as
  extraordinary, when the banal blossoms as the sacred. Those are the moments
  which slow down the life that speeds on by so quickly, and quickens the life
  which languishes sleepless in bed. Such a moment can't be commanded or created
  of course?it can only be received, in the manner one receives birthday
  presents. But I think anyone can be open to such moments, as long as they
  know the truth hiding behind our clocks and calendars and counting?
  the truth that every day is our birthday, every day is a birthday gift, and
  every breath is both our first and our last. The world can indeed be seen
  in every grain of sand, infinity lies in the palm of your hand, and eternity
  is here, right now, not tomorrow. Blest is this moment, and all with whom
  I share it on "most this amazing day."
  

    "all the moments of the past
    began to line up behind that moment
    and all the moments to come
    assembled in front of it in a long row, 
    giving me reason to believe
    that this was a moment I had rescued
    from the millions that rush out of sight
    into a darkness behind the eyes."
  
  O Song of Love
  which we did not begin, 
  and which we shall not conclude,
  where are our fathers?
  
  Wherever wholeness and brokenness meet.
  Wherever human beings admit 
  to actually being human.
  Whenever we act or think with patterns
  we don't remember learning 
  at our mother's knee.
  Whenever we are afraid and do it anyway.
  Wherever and whenever
  we find ourselves amazed 
  to be alive at all.
  Song, neither begun nor ending,
  here we are.
