Do I Want To Live Forever? 
Easter, March 31, 2013 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini
  
Gathering, Welcoming, Centering, Kindling, Opening 

 
We are here, 

 as the first crocuses break through the earth
 to celebrate the spirit of Easter 

with an abundance and diversity of flowers,
 which sign the golden dream of love and justice 

soon to be blooming in our very hands. 

 
Grounded in gratitude for the cosmos that is our ho
me, claiming deepening wisdom as our 
authority, and daring to engage joy, burdens, loss 
and insight in a deliberate community of 
many ways and ages, the flame summons us to 
awaken
: to listen with our whole lives, to 
open,
 to serve.
  
Affirming: The Easter Exultet of 2013  

       
A Great Litany with Song: 
#201
        Words: The Kingdom Has Already Come 

       Iris DeMent (2012--Album: Sing the Delta) 

 
I stopped in the church to pray, 

It was the middle of the day 

And I don™t even know if I believe in God 

But I laid my soul on the table 

and left that place believing I was able 

to pull back the curtain my fears had drawn 

 
v. 1 Glory, Glory, Hallelujah 

 
I was out on the fourth of July 

when I saw those kids, and just had to cry 

The whole town was blazing in the summer™s heat 

But out in front of a row of rundown shacks  

they had that fire hydrant untapped 

baptizing their bodies right there in the street 

 
v. 2. Feel Like Shouting Hallelujah 

 
There™s a tree outside my window 

It sings when wind blows 

I™ve got water and fire 

I know sorrow, I feel desire 

And could it be  

that the kingdom has already come 

 
v. 4. Feel Like Dancing, Hallelujah 

 
We all see good or bad in everything that we have 

But life is waiting just behind that veil 

If this will be loved and that will be hated 

the soul is left to struggle segregated 

Trapped in the harbor too weighed down. 

But it could be the kingdom has already come. 

 
v.5. Love is Shining, All Around Me 

 
Communing 

 
Daffodils are beautiful, but silent. 

Crocuses are beautiful, but silent. 

Roses are beautiful, but silent. 

Vases make no noise. The act of budding is silent. 

The process of blossoming is silent. 

The ink on a gold-edged page describing scripture s
tories of resurrection is silent.   
Lyrics of a song stay still until lifted off a page
 and sung.   
Eggs are silent on their lawns or on plates. 

Chocolate in a silver wrapping makes no sound. 

Children who get them rejoice in their baskets, peo
ple may sing beautifully, cooks clang pots as 
they cook a special dinner, but still, more than an
y other season, Eastertide is filled with silence. 
 Comforting is the silence of the season. 

Blest is the quiet opening of the spring.      

 
silence
  
Our lives can be noisy on the outside, 

but our inner hearts are filled with silent memorie
s and quiet faces that make us who we are. 
Remembering those we love, who love us, whom we str
uggle with, whom we miss, we 
gather their names as we gather the flowers, 

in the vase of our heart we place them, quietly 

naming them, or simply bowing to them in quiet grat
itude.    
 
naming
  
Our lives, touched by daffodils and love and color 
in this season of spring and new life, make a 
kind of music that is a form of heaven on earth. Th
e choirs of our community now open the 
golden gates of that vision.      
  
 
In Time of Daffodils ....e. e. cummings 

 
The First Reading
 is from the Letter of Peter in the New Testament, d
ated, because of internal 
evidence, to the reign of the Emperor Domitian, c. 
81. So it couldn't have been written by Peter, 
who died in the early sixties. It may, according to
 some critical scholars, however, embody a few 
actual teachings from Simeon Bar Yona, called Kepha
, or Peter in the New Testament. I myself 
think the following sentence is one of them: 

 
For the Messiah suffered and died, to address our t
ragic flaw, a just person amid the unjust. He 
was put to death in the flesh, and raised up in spi
rit. 
 
 
The Second Reading
  is another set of lyrics for a song by Iris DeMent
. It™s called There's a 
Whole Lot of Heaven Shining In This River of Tears,
 composed just last year. From her album 
Sing the Delta 

 
There's a lot of people talkin'  

'bout getting in the gloryland way 

Walkin' straight and narrow,  

trying to get to heaven someday 

But I've been saved  

by the love of the people livin' right here 

And there's a whole lotta heaven  

shinin' in this river of tears 

 
We don't have a prophet to tell us  

what our future holds 

We've only got each other  

and the love we carry in our souls 

Though this world's full of trouble  

and the path we walk is never clear 

There's still this whole lotta heaven  

shinin' in a river of tears 

 
There's a whole lotta heaven  

shinin' in this river of tears 

You pull back the curtain little diamonds will appe
ar 
You can take your streets of gold if you want 'em 

and your mansion so dear 

But I'll take the whole lotta heaven shinin' in thi
s river of tears 
 
This life that I'm livin' is like a ship  

that don't want to be steered 

Sometimes I wake up in the mornin' thinkin'  

I could buckle beneath the weight of my own fears 

It's some pain, some strain and some struggle 

but I persevere 

I got a whole lotta heaven shinin' in my river of t
ears 
 
There's a whole lotta heaven 

shinin' in this river of tears 

You pull back the curtain  

little diamonds will appear 

You can take your streets of gold  

if you want 'em and your mansion so dear 

But I'll take the whole lotta heaven shinin'  

I want a whole lotta heaven shinin' 

I love a whole lotta heaven shinin' 

in this river of tears 

 
Preaching 

 
Whatever else they may be, the Easter and Passover 
seasons are jam packed with symbols that 
are rich and various. This is especially true when 
these two holidays fall this early, and during 
unseasonably cold weather. Indeed, spring itself...
with its own rife glories worthy of celebration 
–seems a bit paltry this year. The daffodil outside
 my office window looks as if it™s bending 
over to take cover under the soil warmed by the sun
 all day, so it won't shiver come night. 
 
Among the rich symbolism of the holidays, you'll fi
nd many images that address the mystery of 
life and death. Certainly, one of the conversations
 I often hear going around, especially at 
Eastertime in particular, has to do with the whole 
notion of what "life" might look like when seen 
within the context of our mortality. Is there some 
sort of life after death? Resurrection for you 
and me as well as for an ancient Jewish prophet?  

 
Resurrection? Most secular and religiously progress
ive people that I've talked with in my 
ministry are pretty sure that 
all 
the various churches of Christendom celebrate a lit
eral 
resurrection of the physical body of Jesus of Galil
ee on Easter Sunday. 
 
But I am here to say that such an understanding is 
a caricature, at best. While many of the more 
conservative churches do indeed preach that resurre
ction means a physical body returning to 
recognizable life, many of the more progressive chu
rches simply do 
not 
think of resurrection or 
Easter in such a concrete and literal way. And, the
re have been different interpretations of the 
"Easter Event" for ages. For instance,  back in the
 early 1900's, a group of radically conservative 
Christians put out some pamphlets called the Fundam
entals, which led eventually to the word 
"fundamentalism" in English. They insisted that one
 had to believe that Jesus' 
physical body
...the 
Greek word for that is "
sarx
"...flesh....actually reanimated on Easter Sunday m
orn. But it seems 
to me that the reason they had to blare their trump
et so loud about this, and get so belligerent, 
drawing their lines in the sand, is because congreg
ations all around them simply didn't accept 
that interpretation of resurrection. Most of these 
churches had given up the idea of hellfire too, 
and denied that there would be general resurrection
 at the end of time for the rest of us. These 
were the congregations who looked at the empty tomb
 stories as mythical teaching stories, not 
sober histories. They did however take the words fr
om the 
Letter of Peter
 in the New Testament 
seriously...the letter you heard earlier this morni
ng which says "He was put to death in the 
flesh
 
(that is, 
sarx
), and raised up in spirit." (The Greek word is 
pneumati, 
for which "in spirit" or even 
"spiritually" is a better
 translation. 

 -
pneuma-
 in Greek, like 
SPIRITVS 
in Latin, both 
literally
 mean "breath of life" or "circulating air...a bree
ze, or the wind." )   
 
The mere fact that these interpretive words were wr
itten during the reign of Domitian...all the 
way back in the early 80s of our era, tells me that
 different understandings of the central 
Christian proclamation were there from the beginnin
g as well. 
 
I am also saying that this variety of approaches ha
s always been true, not just for Christians, but 
for everyone else as well. And as yet, I see no sig
ns that this variety of approaches is dying out.  
 
So long ago, the Jews at the time of Jesus were all
 over the map about this. The Ranking Priests 
in the temple all taught that death was the end of 
you, and expecting anything else was greedy. 
The liberal Pharisees, however, claimed that you wo
uld live on, or even be resurrected in some 
fabulous way. Even earlier than this, ancient Sumer
ian and Babylonian literature clearly makes 
fun of the idea of living forever. Egyptian literat
ure of the same period, however, says that living 
forever is possible... at least for those wealthy e
nough for the mummification process.  
 
So I am saying this morning that, throughout all hu
man history Œ and whether we are talking 
secular or religious history makes no difference Œ 
human beings have confronted the reality of 
their mortality most each and every day, with a var
iety of responses. They may accept it, or deny 
it, or express bravado about that reality. And many
 have formed theories to cradle their 
understanding of its reality...from reincarnation, 
to some vague or not so vague afterlife, to 
ghosts or even to utter extinction. They have come 
to different conclusions in every age and 
culture.  

 
I do understand that it™s hard not to make generali
zations and burrow into simplifications, but 
almost always such generalizations are complete fic
tions. You may, for example, think that all 
Christians believe in heaven and hell as destinatio
ns for the dead, but you would be completely 
wrong. Many groups, or denominations, within Christ
endom, simply say that when you die, your 
soul...your vitality–sleeps. No trips to heaven. So
me say that this sleeping soul will eventually 
come back to life in a transformed body. Others say
 that your inner soul only survives, and is 
absorbed into the vision of God. Since the 19th cen
tury, some Protestants and Catholics have 
imagined a heaven where you would recognize other s
urviving humans as easily as you could 
recognize them now, although this idea is relativel
y a new one. My father, for example, always 
imagined himself playing pinochle with his mother a
nd father, for example...at a table, with 
cards, "somewhere." I assure you, pinochle playing 
is not standard Catholic doctrine. Others, like 
the Christian Unitarian philosopher Charles Hartsho
rne, used to say that all of the stories in the 
New Testament that deal with death mean only this..
.that after we die our lives will be 
remembered in the mind of God. And even then, you'l
l have to deal with an unexpected diversity 
...because, by "God," Harshorne meant something ent
irely different from the "traditional" model 
of the originator of the universe. You see how comp
lex it gets? 
 
Then there are those who use the anxieties people f
eel about death to control them with more and 
more vivid threats of torture in hell. The religiou
s progressives at the turn of the century were 
surprised by this turn, since most of them had alre
ady stopped preaching sermons on hell after 

death. The tent revivals of people like Billy Sunda
y disgusted them. They were trying to focus on 
getting rid of a more patently real "hell" here on 
earth, divorcing the metaphor from any life-
after-death significance. The poverty, disease, and
 cruelty on earth was visible and solid...true 
images of hell indeed.  It needed to lose its power
. And for many of these Christians, heaven 
after
 death had often been reduced to Karl Marx's famous
 opiate, or pain-killer. For many, they 
realized, heaven and hell were not theories about l
ife after death as much as they were symbols 
that would one day redress injustices here on earth
 after this life was over.   
 
But mostly, at the turn of the last century, the wh
ole idea of hell faded in educated circles 
particularly, often replaced by a more positive hea
ven-on-earth image. Socialists, progressives, 
our own ancestors, the Universalists and the Unitar
ians, all joined in lifting up the idea that any 
establishment of heaven-on-earth would have to be 
our 
responsibility. To make of our years on 
earth The Golden Isle, where peace, prosperity for 
all and justice for all would be the norm, just 
as in our children's story this morning, was a huma
n project, not a New Jerusalem coming down 
from the clouds.  Their idea was that the privilege
d, like the prince in the story this morning, 
would be willing to give up all their comforts for 
the sake of a better life for others. And if they 
were not willing, later Leninists affirmed, they wo
uld be 
made
 to give them up. 
 
Still others, like Iris DiMent, the singer, have go
ne further along this pre-death idea of heaven. 
 We don't have a prophet to tell us  

what our future holds 

We've only got each other  

and the love we carry in our souls 

Though this world's full of trouble  

and the path we walk is never clear 

There's still this whole lotta heaven  

shinin' in a river of tears 
 
She is saying that yes, we mustn't wait till death 
in order to see heaven; we have to see it here 
and now, long before everything is made fair and ju
st and golden. We have to see heaven shining 
even in those tears that fall down our cheeks becau
se we hurt so much. The brightness 
symbolized by heaven is for now, not tomorrow. Eter
nal life, she is saying, is not about long 
duration, infinite years ahead, calendar sheets in 
the wind...but it™s a luminous quality, visible in 
each and every moment right now.  

 
But despite the last five thousand years of interpr
etation and re-interpretation and outright mutual 
criticism, the actual 
fact
 of mortality, unadorned by interpretation, greets 
us every day. The 
metaphors never cover up the reality. 

  

But I have more to say: the idea of some sort of su
rvival beyond death is not just based on 
interpreting scriptures, or the loud theological pr
oclamations of preachers, or the manipulative 
famous "cold-readings" offered by folks who claim t
o talk with our dead relatives "on the other 
side." 

 
These ideas are often rooted in something closer to
 home. For there are unexpected, unmediated 
and unnerving human experiences which many of us ha
ve that cause us to speculate about death 
in different ways. I remember the first time I witn
essed someone actually dying, all of my ideas 
around mortality were completely upturned. This man
 had been in a coma for a long time. He 
weighed no more than a few small birds would weigh.
 His elbow joints were wider than his 
actual arms, his face had sunken, and he had not op
ened his eyes, or shown any responsiveness, 
in over three weeks. Suddenly, he opened his long-s
hut-eyes, raised himself up on his non-
existent elbows, and grabbed his wife's hand with s
trength, and said to her, "Goodbye Marilyn. I 
am going now. I want you to know I have loved you f
rom the first moment I saw you. Good 
bye." And then he took my hand, and said, "Goodbye 
Mark. I am going now. I want you to know 
I am dying happy, for I have seen my sons all grown
 up and doing well. Goodbye." 
 
Then he lay down, this 40-year-old man, and stopped
 breathing, just like that. What was I to 
make of a man in a coma rising up, and then conscio
usly telling us that he knew he was going 
"now??  That event haunted me for years. 

 
Or this week, my friend Susan called me to tell me 
about the Florida memorial of her husband, 
my good friend and dear love, Flip, who had died of
 early onset Alzheimers. 
 
I spoke my eulogy at his memorial in Kansas City a 
few weeks ago. This was a smaller memorial 
for his family back in Sarasota. Susan had taken so
me ashes to scatter on the beach there, near 
where he grew up. And as she was doing so, a ping-p
ong ball bounced past her, blown the by 
wind, bouncing off stones.  

 
This would be strange enough in itself, but there's
 more. Flip had been a stage entertainer all of 
his life. One of his major juggling accomplishments
 was to blow three ping-pong balls out of his 
mouth, one at a time, pfumph, pfumph, pfumph–and th
en catch them in reverse order in his 
mouth. He was famous for it. So Susan watched the b
all. The wind blew it around her several 
times. ?And what was a ping pong ball doing on the 
beach, anyway?? she asked herself. 
 
Now please, don't imagine that she thought that Fli
p was there in ghostly form giving her a sign. 
That would be 
an interpretation
 of the event, not the emotional experience she was
 having. She 
was content to let the experience be as it was...mo
ving, transformative, a source of both laughter 
and tears...but, but...she 
did have it. 
Just as I had the experience of a man announcing hi
s own 
death from a break in his coma. 

 
Am I saying that there is some sort of spiritual li
fe after death? No, I can't know any such 
thing...but I 
too 
have had many odd experiences after friends have di
ed, experiences that don't 
make any immediate sense, but where my awe and amaz
ement are kindled in fresh new ways. 
After my best friend Stefan died, his partner Richa
rd and I were taking a break from 
shiva
 (the 
eight day Jewish mourning period), and climbed up a
 steep staircase connecting two streets in 
San Francisco. It was a beautiful, bright sunny day
. Suddenly, a dark cat leapt off a nearby 
garage and landed at our feet right between us. The
 cat looked up at each of us, his head moving 
back and forth, then made three figure eights aroun
d our legs. Then it sat for a moment in front 
of us again, looking at each of us face-to-face. An
d immediately, after making a little cry, this 
stranger cat leapt back up onto the garage roof, an
d disappeared over its gable. Richard and I 

looked at each other with amazed smiles and said in
 tandem, "Stefan?"  Now please. Stefan 
never had a cat; neither Richard or I have ever fav
ored the idea of the transmigration of souls, 
and cats, as far as I know, act like that all the t
ime. But...we were grief-stricken to the marrow of 
our bones, sensitive, torn open, and almost anythin
g could have offered us that comforting sense 
of presence, a flash of reconnection. We could have
 interpreted it as Stefan letting us know that 
he was OK, but that's not what we said. We just wer
e thankful for this wondrous event on a day 
of grief. 

 
All of my ministry I have heard similar stories fro
m folks, including from skeptics, atheists and 
agnostics, who were completely embarrassed to have 
had such an experience. They usually kept 
it secret from everyone, even though it had a myste
rious impact on them when they had it. Many 
people who have these experiences write them off as
 "merely" psychological...but then, they 
never tell anyone anyway, because they think it mak
es them look soft-headed.  
 
Me personally? I don't interpret these experiences,
 in either the light of theology, philosophy or 
even psychology, although all of those categories m
ay be chomping at the bit to interpret such an 
experience. I am content to let mystery be mystery,
 and to take what positive comfort comes 
from such unusual, and unusually common, and often 
awe-striking experiences.  
 
Perhaps this is exactly what happened to the studen
ts of Jesus, Peter for example. One day up in 
the Galilee, Episcopal Bishop Shelby Spong theorize
s, about 
six months
 after the death of their 
teacher at the hands of the Roman prefect, Peter, p
erhaps while breaking bread just as Jesus had 
done all of his life, had the experience of his tea
cher being recognizable in that simple act of 
taking supper. "He was killed in the flesh, but rai
sed in spirit," was how he apparently put his 
insight...not as a ghost or anything, mind you, or 
an hallucination, or worse, a reanimated corpse 
...but in the everyday action of having a meal with
 those you love. An act of love and sharing and 
communion. 

 
All the angel and empty tomb stories were written m
uch, much later, concrete and inflexible 
interpretations
 of the joyous experience Peter had and shared orig
inally. Leaving 
us
, ultimately, 
with clumsy stories of resuscitation which have pol
luted much of our thinking about our 
mortality. 

 
For me, Easter has always been less a meditation on
 my mortality and more an affirmation of 
life, an affirmation of heaven being here and now, 
even in this river of tears. Easter is sharing 
meals with friends, breaking bread with them, expre
ssing love openly and freely now...despite 
the fact that one day I will not be alive. Eternal 
life is now, not tomorrow....I'm not sure I even 
want to live forever, with infinite days, personall
y. Norbert Capek, who invented the Flower 
Ceremony we'll celebrate today, did want to live fo
rever, and thought life pointless without it.... 
but then, he knew the kind of suffering that led to
 his death at Dachau, and I have not. It might 
make a difference, that kind of suffering. If my li
fe was miserable from day one, as many of the 
millions alive on earth can attest, I wouldn't be t
oo fond of someone saying "Oh, buck up and get 
real. There is no justice, you were just unfortunat
e, and when you die, you die...no justice for 
you." On the other hand, many of our ancestors in P
oland, the Socinians, believed that when you 
died, your soul slept too; and they suffered a lot 
too, yet maintained their position. So I don't 
know. I simply don't know. And I'm ok with that. 

 
And I conclude this morning by telling you an Easte
r story I did not witness personally, but an 
Easter story in which I personally knew the subject
. Some of you know that I was good friends 
with my colleague Forrest Church, who died a few ye
ars ago Œ around my exact age Œ of 
esophageal cancer. He fought the cancer for years. 
Oh, how he fought. But eventually, just like 
the great man I spoke of last week, Carl Sagan, he 
succumbed to it. As he lay dying in his house, 
his wife Carolyn and other family members and frien
ds gathered around, he was barely 
breathing. But they were all present to his dying. 
His wife Carolyn finally climbed into bed with 
him, and held him. Then she got up, and said aloud,
 "God bless Forest Church." After which, 
immediately, he stopped breathing. And what did eve
ryone do? Weep? Gnash their teeth? 
No...something far more Eastery...they broke into a
 long and sustained applause. In gratitude for 
a life well lived. Not a perfect life, mind you. Fo
rrest wasn't perfect, and would be the first to say
 
so. But he did lead an amazing, rich, loving and ex
pansive life. I can applaud that. 
 
It™s that applause which signs the deepest meaning 
of Easter and life for me...not what theories 
we have about how long ?forever? is or what the sou
l looks like, or doesn't look like. It™s 
gratitude, in this heaven which is also a river of 
tears, for a life well lived. 
 
Offering
  
Knowing for sure that the responsibility for this p
lace resides with no one else but us, let us 
gladly pay our pledges, offer our gifts, and thus b
less the grace and work of our principled and 
rooted community of love, peace and justice making.
  
Flower Ceremony 

 
A. The Consecration of the Flowers
  (adapted from Capek, 1923) 
 
East:   Spirit of Life, we find your blessing in th
ese messengers of fellowship and love.  
 
South: May they remind us, even though our skills a
nd what we know is different from each   
other, and can do different things, to be yet unifi
ed in our desire for mutual affection, and         
devotion to Love's holy purpose.  

 
West:    May they also remind us of the value of wo
rking and playing together, and sharing 
ourselves openly and kindly.  May we cherish the gi
fts of friendship. 
  

North:  May we not let our awareness of another's t
alents discourage us, or warp our relationship 
with envy, but may we realize that, what 
ever 
we do, great or small, counts, and that therefore 
the efforts of all of us are needed to do Spirit's 
work in this world.  
 
B. Prayer of Norbert Capek
 written in the concentration camp of Dachau, not l
ong before his 
life was taken. 1942 

 
Solo  (Jolinda) 

 
It is worthwhile to live and struggle 

courageously for sacred ideals.  

Whatever winds may blow, O fire of my soul, 

I trust you will never flicker out.  

Even though I've been disappointed a thousand times
   
I have lived in the middle of eternity. 

 
Unison
 All who overcome what holds them back 

give wings to their heart  

and enter the golden age. 

May we take these flowers as a sign of that age, 

which blossoms right now in our hands. 

 
Distribution of the Flowers 

 
#63 Spring Has Now Unwrapped the Flowers 

