
  We are here
as winter stubbornly clings to our heels,
  to worship, to celebrate the fullness of life
and give thanks for our ability to embrace it
  with our hearts and minds and bodies
woven into the grace of this community.
  Love, come, for we are ready.
  
May our reason and our passion keep us true to ourselves,
  true to each other,
  and true to those shared visions of what we can together become.

  (A great man died this week at age 74, a man who was, in many ways, the spiritual
  leader of our own School for Young Children. I am speaking of Fred Rogers,
  of course, Mr. Rogers, whose decades long television show expressed the same
  philosophy of esteem, diversity, imagination, cooperation and so forth found
  in our own day-school. Many of our teachers had met this gentle Presbyterian
  minister, and learned from him throughout the last years. I express my
  condolences to our School for Young Children faculty on the death of this
  teacher of teachers, who has taught more children and inspired more teachers
  than any human being in history. And I have let this morning's prayer before
  the silence be a tribute to his philosophy by quoting him as a wisdom teacher
  for us all. 
  
  O Love, this is what he said.
  He said: "There is something of yourself you leave at every meeting of another
  person."
  He said: "In the scheme of things, this morning is as brief as the twinkling
  of an eye, yet eternity is made of such twinklings."
  He said: "True wisdom is never separated from compassion."
  He said: "Life is for service."
  He said: "It's wonderful just to be yourself."
  He said: "The truly great things in this life are never center stage, but
  always in the wings."
  He said: "What really matters is whether the alphabet we learn is used for
  the declaration of war or for the description of the sunrise."
  He said: "If only you could see how important your life has been to those
  you have met."
  He said "All I know how to do is to light the candle that has been given
  to me."(Here, the candle is kindled)
  In his honor, let us keep a span of silence. Amen. 
  
(silence)

  And let us remember the worthiness of our own lives, the gifts we have been
  given, the people we have met who have left their mark upon us too. Let us
  remember those who have been truthful to us, and shown us the fullness of
  their person, and who have thus been our teachers.
  
  We can name these men or women or children aloud in the shared air, or silently
  in the sanctuary of our hearts.
  
(naming)

  Many are the men and women who have gone before us who have been our teachers
  and our inspirations. Fred Rogers, the teacher, certainly, and Susan B. Anthony,
  the prophet. Martha Graham, the dancer, and Albert Einstein, the scientist.
  So many. So many. Buddha and Jesus, the questioners, and Mirabai and Rumi,
  the singers of the heart. So many, so many?Ashoka, the peacemaker and
  Sojourner, the truth-teller. And Michelangelo, poet, painter, sculptor,
  architect, lover, loner and leader.
  

  In years long past, I have been a thousand times wounded, and even slain.
  Not to mention being knocked down and exhausted. By my own fault, yes, but
  mainly by You, Love. So do you really think my gray head will fall for your
  false promises again?
  
  How many times you have first tied me up, then cut my sorry limbs free. How
  many times you have punctured my flank! I'm so torn apart I can hardly recreate
  myself, I think. Even when I water the garden of my breast with endless tears.
  
  Love, I complain to you. I speak to you. Look, I am free from your wiles,
  now. So why do you have to take up your cruel bow and keep shooting at the
  nothing that is me?
  
  After all, when wood is already ash, using a drill or a saw on it makes no
  sense. Why chase someone like me who has neither the capacity nor the energy
  to move so much as an inch?

  Acting is not difficult for me. Some roles are immensely challenging, but
  because I believe in a universal soul I feel that within me there is a deep
  well of human experience to draw upon. Sometimes it takes a lot of cajoling,
  patience and despair before the right emotion or state of mind reveals itself,
  but I know it is there, and that when I am truthful in my work, it strikes
  a responsive chord within the audience. 
  
  "Beauty is truth, and truth, beauty?that is all you know on this earth
  and all you need to know," said Keats. I too, hold this as my precept. "Nothing
  human is alien to me," said the ancient Roman, and that also is my precept.

  Since today we welcomed new members to the congregation, I thought I would
  look at two central touchstones of our liberal religious heritage. Two words
  that we say most every Sunday at the beginning of the celebration. Reason
  and Passion. Ancient words. Words of approach, not doctrine. Words of practice,
  not conclusion. One might even say, holy words.
  
  And I want to explore these two words by meditations on a famous human life,
  namely, that of the great Renaissance artist, Michelangelo di Ludovico Buonarotti
  Simoni, or, as he is commonly known, by his first name only, Michelangelo.
  
  No, Michelangelo was not a Unitarian Universalist. Michelangelo was probably
  not even the most pleasant person to hang around with back in the days when
  he lived. His nickname, after all, was Terribilit. (the Terrible One, or
  even, the Terrifying One).
  
  But grappling with his life serves to lift up these two magnificent words
  beautifully. Reason. Passion.
  
  First, let me set the stage.
  
  The century when Michelangelo lived does not at first seem very much like
  our own. They had no computers, no bombs or missiles. They had no weapons
  of mass destruction, nor television sets on which they could watch brutal
  events from the comfort of their living rooms. They had no radios, no centralized
  plumbing, no grocery stores with wide aisles, no cars, trains or planes.
  
  Yet they managed to live lives that were little different than our own?
  for fragility, drama and sheer intensity. Michelangelo's day and age was
  surprisingly like our own.
  
  We have our religious fanatics on TV, or hiding out in caves, strongly
  criticizing the sensual pop culture of our day. They had their religious
  fanatics too, like Savonarola, setting fire to "the vanities" he didn't approve,
  for religious reasons. (Vanities which included, I'm sad to say, some paintings
  by Botticelli.) We have our fundamentalists who take scripture literally;
  they had their extreme religious reformers, who popped out the stained glass
  windows in the cathedrals because such things are not explicitly mentioned
  in the Bible.
  
  We have our sexy movies, our (wink-wink) "reality" television shows, our
  easy flirting with sexuality in the public sector. They had their public
  sex scandals, debates about nude art in the church, and surprisingly frequent
  torrid events, like the 50 courtesans who danced naked at the Vatican to
  honor Lucrezia Borgia.
  
  We have our learned scholars, like Karen Armstrong, who can explain the nuances
  of Islam to parochial Americans. They had their scholars too, like Pico Della
  Mirandola, who could speak 22 languages fluently, or Leonardo da Vinci, who
  familiarized himself with fifteen different scientific disciplines in between
  beautifully painted masterpieces.
  
  We hear talk of terrorism in our newspapers and on television, terrorism
  both by others and by ourselves (depending on the politics of the speaker).
  But Michelangelo also lived in an age of routine terrorism, where tyrants
  sent around their mercenaries routinely to ransack and destroy at will. The
  artist saw citizens of the great walled cities of Tuscany simply tied up
  and left to starve to death in a display of wanton power comparable to the
  worst excesses in our own day.
  
  The rich and poor were as far apart in his day as in our own, and the topic
  of "cultural wars," Protestant North vs. Catholic South, Islamic East vs.
  Christian West, raged back then with the same maddening fury of our own day.
  
  So you can see why the settings strike me as remarkably similar. But you
  probably don't know yet why Michelangelo figures into my meditations on Reason
  and Passion. Let me now try to make that clear. 
  
  Over the last three decades, Michelangelo has been a favorite subject for
  me to study. And during my readings on this man, I kept on bumping into ideas
  which helped me to understand my own religious life.
  
  Now Michelangelo is undoubtedly the best known artist that ever lived, in
  any culture. The Sultan in Istanbul wanted him to come and paint there, despite
  the Islamic hesitation to use images, so great was the artist's reputation.
  Popes and patrons vied for him. His images of the two mighty hands of God
  and Adam almost touching can be found now in a million places outside the
  Sistine Chapel?they are as much an overused cliché in the world
  of art as the Mona Lisa's famous smile. 
  
  But I would submit that the great Michelangelo is really not known at all.
  That his whole life has been distorted. And that even our greatest biographers
  have wantonly and deliberately lied about him. 
  
  Throughout his life, Michelangelo had a rich love life, including a sexual
  life. No one wanted us to know that until recently. His most famous biographer,
  Irving Stone, went so far as to make up a love life for him by inventing
  women who never existed. Stone suppressed all the letters the artist wrote
  to the many young men with whom he had fallen in love, like Febo di Poggio
  or Cecchino Bracci. The sculptor's own nephew took all of his love
  poems?and the man was prolific?and changed all of the he's to she's
  in every poem implying same gender love. His love life was not always
  consummated?for instance, his three decade swoon for the handsome Tommaso
  Cavaliere was only expressed by letters, never by physical engagement, but
  it was a same-sex love nonetheless. But peoples' love lives, whatever form
  they take, permeate the rest of their days, affecting their decisions, their
  grief, their joy, their sense of self and their energy for their work.
  
  The commitment to the religious approach of reason which our living tradition
  asks of us as religious people is not some clockwork, tick tock logic that
  vainly calculates whether an omnipotent God exists or not. No, the reason
  that our living tradition asks of us takes this form: a commitment to dig
  below the surface of any assertion. A commitment to question any story. A
  commitment to refuse to accept fame or popularity as authority right from
  the beginning.
  
  And furthermore, our living tradition asks us to reason about the world always
  through the lens of the disenfranchised, the marginalized, the minorities.
  Historically here in the west, these have been women, people of color, men
  and women with variant sexualities or gender identities, minority religious
  sentiments, etc. These realities are often hidden, and quite deliberately.
  Apparently some folks would like us to think that all of this talk of minorities
  and diversity is new. Something fresh. Something revolutionary and maybe
  even a tad dangerous and upsetting. Our tradition reminds us that this simply
  is not true. There have been minorities struggling in this world for ten
  thousand years, but always being thrust back to the margins, the edges, or
  hidden under cloaks of dishonesty, like Irving Stone's, and ignorant assumption.
  Michelangelo's whole sad and frustrated same-sex love life, revealed so clearly
  in the heart-breaking poem I read this morning, has been dismissed as irrelevant
  for four hundred and fifty years. But love is never irrelevant.
  
  This deliberate marginalization of minorities, or rather, assumption of
  uniformity, still goes on. Bible stories are read heterosexually when they
  can be just as easily read from a minority sexual viewpoint?and have
  been for a long time, not just in these post-Modern days. Rabbis over a thousand
  years ago concluded that the biblical Joseph of Egypt did not share their
  own interest in women, and that the story of Joseph and Potiphar found in
  Genesis is about a lover's quarrel more than anything else. But such
  interpretations, ancient as they are, have been swept away by modern conformist
  culture. Was it really a Roman who wrote the famous sentence which Jane Alexander
  quoted, "Nothing human is alien to me?" Not if you assume that Romans were
  "white" people from Italy. Terentius Afer was eventually a Roman citizen
  but he had first been a slave. An African. A black African from Central Africa.
  But that reality is known by few. Russians are assumed to be white and monolithic
  also, yet the great Russian poet Pushkin had African grandparents, and was
  black, unknown to most folks who read his poetry. And did Kurt Vonnegut write
  that famous graduation address that begins "Wear sunscreen?" No, Mary Shmich
  wrote it, a woman. And the famous piece attributed to Nelson Mandela, read
  in Unitarian Universalist pulpits around the country, about human beings
  being afraid of their own power? That was written by a Detroit minister,
  a woman, not a head of state. When a woman science fiction writer in my former
  parish tried to get published under her own woman's name, Joyce Van Scyoc,
  she was not published. When she submitted the same stories with a name that
  could be a man's name, Sydney, she was published lavishly, and translated
  into five languages. 
  
  To be a man or woman of reason in this world is to always be willing to question
  past the surface of things. It's to be wary, critical and not quick to believe.
  Most of the cultures of the world we are part of, favor such deception about
  history. They would rather we not know that minorities were writing, preaching,
  singing, criticizing, shouting, painting and building long before this present
  era. But it's a truth that reason reveals, and a healthy skepticism uncovers.
  Ours after all, is a religion of revelation. Our ancestors put it this way:
  "Revelation is not sealed." And this makes sense to me, for revelation means
  "to lift the veil off of what has been hidden." This sort of reason is good
  and healthy religious work, depth work, in the words of the late theologian
  Paul Tillich. Or spiritual work if you will. For to be spiritual, says Matthew
  Fox, is to let go of the superficial and shallow, and be radical, that is,
  to dig deep to the radix or root of things. Come, let's be reasonable together.
  
  And while we're at it, let's be passionate. To be passionate does not necessarily
  mean swooning or shaking or yelling. It means admitting that, like Michelangelo,
  we are "always learners." Liberal religious language, you see, does not speak
  of being "saved once and for all" by the bloody passion of a crucified savior.
  It does not preach about "the one final sacrifice" on Calvary. For us, passion
  means that nothing is final. It means there is always more to learn, to
  understand, to grapple with. Our religious history thinks of us as if we
  were still children with wide open eyes. It has reminded us that to make
  our lives whole (which is all the Latin word "sacrifice" means) we do not
  have to worship blood or death. But rather, we are free to worship, to deeply
  value, learning and life.
  
  Michelangelo was one of those people who always learned by doing. He writes,
  in one of his letters, of poets and painters being good because they "dare
  to do whatever they desire to do. This is a good insight, and a good power."
  He criticizes a particular Flemish painting he sees one day for not having
  any "nerve."
  
  I find this approach to passion helpful. For Michelangelo, passion is not
  some sudden impulsive "I can do what I want when I want" attitude, but rather,
  the artist sees passion as the daring which is the fruit of practice and
  study and learning. Michelangelo always sculpted and painted very quickly.
  Those who watched him were aghast at the sheer weight of the chunks of stone
  which flew off his chisel. They were surprised by the large, swift strokes
  he used on the ceiling of the chapel, working with strength into the wet
  plaster. 
  
  But he was never being impulsive. Everything he did was the result of practice,
  practice, practice, and thus, accumulated learning. And he did not think
  such passion could be taught. It had to be discovered from within, from within
  one's own life. He cautioned his students and novice artists not to try and
  paint as fast as he did but to paint as fast as they did. Each person's passion
  is unique. In our Unitarian Universalist language, we say the same thing
  by asserting the "worth and dignity of every human person."
  
  But even though his motto was "ancora imparo," always learning, he was not
  talking of book learning. He was talking about the hands-on work, or, in
  the words of our principles, "direct experience." Michelangelo was not some
  finished scholar, a serene guru of art who dispensed wisdom, a zen master
  of perfection to whom people came for sober advice. He was simply a man who
  was always learning, and expected others to learn for themselves. Nevertheless,
  he himself was always daring and nervy. 
  
  Religious liberals have chosen a similar approach. We too, by virtue of our
  claim to live without a creed, have chosen to be "learners always." We have
  chosen not to close the door on new revelation, new ideas, new insights that
  might invalidate, or, at least re-interpret the old. This is a deeply passionate
  thing to choose to do. It is daring and nervy. To set sail without familiar
  winds and time-worn charts is courageous. But that is our incredible heritage.
  
  It means we can act in this world, and offer critiques of its plans and purposes,
  even though we are not perfect ourselves. We don't have to wait till "we
  get it all together" before we make our mark on the earth. I, for one, know
  that I will be long dead before I finally "get it all together." I am convinced
  that the purpose of life is not perfection and completeness anyway, but as
  Fred Rogers reminded us, to be of service to others. The purpose of life
  is to live it. To play the hand we have been dealt as best we can.
  
  Michelangelo may be revered as one of the world's great geniuses now, but
  he had a difficult hand to play when he was alive. Yes, he was passionate,
  but he was also a total introvert in an extroverted era. He hated crowds
  and hated parties. He ran from fans who were always after him to give away
  his art. He lived in a time of almost endless political turmoil and decadence.
  He had to change his address at least fifteen times in his life, suffering
  incessantly from homesickness. People went out of their way to steal from
  him. The physical nature of his work made sure he suffered from bodily things
  too, gallstones, depression, and other painful matters. He could be clumsy
  and awkward, or even petty in his responses to people when he was feeling
  pain. He often was not the most pleasant of human beings to spend time with.
  
  But despite these limitations and difficulties, despite his fears and pains,
  Michelangelo consistently dared to produce great works. Many of them he never
  finished?he got sick, or was whisked away by some other project, or
  the funding ran out. But he was always creating, always learning, always
  true to himself, true to his passion?the passion to create, to improve,
  to bring beauty to the earth, the beauty that, as Keats said, is a form of
  truth itself.
  
  This passion, you may have guessed by now, could also be called by the word
  freedom if you would like? Michelangelo was first and foremost a man
  who dared to be free. Not free from old ideas or ancient superstitions, like
  so many interpret religious freedom these days. But rather, he counted himself
  free to express whatever his deeper life demanded of him?the daring
  and nerve to live out your life responsibly by your own choices and decisions
  no matter what the conditions you live in, or live in you.
  
  In this, we have no greater model than Michelangelo, a man of sacrificial
  passion, that is, a man whose freedom made him, despite his undeniable
  brokenness, whole. Whole.
  
  The David, the captive slaves, the Sistine Ceiling and Altar Wall Fresco
  of the Last Judgement?these are masterpieces that may endure a thousand
  years. But the spirit of reason and passion once embodied in the artist shall
  last a lot longer than that. His loves, his losses, his torment and his creative
  tension are gone from the earth right now, but his spirit lives on whenever
  a religious liberal reasons from the perspective of the edge, not the center.
  And his spirit lives on whenever a religious liberal freely dares to move
  toward love even if they are imperfect and not finished yet.
  
  Michelangelo is a dear teacher in my own personal pantheon of great men and
  women. But, as a religious liberal, I do not worship any human being as final
  or ultimate. I worship the reason and passion which can pave a path on which
  any man and any women might walk their pilgrimage toward greater love and
  learning. 
  
  Blest is that path. Blest our liberal religious tradition, and blest is Love,
  that Love which Michelangelo has taught me, like so many others, to worship
  as the Most High, the Most Deep, my daily means and my final end.
  

  For the sake of a community that proclaims its responsibility in the real
  world of budgets, and commitments, as well as in the world of the spirit
  and of love, we both give and receive the offering. 

  Love, like unexpected fountains of flowers in the winter you fill my heart
  with beauties for which nothing has prepared me.
  
  Remind me that every day is just as unexpected as an iris in March. Impress
  upon me that my work in this life is to carve the stone of this very moment
  with the chisel of my love, my reason, my passion and my struggle, there
  to reveal the blossom that had been hidden inside all the while. Don't let
  me confuse peace with stillness, or love with sentiment. Give me the peace
  of heart that is unrest, a longing for deeper things. Dare to startle me
  with unrest, O Love. Dare to startle me. Amen.
