
  We are here,
mortals, creatures of the earth,
  who each say with joy the great words "I am!"
  
Crown'd by sun and moon,
  robed in autumn wind and the mist of rivers,
we come freely to this time of worship
  here to discover the deeper freedoms
that enrich our responsibilities.

And so we pray: (together) may our reason and our passion keep us true
  to ourselves, true to each other,
  and true to those shared visions of what we can together
  become?


  Right now, in St. Paul, Minnesota, a woman named Clara weeps in her bed thinking
  about the death of her beloved Senator, Paul Wellstone, as her daughter sits
  in a pile of costumes on the floor next to her bed, trying to pick out just
  the right one for All Hallows Eve.
  
  Right now, on an island not far from Seattle, a woman named Ann gets up early,
  brews coffee, and reads her Sunday Times, the steam fogging her bifocals
  in the cold.
  
  Right now, in Kuching on the island of Borneo, an old man named Tanjing tosses
  fitfully, unable to sleep. He worries that the bloodshed in Bali last week
  will soon be coming closer to him.
  
  Right now, in Sri Lanka, in Kandy, a young 18-year-old monk named Aveli rises
  from his bed to bring a soothing tea to his beloved abbot, who is ailing
  and quite sick.
  
  Right now in Baghdad, a man named Rushid eats a late supper of artichokes
  at a café not far from Straight Street. He thinks about his Kurdish
  wife, and utters a spontaneous silent prayer to Allah for her safety and
  his own.
  
  Right now in Barcelona, the apartment of a woman named Elizabeth is empty,
  as she is attending a Unitarian Universalist conference up in Spa, Belgium.
  
  Right now, in Washington D.C. a police chief sorts out the scars caused by
  being a witness to so much horror in his work, as a woman named Leslie wakes
  up finally after her first good sleep in months, and a Muslim convert Gulf
  War Veteran named DeVon lies awake thinking of how many casualties never
  really get reported.
  
  Right now, in Columbus Ohio, a minister named Mark strikes a temple bowl
  to invite the gathered people to experience silence, where their own part
  in the great fabric of heart and hurt and healing that is the world might
  also
  
  strike them, and set them to ringing?.
  
(silence)

  Let us declare our communion with all humankind, by imagining, in silence
  or even saying aloud, the names of those persons whom we love, those who
  have loved us, those whom we miss, those with whom we struggle, those who
  are ailing. Let this communion of imagination and heart be the firm ground
  upholding both music and word this morning.
  
(naming)

  Let our human hearts struggling to be wise be set free in the beauties of
  singing. Let the bread of wisdom and the wine of compassion be set out on
  the table which is spread for us every-where if we but notice, a rich feast
  for the nourishment of lovers.

  Every society appears to have a few mind-altering substances in its repertoire;
  some of those are gentle modifiers of mood or energy, and some are brain-bashing
  invaders that transform all concepts of personal and cosmic reality. In the
  1960's, when drug use came out of the closet in Western Civilization, it
  was commonly believed that the psychedelics, like LSD, enabled the user to
  "drop out" of socially constructed reality and to tune in to a "cosmic reality"
  beyond culture. With the right drugs, you would find the real world and the
  True Self.
  
  But it became apparent rather soon, to everyone who wasn't stoned in the
  process of thinking about it, that the matter was a good deal more complicated.
  People who used drugs were still inside their cultures and their cultures
  were inside them.
  
  And to further complicate the matter, people are ingeniously creating new
  substances and finding ways to make old ones even stronger than they used
  to be. Sensimilla marijuana, grown in many parts of the world today, is several
  times more powerful than the Acapulco Gold that blew the minds of young and
  old a few decades ago. And crack, some say, is instant addiction.
  
  Although politicians effortlessly make pronouncements about what the American
  people really believe, the evidence is strong that at any given time, a
  considerable portion of said American people are shooting up, snorting cocaine,
  swallowing pills, tripping, smoking dope, getting drunk, or any of a myriad
  other ways of turning to private dramas that only have the shakiest links
  to the official public reality.
  
  This is not only a matter of domestic custom, but of international agriculture
  and trade. Every morning, peasants in South America get up and go to work
  tending coca plants to produce substances that will ultimately disappear
  up noses in Beverly Hills, while laborers in Scotland tend their vats to
  produce whiskey that will ultimately wash down the throats of men in South
  America who make their money in the cocaine business. A lot of people in
  the world and a lot of land are engaged in the production of substances that
  help human brains play around with reality. The early post-modern years are
  easily the dopiest in the human history.
  
  Anthropologists tell us that there is nothing unusual about the ingestion
  of mind-altering substances?indeed, it is probably the norm of human
  life rather than a deviation from it. Primitive societies managed to have
  drug use without drug problems. They successfully ringed it around with
  prohibitions and rituals. These were unified homogenous societies, which
  undoubtedly made it easier for them to manage the drug experience.
  
  We don't have such rituals in the contemporary pluralistic world. Instead,
  we have rampant experimentation and enormous problems: addiction, crime,
  diseases spread by needles, young men slaughtering one another on city streets,
  countless deaths from drug and alcohol-related accidents, immeasurable damage
  to the health and productivity and sanity of society and the individuals
  within it. And the U. S. government found it necessary to launch a "war on
  drugs" to deal with the problem.

  You truly point out that war is only a symptom of the whole horrid business
  of human behavior, and cannot be isolated, and we shall not, even if we abolish
  war, abolish hate and greed. So it might have been argued about slave
  emancipation, that slavery was but one aspect of human disgustingness, and
  that to abolish it would not end the barbarity that causes it. But did the
  abolitionists therefore waste their breath?

  A sermon on such a topic can only be, at best, an apéritif, an hors
  d'oeuvre. There are a thousand things I cannot mention, for the time, and
  courses I cannot offer, in so short of time. But feel free, in the coming
  months, to discuss these ideas and issues with each other and with me, if
  you wish. And please take the Statement of Conscience which I have placed
  on a chair out in the Gallery.
  
  I met a guy named W. three years ago. I was sitting down on a bench in the
  downtown area, drawing a particularly beautiful oak tree, when W. came up
  to me to see what I was doing.
  
  Without a word he sat down on the bench next to me. I could smell beer on
  his breath. He leaned over and watched me draw for a bit. He said "hello"
  and I said, "hello" back, but otherwise we were both quiet. Because he looked
  kind of scruffy, I sort of expected him to ask for some spare change after
  he made a few perfunctory comments on my drawing skills to butter me up.
  
  Then he noticed the design on the T-shirt I was wearing. It was a gift that
  someone brought me from Spain, with a embroidered picture of the famous Alhambra
  with an Arabic inscription under the embroidery.
  
  Somewhat to my surprise, he read the Arabic aloud, clearly pronouncing it
  slowly, and to my mind, quite accurately.
  
  "I see you can read Arabic," I said to him.
  
  "A little. I'm studying it on my own. It's so I can eventually read the Quran
  in the original."
  
  "Ah, so you are converting to Islam?"
  
  "Yeah, I guess I am," he said, apparently intrigued that I even knew what
  the Quran was.
  
  He told me his name and stuck out his hand. I told him my name and shook
  his hand.
  
  We ended up talking for over an hour. He was surprised at my religious knowledge
  and I guess I was surprised at his, considering his visible rough edges.
  
  Finally I said to him, "When you came up to me, I could tell you had had
  a few beers. How are you squaring that with your conversion to Islam? I thought
  Muslims agreed not to drink."
  
  "Yeah," he smiled, "you're right, I shouldn't be drinking, but Ido love my
  beer."
  
  W. and I continued to talk, and over the next few months he and I met several
  times, and I had him over for some supper a couple of times. Then it became
  clear to me he was doing more than beer. And it was his predilection for
  cocaine that eventually landed him in the penitentiary, someplace up north
  near Cleveland, where he was originally from.
  
  Now of course, some of his arrest has to do with the times and places of
  his infraction of the law, with culture and, undoubtedly, since this is the
  United States, race. After all, Sigmund Freud was a white man who lived a
  long time ago, and an inveterate cocaine user, and no one threw him in jail,
  even though he wrote about it openly. This is because cocaine trafficking
  was not condemned in those days. But I assure you, W. is most definitely
  in jail.
  
  I write to him biweekly. He writes back, with the best handwriting on earth,
  by my lights. He continues to study his Arabic. He is dealing with his drug
  and alcohol problem in some sort of group therapy situation in the penitentiary.
  
  W. is a fine intelligent human being. Quick as can be, educated, passionate,
  and a precise and reliable worker when he has a job. I've known him as a
  man clearly looking for something real amid all of life's regrets and
  disappointments, looking for depth and quality of experience amid the shallows.
  I could tell you he convinced himself that drugs were a short cut to brilliance
  of experience. But I think there is far more involved here than someone just
  fooling himself.
  
  You see, when I first got to know W. and asked him that question about his
  alcohol use, it was very clear to me that alcohol affected him entirely
  differently than it affects me. There was a complete personality change,
  at an almost Dr. Jeckyll/ Mr. Hyde level. A few beers make me sleepy. A few
  beers made him wild and boundaryless. I once stopped at his place to visit
  him on my way home from the office and encountered him high on a much more
  powerful drug than beer, perhaps cocaine. He was quite wild, but I clearly
  recognized the totality and sheer physicality of his transformation. And
  thus I recognized that his body is not like my body at all. It processes
  things differently than mine.
  
  Yes, W. was imprisoned for breaking the law. But ultimately, W. was imprisoned
  because his body reacts to drugs differently than the average person. He
  was imprisoned for who he is physically, not who he is as a whole human person
  of will, need and desire.
  
  My old neighbor Oliver was imprisoned for drug trafficking, too. In his case,
  the drugs he was taking daily on the ghetto streets of Oakland, where we
  both lived, did for him exactly what Paxil and Selexa and other modern
  medications do for white suburban folks?reduce anxiety and lessen
  depression. Oliver, however, was in a social situation, without insurance,
  and without a steady job, where he very cleverly learned to self-medicate.
  Unfortunately, it's against the law to do that.
  
  And I used to make the long trip to the Santa Rita Jail to visit him. Just
  like the young girl in our story this morning. I found the whole experience
  of visiting Oliver in the jail to be a powerful learning experience in every
  way.
  
  I, for one, am not convinced that imprisonment can teach anyone how to change
  their body, change their physical reactions to chemicals either within the
  body or ingested into it. A cell is not a teacher. Isolation is not a professor.
  Prison violence makes a poor classroom.
  
  Thus, I find I am ethically bound to seek other solutions to problems associated
  with drug use and drug trafficking.
  
  And let's be clear. There are problems, no matter how open some of us in
  this room may be to marijuana and martinis. Anderson writes clearly and cleanly
  about this. "Things are more complicated than we thought," he writes with
  a rather restrained charity, as the blood of young men killed in drug runs
  pours down the drains of our cities. His riff on the international character
  of the drug industry is witty (cocaine and Scotch), but also, oh so true.
  
  And then, what family in North America has not been visited with some horrific
  drug-related problem? Can you think of one? I can't. Such problems might
  be a suicide, an overdose, a culture of denial and blame, the incredibly
  self-righteous "just say no" moralism, the economic debacles of our cities
  and international relationships, even the wholesale destruction of families,
  institutions and communities. Clearly, to say that there are no problems
  associated with many kinds of drug usage and present policies is simply a
  fiction.
  
  Now, I need to say something here to make clear the context from which I
  am giving this sermon. I am going to say that all of us are drug users. Every
  single person in this room. I am not just talking about the drugs which we
  don't call drugs?coffee, tea, chocolate, Cabernet, a Mai Tai, aspirin,
  niacin and vitamin B, and sugar cookies. I am talking about the drug-reality
  of all animal life. After all, our physical bodies are partially electro-chemical
  in nature, our brains are awash in drugs. A worshipper at some pentacostal
  church, belting out a song, and waving hands, and getting excited enough
  to dance is not on cocaine. And a Unitarian Universalist sitting in ecstasy,
  as Myra plays a stirring offertory, is not on the drug Ecstasy. But some
  of the same lobes of his or her brain are being stimulated, with chemicals
  not very different from those found in a line of white powder on a mirror,
  or a small tablet to swallow.
  
  Coffee can brighten a morning, chocolate can soothe an afternoon, and none
  of us are imprisoned for partaking, for these are relatively mild drugs.
  We have already decided some drugs are legal. The ordinary human situations
  of falling in love and deep grief both change the chemistry of the brain
  like a drug does. And literature and music would not exist as they do without
  the brain- swooning chemicals associated with those two realities washing
  through our synapses with every kiss and every tear.
  
  Our bodies are actually flasks of drugs with skeletons tucked inside, in
  some ways. The very neurons of our brains, which light up to say "I am,"
  don't even fire without certain chemicals, or drugs, present as transmitters.
  
  This is my context, but, of course, I know that my beliefs do not reflect
  what most folks understand when they hear the word "drugs." Mostly, I think,
  the word "drug" means some sort of chemical imported into the body, not generated
  within it by experiences and bio-logical necessity.
  
  And Anderson is right when he suggests that anthropologists have never found
  a human culture untouched by some sort of drug usage.
  
  I remember once having the privilege of working on an archeological dig in
  the State of Illinois. We were digging up a village over a thousand years
  old not far from the confluence of the Illinois and Mississippi rivers. What
  the archeologists found that perplexed them were burial pits of tiny river
  frogs, smaller than your little finger nail. They were so small you could
  barely tell they were frogs. And yet their skeletons were so large in proportion
  to their flesh that it was inconceivable that the Native peoples used these
  frogs for food. There simply was not enough meat on the bones of all them
  put together to keep a person alive for a day.
  
  The archeologists studied the situation for years, until one of them suggested
  that the skin of the frog might be the clue. They tested modern examples
  of this species, and, wouldn't you know it, the frogs were a drug. A mild
  hallucinogen. After the venison was brought in, the fish smoked and the acorns
  leached and ground into flour, the social practice was to join in a circle
  of getting high.
  
  But this was a monolithic society, as Anderson pointed out, with rituals
  and social sanctions to corral the drug use into tolerable usage. No street
  gangs, overdoses, no lost lives, just a little fun.
  
  But our modern multi-cultural society has no such cultural center. Sanctions
  have been dropped, replaced by crisp laws. Rituals of family and religion
  have been replaced by moralism on one hand and anything goes on the other.
  Individualism rules the roost and experimentation just goes part and parcel
  with it. Now please, I don't condemn the modern world; after all, I am part
  of it, and decidedly an individual, and I certainly have experimented myself.
  But Anderson says, with justification, that ours is the most doped up generation
  in the history of humanity, and I think I have to agree with him.
  
  And so our pluralistic modern world, bereft of a shared center, a common
  ritual, or even social health policies worth spitting at, has decided to
  declare "war" on drugs.
  
  The metaphor is a strong one, but a destructive one ultimately. So far, the
  war resembles the sad and blurrily-remembered debacle called the Vietnam
  War more than it resembles some great triumph.
  
  So thus I am one of many who have joined to protest the waging of such a
  drug war, for the same reason Rose McCauley protested in her day. You see,
  this war against drugs with its prison terms and stealth attacks in Colombia
  and Oregon does not even acknowledge the human reality behind the drugs.
  It simply demonizes them, blames them, and tucks them under the shadow of
  red-faced attempts to control and curtail. Macauley, in her letter, neatly
  reasons that tanks and guns don't destroy greed or hatred, they just kill
  human beings. The causes for the conflict are left un-witnessed and un-admitted.
  But she says that the American abolitionists, on the other hand, had a more
  holistic response. They worked to end slavery by dealing with the real issues
  of economics, and human dignity. They knew very well that they would not,
  by abolishing slavery, bring an end human need or greed or hatred. They were
  not utopian. But they recognized that slavery was a betrayal of all that
  is best in our humanity.
  
  I think the way we have been responding to drug issues in this nation reflects
  neither our best thinking nor the authentic reality of our compassion. I
  agree that the needs and issues which drugs address in the human person will
  not go away even if every coca plantation is destroyed down in Colombia,
  and the last drug user is thrown in the clinker. And this is precisely why
  these methods don't work?they treat the symptoms not the reality, the
  symbolic ecstasy, not the whole embodied human being. The future must address
  the reality of drugs in a human context, a social context, a medical context,
  a cultural context and even a spiritual context, and there will be no easy
  answers, or maybe even unified answers.
  
  But delegates to our Unitarian Universalist annual General Assembly went
  through a long process for several years discussing this issue. They
  overwhelmingly passed a Statement of Conscience about this issue last year
  in Quebec. This carefully crafted document is available to you as you leave
  the Meeting House this morning. I ask that you read it as you are able and
  reflect upon it as it impacts your own lives. You may disagree with some
  of it, agree with all of it, or it may just stimulate your thinking about
  this or move your heart.
  
  But it is not this document, but my friendship with W., an Ohio citizen,
  which makes me keenly aware of how we treat folks who have a drug problem
  and who have no history of violence. Whereas Ohio is already better than
  many states in providing the kind of treatment that Warren is getting, I
  know there is a controversial proposal on the ballot in the coming election,
  one asking for a still more significant change in State social policy on
  these issues. The pros and cons about this proposal each have interesting
  arguments. But no matter what the objections are to creating State policy
  by a yea or nay vote of the populace, I personally have no doubt that social
  policy around this issue, both at the State and Federal level, needs to be
  improved. Because the problems Anderson addresses are not going to blow away
  using the clumsy techniques of our present War on Drugs. Our social policies
  need to reflect our actual physical humanity, so that human beings are treated,
  in part, as actual bodies who do not respond to the ubiquitous reality of
  drugs in the same way, and who are neither educated nor liberated by our
  present techniques. I'd go so far as to say that our State and Federal public
  health policies around this issue need to actually reflect one of the principles
  we Unitarian Universalists cherish so much, "the intrinsic worth of every
  human person." This, no matter how different our body, our chemistry or our
  social setting. No exceptions, ever.
  
  W. will get out in July and try to begin his life over again. I will stand
  by him as he does, in support and witness and friendship. He is armed with
  his devotion to the Quran's teaching on a compassionate Allah, a good devotional
  life, and the sincere encouragement of a good medical program. I have every
  hope this precious human life could be saved, not lost, blessed, not cursed,
  if his whole society were as supportive of his dignity as his friends and
  his religion. And if we are not in the business of blessing, not cursing,
  what business are we in?

  You, darkness, from which I come
  
  I love you more than all the fires
  which fence out the world,
  excluding all those not encircled
  by the light.
  
  But darkness, you hold it all.
  
  The shadows and the flames,
  the beasts and even me.
  
  How you hold us, 
  all powers, all visions.
  
  It lets me imagine a great Presence
  is stirring here, among us.
  I have faith in you, o night.
