Rediscovering Unitarianism in Transylvania 

Rev. Scott Gerard Prinster 

March 9, 2008 

 
Opening Words 

We are here to celebrate the free spirit,  

wherever it has arisen: 

under the fists of tyrants,  

where fear drives us to forget our vision; 

surrounded by the horrors of war,  

where chaos drives striving from our minds; 

in the degradation of poverty,  

where want eclipses all other thoughts; 

or in a life of ease and safety,  

which lulls us into complacency. 

In all places and times, our hunger for meaning has
 refused to be silenced. 
 
We gather in the midst of all that is our lives to 
give thanks for the persistence of the 
human heart, for the clarity of the open mind, and 
for communities such as this one, 
where our seeking is welcomed and affirmed. 

 
First Reading
 from ?A Call for Historical Consciousness? by the R
ev. Dr. Rebecca 
Parker, 1994
  
Unitarian Universalists often see hope and liberati
on in escaping the past and venturing 
into the new.  That new may be the fresh immediacy 
of life lived here and now, or of 
encountering life on one™s own terms, not pre-descr
ibed by the experiences of others.  It 
may be a new life oriented to hope for what could b
e, free from the bondage of what has 
been: the future good always out ahead, the present
 a place of pilgrimage, and the past 
defined as evil. 

 
For come-outers, departure means saying ?no? to wha
t one inherited.  The danger is that 
we become habituated to saying ?no? as the only sav
ing grace, and find ourselves only 
leaving, only backing away from life, only dissenti
ng.  As our identity becomes tied to 
what we reject, our spirit languishes, and the past
 is just a cardboard box labeled, ?No 
good.  Discard.?  Were there treasures in this box?
  Did we label it in haste? 
 
Second Reading
 from 
Video Night at Kathmandu
 by Pico Iyer, 1988
  
Every trip we take deposits us at the same forking 
of the paths: it can be a shortcut to 
alienation -- removed from our home and distanced f
rom our immediate surroundings, we 
can afford to be contemptuous of both; or it can be
 a voyage into renewal, as, leaving our 
selves and pasts at home and traveling light, we re
cover our innocence abroad– If every 
journey makes us wiser about the world, it also ret
urns us to a sort of childhood. In alien 
parts, we speak more simply, in our own or some oth
er language, move more freely, 
unencumbered by the histories that we carry around 
at home, and look more excitedly, 

with eyes of wonder– We travel, initially to lose o
urselves, and we travel, next to find 
ourselves. We travel to open our hearts and eyes an
d learn more about the world than our 
newspapers will accommodate. 

 
Sermon 

 
 I™m sorry not to be delivering this service to you
 in person, but Mark and I very 
much wanted you to have the text of the sermon at t
he very least.  As central as the 
printed word is to our lives, it will be up to you 
to imagine the enthusiasm I wished to 
share with you about our relationship with Transylv
ania.  This mountainous region 
halfway around the world, just smaller than the sta
te of Ohio, has become a place of 
pilgrimage and a spiritual second home to many Unit
arian Universalists.  I hope that my 
love for this place, its great-hearted people, and 
its rich history which is partly 
our own
 history, will shine through the printed word and to
uch your life as well.  And I look 
forward to visiting you in the not-so-distant futur
e, and making good on my promise to 
Mark to share my message in person. 

 
 It™s ironic that the very source of Unitarian Univ
ersalism™s prophetic voice can 
also become a source of short-sightedness.  English
 historian Lord Acton is credited for 
having said, ?Every institution finally perishes by
 an excess of its own first principle.?  
For our congregations this double-edged principle m
ight be our love of freedom, the 
freedom to seek out and embrace new ways of seeing 
and doing.  In exercising this 
freedom and liberating ourselves from the shackles 
of dogma and the weight of tradition, 
we have often overlooked the possibility that we mi
ght also be disconnecting ourselves 
from important sources of wisdom and guidance. 

 
 Many Unitarian Universalists, new to our movement,
 are surprised to realize that 
our tradition draws upon a long and important past,
 and is part of a much larger 
movement for religious freedom that has arisen in d
ifferent times and places around the 
world.  Few of these places, though, strike us as m
ore 
unlikely
 a home for liberal religion 
than Eastern Europe.  Most of us think of this regi
on first as a former pawn of the Soviet 
regime, the ?Evil Empire,? as Ronald Reagan used to
 call it.  We imagine featureless gray 
buildings, oppressive governments and faceless bure
aucracies, ethnic and religious 
conflicts in places like the former Yugoslavia, and
, more recently, the American 
outsourcing of torture to Poland and Romania.  Thes
e places strike many of us as alien, 
chaotic and terribly backward, almost medieval.  It
 is unexpected, then, to learn that 
during the tumultuous 16
th
 century, when the Protestant Reformation swept thr
ough 
Europe, places like Poland, Hungary and Romania wer
e islands of religious tolerance.  
What a surprise to learn that the roots of our own 
liberal religion were flourishing in 
Eastern Europe long before they were imagined here 
in the United States.  Throughout 
the turbulent history of that region, misery under 
communism and totalitarianism, 
constant poverty and bureaucratic absurdity, we see
 that there have also been 
communities who have nurtured and sustained the pri
nciples of religious freedom, 
suffering because of this work but persevering none
theless. 
 Amidst the names of places so foreign to us, the m
ention of Transylvania calls to 
mind particular mystery.  We associate it with a wo
rld of fantasy Œ of Dracula, of course, 

and sinister mountaintop castles, a distant Shangri
-La, both romantic and eerie.  Bram 
Stoker chose Transylvania as the setting for his no
vel 
Dracula
 without ever having seen 
it because he found its name so evocative of this m
ystery.  Stoker™s fiction aside, 
Transylvania™s story remains both complex and chall
enging, and important for Unitarian 
Universalists to know about, especially as we consi
der the difficult relationship the 
United States is currently in with the rest of the 
world. 
 
 My real interest in Transylvania was peaked when a
 Unitarian minister, the Rev. 
Sándor Léta, and his wife Erika came to spend a yea
r at Starr King School for the 
Ministry, where I was completing my seminary studie
s.  Instead of the dates and names 
and places in our history books, here was the real 
thing, the real story of Unitarianism in 
such an exotic a place as Eastern Europe.  I soon c
ame to realize, though, that 
Transylvanian Unitarianism involves some significan
t differences from our movement in 
the West.  Most surprising for many of us is that t
he Unitarians there unapologetically 
call themselves Christians, in the sense that theol
ogian Marcus Borg calls himself a 
Christian, which is to take completely seriously th
e life and work of the human Jesus.  
Even with this liberal definition, their theology i
s still a potential challenge for American 
Unitarian Universalists, some of whom have an uneas
y relationship with Christianity.  
Also, as much as our movement is a reflection of it
s American context, their church is an 
expression of its Transylvanian setting.  It™s wort
h asking ourselves, can liberal religion 
shaped by such a different world mean anything more
 to us than an exotic oddity?  Is 
there any reason to see Transylvanian Unitarians as
 our religious kin, any reason to 
pursue a deeper relationship with them?  These are 
questions worth asking, if a 
connection with them is to be anything more than sh
allow sentimentality. 
 
 My two years as an English teacher at the Unitaria
n seminary in Transylvania 
brought me into daily contact with questions like t
hese, and the answers had the effect of 
changing my life permanently.  When I arrived in Tr
ansylvania in 1996, I had the good 
fortune to be able to speak both Hungarian and some
 Romanian, so I wasn™t a stranger 
there for long.  I was able to follow the sermons a
nd prayers in church and soon preach 
some of my own, as well as participating in my stud
ents™ conversations with one another, 
and I was soon being treated like one of the family
.  Because of the common languages 
between us, I was able to be involved in people™s e
veryday lives in a way that a tourist 
might not.  The stories that they have shared with 
me there also help me to understand 
our shared history on a different level Œ on the le
vel of everyday experiences Œ and 
appreciate what a life-saving force faith has had t
o be for the Unitarians there.  In 
addition to already having their language under my 
belt, though, much of my 
understanding has been a heart-centered connection,
 the result of being open to the 
realities of life for Transylvanians. 

 
 It would be easy to romanticize Transylvania as me
rely picturesque and quaint, 
but we do so at our own risk.  Their brutal history
 under dictator Nicolae Ceau
escu, and 
the nation™s struggle to recover after decades of f
orced isolation from the rest of the 
world, have made demands upon people that we can sc
arcely imagine.  The inflation rate 
has been staggering, so bad that prices tripled in 
the first six months I was there.  
Interethnic hostility, although improving, has hist
orically been a source of conflicts, 

discrimination and resentment.  Industrial pollutio
n is horrifyingly bad, so dangerous that 
the life expectancy is as low as 50 in some cities.
  In the midst of breathtakingly beautiful 
countryside and open-hearted people are towns uglie
r and dirtier than I could have 
imagined.  Some of my female students, now just in 
their early 30s, are already suffering 
thyroid problems from Chernobyl™s fallout in their 
air and water.  And the widespread 
problem of HIV-infected orphans is still fresh in t
he world™s memory.  How do we, 
whose lives are the most privileged, the most comfo
rtable and, perhaps until recently, the 
most sheltered in the world, understand life in thi
s context?  And how do we understand a 
Unitarianism that has persevered for more than four
 centuries in the midst of such a life? 
 
 I found that, only by listening to their stories, 
grieving with them the absurdity 
and hardship they have suffered, and celebrating wi
th them the wonderful persistence of 
the human spirit in the midst of pain, was I able t
o find some sense in such a different 
world.  Through their worship and their stories I w
as able to understand how much our 
two churches truly have in common, and how much eac
h of us has to gain from our 
connection with one another. 

 
 I think back to when I had been there a little les
s than a year, and the church was 
celebrating the spring holiday of Pentecost, when t
he Holy Spirit is said to have come 
upon Jesus™ apostles and filled them with new autho
rity.  Pentecost is one of the four 
church holidays when the Transylvanians serve commu
nion, and I had come to love their 
rich and dignified ritual of bread and wine.  On th
is particular Pentecost, however, we 
ministers were feeling more despair than joy.  The 
23-year-old son of the congregation 
president had committed suicide just that week, as 
had another young Unitarian woman 
in an unrelated suicide.  As we put on our robes an
d prepared to enter the church, I could 
see the same overwhelm and dismay on the other mini
sters™ faces.  How could we Œ after 
such senseless loss, deaths so recent and central t
o the congregation Œ how could we 
presume to claim that God was with them, and dare t
o celebrate the Pentecost message of 
that genuine presence of hope in their lives?  I fe
lt like an imposter, and a hypocrite. 
 
 After the sermon, the six ministers rose and walke
d to the center of the sanctuary, 
where the elaborately-carved wooden communion table
 stood, the bread and wine laid 
out.  As we sang the communion hymn, the members al
so rose and lined the aisles and 
central open space.  I took up one of the chalices,
 the 450-year-old chalices of church 
founder Ferenc Dávid, and walked to the head of the
 line, where the congregation elders 
waited.  Hands received the chalice from me, pair b
y pair, and raised the wine to their 
lips.  Gnarled hands, arthritic hands, battered by 
decades of work and hardship still 
unimaginable to me, held the heavy chalice and cele
brated their community of faith.  As 
they received the wine from me, each of them looked
 into my eyes Œ how could I not 
have seen it before! Œ looked into my eyes with a s
eriousness and power that moves me 
still to think of it.  And in their old, old eyes I
 saw the message, ?Don™t worry Œ we™ve 
been here for 400 years, and we™re not going anytim
e soon.  We have seen so much 
suffering, but we who have survived, live with dign
ity.?  And I was ministered unto in 
that raw and hurting place, by the 500 of them, dem
onstrating God and Spirit in a way 
that has ever since made those words safe for me to
 take seriously.  Not just once, but the 
next spring as well, when an 11-year-old Unitarian 
boy had been hit by a brick dropped 

by playmates from their apartment roof, and lay dyi
ng in a coma, I was overwhelmed by 
the same despair, and buoyed up once again by the e
yes and the hands of people who 
would not be defeated by their circumstances.  Even
 the lasting damage of violence upon 
the human spirit could not quell the redeeming forc
e of faithful community, a power 
which can lead us back to wholeness and offers the 
possibility of living more deeply and 
authentically. 

 
 In the days that followed the September 11 attacks
, in the midst of presidential 
posturing and flag-waving, I remember that the most
 meaningful and moving words for 
me were from my friends in Unitarian churches overs
eas, and especially from the Rev. 
Dr. Arpád Szabó, the Bishop of the Transylvanian Un
itarian Church, who closed his 
letter by writing, ?Our prayers and thoughts are wi
th you in these hard days of trial. May 
God bless America and humankind with a safer future
.? This from a people who have 
lived with tragedy and suffering for centuries, and
 have never had the luxury of doubting 
whether evil exists.  They know that the United Sta
tes is a relative infant when it comes 
to experiencing tyranny, but their own history has 
had much to say about repression.  In 
the midst of tragedy, our response must not be to w
ithdraw into further isolation, as 
tempting as that impulse might be Œ hitting the mal
ls won™t save us, flag-waving won™t 
save us, and finding ways to numb ourselves won™t s
ave us Œ only by recognizing the 
universality of that raw and tender place we all ca
rry may we reconnect with our fullest 
humanity and deepest wisdom.  Throughout their diff
icult circumstances, Unitarianism 
has helped our Transylvanian cousins to find meanin
g, strength and comfort Œ a faith that, 
like ours, is a growing, living presence, rather th
an a dusty relic to be idolized.  A faith 
that, like ours, brings the human element into the 
religious life, creating meaning in 
this
 world, building justice in 
this
 world.  A faith that, like ours, thrives on human 
strength 
and dignity, rather than encouraging and exploiting
 human weakness. A faith that, like 
ours, celebrates the hopeful spirit that refuses to
 surrender, even under the most grotesque 
of circumstances.  These are 
our
 roots, growing deep, deep into history and deep in
to the 
human heart, and our congregations gather partly to
 share this depth with one another. 
 
 The Partner Church Program, which helps connect Am
erican Unitarianism 
Universalist and Transylvanian Unitarian congregati
ons, produced a bumper sticker that 
says, ?The most radical thing we can do is to intro
duce people to one another.?  It is in 
mindfulness of our connections that our species™ de
epest wisdom is expressed.  American 
Unitarianism Universalism and Transylvanian Unitari
anism have a great deal to offer one 
another.  We show them what is possible with wings 
Œ the wings of individual worth and 
radical possibility.  We show them how to question 
and challenge and change.  The 
Transylvanians offer us a fundamental rootedness Œ 
rooted in a long history, rooted in 
human relationship.  They show us how to trust and 
praise and persist.  The church that 
emerges at this intersection Œ the edge between Eas
t and West, the edge between tradition 
and freedom Œ is not a church of simple answers and
 cheap salvation. It is, I believe, a 
place where we can find a sense of belonging to a g
reat and tenacious religious family, 
and where we may reap the rewards of a real and hon
est faith.  Amen. 
 
