  Even So 
March 7, 2010 
Reverend Mark Belletini  
 
Opening Words
  
We are here, 

after some delicious days of rising sunlight, 

to worship, to welcome questions and insights, 

to risk vulnerability before the world™s realities,
 and to offer the gifts of our heart, and focus 

in response to the sacred call to live just lives. 

 
And so, 
mindful that we share a common world, but approach 
that world in different ways, 
we begin our celebration together by kindling our p
romise of mutual honesty, attentiveness, 
and deep courtesy. May we become more proficient at
 gratitude and awareness, that we 
might more deeply embody the kind of justice and pe
ace which embraces everyone on earth. 
 
Affirmation: 

 
From Henry David Thoreau:  

 
?It is not when I am going to meet God,  

but when I am turning away and leaving God  

that I discover God is–? 

 
then, #487 

 
then: from Gustavo Gutierrez:  

?To know God is to do justice.? 

 
Sequence 

 
What would I do, I wonder, if a woman 

claiming to be the goddess made a yellow rosebud bl
ossom in her hand, just like that, right 
before my eyes? 

I would breathe in, breathe out, and ask: 

?There will be more roses pretty soon;  

wanna go walk in the rose-garden with me come May??
 What would I do, I wonder, if a man who claimed to 
be the son of god  
waved his hand, and a huge mountain suddenly was fl
oating over my head? 
I would breathe in and breathe out, and ask: 

?Wanna come with me on a road-trip to the 

Sierra? They™re beautiful at this time of year, too
.? 
What would I do, I wonder, if someone said to me 

  ?Your house was destroyed in the earthquake  

because you don™t believe in my god,  

and I know the real truth and you don™t, you devil.
? 
I would breathe in and out and ask: 

?I™d appreciate it if you would help me rebuild my 
house.  
Hand me that plank, will you, please?? 

What would I do if someone said to me  

?God lives in my heart when I am giving bread to th
e poor.? 
I would breathe in and breathe out, and ask: 

?Did god live inside my grandmother  

when she didn™t even know who she was for 11 years 
in the Alzheimer™s ward?? 
And then, after asking all those questions, 

I would just sit still for a while and keep silence
. 
 
silence 

 
So now I breathe in and I breathe out, and I think 
of all the people I have known who 
have helped me to think that whether or not we ever
 agree about the language of divinity, there 
are certainly godly people in my life and your life
, whose humility and tenderness, love and 
recovery, have moved us and blessed us all the way 
to this moment. Remembering them as they 
rise out of our hearts of love, we name them to our
selves or pronounce their names aloud softly, 
knowing that they are one with us, and us with them
. 
 
naming 

 
O the beauty in a life that sings! O the beauty in 
lives that breathe in the questions and breath out 
music to face everything with singing and love. 

 
The First Reading 
consists of major excerpts from a longer poem by A.
 E. Spellman, who was 
the long-time Poet-in-Residence at the great Moreho
use College in Atlanta. It™s called Theology. 
 
sometimes the day deceives me and i think 

the ashes have settled enough that i might see–
  
i try to digest all i observe when i search 

frantically for god whose most credible sightings 

are within. 

 
but silence cannot call god to be. 

the colors of the earth cannot call god to be. 

?why?? cannot call god to be. 

the oppressive distance of the stars, 
the making, living or losing of life 

cannot call god to be. 
 
  god must be the being that calls itself to be 

in the unspoken quiet. 

 
oh, i do hear those who claim title 

to god™s inaudible song. 

their arias are brilliant,  

their voices swoop; 

they sing, they seek to carol 

through the grave  

to merge with some eternal chord. 

do not allow me to belittle the faith 

of the godded. 

 
they do doubt the wisdom of their flesh, 

their earth, their reason. 

they doubt me. i see oppression. 

my faith is finite, does not turn corners, 

skim time, or till the cosmic soil. 

my faith is local and sustains me by the hour. 

 
i would if i could name what lives in me a soul. 

but to name a soul is not to be eternal, 

and to name that soul god is not to be god. 

 
i crave all, but live on enough. 

atheist, I worship the play of the leaf 

and the wind, the stand of the strong  

against the wrong. 

it would satisfy me if my labor left some small adv
ance–
 not even my name–to mark my living. 

 
let the next ones notice that the–growth  

touched by me, has shifted toward the sun. 

if they must call it god™s work, i will say,  

no it was mine.  

 
and they will say ?even so,?   

and I will answer ?even so.? 

 
The Second Reading
 is from the late, great American poet with both Jew
ish and Christian 
family heritage, Denise Levertov. This beautiful po
em is her reflection on the process of how to 
approach thinking about ideas like ?God.?
  
Contraband 

 
  The tree of knowledge was the tree of reason. 

That™s why the taste of it drove us from Eden. 

That fruit was meant to be dried, and milled 

to a fine powder, for use a pinch at a time, 

a condiment. God probably planned to tell us 

about this new pleasure. 

 
We
 stuffed out mouths full of it, 
gorged on ?but? and ?how? and again ?but..? 

knowing no better. 

It™s toxic in large quantities; fumes swirled 

in our heads and around us to form a dense cloud 

that hardened to steel,  

a wall between us and God, Who 
was
 Paradise. 
Not that God is unreasonable–
 but reason in such excess was tyranny  

and locked us into its own limits, 

a polished cell reflecting our own faces. 

God lives on the other side of the mirror, 

but through the slit where the barrier doesn™t 

quite touch the ground, manages still to squeeze in
: 
as filtered light, a strain of music heard then los
t, 
then heard again. 

 
Sermon 

 
So my good friend Bonni finally emailed me after I 
had been calling her for days. She and her 
husband live in Puerto Montt, Chile, 515 kilometers
 south of earthquake-ravished Concepcion. 
Their daughter, Andrea Maria, lives up in Santiago,
 where the airport was closed for days 
because of the quake. 

 
I used the overseas operator 
seven
 times in two days and couldn™t even get a line to 
any
 place in 
Chile, let alone their farm. Finally, I got a dial-
tone, but to no avail. No one was home, and the 
answering machine wasn™t on. Of course, I started t
o imagine the worst.  
 
But Bonni, bless her heart, finally emailed me to t
ell me that all three of them had been on 
vacation in the deep south, in Patagonia at the gor
geous 
Torres del Paine
 mountains, when the 
quake shook up north.   

 
As it is, they have been stuck down in Patagonia, s
ince Chilean airlines are not flying. But they 
did find out from friends with local cell-phones, t
hat their house, their farm, and their daughter™s 
place in Santiago are all ok. 

 
?Thank God, or whatever,? wrote Bonni, ?nothing was
 damaged.?  
 
  God or whatever.  Interesting phrase that. 

 
Now, let me be clear. Bonni™s letter to me was not 
an essay in her theology. She was not defining 
God as the author of earthquakes. She was simply sa
ying she was relieved. Glad. Happy that the 
places where her family members lay their head at n
ight were not damaged. She does 
not, 
however,
 I assure you, think of herself as somehow deserving
 to be saved, someone especially 
blest.  

   

But it did strike me that she knows that there is a
 language problem with the word 
God
, because 
she added the ?whatever.? Maybe, you might think, t
hat™s her substitute for the word Luck. Or, 
Fate. But 
those 
are words as problematic for many as the word ?God?
 is, no? 
 
Still, her phrasing reminds me that, at the very le
ast, the word ?God? poses a problem for many. 
 
Seems like it has been since ancient times. The pas
sage from the Hebrew Scriptures (Book of 
Melakim/Kings) up at the top of your orders of serv
ice was written over twenty-four hundred 
years ago.  

 (Here is the passage: ?And look! The Eternal was th
ere. A great torrent of wind 
rent the mountain into gravel, yet the Eternal was 
not in the wind. And after the 
wind, an earthquake, but the Eternal was not in the
 earthquake. And after the 
earthquake, a fire, but the Eternal was not in the 
fire; but after the fire, a lean, 
thin silence–? )   
 
Yet that particular author is quite clear that what
ever else the Ineffable may be about,  
earthquakes, hurricanes and forest fires are not ev
idences of God in any way. They, the biblical 
editor suggests, are just what they are. If you are
 looking for God, pay attention to the lean, thin 
silence 
inside you
. The famous King James Version renders that Hebrew
 as ?still, small voice.? 
Still other translators render the Hebrew phrase 
qol demamah daq™
 as ?a soft murmuring sound? 
or ?the sound of a whisper.? Take your pick. You ge
t the picture, whichever translation you 
favor.  

 
Because the author of that poetic passage thinks th
at whatever else God may mean, bombast and 
lightning bolts are simply not part of the picture.
 You have to search in subtleties, the passage is 
saying. Silence and hunches and whispers. What Unit
arian minister Waldo Emerson used to call 
?intuition,? or ?spontaneity? or even ?instinct.? I
 like how poet Denise Levertov describes this 
subtlety: God, she says, manages still to squeeze i
n: as filtered light, a strain of music heard then 
lost, then heard again. 

 
But there is no God, you say. Auschwitz proves that
 once and for all. Or how can anyone know if 
there is a God, you ask. How can you imagine 
any
 Being that could explain both a pink and 
purple sunset over the Pacific near Hawaii, 
and
 a child dying of a one-in-a-million genetic 
disorder? You can™t, so why bother. ?A strain of mu
sic heard then lost?? What does she mean? 
She™s not saying God is a song by Sinatra that I™ve
 half forgotten, is she? What sense does that 
make? 

   
None. But that is her point. Levertov is not agains
t reason. She is entirely for it. But there can be 
too much 
reasoning. It™s like food, she says. Food, in all o
f is varieties, is certainly good.  But 
you don™t have to be the Surgeon General of the Uni
ted States to realize that too much of it will 
rob you, eventually, of your health.  

 
Same thing with reason. I can reason that the word 
God makes no sense because all of the 
famous philosophical proofs of God fail to convince
 me. I can reason that the overwhelming 
narcissism of many of the television preachers is s
o blatant that the word God is simply too 
tainted to use without wincing. I can reason that b
ecause God is depicted, in stories, as being 
downright brutal in many biblical and quranic passa
ges, that it™s better to have no truck with that 
word at all. I can reason that Buddhism and Confuci
anism and other religions do very well 
without such a word, so what™s wrong with me doing 
that as well? 
 
Those are all fine reasons. But those reasons will 
clog my brain and my heart both if I assume 
that such reasons 
ought or should be universal
. For example, Gustavo Gutierrez says that to 
know God is to do justice. I can get upset and say:
 ?Why not just say ?To do justice is to do 
justice.?  But even to 
say that
 means I must think Gustavo Gutierrez is a lot like
 me–an 
American citizen living in a mid-western city with 
moderate but very real affluence. But he is 
not. He is a Peruvian, a Native American of Quechua
 ancestry, and he has lived much of his life 
among people who might be described accurately as 
remarkably
 poor, and poor because of 
insane systems of injustice. Will anyone then tell 
me that the word God is useful only as a crutch 
for the poor, but is easily dismissed by the afflue
nt? If so, I have many more sermons to preach 
–about systems theory, about economic theory, and a
bout shame, power and privilege. 
 
At the BREAD interfaith clergy meeting on Thursday,
 Susan Smith of Advent United Church of 
Christ preached a truly thrilling sermon on God as 
the source of the call to justice, quoting a 
passage from the book of the prophet Haggai in the 
Hebrew Scriptures, which contains the 
following observations put in the mouth, so to spea
k, of God:  
?Consider how you are faring. 
You have sowed much and harvested little. You eat w
ithout being satisfied. You drink but are 
never full. You clothe yourselves but are never com
fortable. And if you earn a salary it burns a 
hole in your pocket.?
  These are stinging words of social criticism foun
d in a justice-rooted text. 
After the sermon, Tim Ahrens, who ministers at Firs
t Congregational downtown, told us how 
those words affected him. He got up and said: ?I ne
ver understand what people mean when they 
say they ‚believe in God.™  As if to say, it™s impo
rtant to decide whether or not God actually IS 
something somewhere. Rather,? he said, ?I™d rather 
turn to the words ascribed to God, interpret 
them with my own heart and mind, and listen to thei
r call to love and justice, and then put them 
into practice.?   

 
This theology is similar, it seems to me, to the wo
rds of the lesbian Episcopal priest, Carter 
Heyward, who writes, putting the word in small case
 letters, that ?god is our common strength, 
whose movement is to empower, whose name in  histor
y is love.? 
 
Recently I heard a story about an event in a Unitar
ian Universalist congregation. Who knows 
what congregation it was; maybe it was nearby, or m
aybe it was far away, but no matter, this is a 

  true story. A husband and wife were at a dinner tog
ether with other members of the 
congregation. I really don™t know what the husband™
s theology was, but the wife was definitely 
someone for whom God was an important word. She was
 not a fundamentalist, or a rigid person, 
any more than Gutierrez or Heyward are rigid people
. Or Martin Luther King, or Rumi, or Kabir, 
or Denise Levertov.  No, the wife was not a fundame
ntalist, nor did she have some religious 
agenda to foist. But she did find comfort and suppo
rt and challenge in what Heyward calls ?the 
movement? of god, ?to empower us– together.?  

 
Now another member of the same congregation, also a
t that dinner, when she heard the wife 
bring God into the conversation, responded, ?I just
 don™t know how you or anyone can believe in 
such a thing as God. With all the suffering in the 
world, with all the wars and fighting, it simply 
makes no sense. There™s no reason in it.? 

 
I wish this woman had simply asked the wife what go
d meant to her, or how she imagined god. 
But she didn™t. She proclaimed: ?There™s simply no 
sense in believing what you believe.?  
 
Well, you see, it did make sense to the wife. Mind 
you, she was no fool. She knew about 
suffering. Auschwitz. Pol Pot. The various genocide
s. The death of innocents daily. She knew 
about racism and other injustices. But, it™s fair t
o say she was actually suffering right there at tha
t 
dinner. Why? Because the phrase ?How can you believ
e?? is not English. It™s a knife. It™s 
ridicule, however unintentioned. It™s a proclamatio
n of personal superiority in theological 
matters. It™s a sundering of any possibility of a r
eal relationship or conversation.  
 
What happened was predictable. The wife never came 
back to any church suppers. Or to 
anything at the church from that day on.  Why would
 she? 
 
This is a sad story for me. Oh, I understand the pa
ssion behind questions about God. I understand 
the electricity of freedom crackling in those who h
ave turned away from what they were taught: 
namely, that god is superhuman being who is rigid, 
controlling, the source of sickness and 
storms, and who flings people into hell forever. I 
am all for rejecting such gods. But still, I™m 
troubled. 

 
What troubles me is that it was impossible for this
 person to imagine that someone else, someone 
she might have a great relationship with, might als
o feel the electricity of freedom 
flowing inside 
her
. The electricity of an image of god that she feels
 spurs her to justice-work, deeper 
compassion, and fiercely honest self-questioning. 

 
What troubles me is that it was impossible for this
 person to understand that this woman might 
be strengthened by the image of god in Denise Lever
tov™s poem, which affirms that God 
is
 Paradise itself. Maybe this image helps her to desi
re that the world, too, become Paradise–full 
of abundance for all. ?Oh,? my critic might chime i
n, ?all that poetry stuff–it™s just your 
imagination!?  To which, I hope the woman in questi
on might have had the strength to say, ?Of 
course it™s my imagination! Do you think that what 
I imagine isn™t also part of reality?  Is there 
really something wrong, evil or stupid about seeing
 the world as a sacred garden??   
 
  What troubles me is that someone who lives with fea
rs, like the girl in our story this morning, 
might want a way to address fears which paralyze he
r. In the story this morning, the girl names 
the jibberwillies, the fears, one by one, and the w
ise mother tossed them out the window. Maybe 
for some, God is like an image in their heart as st
urdy as that pail, an idea they find powerful and 
effective to free them–not just from fears, but fro
m addiction, and self-loathing. OK, maybe for 
you, those images don™t work. Maybe you face your f
ears by just whistling in the dark, or like 
me, by working with a therapist over long years to 
confront my own jibberwillies. But my point 
is, what business is it of any of us to even sugges
t that it™s better for others not to use certain 
words or ideas or concepts that work well for them–
even if it™s true they don™t work for others? 
What business is it of anyone™s? 

 
I like what A. B. Spellman says in his most remarka
ble poem.  ?Do not allow me to belittle the 
faith of the godded–? he prays. And he prays that, 
even though
 he says he is an atheist, who 
doesn™t worship god, but rather, ?the play of the l
eaf and the wind, the stand of the strong against 
the wrong.? 

 
But my colleagues in BREAD also, most certainly, wo
rship ?the stand of the strong against the 
wrong–?  heck, that™s what the organization is abou
t. And, of course, Cantor Chomsky and Rev. 
Frosh, and Imam Hany also adore ?the play of the le
af and the wind–? To use God-language is 
hardly to give up on ecstasy based on the natural w
orld. I know I always am lifted up by the 
beauties of the season. It™s hard to imagine 
anyone 
who hasn™t gotten a little lift around here this 
week as the sun draws the unfurling leaves of new s
hoots up past the snow line.  So some speak 
just of leaves, and others speak of leaves 
and
 god in the same sentence. Is one person really 
better or wiser than the other? So one person speak
s of justice and the other speaks of justice 
and
 God? Is one person really more representative of th
e human race than the other? 
 
No, do not allow me to belittle the faith of the go
dded, writes Spellman. Right. But note, just 
because he doesn™t belittle doesn™t mean he has to 
give up observation and even critique. He 
notes, for example,
 they do doubt the wisdom of their flesh, their ear
th, their reason. they doubt 
me. 
But, he also is not afraid to look at himself eithe
r.  
My faith is finite, does not turn corners, 
skim time, or till the cosmic soil. my faith is loc
al and sustains me by the hour. 
 
But what I like most about Spellman™s amazing lines
 is the ending. He seems to realize that there 
will never be a time–
never, never, never
– when 
everyone
 agrees there is a common image of 
god that everyone can share–the stated hope of most
 religious conservatives that I know, 
believing it will be their own. And, just as true, 
he also realizes that there will never be a time 
when everyone just gives up religious and spiritual
 language, the stated prediction of many non-
religious progressives of the last century–and this
 one. This is how Spellman does it: he writes: 
let the next ones (
that is, the next generations
) notice that the–growth touched by me, has shifted
 
toward the sun. if they must call it god™s work, i 
will say, no it was mine. 
And then, with humility 
that almost blinds with its brightness, he conclude
s: 
& they will say ?even so,? and  I will answer 
?even so.? 

 
And so it goes on. The earthquakes and the fires. 

  The poetry and the prose. Stories and questions. Re
ason and feelings. Intuition and science. 
Newer images of god coming to life, and older image
s of god being dashed to the ground; people 
like Thoreau turning away from God, and thus, he cl
aims, then 
discovering 
some intimation, 
some ?filtered light? illuminating ultimacy. Who kn
ows? All I know is that God–and Bonni™s 
?whatever?– need to share the same world, the same 
beds, the same communities, and the same 
historic age. And that, at least part of what it me
ans to be a Unitarian Universalist is to always 
find a way to help people feel as safe and supporte
d as possible while they deepen images, smash 
them; run to them, or away from them; or try to liv
e without images at all. I can™t imagine a more 
beautiful way of living out our days together. 

 
Offering 

 
What gift can we bring?  We sang at the beginning o
f our celebration. What gift can we bring? 
Our presence.  Our humility.  Our teachable-ness.  
Our self-questioning.  Our risking.  Our hope. 
Our ideals.  Our conversations.  Our financial supp
ort, either given in more modern ways behind 
the scenes, or offered in this more ancient way as 
an integral part of our celebration. The ushers 
are invited forward. 

 
Sinkoffian Prayer 

 
Question and answer; question. 

Question and answer and question. 

 
Listening and speaking; reflection 

Listening and speaking and reflection. 

 
Experience and vision; imagination. 

Experience and vision and imagination. 

 
Image and emptiness; struggle 

Image and emptiness and struggle. 

 
Solitude and community; deepening. 

Solitude and community and deepening. 

 
Compassion and justice: divinity. 

Compassion is justice is divinity. 

 
 
