  2008-10-5 Leftovers 

MLB 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here, 

after a still unsettling week, 

 to be together in beauty and peace, 
 that we might grow toward gladness 

even in these worrisome days. 

Now music, word, silence and fall™s first color 

bid us turn toward forgiveness and Love. 

 
And so, though our ways of thinking and feeling abo
ut the meaning of our days may 
differ, we agree to journey together, side by side,
 face to face. Within this circle of 
strong spirit, mutual care, and ethical vision, may
 we ourselves remain open to 
being transformed by a welcoming heart and emerging
 justice. 
 
Sequence 

 
The leaves are just beginning to yellow 

on oak and poplar and aspen. 

Some may soon turn to red or rust,  

others, to pure gold. 

And soon the wind will loosen them 

from their branches and carry them away 

across the lawns and fields. 

But not all of them. 

Some will cling tenaciously to the branches 

throughout the cold days to come. 

Some will only be pushed off the branch 

by new buds come spring. 

Autumn glory doesn™t come all at once, 

and it doesn™t end all at once. 

And human glory doesn™t begin or end all at once ei
ther, by pressures of clock or 
calendar. 

Some memories stomp about noisily at the same time 
as others barely whisper in a mist. 
Some are very far along the road of forgiveness  

at the same time as others face blocked lanes.  

The glory of autumn never finishes, O Love, 

and neither am I finished and perfect.  

For there are no perfect acts. No perfect words.  

And, no perfect silence. 

Still I act. Still I speak. Still I keep silence. 

 
silence 

   
The glory of being human 

is neither to turn yellow nor red, 

but to relate to each other 

and to the world of which we are apart 

with care, attentiveness and awareness. 

Thus we set aside time each week 

to remember and remember again 

those whom we love, those with whom 

we struggle, those who are suffering, 

and those we miss. We whisper their names aloud,  

or speak them in the peace of our hearts  

into the imperfect silence. 

 
name 

 
The glory of the natural world of autumn 

and the natural world of the human blend: 

roses have thorns, relationships of beauty 

may break, and all things are imperfect. 

And for this reason we sing, and sing and sing. 

 
Readings 

 
The First Reading 
is an abbreviated form of the letter the painter Vi
ncent Van Gogh 
wrote to his sister Wilhelmina from Saint-Remy, 20 
January 1890 
 
Dear Sister, 

Are you enjoying yourself in Paris?  I can well ima
gine that it gives you the impression 
of too large, too confused a city.  This is what al
ways goes against the grain with us, who 
are rather accustomed to simpler surroundings. 

 
I often think of Holland, of our youth in the past 
Œ for the very reason that I feel entirely 
in the country here.  And yet I am aging, you know,
 and it seems to me that life is passing 
by more rapidly, and that the responsibilities are 
more serious, and that the question of 
how to make up for lost time is more critical, and 
that it is harder to do the day™s work, 
and that the future is more mysterious. 

 
Did you meet Bernard yet?  I should very much like 
him to come here for a while in 
order to see the pictures I did here lately; I ough
t to write him a letter, but I am waiting 
for a letter from him at any moment.  He is a Paris
ian from top to toe, and to my mind he 
is a model of vivacity.  He uses his brains. 

 
As for me, I often think with a deep sigh that I ou
ght to have been better than I am.  Let 
me stop talking of it at once, or else it might dis
courage me.  Well, the fact is that one 
cannot retrace one™s steps, and the steps one has t
aken greatly influence the future. 

   
If you have half an hour to spare, I recommend myse
lf for a letter from you. 
 
I embrace you. 

 
Yours, Vincent 

 
The Second Reading
 is a new translation of the poem by Wislawa Szymbor
ska 
which was read at my Installation servicehere ten y
ears ago. Life On The Run 
 
Life On the Run: 

Performance without rehearsal. 

Body without stretching. 

Mind without planning. 

 
I know nothing of the role I play. 

I only know it™s mine. I can™t exchange it. 

I have to guess while on the run 

just what this play™s all about. 

 
Ill-prepared for the privilege of living, 

I can barely keep up with the pace life demands. 

I improvise, although I hate to have to do that.   

I trip over my own ignorance at every step. 

My way of life smacks of the provincial. 

I am nothing but a ham, a rank amateur. 

The stage fright I claim for my excuse   

humiliates me all the more. 

Mitigating circumstances just  

strike me as cruel. 

 
You can™t take back words or gestures. 

You™ll never count to the last star. 

Your character is no more than a raincoat 

which you button up on the run. 

These are the sorry results of all this unexpectedn
ess. 
If I could just rehearse ahead one Wednesday,  

or repeat a single Thursday that has passed! 

But here comes Sunday already,  

with a script I haven™t seen. 

Is this fair? I ask (my voice a little hoarse, 

since they wouldn™t even let me  

clear my throat offstage). 

You™re deluded if you think that this is just a sla
pdash quiz taken in a makeshift office.   
Oh no. I™m standing on the set right now 

and I telling you, they™re very well-constructed. 

  The props are all surprisingly precise. 

The machine rotating the stage  

has been around for a very long time. 

The farthest galaxies have been switched on. 

Oh no, there™s no question,  

this must be opening night. And whatever I do 

will turn forever into what I™ve done. 

 
Sermon 

 
I used to love to watch my grandmother fold ravioli
. No wasted motion. Pure, unrushed 
efficiency, and simple elegance. The fingers tuckin
g the little squares over end, the green 
Swiss chard and ricotta filling disappearing into a
 tight little package soon to be boiled 
and served with melted butter. She cooked the way s
he did out of our tradition, sure; but 
when I remember the taste of those ravioli on my to
ngue, I would have to say she did it 
out of love a lot more. 

 
Of course, 
we
 didn™t call them ravioli. That was the general Ame
rican English word. In 
our dialect, however, we called these little round 
treasures 
?Tortellacci,?
 or even more 
accurately, ?
Tuthlotch
? (And as children, we couldn™t even pronounce that
, so we called 
them kukaches.) 

 
My friends didn™t know a thing about dialects, so i
f they came over for dinner, they 
would say ?Wow! Are these ravioli ever good!? 

 
The word ?ravioli? 
is
 basically accurate however. It just comes from ano
ther dialect, 
namely that of Genoa. And, it has a meaning. 
Ravioli
 means ?leftovers.?  
 
The great Italian chef Mario Batali correctly calls
 the Italian cuisine of the immigration 
era 
La Cucina Povera
, ?

.? I think this is accurate. Long before 
the great Depression, when a studied frugality was 
one of the things that got people 
through the tough times, my grandparents never thre
w any food away. Ever. Egg shells, 
tough stems or stalks and ground up chicken bones w
ent back into the garden to prime 
soil for next year™s yield. And any food leftover f
rom Tuesday supper could be ground up 
with some cheese and tucked into 
tortellacci
 for Wednesday™s supper– trans-forming 
leftovers into something satisfying and comforting,
 and even serving a delicious emblem 
of love. The immigrant poor like my grandparents di
dn™t have much, but they sure made 
the best of it. 

 
I admire this approach to life, although I don™t al
ways find myself quite as frugal as my 
grandmother in particular was.  

 
But I do think that the food metaphor easily stretc
hes to our larger lives as I begin this 
month of exploring the theme of forgiveness, a word
 that several people in this 
congregation remind me could bear a whole year of s
ermons, so difficult, rich and 
complex its meanings and implications. 

   
As I say each year as the Jewish High Holiday seaso
n approaches, it™s important not to 
confuse simple courtesy with the sheer majesty of t
he word ?forgiveness.? If I 
accidentally bump into you in the hallway, I might 
say: ?Gosh, I™m sorry. Wasn™t paying 
attention to where I was looking!? And you could ve
ry well say: ?Not to worry. No big 
deal.? But that is NOT an act of forgiveness, just 
a simple ritual of courtesy found among 
people who share crowded urban buildings. 

 
 
No, forgiveness (and the apologies which ask for it
) is a sacred approach to the deeper 
wounds and conflicts of life, the disruptions in re
lationships, be they among family or 
friends.  It™s not about bumps, but betrayals; not 
about nudges, but nagging hurts.  
 
But it™s important to say that forgiveness is a roa
d, but not always our final home. It™s a 
journey, but not always the station at the end of t
he line.  
 
Not always, but often enough, when we are moving al
ong the path of forgiveness, we 
find something leftover from the journey which stub
bornly refuses to budge. There may 
be some memory, some resentment, some grudge that w
e find stubbornly clings to us, 
and we to it. 

 
I understand this. It makes sense to me, since my u
nderstanding of forgiveness does not 
resemble in any way the granting of a presidential 
pardon, or some sort of unilateral 
clemency, especially to someone whose offender reco
rd is not even in question. 
 
No, real forgiveness takes the hurt seriously, and 
doesn™t ever excuse the hurt, or deny it, 
or diminish it. Genuine forgiveness, as a psycholog
ist I™ve been reading, Janis Spring, 
articulates so well, is conditional, not unconditio
nal. It™s not something that happens 
quickly. It™s not something, she says, that 
magically whisks away all negative feelings 
toward the offender, creates perfect reconciliation
, nor insists that I somehow have to 
admit that my own anger was exaggerated or unjustif
ied. 
 
Wounds in the spirit, you see, leave real leftovers
, scars, in the soul, just as physical 
wounds leave scars in the body. You can see them wi
th your inner-eye, finger them with 
your inner touch. And, it™s fair to point out that 
some folks scar worse than others too, 
something exemplified in our biological skin. My mo
ther, for example, has keiloid skin, 
which means when she fell down as a little girl and
 cut her knee, the scar raised up a lot 
higher and more obviously than it would in my own s
kin, which is not keiloid. There are 
different sensitivities among human beings, and I d
on™t think it™s sensible to deny that. 
We may all be equal in inherent worth, but we™re ha
rdly the same. 
 
The idea that there are scars, enduring leftovers f
rom wounds makes sense to me too. As 
my muse Szymborska says: 

 
And whatever I do will turn forever into what I™ve 
done. 
 
  Our actions do not evaporate once completed. 

They are left in our common world to shape our comm
on future. 
 
Our mistakes and our great deeds both.  Our acciden
ts and deliberate acts both. Not scars, 
always, in the hard sense of that term, but real le
ftovers, enduring consequences you 
might say. And I think this is exactly what Van Gog
h means when he writes to his sister: 
Well, the fact is that one cannot retrace one™s ste
ps, and the steps one has taken greatly 
influence the future. 

 
He™s right. We can™t retrace our steps. We can™t si
mply redo our life, and take all of our 
mistakes back, undo scars, make the leftovers into 
the full dish they once were. As 
Szymborska puts it with her succulent and reliable 
humor: 
 
If I could just rehearse ahead one Wednesday,  

or repeat a single Thursday that has passed! 

But here comes Sunday already, with a script I have
n™t seen. 
 
But I think Szymborska is more than just witty. I a
lways find her to be the soul of 
compassion. She admits we are in a big predicament,
 and that it™s hard to figure out what 
to do that doesn™t cause some wounding around us. S
he recognizes that we are all 
improvising here, that the rulebooks of earlier era
s–the simple Ten Commandments for 
example–hardly begin to address the rather absurd c
omplexities of modern life. From 
the Dow Jones to camera cell-phones. From 250 telev
ision stations to news from 
Kyrgyzstan and other nations we never remembered st
udying in grade school. From 
elected national leaders and radio pundits repeatin
g lies, innuendo and distortions 
in a 
louder voice
 to immediately convince us that they must actually
 be telling the truth, to 
endless knots of traffic on our highways and on our
 computer screens, life is complex and 
unfathomable beyond belief. We™re rather like Van G
ogh™s sister as he imagines her, all 
overwhelmed by the craziness of Parisian life.    
?I can well imagine that it gives you the 
impression of too large, too confused a city.  This
 is what always goes against the grain 
with us, who are rather accustomed to simpler surro
undings.? 
 
This modern new-fangled world of ours is a lot more
 complex and aggravating than Van 
Gogh™s Paris. It™s such that we can hardly 
help
 but wound each other now and then. Step 
on each other™s toes as we dance around. We can har
dly 
help
 but make some mistakes, 
even if we think we are the best people in the worl
d, and are always trying to live good 
and honest and courteous lives.  Our tempers can st
ill flare out at unintended targets, our 
speech can be intemperate, our emotions can come ou
t crooked because we feel more of 
them now than we have ever had, and are improvising
 all the time how to best express 
them. And sometimes the improvisations are not very
 elegant as we go around on this 
stage called earth, turning and turning under all t
hose galaxies that were 
switched on
, in 
the poet™s words, a long, long time ago. 

 
And even if we are 
not
 culpable tricksters, like Raccoon in the Native Am
erican story, 
there are always consequences to our actions. Wheth
er we deserve them or not is not the 
issue. They are simply there. 

   
Now if the picture I now painted of the modern worl
d raises your anxiety a notch, I 
actually think that™s good. As theologian Dorothee 
Soelle reminds us, at least with 
anxiety, you can have faith in what™s possible, and
 you can actually consider turning 
away from, in her singeing words, all those ?bombs 
and file cards.?  Anxiety is openness. 
Certainty is a closed mind. 

 
But Szymborska suggests that because we live in a w
orld that generates such anxiety, we 
all
 need forgiveness, since, unlike Raccoon in this mo
rning™s story, we do indeed mean 
well, but we™re simply unprepared for all this comm
otion, all the choices before us, all 
the complexities of the age.  

 
And when we do what we do, there are always leftove
rs. Whether our acts are good or ill, 
these leftovers affect the future, like Van Gogh re
minded us. Each of our actions has con-
sequences. None of us can take anything back.   

 
Now I know that all seems really poignant this week
. I suspect that during this week 
many of us dreamed of having a whole lot of Wall St
reet speculators get on their knees 
and apologize to us with tears and groveling for wo
unding so much of our 
sense
 of 
security, and our 
actual
 security. But I think waiting for their apology to
 come our way 
would take a lot more of our time than we would be 
willing to give on a Sunday morning. 
 
So let™s talk about us. Not the people who have wou
nded us. Nor the people we may have 
wounded. After all, we™re the ones sitting here.  

 
So, in this dance of forgiveness, what happens if w
e realize we have wounded someone? 
What™s the best thing to do? Start by apologizing, 
right? Well, yes, yes, 
if
 it really IS a 
thoughtful apology. It™s funny how many apologies w
hich go by that name actually do 
more harm than good. Again, I go to the wisdom of p
sychologist Janis Spring, who helps 
us to understand what a good apology might be like 
by describing bad apologies. You 
might call her description: ?Apologies I have known
– and used.? 
 1.
 The two second apology: ?Sorry? 
2.
 The sanitized apology ?I™m sorry for whatever it is
 I did wrong.? 
3.
 The shirk of responsibility apology 

?I™m sorry 
if
 I hurt your feelings.? 
4.
 The lack of ownership apology: 

?I™m sorry your feelings are hurt.? 
5.
 The perfunctory apology: ?As I have said 

before, I™m sorry.? 
6.
 The vindictive apology: ?I™ll show you  

what it means to be sorry!? 
7.
 The grudging apology: ?I said I was sorry. 

What else do you want?? 
8.
 The expedient apology: ?I know I am in the 

doghouse until I apologize, so here it is.? 

  9.
 The ?Yes-but,? blame-defecting apology: 

?I™m sorry I did X, but you™re no Mother 

 Theresa either.? 
   10.  The ?Oh, what the hell? apology: ?Hey, 

         I™m sorry, pal.? 

   11.The obsequious apology: ?I™m so sorry, 

          I™m so sorry, I™m so sorry (but don™t ask
           me why). 

   12. The contemptuous apology: ?I™m sorry 

          for stepping on your big, fat ego.? 

   13. The exaggerated, manipulative apology: 

          ?I hate myself for what I did. Can you  

           ever, ever, forgive me?? 

    14. The guilt-inducing apology: ?Do  

           you really need me to apologize  

           for 
that
?? 
(After the nine o™clock service, one man told me ab
out a number 15 which could end this 
list, namely, ?the pre-emptive apology.?  He simply
 turns to his spouse every morning 
before getting out of bed and says ?I™m sorry for w
hat I am going to do today!?) 
 
Now, getting clear about what we may have done that
 requires an authentic apology, not 
a manipulation, may be hard work. But it seems that
 if I really want to go through the 
world not burdened by grudges and resentment, if I 
really want to live in the present not 
the past, if I really want to live free, not all ch
ained up to the folks who once wounded 
me, this is the hard work I am called to do. And no
t just during this High Holiday season, 
but every day. 

 
It seems to me that I have to be willing to admit t
hat I wound as well as I am wounded. 
And that such is the state of the whole world and e
veryone in it. And that to really begin 
to walk the path of forgiveness for myself and othe
rs, I have to learn a certain spiritual 
frugality, similar to my grandmother™s frugality wi
th food. If I apologize with extra, and 
quite unnecessary, excuses, as in the examples I ju
st offered you, I am only causing more 
scars, more leftovers, more obstacles on the path t
o forgiveness. Better to be frugal, and 
keep it plain and simple.  And after all, the spiri
tual scars I might leave by apologizing in 
an insincere way will also be quite real, as real a
s the original wounding, and I cannot do 
some spiritual plastic surgery and remove them so t
hat everything is perfect again. 
Because nothing is perfect or can ever be.   

 
When it comes to the scars left by the original wou
nds, not the apologies, I might have to 
deal with them like my grandmother dealt with her l
eftovers. I will have to find some 
way to repackage them so that they nourish my life,
 not disfigure it. 
 
My grandmother whole frugal approach is instructive
 here. What was 
not
 useful she 
tossed into the garden to enrich the soil. What 
was
 useful, she transformed into something 
entirely different, but very delightful and richly 
nourishing. 
 
  This is what I want to do with the leftovers in my 
own process of forgiveness. I want to 
simply let go of what I cannot use. I may have to n
ot reconcile with someone, or admit 
the scar is so great I can never overlook it, so I 
may have to break off a wounding 
relationship for my own soul™s sake. I may have to 
bury what is not useful in the garden 
of my future, so that it enriches what grows there–
a healthier character, a more street-
wise vision. 

 
And, I can use the still useful leftovers. I can tr
ansform them into something that 
nourishes my spirit. Re-shape them, wrap them up di
fferently.  
 
This might mean getting far more acquainted with my
 own feelings, and not being afraid 
of what they might teach me. This might mean honing
 my compassion, to remember that 
the ones who hurt me may themselves being acting ou
t on hurts once received. Maybe I 
cannot be in relationship with these persons, but I
 can still see them as human beings with 
the same inherent dignity that I have. They did not
 ask to be wounded, after all. They 
didn™t ask to be distorted with hurt. Look, compass
ion doesn™t mean being a patsy and 
letting yourself be wounded all over again, after a
ll. But it also does not mean pity, you 
the superior soul feeling sorry for the sad creatur
e that hurt you. Forgiveness begins on a 
level playing field, 
when we simply admit that the past cannot be any di
fferent than it 
was
, and that we all have to face that, and that somet
imes that means reconciliation, and 
sometimes that does not. But it does not mean that 
we are suddenly divided into two 
distinct species, the evil devils and the good ange
ls. We™re all just human.  
 
My grandmother wasn™t a psychologist or a theologia
n, but she did teach me something 
about what to do with stuff that was leftover. It w
as beautiful to watch her tiny hands 
transform them into something new and wonderful. Bu
t it wasn™t her skill that taught me 
these things–it was her love.  

 
Offertory 

 
Early Autumn Glory 

 
Glory slowly, slowly yellows  

the poplar leaves. 

Soon they will dance in the wind 

circle and circle to the ground. 

I hope to take them by the hand 

and join the dance.  

Going round and round 

as they bring light to the ground. 

The ground that I stand on 

which is solid, and soon will be 

bright like fire. 

Glory above! Glory below! 

Light all around me. 

Light all around us. Let™s dance. 

