 Guns, Directness, Controlling, Sensitivity 
March 16, 2014 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini
   
Gathering, Welcoming, 
Centering, 
Kindling,
 Opening:
 We are here 

    
after a roller coaster week of wind, warmth 
and icy cold, to worship; to forsake the hectic 

    
for a moment of wholeness, 
to make of our diversities a power for good, 

    
and to join together in loving purpose 
of nourishing health in our shared, hurting world. 

 
And so, bearing witness 
both
 to our world as it 
is, 
and
 as Love can imagine it, we would claim 
that vision of a just world in our own lives. And 

because of a growing sense of kinship with all 

beings, inviting our compassion, we begin in 

this celebration to engage our mission with our 

whole lives: body, mind, and heart.
   
Praising
  
#391 Voice Still and Small 
 
Ingathering  
Same, Same but Different  by Jenny Sue Kestecki-Sha
w 
 
In my art class in school, I drew a picture of the 
world. My teacher sent my drawing and the drawings 
of the other kids to a school in India, a country v
ery far away. 
 
My name is Elliot, and guess what? A kid named Kail
ash sent a drawing back to me with a picture of 
his country surrounded by the ocean. 

 
So I wrote him back, and sent a picture of me climb
ing the tree in my back yard. Kailash wrote me 
back with a drawing of him climbing the tree in his
 back yard. Squirrels ran down the branches in my 
tree. Little monkeys ran down the branches in Kaila
sh's tree. Different but the same. 
 
I sent him a drawing of my family. My mom, my dad, 
and my baby sister, in front of the brick house 
where we live.   (drawing of photograph) 

 
Different but the same. 

 
Kailash sent me a photo of his family...22 of them,
 mom, dad, sisters, brothers, grandmothers, 
grandfathers, aunties, uncles, cousins...and some a
nimals, some goats and some chickens. (drawing of 
photograph) 

 
 I sent him a picture of my one animal, my pet dog, 
Barney.  Different but the same. 
 
I told him that I went to school and that we learne
d the alphabet. A B C D E... (chart of alphabet) 
 
Kailash also went to school. ?This is our alphabet,
? Kailash said, and he wrote my name, Elliot, in hi
s 
language.  (Hindi alphabet chart) 

 
Different but the same. 

 
This is how we say hello, I wrote to Kailash, and I
 drew a picture of people shaking hands, or bumping
. 
 
He sent a picture back of him bowing his head and s
aying Namaste. This is how we say hello, he wrote. 
(Namaste in Hindi) Same but different. 

 
Kalash and I are good friends. We live in different
 worlds. Or do we?
  
Greeting  
news of the congregation 
 Justice Action Ministry           Alice Faryna 

  

Affirming The idea of diversity becomes a strength,
  sacred to us. The music of difference, all 

 alive. The base of our living.   
Muriel Rukeyser 1957 
 
Singing  #393 Jubilate Deo 
(in parts)
  
Communing 
the Sequence, the Great Silence, the Naming, the Mu
sic 
 
Every star in space is unique in name:  Alpheraz, S
pica, Deneb, Tau Ceti, Sol...unique in color or 
arrangement, red and yellow and blue, some in famil
ies of two or six or 22...yet all of these 
unique stars with their planets make a universe tog
ether. 
 
Every life form is unique. Six legs in the cockroac
h, four on the cow, two on the shopkeeper, 
none on the rattlesnake. Every life form is unique.
..robins in the air, tunicates rooted on the 
muddy sea bottom, lions prowling the savannah, spid
ers suspended on silk, students on break 
visiting home cities with towers brushing the cloud
s...yet all of these unique life forms together 
make the world alive. 

 
Every moment is unique. A brush with fear, a sappin
g anxiety, a burst of joy, a sense of quiet 
gratitude, satisfaction and impatience, grief and r
elief, sadness and bliss... each moment unique, 
yet all these moments together make the human heart
, and form, along within this cradle of 
silence, a good meaning of the word "spirit." 

 
silence 

 
Every human life is unique. Distinct faces and hist
ories, families sublime and difficult, losses 
unexpressed or wept into the common life...and all 
of these unique lives form humanity, and 
form this assembly. To so honor this reality, let t
he names and faces from our unique lives call to 

 us in this safe moment, that we may utter the names
...aloud or quietly within–of that great 
diversity of lives which has helped to shape who we
 are at this present moment. 
 
naming 

 
Every gift of song is unique, ancient or modern, in
 English or Latin, composed by the famous or 
the forgotten, yet each a part of the magical, impo
ssible and grandly diverse reality we call 
music. 

                     9:15 The Arching Sky of Morning
 Glows 
 words by Mark Belletini, music by Thomas Tallis 
 Spirit of Life Choir, Karen Madden, Director 

                       
 11:00
 Laudate Dominum
 (from 
Vespers
) by W.A. Mozart 
 Chalice Choir, Brandon Moss, Director 

  

The First Reading
 comes from a book by Irshad Manji, a Muslim lesbian
 woman whose writing 
style in English simply excites me it™s so fresh, h
onest and fearless. In a chapter titled "Offence is
 
the Price of Diversity," she writes:   

 
Now for a note to non-Muslims, particularly aspirin
g global citizens. Petrified of being taken for 
provincial imbeciles, many of you feel a special re
sponsibility to "respect" Islam, the word you 
typically choose when you write me. It™s also a wor
d that throws you for a loop. David, a student 
who attends York University in Toronto, emailed me:
  
"I am focusing on Middle East politics, peace and c
onflict. I am writing you during a break in 
my class. I seek your advice on how to keep debate 
alive. The vast majority of this class is 
Muslim. They appear to be here to make sure that Is
lam is treated with proper respect. I'm 
hoping you can offer up some strategies for how I c
an ask my questions without causing an 
uproar (which seems to happen in every class) and w
ithout being disrespectful. 
 
So let's say I am one of those Muslim students dema
nding respect. David has every right to tell 
me: "Religions and cultures don't talk, 
people
 talk on their behalf. When I, David, question your
 
beliefs, Irshad, I'm questioning how 
you
 define ideas, not how God does. I'm not God, and 
neither are you. So we can move forward with my que
stions for you, and yours for me." 
 
I might retort to David, "Respect me, not just my r
eligion." Having heard this one umpteen times 
myself, I now appreciate that "Respect me" serves a
s a pitch-perfect dog whistle for "Don't 
challenge me."  But indifference is the opposite of
 respect. The way you honor a person is to ask 
of him or her an effort. That kind of honor trusts 
in an individual™s capacity. 
   

The Second Reading,
 The Rabbis, was just published this year, and it™s 
by Dan Hotchkiss, 
a senior consultant at the Alban Institute, an inte
rfaith think tank which studies trends and 
institutional developments in religious organizatio
ns. Dan is the son of the choir director who 
served our church in Rockford Illinois, where I did
 my internship, so I've known him for a long 
time. He is a Unitarian Universalist minister who w
orks with both our own congregations as 

 well as others. In this word you will hear words fr
om the Jewish tradition...Don't worry, Dan 
explains them all. 

 
The job was to facilitate what may have been the mo
st diverse gathering of rabbis ever.  Tension 
was apparent even as the rabbis started to arrive: 
men in black with side-locks and long beards, 
women wearing 
yarmulkes
 (skullcaps) and 
tallits
 (prayer shawls) spanning all the major 
branches:  Orthodox, Conservative, Reform, and Reco
nstructionist.  Most amazingly, one rabbi, 
greeting everyone, and vigorously shaking hands wit
h all the men, was from the Lubavitch 
Chabad, a movement that irritates and worries all t
he others. Chabad centers, with their mystical 
ideas and their lack of dues, have become a nuisanc
e, in the view of many synagogues. 
 
The little room had only fourteen people in it.  Fi
fteen, if you counted me.  My bio on the 
website says I help with planning, governance, trai
ning, conflict, etcetera.  Another way to say it 
is:  I walk into a group I don™t belong to, where n
either I nor anybody else knows what will 
happen, and I watch while something does. For this 
three-day rabbinical retreat, I prepared three 
days™ worth of material.  I might as well have save
d myself the trouble. 
 
We started the first evening with a go-around Œ a c
heck-in Œ which took much longer than 
planned, because these rabbis had a lot they couldn
™t talk about with anybody else, because a lot 
of what a rabbi or a minister experiences, you can™
t imagine. 
 
Of all the pains and troubles that poured out that 
evening, one rose right to the top of our agenda.  
One rabbi, Jacob, had a 
yahrzeit
.  And he asked the group to form a 
minyan
 to say 
Kaddish
.  
Minyan
 is Hebrew for a group of ten who form a quorum for
 a prayer group.  
Kaddish
 is 
Aramaic for one of the most moving and important pr
ayers in the tradition Œ the prayer for the 
dead.  
Yahrzeit 
is Yiddish for ?year-time,? an anniversary of a dea
th.  Jacob had lost his brother; 
he was asking the group to pray with him. 

 
What rough seas we were heading into!  Some of the 
rabbis wouldn™t count a woman in a 
minyan
.  Some of them wouldn™t even pray unless men were 
physically separated from the 
women.  And a couple of the women made it clear: Th
ey would not be separated, and they 
would
 be counted.  

 
I ceased being the facilitator.  I became the awed 
spectator of a learned debate among a group of 
fourteen rabbis about how to reconcile their differ
ences in order to achieve a goal they all agreed 
on:  
Kaddish
 must
 be said.  A bereaved Jew™s request to form a 
minyan
 for his brother was a 
non-debatable priority
.  
 
Me, awed at the willingness of people, who were in 
such sharp disagreement about so many 
things, to struggle with their differences in the n
ame of a shared purpose. 
 
At our best, this is what we do in congregations:  
struggle with our differences in the name of a 
shared purpose.  But we don™t, always.  Sometimes w
e lose track of our purpose. 
 
It took most of a day for the rabbis to solve the p
roblem: fourteen of them speaking English, 
Hebrew, and Œ when they got really angry Œ Yiddish.
  

 They 
all
 agreed that Kaddish must be said. 
 
In the end, the orthodox conceded the most Œ they f
ound a local congregation where they could 
say 
Kaddish
 simultaneously
 with the rabbis™ 
minyan.
  The women adjusted their participation to 
accommodate some of the more moderate men.  In the 
end, Jacob had not one 
minyan
 but two.  
And I, a functional illiterate for most of my own r
etreat, left with a gift of lasting awe for 
fourteen rabbis™ willingness to struggle with their
 differences in the name of a shared purpose. 
  Interlude: 
 Granddaddy's Gun / Blake Shelton 
 Preaching Guns, Directness, Controlling, Sensitivit
y 
   
  
The very last thing I saw when I said goodbye to my
 parents as I left for seminary in California 
was a gun. It hung over the fireplace mantle in my 
folks™ family room, a rifle mounted on a very 
large wooden plaque. 

 
Under it, on the mantle, were other focal points: p
hotos of me, my sister Lynne and my brother 
Robert. Next to the photos was the carbide lamp my 
grandfather wore on his head when he was 
working in the coal mines. But the big rifle domina
ted everything by size and by power of 
placement. 

 
I never knew why my father had hung it up there. Oh
 he had done some hunting when he was 
younger, but not much. He knew many hunters, certai
nly. His best friend Navio hunted every 
year in the Dakotas, and brought home enough wild g
ame to thriftily feed his family for a whole 
year (his wife being a most excellent game cook). B
ut my father never hunted anymore. And, as 
far as I know, neither Navio nor my father kept han
dguns in the house, nor went around the town 
arguing an interpretation of the Second Amendment s
uggesting that any sensible American 
would keep a loaded gun (or ten) in their home. No 
gun talk in my family. None at all. 
 
When I moved to California, I never personally knew
 anyone who ever owned a gun, talked 
about guns, or went hunting. I certainly never hear
d of anyone going to gun shows, or bringing 
up constitutional issues, with or without strong pa
ssionate convictions. Fancy California 
restaurants certainly featured game dishes, but eve
n then, no hunting was involved...they served 
only farm-raised, not wild, game. 

 
When I moved to Ohio, the culture here was drastica
lly different. Here, most folks I know 
outside the church keep guns in their homes, and ta
lk about that reality openly. Some keep guns 
for hunting, others for what they name as safety. F
riends who vote way on the left, and have no 
particular interest in the politics of the National
 Rifle Association, work for local gun shows. I 
know one guy who carries a concealed weapon sometim
es on the street. And another who sleeps 
with a pistol under his pillow. 

 
There are folks in this congregation who hunt and k
eep guns in their homes too. I know this very 
well. And I say this because I want to be clear tha
t the diversity we hold 
as a source of our 
strength 
(as our affirmation this morning and our mission st
atement both announce)
 is hardly just 
about theologies, or our ethnic origins, or our chi
ld raising techniques, or distinct ways of 

 grieving. It™s about differences in philosophy and 
culture which have to do with things like guns. 
 
And with patterns of being in the world, like sensi
tivity and directness. In families where direct 
speech and loud voices were normal and ordinary, th
e assumption that such directness and 
loudness is 
universally
 ordinary is but a small leap. The assumption is ma
de that if you say 
something directly to another person, they will imm
ediately speak directly back to you. 
 
But in families, where there were silences daily, t
en times longer than any we manage here on a 
Sunday morning, silences which were ordinary, and n
ot indicative of anything, direct speech and 
loudness brought into a conversation within a congr
egation such as this one can be quite 
frightening. It can shut the other person down.  

 
Mind you, no one intends to frighten. No one intend
s to put off. But it sometimes happens, 
because the assumption of universality of a family 
style keeps people unconscious of their 
impact. 

 
And the silent, or quieter, or in modern parlance, 
more "introverted" person, does not benefit 
from anyone suggesting that they are repressed, or 
afraid of their emotions. Or even that they 
don't feel their feelings at all. Oh, I'm sure some
 folks may indeed be traumatized by events in 
their childhood, but to assume this is true of ever
y quieter person is hardly sensible.  
 
Family culture is another diversity that can remain
 unexplored even in congregations like this. 
And it™s harder for some to explore such diversitie
s than it is for others.  
 
Another diversity rarely lifted up. I grew up in a 
storytelling culture. Every suppertime was story 
time. Army stories, childhood stories, work stories
. Every visit to my grandparents was rife with 
stories about immigration routes, life in the mount
ains, pilgrimages to the shrine of San 
Pellegrino. Personal stories...from life. It™s natu
ral for me. Deeply cultural. Very Italian. For 
others, storytelling from life is too intimate, too
 transparent. Not controlled enough. Loose. It™s a 
bit scary. 

 
Yet, to the bafflement of many outside our communit
y, we claim to make a congregation with 
all 
of these diversities. Some of which go unnamed.  

 
In the story this morning, the diversities are much
 more obvious. The Hindi alphabet is not the 
ABC song of English. They don't resemble each other
 in the slightest, visually, at least to me. 
But the two boys, Kailish and Elliot, become friend
s, because despite the differences, they see a 
sameness too...both alphabets are designed to help 
folks communicate. To form words that cross 
from heart to heart, mind to mind. Both alphabets a
re tools to be memorized and mastered for 
common use in the community. The word 
family
 to Elliot means just a few people. The word 
family
 for Kailish means 22. VERY different, right? Yet t
hey both perceive that their family is 
somehow their center, their source. Very different,
 yes, but there is something the same about it 
too. 

 
Being loud and being quiet are two ways to communic
ate too. The number of decibels does not 
have anything to do with the intention to communica
te. Both those that do not favor guns and 

 those that find it a comfortable part of their cult
ure are 
both
 concerned about issues of safety, 
both concerned about the welfare of children, both 
generally concerned about lawfulness; this, 
even though both groups are certainly aware of a cr
iminal gun culture that ranges from drive-by 
shootings to actions like those taken by the very s
ad George Zimmerman. 
 
As I said, I come from a storytelling culture. Thus
, it won't be a surprise that I love the three 
stories you heard his morning: the one about Kailis
h and Elliot, and also Irshad Manji's story and 
Dan Hotchkiss' story.   

    

Irshad Manji's story reflects on the sensitivities 
of Muslim students in a class, when asked 
questions by a curious non-Muslim. In an America, w
here everyone from Pat Robertson to 
Richard Dawkins slams Islam the religion as the pri
mary source of malice in the world, I can 
appreciate some sensitivity. But Irshad then reflec
ts on how defending sensitivities with bristling 
tends to cut off all communication and any chance f
or deeper understanding. She writes 
insightfully: I now appreciate that "Respect me" se
rves as a pitch-perfect dog whistle for "Don't 
challenge me. But," she goes on to say, "(such) ind
ifference is the 
opposite
 of respect. The way 
you honor a person is to ask of him or her an effor
t. That kind of honor trusts in an individual's 
capacity." 

 
In other words, don't get defensive, engage kindly 
and for real. Honor the other's capacities. 
 
Or to tie that story to our own Unitarian Universal
ist ways of approaching community, despite 
the very real diversities here, a community like ou
rs is not really about "live and let live," "you 
do your thing and I'll do mine." It™s about daring 
to find ways to communicate despite 
sensitivities, despite fear of losing control over 
feelings (about guns or anything else), despite a 
culture of directness or a culture of quietness. Ir
shad Manji believes such communication is 
possible. So do I. Otherwise, I would find my parti
cipation in a community like this not very 
satisfying at a deep level. 

 
And then there is the story Dan Hotchkiss tells of 
his time with a group of rabbis. He tells the 
tale of a kind of diversity that leaves him speechl
ess. Truly drastic differences about the place of 
women in Jewish religion, and the debated right to 
say certain prayers. Dan, who defined all of 
these Jewish terms for us, tells us that their sing
le agreement was that 
kaddish
, the prayer for the 
dead, 
had
 to be said for the brother of one of the rabbis pr
esent. Personally, I understand that 
"had to be said" immediacy this week. Since Thursda
y, when I learned that my friend and 
colleague Jane Barraclough, minister in Manchester 
UK (she who took such good care of me on 
my trip there last September), had suddenly died at
 age 50, I could share with any number of 
rabbis a desire to say 
kaddish
. I wanted to sing a 
requiem
. To utter a wailing psalm of lament for 
Jane. The flowers and her photo up here this mornin
g were my way of making a sculptural 
kaddish
, 
requiem, and psalm.
     
 
But this morning, besides wanting to do my own vers
ion of 
kaddish
, I want to lift up the lesson 
Dan Hotchkiss learned from what he experienced. He 
concluded: 
"I, a functional illiterate for 
most of my own retreat, left with a gift of lasting
 awe for fourteen rabbis™ willingness to struggle 
with their differences in the name of a shared purp
ose." 
 
 Our congregation, despite all of our diversities, b
oth named and unnamed, has many shared 
purposes too, that call us to come together, "willi
ngly," no matter how much we agree or 
disagree, no matter how much we are the same, yet d
ifferent. One shared purpose is the same as 
the rabbi that gathered. It™s to grieve when grief 
is called for. A memorial. The offer of 
condolences. It™s also, surely, to celebrate when c
elebration is called for, a wedding, a naming 
ceremony. 

 
But there is another shared purpose, one proclaimed
 by our mission statement:  To relinquish any 
privilege in our lives that keeps us from doing the
 work of justice in the world (as well as the 
work of justice in our own hearts). This is somethi
ng Alice Faryna talked about so clearly this 
morning: 
Health care
, she maintains, 
is unfortunately one area where diversity can be le
thal.
 (Not a soft word, that word 
lethal
!) 
For men turning 60
, she reminded us, 
remaining life 
expectancy is 25 years for high earners, and 19 for
 low wage earners. For all age groups over 
15, there are more deaths among African Americans c
ompared to White Americans, over half 
from heart disease and cancer. The health care cost
 for immigrants is $1000 less per capita than 
for the rest of us." 
 Alice is pointing out that although diversity is a
ll there is, as I said last week, 
human beings have found remarkable ways to twist th
e beauty and strength of that diversity into 
an ugly and shameful system of injustice, saving so
me, damning others.  
 
So I offer this morning that, in this congregation,
 we can share a purpose as deep as mourning 
and rejoicing, one rooted in our Universalist herit
age; and that is to work for a human 
community 
where diversity is mutually beneficial,
 and not a death sentence for some, long life 
for others. Our diversity needs more of the "same b
ut different" that our two grade school 
students, Elliot and Kailish, were able to figure o
ut easily at their tender age.  
 
My sister is selling our parents™ house now; we'll 
have to dispose of everything. Right now, I 
know for sure I don't want to have that gun hanging
 in my place. Guns are not part of my life as 
they are for many of my friends. I don't know what 
she will do with it. She and I are different in 
our outlook about many things. Brothers and sisters
 can be pretty diverse in their outlooks too, 
just like members of a congregation. But I do know 
we will agree to talk about it.  I will ask of 
her that effort, to quote Irshad Manji, and she wil
l ask that of me. Because she will trust my 
capacity to listen to her, and I will trust her cap
acity to listen to me. 
 
Let's be together, sure, even if we do not agree ab
out lots of things. I am convinced it™s a 
radically beautiful way to make a visible and human
e community of spirit in this often spiteful 
and dishonest world.  

 
But let our being together be a form of deep engage
ment, not simply a "you do your thing, I'll do 
my thing." For if that is all we are, then I'm not 
sure of the point of it. I'd be tempted to say, "la
st 
one out, close the lights." 

 
Gladly, I don't think I'll ever have to say that.
  
Integration:   
Recommitting to Our Mission
  Offering 
An opportunity to reinforce what is important to us
, and invest in the ideals and 
principles we share. Your generous contribution all
ows our congregation to 

 transform lives and impact the world around us.
       
 For Evensongs and Covenant groups, for men™s groups
 and Goddesses in Training circles, for 
book clubs and women's ritual circles, for the conc
erted work of
 our
 Justice Action Ministry, 
for 
cleanup days and the School for Young Children, for
 our board meetings and staff meetings, and 
councils and teachers and youth groups and ?cons? a
nd art shows and Immokalee suppers and 
floor mopping and table setting and flower arrangin
g and dancing till late at night, among a 
thousand other things, we give and receive the offe
ring, either this way or electronically during 
the week. 

  

Returning 
Prayer: Prelude to a Song 
 
Spirit of life, not lifelessness...spirit, not some
thing fixed, rigid, but alive, moving, growing, 
blossoming, You, come unto me, in other words, let 
me open my inner eyes to see what has 
always been there, wings and roots and hands all jo
ining together to make a shared and diverse 
world, a world which we are called to make just bec
ause our compassion for other beings can't 
even imagine any other way, although sometimes we k
now we falter. Yet we get up and sing it 
again, and again Œ spirit of life, come unto me. 

 
Singing
  
#123 Spirit of Life 
 
Blessing
  
 
 
