Is the World Really Divided Between 
Unbelievers and Believers? 
October 18, 2009 
Reverend Mark Belletini 
  

 Opening Words
   We are here 

 after a surprisingly chilly week in early autumn
,  to worship, to bring mind and heart to bear 

 in the service of deeper questions, deeper answers
, 
 all that we might learn to love each other better.
 So,
 Mindful that we share a common world, 
 but approach that world in different ways, we begin
 our celebration together by 
kindling our promise of mutual honesty, attentivene
ss, and deep courtesy. May we 
become more proficient at gratitude and awareness, 
that we might more deeply 
embody the kind of justice and peace which embraces
 everyone on earth.
 Sequence
   

Here we are, gathered together at a holy well. 

Here, now, we can bring up living water for our ref
reshment. Lower the bucket 
without any preconceived notions about the taste or
 temperature of the water. 
Lower the bucket. Just know it™s going to bring up 
pure water; after all, it comes from 
very deeps. 

Lower the bucket, even though you know what it brin
gs up will quench your thirst just 
for a while. 

Lower the bucket now. Let the bucket sink on past t
he surface into the deeps.  
Let it sink past the great philosophers and their a
rguments, sink deeper than the prophets, 
who challenged the misuse of authority, sink deeper
 than the poets, who surprised and 
healed us, sink deeper even than the days of our ea
rliest ancestors who looked up at the 
sky, but without any names they could hang upon the
 stars. 
Let it go deeper, past the eras of developing life,
 past the boiling seas and molten moon, 
into the vast Abyss itself, which, billions of year
s ago, flooded with that improbable light 
which flashed out only to concentrate into stars, g
alaxies, emptiness and us. 
Bring the bucket up now. Take the cup that is your 
heart and dip it into the living water, 
and bring the clear refreshment with you to set upo
n the common table. 
Silently, silently, with your whole life behind you
, and your whole life ahead of you, 
lift your cup to your silent lips, and drink, and b
e satisfied–. 
silence
  So many gather around the table of life.  

Notice you are not alone. The living and the dead s
hare this silence, connected by our 
memory and our love. May we now give voice to the l
ove and support that brought us to 
this moment by naming those whom, sharing the table
 with us, we especially notice right 
now.  These we name in silence or aloud as we choos
e. 
  

naming
   

Out of the deep well of life and time we come, 

generation after generation, to sit at the 

common table while we learn to share 

the other gifts of the well: silence, word, 

autumn, trust, beauty, longing and music: 

  

The First Reading 
comes from the book Yearnings: Embracing the Sacred
 Messiness of 
Life by Rabbi Irwin Kula 3 years ago. 

The word 
God
 so often trips us up. For many of us the notion of
 a personal God seems 
anachronistic, something that comforted our parents
 or grandparents but is irrelevant to 
us. We™ve rejected those patriarchal and punitive i
mages we were taught in religious 
school, or church, or temple. Others hold on for de
ar life to a traditional image of an 
Almighty who keeps score. Still others have interna
lized the idea: God is within, not 
outside. God is us. Or perhaps there is no God at a
ll. Everyone has a truth about God or 
no God, and typically, we™re uncomfortable with eac
h other. 
  

But I say: to deny or to affirm–both can be holy.  
There is a wonderful passage in the 
Talmud describing one of the steps in the process o
f being ordained a rabbi. Every 
rabbinical student must make an argument for the pu
rity of a specific food, offering 49 
reasons justifying the position taken, and 49 reaso
ns justifying the position 
not
 taken. The 
point is, one cannot understand the reasons for a d
ecision unless one understands the 
other side. Why 49? The implication is that every d
ecision unfolds worlds of possibilities. 
Every decision creates as many uncertainties as cer
tainties. 
  

But yet, we must act in the world. And how much eas
ier will it be to act if we understand 
we don™t have to strive for 100% certainty? Isn™t i
t more authentic to be 51% sure 
instead?  This way, even as we become clearer, we a
re still engaged in the questions. The 
other 49 percent remains alive in us. 

  The Second Reading 
comes from a wise, intelligent and insightful text 
by the Buddhist 
teacher Sharon Salzberg, called Faith: Trusting You
r Own Deepest Experience, written 
seven years ago.
   After his enlightenment, the Buddha arose from his 
place under the tree, and set out 
walking along the road. The first person he encount
ered was struck by the power of his 
presence, and asked, ?Who are you?? 

The Buddha replied, ?I am awakened.? The man just s
aid, ?Well, maybe,? and walked 
away. Had he shown curiosity, taken the time to fol
low up on his doubt by asking 
questions, he might have discovered some-thing prof
oundly transforming. This kind of 
walk-away doubt manifests as cynicism, which is act
ually a self-protective mechanism. A 
cynical stance allows us to feel smart and unthreat
ened without really being involved. We 
can look sophisticated, remain safe, aloof, at a di
stance. But habitual suspicion belittles 
all dreams of change until they simply fade and we 
no longer believe change to be 
possible. We feel impervious and confident, knowing
 we are not gullible, not going to be 
swayed. 

  

Of course, sometimes doubt seems to be sincere ques
tioning, but underneath, endless 
abstraction leaves the questioner uninvolved. Thus,
 the tendency to fixate on big, 
unanswerable questions like ?Is there a God?? or ?W
as there a beginning to the 
universe?? was characterized by the Buddha as ?a de
sert, a jungle, a puppet show, an 
entanglement of speculation.? Instead, he urged eve
ryone to find answers for themselves 
in a way
 that would help them resolve suffering in their li
fe. 
Sermon
  I didn™t make a precise list or anything, but I rec
kon almost 25 of you kindly took the 
time to tell me about Garrison Keillor™s little rad
io skit which you heard on 
Prairie Home 
Companion
 two weeks back. If the rest of you didn™t hear it,
 you can still find the script 
on line when you put in Keillor™s name and the name
 of our religious movement: the 
Unitarian Universalists. You see, the skit talks ab
out– us. It tells the story of a football 
game between the deeply democratic Unitarian Univer
salists of United University and 
some angry Baptists from Gethsemane Seminary and Se
minar Center. The Baptists 
really 
want to win to prove their view of things. The Unit
arian Universalists don™t care if they 
lose, and even bet their entire endowment that they
 
will 
lose. Of course, as they™re about 
to do just that, clouds gather, a wind blows strong
 and hard, and the Baptists were all 
knocked to the ground, allowing the Unitarian Unive
rsalists to score the winning 
touchdown. 

  

Now it seems to me that Mr. Keillor is 
always 
mentioning Unitarian Universalists on his 
show. And he also mentions the Lutherans, the Catho
lics, the Jews, and the 
Episcopalians. As far as I can tell, each of these 
religious groups gets a pretty even 
satirical treatment, including his own chosen denom
ination, the Episcopal Church. 
 
Funny thing is, whereas many Unitarian Universalist
s outside Minnesota 
love
 his gentle 
jabs at our foibles (and even though some people ha
ve actually found us 
because 
they 
first heard about us 
on
 his show), I know a number of our sisters and brot
hers in 
Minnesota who see things differently. They think Mr
. Keiller really doesn™t like us much. 
They think his caricatures are distorted depictions
, and that his ridicule is real. 
  

Frankly, I have no way of knowing what he thinks of
 us. But it™s clear to me that 
Unitarian Universalists can hold radically differen
t opinions from each other about 
something as unimportant as a radio personality™s o
pinion of us. And, here I must add, 

they disagree about his motives 
without
 offering a shred of concrete evidence to back up 
either of these opinions. They just interpret their
 own feelings about it, and proclaim it a 
fact. 

  

All of this reminds me of an event I™ve mentioned b
efore from this pulpit, when a student 
at my seminary out in California wanted to celebrat
e the memory of Miguel Serveto (or 
Michael Servetus), the great Spanish heretic of the
 16
th
 century who set the radical 
Reformation in motion with his questions and jibes.
 The suggestion of the organizer, 
namely, that we celebrate him by hosting a Michael 
Servetus Memorial Barbeque, raised 
the temperatures of about half the student populati
on past the boiling-point. ?That cruel 
theologian John Calvin burnt this man at the stake,
 for godsake! The stake! Do you know 
how awful death by fire is? How can you even think 
of using his name and the word 
‚barbeque™ in the same sentence! Are you a monster?
?  The organizer™s friends thought it 
was just ?playful,? and scolded their fellow studen
ts for having ?no sense of humor or 
irony.?   

  

Well, the event did take place– but it tore an emot
ional rift in the student body that 
lasted for years. 

  

Rabbi Kula, in the first readings, suggests that th
e same disagreements are true about 
deep, complex words like God. ?Everyone has a truth
 about God– or no God,? he says, 
?and typically, we™re uncomfortable with each other
.?  
  

It™s that discomfort I want to look at right now. 

  

First, I want to lift up the title of this sermon: 
?Is the world really divided between 
believers and un-believers??  I™ll give my answer t
o that question right now. 
  

No. 

  

Second, I want you to know I worded my title that w
ay to make a point. Both the words 
?believer? and ?unbeliever? are not our usual Unita
rian Universalist words. Oh, they 
ARE commonly used in some of workplaces, in some of
 our family gatherings, and 
certainly in the press. Just not around the church.
 I think of when the 
Columbus Dispatch
 reported on how our congregation dealt with the hor
rible shooting in our Knoxville, 
Tennessee church. The article™s byline said of our 
church, ?All believers are welcome 
here.?  A number of folks told me they were very up
set about that word, ?believer,? being 
used in a phrase that described our ?open-mindednes
s,? a word that she also used, by the 
way. But because ?believer? is simply not one of ou
r commonly used words, I can 
understand why it rubbed some of us the wrong way. 
Because I DO know that both 
words ARE used by many rather conservative Christia
n denominations. I™m thinking of 
phrases like ?believers™ baptism? or ?believers™ vo
ice of victory.? And ?unbelievers? are 
often castigated from behind the Plexiglas pulpits 
of many large mega-churches, both on 
television and around here. Thus, these words ARE i
ndeed favored by one of the more 
articulate and media savvy cultures in the US today
, namely, conservative Evangelical 
religion. Thus, the either/or contrast of 
belief/unbelief
 seems to be associated with the 

theological approach of a specifically Protestant m
ovement which self-describes as 
Evangelical.  Jews, Catholics, and Buddhists hardly
 ever use such language, avoiding the 
word ?non-believer,? and opting instead for words l
ike ?unobservant,? ?non-practicing,? 
?lapsed? or even, at the harsher end, ?apostate.? B
ut most certainly, ?believer? is just not 
a word used around here. So at the very least, the 
Dispatch
 article was not an accurate 
presentation of our way of speaking, although, as I
 said, the rest of the article represented 
us fairly.  

  

So, in other words, any worldview that divides the 
world into 
believers
 and 
unbelievers
 doesn™t really have much to do with Unitarian Unive
rsalism. 
  

The trouble is, the conservative Evangelicals have 
indeed decided, as Garisson Keillor 
suggests in his skit, on 
winning
 at this game. Not football, but the 
language
 game. And 
we, apparently, have decided to 
lose
 it, and bet our whole spiritual endowment on it.  
 
What I mean is this: I often talk with Unitarian Un
iversalists who have decided that 
words like ?faith? and ?God? and ?creation? are wor
ds we have to either 
believe
 or 
un-
believe
; to use, or not use, in some absolute division of 
the world into 
those guys
 and 
us 
skeptics
. In other words, I often find that we just 
give away wholesale 
the authority to 
define religion, religious language, religious meta
phors etc. for ourselves. And we give it 
away to whom? To the very theological rhetoric that
 many Unitarian Universalists find 
exasperating, namely, ultra-conservative Evangelica
l Christianity with its vocabulary of 
hell and heaven, the saved and the ?left behind.? I
t™s as if we need to be on the defensive 
against them, and jerk and flop around on their pup
pet strings, instead of rising up 
ourselves and articulating what™s meaningful to our
selves, in our own language, and 
without apology for refusing to split the world int
o 
this and that
, 
those people and us 
skeptics
.   
  

Now I really want you to hear me carefully when I u
se the word ?Evangelical.? I am 
always using the word ?right-wing? or ?conservative
? in front of it. The word 
Evangelical by itself, however, can fairly be used 
by a large number of churches, 
churches that run the gamut from traditional to rad
ical, from creedless to creedal; from 
those churches with rock bands and pop music to chu
rches like the Crystal Cathedral with 
a pipe organ and pews. The recent upwelling–and I d
o mean recent–in the last 75 
years, I mean–of a loud and frequently televised 
right-wing
 Evangelical voice in our 
nation 
is indeed 
something new. As the terrifying ?prosperity gospel
? theology 
is
 new. 
As even television itself is new. But Evangelicalis
m itself, without modifiers, is old. And 
various in form. It™s really not defined once and f
or all by your Cousin Betty or Uncle Joe 
slipping scripture-packed pamphlets into your coat 
pocket at the family reunion in order 
to save you. Listen, the Evangelical movement in th
e United States embraces Methodists 
and Baptists as well as idiosyncratic non-denominat
ional mega-Churches like World 
Harvest down in Canal Winchester. And despite this 
new trend of some Evangelicals to 
link themselves with the right-wing politics of our
 day, Evangelicals in the last century 
were different. They were the ones, in fact, who sp
oke out loudest against slavery, 
loudest on behalf of women™s rights and education. 
Remember, Oberlin College here in 
Ohio has an Evangelical origin, and it was among th
e first schools in the US to admit 
both women and persons of color into their educatio
nal system. And even in this century, 

among some progressive evangelical congregations, y
ou™ll find these words of 
affirmation: 
Finding a home in God™s wilderness,
we seek to savor God
and magnify 
the longings of Jesus.
We dare to be uncertain.
Practicing compassion and awakening 
conscience,
we bear hope for a suffering world.
In this Spirit, we honor one another 
in beloved community.
  (Seeker Statement, First Congregational, Berkeley
 CA) 
  

Is that a statement of belief? Or a confession of  
unbelief? Or is it a poem that is not 
served at all by 
either
 of those two words? I answer that second question 
with a 
resounding 
yes
! Poetry is not a creed!  
  

I find myself amused and aggravated at the same tim
e - a very odd feeling - when a 
Unitarian Universalist in some church where I am gu
est preaching comes up and rudely 
questions me because I favorably quoted the Gospel 
of Luke in the sermon. ?You™re not 
one of those Christians, are you??    I answer as p
atiently as I can, but, on my better days 
(and I do have them now and then), I do the right t
hing, and always try to move my 
questioner 
away
 from talk of Jesus and 
toward
 a conversation about his or her actual life. 
I almost always find out that Jesus is not really t
he issue, just a symbol used to stop any 
real conversation. The issue is really about this w
hole confusion of symbolic words with 
the individual stories of real human lives. It™s ab
out how we are 
always
 going to see 
things from different vantages (and probably will t
ill the end of time), and that unity of 
thought and image will never arrive. But sometimes,
 we pretend that™s not true, and that 
disdaining someone else™s metaphors matters more th
an our actual lives.  
  

Maybe all this is best represented by the famous li
ne drawing on the cover, a so-called 
?optical illusion?–looking at it, some will see an 
elderly woman, others a young 
woman–, but the thing is, these inky lines will alw
ays remain a reality that invites 
different responses 
which cannot be seen at the same time.
   

Mr.Yellow™s point of view, or Mr. Pink™s point of v
iew? the story asks this morning. 
Now please, in no way is this story putting Darwini
an evolution on the same shelf as the 
maddening Six-Day creation story offered by the Cre
ation Museum down in Cincinnati. 
Please don™t imagine this story is saying that ever
y philosophical theory is the same, and 
all you need do is throw a dart and pick one, and t
hat we don™t have to go deeper and sift 
out the meaningful from the merely comforting (even
 though we probably need 
both
 meaning 
and
 comfort in our lives).  No, this story was written
 by its author to help 
children think about philosophy, and the questions 
that philosophers raise, about God, or 
about creation/ evolution. But please note that, in
 the end, both Pink and Yellow are so 
caught up in their abstract thinking and logical qu
estions neither of them can make sense 
of their 
actual 
reality–that they are both just wooden puppets.  Ne
ither God, nor 
happenstance–something entirely different and unexp
ected–a mystery they really 
cannot fathom. And that ending tugs at me deeply– b
ecause for me, faith is not a list of 
?I believes and I don™t believes?--- that™s totally
 another religious way of interpreting the 
world. For me, faith is this: trusting myself to be
 open to what is different and 
unexpected, combined with a deep conviction that I 
can usually grow wiser from an 
encounter with the different and unexpected.  

  

Sharon Salzberg agrees. She says she prefers to be 
more than merely cynical, always 
doubting every thing. ?Habitual suspicion,? she aff
irms, ?belittles all dreams of change 
until they simply fade, and we no longer believe ch
ange to be possible.?  She says that 
being 
only
 doubtful without also finding a way to be faithful
 is merely a way of staying 
?safe, aloof? and ?uninvolved.? But then she cautio
ns something more: ?Sometimes,? she 
says,  ?doubt 
seems
 to be sincere questioning, but underneath, endless
 abstraction leaves 
the questioner uninvolved. Thus, the tendency to fi
xate on big, unanswerable questions 
like ‚Is there a God?™ or ‚Was there a beginning to
 the universe?™ was characterized by 
the Buddha according to one of the Buddhist scriptu
res as ‚a desert, a jungle, a puppet 
show, an entanglement of speculation.™ ?Instead,? w
rites Salzberg, ?Buddha urged 
everyone to find answers for themselves 
in a way
 that would help them resolve suffering 
in their life.? 

  

That™s a beautiful idea. Finding answers for oursel
ves 
in a way
 that will help us resolve 
suffering in our very real lives. She™s saying that
 the concepts of belief, trust and faith can 
be purposeful, and not merely be imposed on us by a
uthoritarian figures. We can own our 
own faith, instead of rejecting someone else™s fait
h. We do not say at any Unitarian 
Universalist congregation that our faith is a fixed
 tradition to be handed down to our 
children, once and for all–no we want their voice t
o help create that tradition. And, like 
Buddha, we say that our beliefs, whatever they may 
be, need to be in the service of 
resolving the real injustices, pains, tragedies and
 suffering in the world, including in our 
own lives. And we™ve said this, mind you, for hundr
eds of years. 
  

Trying to understand how your cousin or uncle with 
the tracts thinks and reasons might 
actually be worth a bit of your time now and again.
 Maybe they are not just tract stuffers. 
Maybe they are actually whole people. OK, maybe 
you
 don™t need to do that, or maybe 
you tried that but had not issue, but God knows I n
eed to. When I take a little time to talk 
with such folks, instead of saying a simple ?No tha
nks? to their pamphlets, I almost 
always find that their so-called ?belief? is not 10
0% either. Not as low as 51% like Rabbi 
Kula suggests, but not an 
either/or
 hundred percent either. And I find out that they m
ight 
be lonely, like I feel lonely sometimes; or they ha
ve conflicting needs, like I have; or they 
are deeply grieving, like I am, forever and ever am
en. Now, don™t get me wrong. I still, of 
course, will need to draw a good boundary when some
one who calls him or herself a 
?believer? tries to argue with me that I am a mere 
?unbeliever? and don™t know a damn 
thing until I submit to their preferred vocabulary.
  The kindest response I can make to 
such aggression is simply ?Go away.?  

  

But if I attend a neighbor™s funeral, and his famil
y asks me to sing with them the old 
hymn ?Nearer My God to Thee? (written by the Englis
h Unitarian Sarah Flower Adams, 
by the way), I am not outlining my belief system in
 some geography of God™s nearness. I 
am singing an ancient human song of grief and comfo
rt that has little to do with either 
belief or unbelief. Sometimes a song is just a song
. 
  

So I say, let Garrison Kieller have his fun with us
. Let him joke about a great wind 
coming out of Heaven to blow the Baptists down on t
hat football field. It™s really is kind 
of a funny image. And frankly, I don™t know how he 
really
 sees us. All I know is that my 

whole being responds to the way our Unitarian Unive
rsalist heritage invites us to live our 
lives–not by making little lists of beliefs and unb
eliefs, not by ridiculing faith as mere 
credulity, or converting the sacred privilege of do
ubt into perpetual cynicism. But by 
committing ourselves to being open to all the possi
bilities that we don™t now expect, and 
to remain open to learning from them, and being tra
nsformed for the better by them. At 
least, that™s how I see things this morning. 

Offering
  Only the free gifts of the members and friends 
of this congregation keep it strong. There are 

no outside sources, no hidden resources, no 

denominational assets to draw on. To be an 

independent congregation, as all Unitarian  

Universalist congregations are, means to bear 

the full responsibility for everything ourselves, 

the cost and privilege of our freedom to decide 

for ourselves. The opportunity to give gifts 

this way, instead of electronically, is here. 

  Litany of the Table 
(with Sarah Weigand, representing the Religious Edu
cation aspect of 
our community.)
  We™re gonna build up a welcome table. 

 We™re gonna sit at the welcome table.
 We™re gonna set out some great big dishes. 

 We™re gonna sit at the welcome table.
 We™re gonna set up the toasting glasses. 

 We™re gonna sit at the welcome table.
 We™re gonna bring out the food we™d planted. 

 We™re gonna sit at the welcome table.
 We™re gonna set forth the harvest plenty. 

  
We™re gonna sit at the welcome table.
 We™re gonna do it with love and patience. 

 We™re gonna sit at the welcome table.
 We™re gonna bless both feast and the feasters
.  We™re gonna sit at the welcome table.
  
     
