 1 2007-11-4 Our Whole Lives 

 
Opening words from Our Whole Lives class. They were
 written by Mike Lange)
  
We are here 

to center, to explore 

to learn, to understand, 

not to judge, 

not to shun, 

not to feel alone. 

 
Together we™ll do our best to learn and grow. 

 
Thus we say: 



??
?ˆ

?
 
Naming Ceremony 9 AM 

Sequence 

 
Before the sun and moon, 

before the processions of time and stars, 

before the Oneness that grounds the Many, 

I pray: may I never be ashamed to be who I am. 

 
If I disappoint someone who would like me to stand 
for someone else in their lives, let me not be 
ashamed to be who I am. 

 
If my face does not match the faces on billboards, 
or if I do not resemble the  runway crowd, let me n
ot 
be ashamed to be who I am. 

 
If I do not do what I sense others want me to do, l
et me not be ashamed to be who I am. 
 
If I am not yet what I would like to become, let me
 not be ashamed to be who I am now. 
 
If I do not believe what others want me to believe 
as a blessing on what they believe, let me not be 
ashamed to believe what I believe. 

 
If I am not yet entirely comfortable when I dance, 
or refuse to dance; when I sing, or do not sing; or
 
when I sit still during this span of deliberate sil
ence, let me not be ashamed to be who I am. 
 
silence 

 
If I am not aware of how interdependent I am  with 
those I love, those who love me, those who have 
gone before me and those I trust, or even mistrust,
 then why would I, or anyone, ever talk of the 
spiritual life, or understand the promptings of our
 inner life? 
 
 2 If I am not able to leave any sense of entitlement 
I may feel, and take my place in the larger circle 
of 
life and love, of which I am only one small part, t
hen how will I face the reality of my limitations? 
 Let 
our hearts and lips open now, that we might name in
 silence, or within this community, the lives with 
whom our own lives are inextricably joined–
  
naming 

 
If you and I speak of love, of freedom, of joy, and
 are not aware of how music speaks still more 
eloquently of such values, then let our hearts open
 even wider now and receive–
  
The First Reading
 comes from the text Sexuality and Our Faith
, which is a companion book to the 
curriculum Our Whole Lives
, a highly praised curriculum on sexuality we share
 with the United 
Church of Christ. These words were crafted by a var
iety of Unitarian Universalists, and refer to our 
principles–. 

 
The inherent worth and dignity of every person.. 

Every person's sexuality is sacred and is worthy of
 respect, therefore it is not to be violated.
  
Justice, equity and compassion in human relations–
 We treat others as we would want to be treated; the
refore sexual exploitation and interpersonal 
violence are wrong.
  
Acceptance of one another and encouragement to spir
itual growth–
 Accepting each other as we are means doing no harm 
and fostering well-being in one's self and 
others.
  
A free and responsible search for truth and meaning
– In our relationship to others, our freedom of sexua
lity is as important as the responsibility for it. 
 
The right of conscience and the use of the democrat
ic process within our congregations and society at 
large– 

As a community and as an institution, we are respon
sible for creating a secure, safe, and 
nonviolent environment. 

 
The goal of a world community with peace, liberty a
nd justice for all–
 We have the opportunity to create the kind of envir
onment that lends itself to peace, liberty, and 
justice in human interactions, and we can 

become a model for the rest of society.
  
Respect for the interdependent web of all existence
 of which we are part–
 When we respect each person's sexual integrity, we 
honor the wholeness 
of life and respect the web of all existence. 

 
The Second Reading 
comes from the magnificent and most useful text, Ch
anging Bodies Changing 
Lives
. It™s a poem by a high school student, Amy C. Rose
n, and it™s called Lemon    
 
They try and tell me I'm not what I think. 

They dye me and fill me full of their things. 

Conform me. I am myself. I am fresh and sunny. Me. 

They take me and reap me. Stamp me "Sun-Kissed." 

 3 They use my juice. Squeeze the life out of me. 

They take my scent to clean dishes and make hands s
ofter. 
They use my seeds to grow more. 

They throw away my skin, my shell. 

 
Nothing left. 

 
I want to peel the skin off and show you the sun! 

Well, damn you. Yes, you.       

I want you to see me. 

Don't say I'm fake. 

I'm not unreal. 

I am me. 

 
Sermon 

 
It™s hard to keep up around this place sometimes. T
here are so many events listed in our calendar, tha
t I 
don™t always know all the things that are going on 
around here, and I am one of your ministers. 
Concerts, lectures, classes, dances, special meals 
for special groups, business meetings, potlucks, 
covenant groups, bridge groups, meditation circles,
 films, rehearsals–  the place is a veritable spiri
tual 
Times Square, abuzz and alive. 

 
But some of the best things that go on around here 
are not listed on the kiosk out in the Gallery. I a
m 
thinking particularly this morning about the curric
ulum we are now offering to our junior high youth, 
which addresses aspects of human sexuality.   

 
The name we give to this curriculum, 
Our Whole Lives
, does not necessarily tell you that it has to do 
with sexuality. The phrase could be a line in a poe
m or a prayer; there is nothing particularly 
suggestive of anything in that title of any particu
lar theme, it™s so global in scope. 
 
But nonetheless, this most excellent curriculum is 
about sexuality. And the title is indeed significan
t 
because sexuality is not something added to our liv
es, but rather, something that touches all aspects 
of 
our lives–our emotions, our whole bodies, our intel
lects, our relationships, our decisions, our 
boundaries, our senses, our health, our yearnings, 
our self-esteem and self-doubt, our fears, our desi
res, 
our imagery, our stereotypes, our hopes, our dissat
isfactions, our values, our joys and our capacity f
or 
pleasure, affection and love. 

 
The course was put together by two religious associ
ations, our own, namely the Unitarian Universalist 
Association, and our historical cousins, the United
 Church of Christ, which some of you may know 
better by the name it was called throughout most of
 its history: the Congregational Church.  
 
Our Whole Lives
 is used widely in both religious groups. You™ll fi
nd only a few language differences, 
usually centering on theological reflection. The co
urse work addresses different age groups, in age-
appropriate ways. 
Our Whole Lives 
courses
 ( or OWL, as it is sometimes called)
 have been written for 
younger children, ages 5 and 6, and they have been 
written for adults. It™s often most associated with
 
younger teenagers, since the reality of sexuality u
sually begins to impact that age group in a 
particularly powerful way. 

 
But sexuality itself pervades all of life. And it i
s not something confined to our biology: that birds
-and-
bees business, and plaster cross-sections of the ma
le and female bodies. Sexuality touches on all the 

 4 questions of life. No matter your age. No matter yo
ur gender. No matter your temperament. No matter 
your resistance to it. 

 
When students in grades 7 to 9 take this course, fo
r example, they start off with questions that seem 
at 
first to have little to do with sexuality, as it is
 commonly understood. Yet sexuality in some form or
 
another touches every one of these questions. 

 
For example, let™s do one of the warm-up exercises 
found in the workbook. I will ask you to rise, as 
you are willing and able, and face the center of th
e room. I want you to be able to see each other as 
much as possible. I will ask some questions, and th
en I would like you to raise your hand if the answe
r 
is yes, and keep your hands at your sides if your a
nswer is no. If doing something like this is really
 
uncomfortable for you, you are most welcome not to 
raise your hand at all, but do notice the number 
who do, when I ask these questions. There is always
 something to learn. 
 
How many of you: 

Grew up in this area? 

Have grandchildren? 

Use the internet? 

Had an argument with your child or children this we
ek? 
Are the oldest child in your family? 

Are the youngest child in your family? 

Are the middle child in your family? 

Are the only child in your family? 

Have a parent living with you? 

Are a single parent? 

Have a good friend of a different race or 

ethnic background? 

Have a good friend who is gay, lesbian or bisexual?
 Received a good sexuality education at home? 

Received a good sexuality education at school? 

Can talk openly about sexuality at any time? 

 
 ---
congregation does
 so
--------- 
 
You have noticed that sometimes you were almost alo
ne, and at other times, you were part of a 
majority. There is learning in that. You may have n
oticed that you felt more uncomfortable about some 
questions than about others. There is learning in t
hat too. And 
Our Whole Lives
 is a tool for just 
that–learning. 

 
Now of course, not all the learning comes from answ
ering questions about personal experience. 
There are days where exploring the language and bio
logy of sexuality is pretty straightforward. 
There are also formal brainstorming exercises, such
 as where the student is asked, ?How do 
stereotypes hurt females?? and ?How do stereotypes 
hurt males?? When the lists are made, the 
workbook offers even more suggestions about the hig
h price we pay for a lack of consciousness. 
 
Many people I know seem to think that stereotyping 
is primarily something men do to women. But 
men often accept stereotypes from women, and from t
heir fellow men, and the culture at large. And 
these stereotypes are deadly. 

 
 5 For example, did you know that when boys accept ste
reotypes about what it means to be male, they (1) 
are more likely than females to be heavy users of a
lcohol and drugs; (2) less likely to seek help (for
 
anything!); (3) less concerned about their health t
han females; (4) have fewer friends than females; (
5) 
are more likely to engage in risk-taking behaviors;
 and (6), are far more likely to die from suicide t
han 
females? 

 
These are the sobering realities a good sexuality e
ducation needs to provide once you get past the 
vas deferens
 and 
fallopian tubes
 in human bodies. 
 
Because sexuality is about our whole lives, not jus
t about certain parts of our bodies. 
 
Sometimes people are shocked that 
Our Whole Lives
 addresses kids as young as kindergarteners. But 
this shock is based on the old social mythology tha
t human sexuality begins with puberty, and that 
children are simply not equipped to deal, at an age
-appropriate level, of course, with the realities o
f 
relationship, gender and curiosity about bodily dif
ferences. My two oldest godchildren, Adam and 
Toby, for example, were raised by parents who recog
nized there is not one whit of evidence to support 
the rather dangerous mythology that children should
 be exempt from any discussion of issues around 
sexuality. Adam™s and Toby™s parents never once sto
oped to red-faced shame when answering any 
question their sons had, even when they were two ye
ars old. As a result, both of my godsons are 
healthy, responsible young men who live without ste
reotypes about women, about sexual minorities, 
and who live without shame about their own bodies, 
their own feelings and their own values. Are they 
perfect? C™mon. Who is? But do they live without sh
ame and ignorance? Absolutely.  
 
And make no bones about it. Everyone in this room 
receives a sexual education somewhere
. They 
tinker one together from their friends, and whateve
r embarrassment their family, the media and their 
religious institutions hand them. The education may
 be full of misinformation, like that dazzling new 
museum down in Kentucky which, based on fundamental
ist teaching, asserts that dinosaurs walked in 
the Garden of Eden alongside Adam and Eve, only a f
ew thousand years ago. But just as the museum 
impresses almost everyone with its well-crafted, if
 cruelly erroneous, exhibits, so the dazzling 
sexuality education many of us receive at the hands
 of well-meaning but uneducated peers can lead to 
disaster. For example, the mother of my godsons use
d to be a counselor in a health clinic. A bright 
young woman with an excellent college education cam
e to her to express her dismay and surprise that 
she was pregnant.  ?You are surprised that you are 
pregnant,? my friend noted. ?Do you think your 
birth control methods failed this time?? 

 
?Well,? said her client, ?it™s not my fault that I 
am pregnant. I practice birth control. After all, I
 did 
stand up after my husband and I had made love.?  My
 friend didn™t quite understand what that meant, 
and said so. ?Well,? explained the young woman, ?ev
eryone knows that gravity pulls everything 
toward the earth, so naturally, if you stand up aft
er you make love, you can™t get pregnant. The sperm
 
can™t make it to the egg because of gravity.? 

 
My friend was dumbfounded. But she learned, that da
y, the power of the sex education youngsters get 
out on the street–the sex education of hearsay and 
fantasy–is real and rampant. And that an 
education about science, the arts or engineering do
es not educate you about sexuality. 
 
A lot of sexuality education has to do with learnin
g to accept yourself for who you are. Are you tall?
 
Closer to the ground? Shy? Covered in freckles? Is 
your hair glossy or curly or straight or thin or 
cowlicked or that shade of red that everyone likes 
to mock? Is your body larger or smaller? If you are
 a 
girl or woman, are you concerned about your figure?
 If you are a boy or a man, are you concerned 

 6 about the plenitude or absence of body hair? Do you
 worry about your strength, or virility? Do you 
accept yourself as you are? 

 
I think of the moving, angry poem written by Amy Co
hen, a high school student. She perceives, quite 
accurately I think, that it™s easy to fall into bei
ng ashamed of who you are, especially around the ar
ea 
of sexuality. Just like they dye lemons to make the
m a conforming yellow, so does modern society 
tend to suggest that conformity would be better for
 us all. And that we should be ashamed if we are no
t 
ashamed to be who we are. 

 
I want you to see me, says the poet. 

Don't say I'm fake. 

I'm not unreal. I am me. 

 
Wanting to be seen for who we are, not for whom oth
ers think we should be, is the basis of healthy 
self-esteem. Without comfort in our own skins, with
out self-acceptance, life is about ten times more 
difficult than it need be. A good sexuality educati
on helps students to learn that not only are they n
ot 
fake, not only are they not unreal, they are precio
us and lovable, and do not have to pretend to be 
someone other than they are in order to get through
 life. 
 
A good sexuality education, like 
Our Whole Lives, 
suggests that people, younger and older, already 
know an awful lot about themselves, and that they s
hould learn to trust that information, not sell it 
to 
the person who promises to love them if they will c
onform to them. I think of all the years when young
 
transsexual high school students–a small minority, 
yes, but a significant one–have said things to 
adults like, ?I feel like a woman trapped in a man™
s body.? Or vice versa, depending on the gender. 
And everyone tended to tell them just to shut up, a
nd, like Joan of Arc™s tormentors told her, ?Just 
conform, stop talking nonsense and wear the ‚right™
 clothes.? 
 
Now, recent studies at a significant and respected 
brain study institute in the Netherlands have shown
 rather convincing evidence that the brains of trans
gender persons in the hypo-thalamus area resemble 
those in the other gender completely, so that the p
hrase ?I feel like a woman trapped in a man™s body?
 
is not a metaphor, but cool and accurate self-discl
osure. As they always said. Why do we not listen to
 
each other? 

 
It has always troubled me that so-called civilizati
on is often based on the destructive idea that othe
rs 
know more about you and me than you and I do, and t
hat what we know of ourselves is self-delusion if 
it does not conform to some norm.  A norm determine
d by folks who seem to live in an atmosphere of 
fear and loathing that must be as devastating to th
em as it is to the rest of us. 
 
It has also troubled me deeply over the years when 
I hear critics of our free religious tradition–both
 
inside as well as outside that tradition– suggestin
g that because we don™t have either a creed or 
binding sacred book, because we encourage folks to 
feel good about who they are instead of 
encouraging them to imagine themselves as creatures
 who enrage a whimsical God by simply being 
born, that we have no firm ethical stance on things
. That we are immoral. That because we teach 
principles and develop ?values? instead of submitti
ng to unbending regulations from folks who claim 
to know things no one can possibly know, we have no
 sense of limit or violation or yes, wrong. 
 
This is, I™d say, delusional. At best. A delusion b
ased on an abject terror of freedom™s integrity. I 
think 
that the example given in the first reading, which 
unfolds our Unitarian Universalist principles as th
ey 
relate to sexuality, responds, with simply and heal
ing humility, to our arrogant critics:  
 
 7 Every person's sexuality is sacred and is worthy of
 respect, therefore it is not to be violated.
 We treat others as we would want to be treated; the
refore sexual exploitation and interpersonal 
violence are wrong.
 As a community and as an institution, we are respon
sible for creating a 
secure, safe, and non-violent environment. We have 
the opportunity to create the kind of 
environment that lends itself to peace, liberty, an
d justice in human interactions, and we can 
become a model for the rest of society. When we res
pect each person's sexual integrity, we honor 
the wholeness
 of life and respect the web of all existence.
  
I have been thrilled all week as I have been readin
g the 
Our Whole Lives
 materials. I™ve been proud to 
be part of a church which offers such a loving, una
shamed education to the younger set growing into 
their maturity. I™ve been almost envious about thei
r luck in getting to learn in this way. Believe me,
 the 
sexual education I received from family, society, c
hurch and state was so distorted and misinformed 
that I am only now, at age 58, beginning to recover
 from it, and to accept myself for who I am, not fo
r 
who folks would like me to be.  

 
This church may be like Times Square, with a thousa
nd things going on. I love to see the dances and 
potlucks, the earnest teaching and films, the meeti
ngs and creativity. There is some joy there, joy fr
om 
which the larger world, as well as ourselves, might
 benefit. 
 
But I think there is a deeper joy when any of us ca
n be glad to accept ourselves as we are. I think th
ere 
is a truer joy when we can face the truths of our u
nique and individual lives and not run away, but 
explore deeper. 
There are numerous strings in your lute;
 Tagore wrote in the song we sang earlier, 
let 
me set my own among them.
 Why? Because the string of my life is worthy. I ne
ed not be ashamed to be 
one of the necessary strings in the lute that plays
 the music of the spheres. Yes, that joyful music. 
That™s the joy the German poet Schiller writes abou
t, the joy which ?lures the roses out of their buds
, 
and the stars out of their orbits.? It™s the joy th
at makes the universe the universe, he says, the mo
st 
important and basic joy in our whole lives. And I a
m here to say this morning that sexuality, in all o
f 
its dimensions, is one of the mainsprings of that j
oy.  
 
For those who learn about their whole lives, and th
ose who teach from within the context of their 
whole lives, and for those who now rejoice with me,
 my thanks in this month of thanksgiving. 
 
Offering 

 
No walls without a foundation. 

No earth without sky. 

No thirst when there is water. 

No defeat when there is hope. 

No joy without facing reality first. 

No church without generosity from 

those who agree to be a church.  

 
Joyful, jazzy prayer–. 
(jazz melody interspersed) 
 
That we are bodies with breath and  the capacity bo
th for pleasure and boundaries, joy! 
That our minds flow with strength and vulnerability
, joy! 
That we can live by principle, and learn to love bo
th self and others better each day, joy! 
That we are alive, together, and can learn and not 
run from either truth or truth-telling in the sacre
d 
circle of conversation, joy! 

