 2008-4-20 Land 

Rev. Mark Belletini 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

born of the earth and many generations 

to worship, to open ourselves to wholeness, 

to remember that the land we cross, day by day,  

the land we sheathe in concrete and tar and war, 

is our source, our end, our past and our future
, 
a mystery no less than ourselves,  

a great summons to thanks and praise. So
,  
 
Mindful that a growing vision of a just world calls
 us together, that a community of commitment, coura
ge and 
care sustains us, and that a life transformed by de
pth of spirit may illumine our way, we have kindled
 this light 
as the sign of our circle of life and love.
  
Sequence 

 
When set against the cold of space, 

the earth is warm, the earth is warm. 

When set against my sun-lit skin, 

the earth is cool, the earth is cool. 

When turned in spring, with shovel and hoe, 

the earth glows black, the earth glows black. 

When planted with seed, and watered by rain, 

the earth grows green, the earth grows green. 

When shaking or flooding or drying or cracking, 

the earth bends will, the earth bends will. 

When embracing the death of those we love, 

the earth grows blest, the earth grows blest. 

When singing turns silent and ringing tapers, 

the earth is still, the earth, too, is still. 

 
Silence 

 
When silence can open the doors of our hearts, 

the earth is full, the earth is full. 

When loving and mem™ry and longing arrive, 

the earth is one, the earth is one. 

When seeing the faces and saying the names, 

the earth is gift, the earth is gift. 

Naming 

 
When singing and rhythm and saying are one, 

the earth is us, the earth is us. 

 
Readings: 

 
 The First Reading
 is a poem by Anna Akhmatova, an exemplary Russian p
oet of Ukrainian birth who survived 
Stalin™s glare, fickle critics and a complex, insec
ure life. She wrote these words when she was living
 at her 
writing cottage near Vyborg, a part of Russia calle
d Karelia where they speak more Finnish than Russia
n. She 
died there only a few years after writing this poem
, called Native Land. 
She uses the feminine pronoun for earth, even thoug
h Russian, like English, has a neuter option. 
 
We don™t wear her on our breast  

in cherished amulets. 

We don™t, with wrenching sobs,  

write love poems about her. 

She does not disturb our bitter sleep, 

nor seem to us the final picture of paradise. 

We romanticize her, in our souls, refusing to think
 her a mere commodity to be bought or sold. The suf
fering 
and the sick wander over her 

as we do, but even we don™t notice her. 

 Yes, for us, she™s merely mud on galoshes, 

 and the grit blown onto our teeth. 

 And we grind underfoot, and we knead,  
and we crumble her, this clean dust. 
But eventually we lie in her and we become her, 

And because of that we freely call her Œ ours. 

 
1961 

Leningrad.  The hospital in the harbor. 

 
The Second Reading
 is in two sections, each of them short: Reading (a)
, from the Scroll of Shemoth, or 
Exodus, in the Torah, which talks about Moses™ feel
ings as an immigrant.  And Reading (b), a text uniq
ue to the 
Gospel of Mark which the scholars of the Jesus Semi
nar consider to be a rather close estimate of what 
Jesus 
said one fine day. 

 
First, from Shemoth, using the Hebrew names: 

 
So Moshe consented to settle down with the family, 
taking to wife Yitro™s daugher, who was named Tzipo
rah. 
She bore a son, whom Moshe named Stranger (Gershom)
 for he reasoned, ?Am I not a stranger in a strange
 
land?? 

 
And from the Gospel of Mark:
  
Suppose a farmer sows seed into the earth; 

and then, afterward, sleeps and rises, sleeps and r
ises, day after day. During these days, the grain s
prouts and 
matures, even though the sower is unaware of it. Fo
r the earth itself produces fruit 
on its own
, first a shoot, and 
then a stalk and then the mature grain clustered on
 the stalk. And when the grain is ripe, the farmer 
calls for a 
sickle. Why? Because it™s harvest time! 

 
Sermon 

 
Today is a day in the week of Passover/Pesach. Toda
y is a day in Spring, the planting season. Today is
 the 
Sunday nearest to Earth Day. Today, like every day,
 is a summons to memory and hope, a commission to 
always go deeper. 

 
And for me, all of these things are connected by th
e word ?Land.? And this formative story: 

  
When I was in college, I took Russian for a couple 
of years, since my school required familiarity with
 two 
languages to graduate.  

 
Helen Kovach was my Russian teacher. She was as ama
zing a teacher as I was an exasperating student. Sh
e 
clearly loved her work and loved us, even though sh
e was invariably tough on us. Most of us called her
 Mama 
Kovach. To her face, no less. She invited her stude
nts over to her house at the end of each quarter fo
r a 
vyecherinka
, a night party, for which she cooked ten gallons o
f 
borshch
 at least. 
 
It was during one of these parties that I met Helen
™s mother, Julia Gersdorff, who was somewhere in he
r early 
eighties then. One summer, Helen wanted to go to Eu
rope for the whole summer, a mini-sabbatical, so sh
e 
asked me if I would stay with her mother. I didn™t 
have to do anything for her in particular–she was q
uite 
independent–but I was simply to be a presence in th
e house. I agreed, and lived in that house in Ponti
ac, 
Michigan, for four full months. 

 
During that time, Julia painstakingly taught me how
 to cook Russian and Ukrainian food. ?Fold them thi
s 
way–you see?? she would say with her unusual accent
, which sounded more German and French than Russian
 
or Ukrainian.   

 
One July day, when it was too hot to go outside, I 
remained inside the cool house.  I was sitting on t
he floor. 
Julia–whom I called 
båbushka
, or grandma, at her request–was hemming a cotton h
ouse-dress by hand. She 
focused on her hands as her arthritic, thimbled fin
gers slowly but surely moved along the edge of the 
green 
cloth. The afternoon sun laid a diamond of light on
 the wall behind her, and lit her up from behind.  
I asked her, 
?Båbushka, did you see some of the events of the Ru
ssian Revolution of 1917? Can you remember any stor
ies 
from that time?? 

 
And so it started. She smiled, continued to look at
 her hands, and then for the next three hours, she 
told me the 
story of her life, the great sail of sunlight movin
g slowly up the wall behind her. Sometimes she woul
d lapse 
into German and I would have to remind her I couldn
™t understand German. And so she continued in Engli
sh, 
with a smattering of French. I remember it all, as 
if it was yesterday. This is the story she told me.
   
 
?I was born on a large estate farm in rural Russia.
 Not long after I was born, Tchaikovski himself cam
e and 
composed for a month somewhere on our land. When I 
grew up, I married a man named Gersdorff, and he 
eventually was appointed the vice-governor of Ukrai
ne. We lived in  Kiev, but spent a lot of time at o
ur large 
farm estate outside of the city. Many 
muzhik
–peasants– lived on, and tilled, that black and bea
utiful land. The 
earth was so rich there in Ukraine! So rich! I trav
eled away from the estate only a few times, once to
 St. 
Petersburg with my husband. There, I briefly met Ts
ar Nikolas and Tsarina Alexandra, and I think I cau
ght 
sight of that scoundrel Rasputin that day. But I am
 not sure. It was long ago. 
 
The war came, and the troops marched across our lan
d to meet the German troops before they got to us. 
My 
husband served as an officer, and was gone for over
 two years. One day, my servants told me that all t
he 
muzhik
 had gathered on the porch of my house. They wanted 
to speak with me. They showed me a fancy document 
confirming that the land now belonged to them, not 
to my husband and me. It was signed Vladimir Ulyano
v, 
which was Lenin™s real name. They were very nice ab
out it, mind you. They said to me: ?You stay in the
 house. 
We will share our food with you.? I said: ?You are 
very kind. And after all, it really 
is
 fair that you should have 
land of your own anyway.? 

 
But not long afterward, despairing soldiers started
 to return from the front, trekking across the melt
ing snow. 
The vodka factories which had been closed by the Ts
ar were broken into by muddy, weary, angry soldiers
 as 
they made their way back north. Some of them, drunk
 and mad, pillaged and set local houses and farms a
flame. 
 
 One day soon after, the 
muzhik
 came loudly knocking at my door. They said to me, 
?Look, madame, flames! 
You must get out, you must leave and save your life
.? 
 
So I packed what I could, including my favorite ico
n, and I had a member of my household take the slei
gh over 
the melting snow into the town. I remember looking 
back and seeing smoke over my house. I knew my husb
and 
was in the White army, but I didn™t know how to con
tact him. I made my way down to Odessa. I stayed th
ere a 
while, until my husband found out where I was and j
oined me. We climbed aboard a ship with what little
 we 
had left. We didn™t even know where it was going. I
t sailed out of the Black Sea through the Bosporus,
 and it 
finally let us all out, ragged and worn, at Salonik
a. From there we made our way to what they now call
 
Yugoslavia, and there we settled, since the Serbian
 language is so much like Ukrainian, and it felt mo
re 
comfortable to us to live with Cyrillic letters all
 around us. Helen was born there in Yugoslavia, and
 went to 
school there. When she grew up another war was alre
ady brewing, and soon started. It was a terrible ti
me to be 
in Europe. But by the time the war ended, Helen fel
l for a man from Budapest, and married him, moving 
up 
there to be with him. I stayed where I had lived so
 much of my life. 
 
Eventually, just when she was pregnant, he was take
n off to Siberia for his anti-Stalinist agitation. 
Before they 
dragged him off, he insisted that she divorce him s
o 
she
 was not branded by his reputation. This she did, 
throwing the ring he had given her into the nearest
 sewer. George was born in a refugee camp some mont
hs 
later. Eventually, Helen had to crawl across a whea
t field into West Germany, her hand held over Georg
e™s 
mouth, after both of them had been smuggled near to
 the border in a coffin. From there she made her wa
y to 
Canada, and she sent for me, my husband having died
, to come there and live with her, and I went. She 
had 
been a law student in Budapest, you know, but you c
an™t practice Hungarian law in Canada. So she was a
 
housecleaner for a time and then she studied social
 work, and finally she made her way to Detroit. The
re, 
someone from the newly founded Oakland University a
pproached her and asked if she would be willing to 
teach Russian there. She didn™t want to at first, b
ut she gave in, and she has been happy teaching the
re every 
since. And I have lived with her here in this house
 in Pontiac all this time.? 
 
It took a full three hours for her to tell this sto
ry. It was packed with more detail than I have offe
red you here, or 
than I can remember. But I probably don™t have to t
ell you that I was simply stunned by her story. It 
was like 
Dr. Zhivago telling his own story, or interviewing 
Dostoyevski on a summer™s day. I said to her, ?Båbu
shka! 
Your life has been amazing! It™s like a famous Russ
ian novel yet to be written. So many people and pla
ces! So 
much courage, and so many split-second decisions in
 your life!? 
 
For the first time in three hours, she looked up fr
om her sewing. She looked me in the eye and said, ?
Yes, I have 
lived an amazing life. I don™t know if I was courag
eous or foolish, but you are right when you say tha
t my life 
was full of many people and places, full of what yo
u young people call ‚adventures.™ But you know what
? I 
would give up every single one of them, and the res
t of my life, if I could, for but one more minute, 
hold a 
handful of the black earth of my native land. I lov
e this land. But it is not my land, and its soil is
 not my soil, 
and its air is scented with gasoline, not lilacs. I
 would give everything up if I could just grab a ha
ndful of the 
land which produced me, and hold it up to my nose a
nd smell its perfume.? 
 
I have to admit I was so moved by her last remark I
 had to leave the room. I excused myself and brewed
 some 
tea for her, served the way Russians like it, with 
a spoonful of cherry jam at the bottom of the glass
. We never 
spoke of her life again, at least with that panoram
ic vantage. 
 
But all at once I understood why Moshe thought of h
imself as a stranger in a strange land–my båbushka 
was 
named Julia, not Gershom, but still she too was a s
tranger in a strange land, a stranger who wanted mo
re than 
anything to hold the dark dirt of her homeland in h
er trembling hand. Moshe must have imagined holding
 the 
rich black soil of the Nile floodplain in his hand 
when he named his son. That was where he was born. 
That was 
his homeland.  Not Canaan up north, where he was su
pposedly headed–but Egypt. 
 
 Both of them ached for their former land. But liste
n! My båbushka™s ache and Moshe™s ache were persona
l 
aches. They were not political. They were not philo
sophical. They were not religious. Neither of them 
acted like 
they were feeling entitled to their former land. Ne
ither of them returned to their former land. They b
oth just 
ached, and felt their terrible strangeness in a str
ange land. They felt the pull of their unanswerable
 longing. They 
wanted to touch the earth which gave them birth. Wh
ich nurtured them. Which sustained them as they gre
w.   
 
It™s what the earth is for
, Jesus observed. Of itself, he said, 
of itself
, the earth™s nature is to nourish and grow 
what™s planted in it. The farmer sleeps and rises, 
sleeps and rises and has nothing to do with the gro
wth of the 
grain. The farmer is not out there jumping around l
eading cheers for the shoots. The farmer sleeps as 
the seed 
nourished by the earth germinates 
of itself. 
This is a wise observation, I think. Our Iraqi chil
dren™s story this 
AM makes another wise observation, doesn™t it? It i
nsists that the land is the only real treasure wort
h 
celebrating. Boxes of gold and emeralds? Mere folde
rol. 
 
The early Hebrews made the connection between the l
and and the person even clearer, at least to those 
who 
aren™t swaggering fundamentalists on the one side, 
or the ?cultured despisers of religion? on the othe
r. The 
famous Genesis story tells of an 
adam
–which is not a name, but only Hebrew for ?an earth
 creature? –made 
from the 
adamah
, the earth, the land itself. Eventually this neute
r creature, com-pletely contiguous with the soil 
underfoot, will be split into an 
ish
, a man, and an 
ishah
, a woman. But at the beginning, it™s called only ?
an 
earth creature.? This story is using the language o
f legend to say what we would say now with a more s
cientific 
vocabulary: our bodies are made of the same element
s that make up the soil under the foundation of thi
s 
building and outside in its gardens. We are made of
 the very same elements of the land, which, of its 
nature, 
nurtures and help things to grow. When we lose our 
connection to the land–by turning farming over to 
agribusiness, or by being kept from it by unjust la
ws, politics, frantic deadlines, competition, wars,
 prejudice or 
ethnic rivalries, we might lose some of our own ear
thly power to nurture and to help things to grow. 
 
Many leaders in the U.S. government knew the nurtur
ing power of the land very well. It™s the only reas
on I can 
think of why they ?reserved? relatively harsh parce
ls of land for the Native American populations, whi
ch they 
were trying to erase from both history 
and their conscience
. 
 
Similar attitudes distorted the GI Bill after World
 War II. Although black servicemen and women qualif
ied to 
get loans to purchase land that would nurture them 
and sustain them at the edges of the great cities, 
the practices 
of those suburbs–overt racial discrimination and th
e point system–made such loans totally futile. This
 
confined black populations to inner city land alrea
dy owned– mostly by folks in the suburbs. If you ke
ep 
people from access to land which might nurture them
, you can, little by little, begin to demoralize th
em and sap 
their hope. 

 
But this week™s Passover story reminds us that land
 without freedom of access doesn™t make any sense. 
Moshe 
didn™t go home to Egypt, because the King still tho
ught he had the right to live on other people™s bac
ks. My 
båbushka didn™t go home to Ukraine, because Stalin 
was still being cruel. And the great Russian poet A
nna 
Akhmatova never went home either. She died up in Ka
relia, far from the black soil of her Ukrainian bir
th. She 
grieves in her poem 
Native Land
 about how most of us have learned to live blissful
ly unaware of our ties to the 
land. It™s just ?mud on our galoshes, and grit on o
ur teeth.? The only real connection, she writes, be
tween us and 
the earth, is that we™ll be buried in it, or scatte
red over it one day. Otherwise, it doesn™t affect u
s much. We 
don™t even notice it, she laments.  

 
Yet later, just before she died, she changed her la
ment to celebration. She wrote something that actua
lly sounds 
like a love poem to the land, something she had ins
isted couldn™t be written. She writes of land not h
er own, but 
still lovable.  
Land not mine, yet I™ll remember how I™ve loved it 
all my days. There™s the sea–the water™s 
chilly! The rosy pines seem all ablaze! Chalk like 
sand still frames the ocean; air, like wine exhilar
ates; and the 
boughs at this late hour seem bare, as day™s sweet 
light abates. As the sun now plumbs the heavens, I 
no longer 
comprehend whether the day ends, or this world, 

 or the Mystery of Mysteries indwells again. 

 
The Mystery of all Mysteries?  Simply, the hard to 
put into words notion 
that we are all equally of the earth, all 
equally made of its elements, and thus, all equally
 due access to it and its nurturing power.
 And that, despite 
that intrinsic equality, the present world is nothi
ng but a knot of warfare and corruption, based on t
he idea that 
the land belongs to some, not the many. Politics, r
eligion and panicked greed deny that the earth is a
 source of 
personal nourishment and growth. Politics, religion
 and panicked greed work to transform land, the wor
ld over, 
into parcels of terror, and territories of corrupti
on. In those parcels of terror, people are stripped
 of their inherent 
worth as ?earth- creatures?–and become instead 
those
 Indians, 
those
 Jews, 
those 
Palestinians, 
those 
Arabs, 
those
 Catholics, those Protestants, those Muslims, those
 Easterners, those Westerners, those Southerners, t
hose 
Yankees, those bumpkins, kooks, Californians, Chris
tians and queers. In other words, 
those 
people are people 
without any inherent worth, according to your polit
ics or religion of choice, or according to your own
 greed. 
Those
 people really aren™t, well, people, just nuisances
 or even beasts to keep safely out of the clubhouse
 
forever. 

 
My point this morning is that our connection to the
 land, despite all the wonderful actions any Earth 
Day worth 
its salt would demand of us, is always first and fo
remost personal, not political. My point is that ou
r power can 
only be moral when we know it comes to us, not by e
ntitlement from above, but from the land below our 
feet. 
My båbushka was not being political---white, red, o
r even today™s green--- when she held up that handf
ul of 
soil. She wasn™t being Russian Orthodox. She was be
ing entirely personal. Spiritual, if you will. And 
she, like 
Akhmatova, despite her longing for her homeland, le
arned to find enough love for the land she settled 
on, even 
though it was not her own, to live a powerful and p
roductive and story-telling life. For I am convince
d she knew 
that ultimately, every bit of land on earth, no mat
ter where it is, can be a holy land. And she knew t
hat every 
single one of us, like her, comes, like the green g
rass of spring, from that same holy source. And the
re is beauty, 
and a sense of both first, and final home, in any l
and we tend, walk, garden, notice, or even hold, bl
ack and rich, 
in our hand. 

 
Offering 

For the continued support of this congregation™s wo
rk and welcome, we set aside time for the steady fi
delity of 
the offering, so that our dreams might have shelter
, our programs, vitality, our vision, embodied. 
 
Land Litany 

Handful of earth. Handful of power
. 
Rise up, shoot!  Open, bud.  Iris open, flower! 

Handful of earth. Handful of power. 

Dark the pathways. Worm and rabbit.  

Fishnet of roots. 

Handful of earth. Handful of power. 

Dust of ages. Fruit of decay.  

Mystery of death and life. 

Handful of earth. Handful of power. 

For the joy of standing on earth instead  

of nothing at all,  

for the gift of holding a handful of earth, a handf
ul of power–   .v 4 
 
(sung) 
 for all that is our life, we come with praise and 
thanks, for all life is a gift, which we are bound 
to 
use, to build the common good, and make our own day
s glad.
 
