Listening 
February 2, 2014 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 
 
Welcoming, Centering, Kindling, Opening: 

We are here 

after a week of cold, snow, and welcome sunlight, 

to worship, to confront the deeper questions, 

that we might answer them with our lives, 

to pay attention to something deeper than words, 

and to weave deliberate and chosen community. 

 
And so, bearing witness, 
both
 to our world as it is, 
and
 as Love can imagine it, we would 
claim that vision of a just world in our own lives.
 And because of a growing sense of kinship 
with all beings, inviting our compassion, we begin 
in this celebration to engage our mission 
with our whole lives: body, mind, and heart.
  
 
Singing  #389 Gathered Here 

 
Ingathering 

 
Do any of you have any sisters or brothers? Are you
 the oldest, or the youngest, or are you in the 
middle?  (Question and answer for a while) 

 
This is a true story from a woman in Canada named N
athalie Trepanier. It™s about her oldest 
daughter. 

 
One day, Nathalie came into the playroom, and she s
aw and heard her oldest daughter 
Dominique, almost six years old, being mean to her 
little sister Isabella, who was only four.  
 
Nathalie was upset to see Dominique, who was usuall
y very gentle, mistreating her youngest 
daughter, Isabella. She scolded Dominique: "That is
 no way to treat your sister, Dominique. 
 I am very upset with you. I want you to go to your
 room and think, really think, about what you 
just did." 

 
Dominique looked upset herself about what happened,
 and went up to her room. 
 
About ten minutes later she came out of her room, b
ut her mother had gone out...to buy some 
ingredients she needed for a recipe she was making 
later that night. 
 
But Dominique's father, Patrick, was there, sitting
 in his chair, reading. Dominique went running 
up to him. He asked her, "Dominique, what happened 
earlier between you and your sister?" 
 
Dominique said, ?My mouth doesn™t always tell the t
ruth, Daddy? she admitted. ?But my heart 
never lies. My heart was telling me not to do it, b
ut my hands just wouldn™t listen!? 
 
When Natalie came home, Patrick told her what Domin
ique had said. And Natalie hugged her 
daughter, and decided that she would write a story 
so that everyone would know how wise her 
daughter Dominique was.  

 
And as for her little sister Isabella? She was part
 of the story too, because, a year after the story 
I 
just told you, Isabella went to kindergarten. When 
she got home one day, she told her mother 
about how someone at the school was picking on her 
because she was shorter than everyone else 
in the class. "Oh my, that is not good," said her m
other Nathalie.  "What did you do?" Isabella 
said, "I told her that just because I was little di
dn't mean I was small. I think she listened to me, 
because she stopped picking on me." Nathalie smiled
, hugged her daughter, and then said, "You 
are very wise, Isabella, and you will be in my book
 too." 
 
And so everyone who reads the book knows how amazin
g Dominique and Isabella are, even 
though they live a thousand miles away. 

 
Children's Departure 

 
Greeting  
Announcements etc. 
 
Affirmation     
Imbolc pronounced Imorg 
 
This time of the year was Lupercal, to some; now, I
mbolc to others, and also Candlemas,  
Groundhog Day and Superbowl Sunday. It is mid-winte
r, the days grow longer, the cold 
still wearies, but all of us, and the season which 
holds us, are part of a circle that does not 
cease to circle, and moves from ice to blossoms. Bl
est are the seasons which circle. 
 
Singing #56  Bells in the High Tower 

  

Sequence 

And so the years go forward, oh Love, day by day, h
our by hour.  
Including this day, with its beginning and its endi
ng. 
I notice time always flows in one direction only, 

forward, toward a horizon I cannot really see,  

but which I try to approach with my sails filled wi
th a hopeful wind. 
 
And so the years go forward, oh Love. 

The wars and rumors of wars, in nations many cannot
 find on a map, are mostly behind us now;  
but I know very well their effects are still with u
s in our flesh, in our hearts in this present hour.
 Poverty is rampant, now more than ever, in this nat
ion so identified by high glass towers and 
Wall Street; I know each day in the life of a desti
tute person must be at least twice as long as the 
man on TV who assures me the poor have chosen their
 own estate gladly. 
Songs sung long ago, by Pete Seeger, in protest or 
solidarity, are different in style from songs 
sung now, but I know they are still with us, bound 
to particular memories of time and place,  

just as present day songs are binding themselves to
 these moments, these days. Whole lifetimes 
of friends and family, in unique locales from decad
es past, rise before us; their memories still 
tattooed to the skin of our souls in colors bright 
or deep; the faces of people we have yet to meet, 
yet to love, are there too, but without recognizabl
e features; for we live now, neither then, nor 
there. For time moves forward, in one direction onl
y. I know too that winters past remain in us, 
some warmer, some as frozen as this one, filled wit
h chills that change our schedules and slow us 
down. Yet I know that even the coldest day cannot p
revent the comforting anticipation of 
forsythias spreading their yellow arms out under a 
warmer sun.   
 
Still, Love, I know: snow first, and winter winds, 
for we live neither in the memories of the past, 
nor in anticipation of what is to come, but in this
 present hour, this present silent moment of 
breath, of breath, of breath, and steady, quiet hea
rtbeats. 
 
silence 

 
And so the years go forward from past days, oh Love
, and our hearts are filled with our lives. 
And so in this hour, in this place of safety and vi
sion, we are free to name aloud, or in the quiet 
of our hearts, all of those who cry out within us..
.those we miss, those we mourn, those we love, 
whether that love is expressed or not, and those wh
ose love has brought us to this day with 
blessings. 

 
naming 

 
And so the years go forward, oh Love, and music, ou
r daily miracle, accompanies us, and blesses 
us, day by day, hour by hour, minute by minute...ev
en now. 
 
The First Reading
 is from Boris Novak, a Slovenian poet. This is one 
mighty fine set of beautiful 
and wise words: it™s called 
Decisions.  
 
Between two words, choose the quieter one. 

Between word and silence, choose listening. 

Between two books, choose the dustier one. 

Between the earth and the sky, choose a bird. 

Between two animals, choose the one who needs you m
ore. 
Between two children, choose both. 

Between the lesser and the bigger evil, choose neit
her. 
Between hope and despair 

choose hope: 

it will be harder to bear. 

 
The Second Reading
 comes from a book that just came out this week. I h
ave an essay in it, 
because of my own interest and submersion in Judaic
 thought and practice, but this is from Sue 
Magidson who is a Unitarian Universalist Community 
minister, affiliated with the First Church 
in Berkeley CA, and serving as a hospital chaplain.
 She is both Jewish and UU, raised in the 
Westport Connecticut UU congregation by Jewish pare
nts. She graduated from Starr King 
School, as did Lane, Eric and I, and so when she ta
lks about Holy Hill, she is talking about the 

very real and steep hill on which most of the ten s
eminaries in the Graduate Theological Union 
are located, with Starr King right at the center of
 it all. 
 
The Christian students and faculty on Holy Hill wer
e warm, welcoming, and well-meaning, but 
often clueless about the impact of their words and 
actions.  Having lived their lives in the 
dominant culture, they just didn't know that religi
ous words like prayer or Bible take on different 
meanings in different religions. They would neglect
 to specify that they were really quoting 
Jesus who was quoting the Torah, passing off the te
nets of Judaism as unique to Christianity. 
They vilified the Pharisees, not knowing that the P
harisees helped shape modern Judaism. They 
dismissed the "Old Testament" as a crude precursor 
to the truth of the superior "New 
Testament," thus disdaining Judaism's holy texts. T
hese micro-aggressions rankled, hurting body 
and soul. 

 
Ironically, Unitarian Universalism and Judaism shar
e many theological foundations. Both focus 
on oneness and interconnection, on actions above wo
rds, on life here on earth. Both have a deep 
commitment to social justice. While Unitarian Unive
rsalist language is not offensive, it can be 
uncomfortable for Jews, as it was for my mother. Mu
ch of our language is from Christian 
history, words like "church, theology, reverend, go
od news," to name just a few. We use the 
word "unchurched" to refer to those who grew up wit
hout religion, oblivious to how that might 
sound to someone who grew up Jewish, or Muslim, or 
Hindu before finding Unitarian 
Universalism. We have some learning to do in order 
to live out our intention of radical welcome. 
 
But I am grateful beyond measure that Judaism and U
nitarian Universalism can co-exist in my 
life, with occasional bumps and bruises, but genera
lly with appreciation and curiosity. My 
internship congregation embraced my Judaism, my Jew
ish congregation blessed me at Shabbat 
services the night before my ordination, and my Jew
ish Unitarian Universalist colleagues offered 
a Jewish blessing at my ordination. 

 
Sermon/Drash 

 
A few years ago, I learned something about the mean
ing of the English verb, "listening," which 
is February's theme this year.  

 
You see, I was experiencing some distress in my ear
s I learned was called 
tinitus
, which affected 
me, at least as a high pitched tone that was there,
 no matter if I was in a room full of people, or 
quite alone and silent. I know many of you have exp
erienced forms of 
tinitus
 as well. 
 
I went to see my 
Ears, Nose and Throat
 doctor up there on Bethel, and he set me up with a
 
battery of many different kinds of hearing tests, o
ffered by a boisterous woman who specialized 
in such things. 

 
The results came in. My doctor reported to me that 
my ears are damaged. My boisterous tester 
told me my hearing is not very good at all, even fo
r my age. I will need, she said to me, to get 
hearing aids sooner than later.  

 
Then, as if trying to figure out what damaged my ea
rs, she asked me if, when I was young, I had 

gone to a lot rock concerts, with gajillion-decibel
 speakers all over the place. I said, "No, I never 
went to any, actually. That wasn't my thing." After
 interviewing me for a while, she surmised 
that it was probably my work in a painfully noisy a
uto factory in Detroit which had seriously 
damaged the nerves in my ears, back in my late teen
s. "But," she said to me, "I have to tell you 
something. Even though literally you cannot 
hear 
very well, I have noticed that you are able to 
listen
, strange to tell, most excellently. It made no sen
se at first. But now I think it's because of 
your years of serving as minister. You listen with 
your eyes, you see little gestures and blinks, 
and though you can't hear sounds with your ears, yo
u listen to people by paying attention to the 
whole of who they are, not just what they say audib
ly. You may actually be able to forgo the 
hearing aids longer than I imagined because of how 
your ministry has trained you to listen, not 
with your ears, but with your heart." 

 
I was totally taken aback by everything she said...
that I had permanently damaged ears; that I 
was continuing to lose my hearing swiftly...and tha
t my congregational work had unconsciously 
trained me to listen to people without the medium o
f sound conveying the information. This last 
analysis had me reeling for days. 

 
Nevertheless, after what I learned from that exam, 
I have to begin by affirming that, for me, 
listening does not have as much to do with hearing 
with the ears, as it has to do with paying 
attention, with all that I am, to all that other pe
ople are. I think this affirmation works pretty wel
l, 
even for those who do not have hearing tests and ti
nnitus in their past. 
 
I can't do that all the time, I'm sure of it. It so
unds exhausting. It IS exhausting. Sometimes I just
 
need to be alone with a restorative silence. 

 
But this new information has made me more conscious
 of what it is that I listen to. 
 
The story I told this morning confirms my learning 
from the test. Dominique figured out, even as 
a six-year-old child, that you have to 
listen to your heart
. Even that young, she understood 
something quite that subtle. The heart does not act
ually speak, mind you. It doesn't even make a 
single sound. Because obviously, the heart Dominiqu
e was listening to doesn't go lub-dub like 
the muscle that keeps us alive. The heart she liste
ned to is no object at all that can make a sound. 
It's a metaphor. Yet even a child of six realizes s
he 
can
 "listen" to that "heart," and respond to 
this "heart that does not lie," by no longer hurtin
g her sister.  
 
The poet Boris Novak understands this too when he s
ays so elegantly, "Between word and 
silence, choose listening."  You can listen to sile
nce as well as the word, he says, whether 
written, spoken or interpreted in American Sign by 
Blythe this morning. 
 
When I was at Starr King School on Holy Hill in Ber
keley CA, almost 40 years before the writer 
of our second reading, Sue Magidson, we used to tal
k a lot about 
listening deeply
 to others. It 
was the era when folks spoke of "active listening."
 This meant that often, when you were 
conversing with someone, they would say back to you
, "I hear you. I hear you."  But in my 
experience, this had simply become a relatively emp
ty ritual that was well-intentioned, but didn't 
really serve any function in facilitating deeper co
mmunication or more authentic listening. 
Perhaps some of you who remember that era might hav
e had a different experience with that 

phrase, but I found myself too often annoyed after 
a round of such "I hear you" rituals. I'm not 
sure either of us were actually listening to anythi
ng, in my sense of the term. 
 
But even in that era when conversations were always
 being punctuated by "I hear you," people 
were often offering new, fresh and revolutionary id
eas, which they expected folks to listen to, 
and respond to, in some way. 

 
And often, I'm afraid to say, I resisted. 

 
Many women at my school proclaimed the idea of how 
language distorts reality. They pointed 
out that the word "man" was supposed to include wom
en in its three little letters, and that "he" 
was used to mean "she" when the gender wasn't speci
fic. They pointed out this made no sense at 
all. They pointed out that male language totally do
minated female language in literature, in 
worship, in the arts and in society at large. Ours 
was a patriarchal culture, run by men who 
claimed automatic authority over women. 

 
To prove patriarchal language dominated even Unitar
ian Universalist worship, for example, they 
simply quoted the language of the Blue Hymnbook, wh
ich preceded this gray book...with lyrics 
in it like: 
Man is the earth upright and proud,
 and 
The
 superior man is universally minded
 and 
Not until a man has helped himself, can he help ano
ther; not until he has made himself strong, 
can he lift his brother.  
Not a 
woman
 or a 
she 
in sight. 
 
I offered resistance to this. I said, "Well, that i
s what they wrote in the old days. You can't 
change what they wrote, can you?"  I said, "Well, j
ust interpret it. Of course it must include 
women." Years later, I felt embarrassed that I had 
ever said these things.  Now I don't.  
 
I realized that it sometimes takes 
time 
to really listen to what others are communicating t
o me. I 
have to listen deeper than merely hearing. I have t
o listen to the pain behind the words, written, 
spoken or interpreted. That took me years, not mome
nts.  
 
And guess what? Twenty years later, Mr. Resist Ever
ything
 was chosen to head up the 
commission that produced this grey book. We took th
e ideas and the pain seriously, and worked 
to alleviate the pain by changing words and phrasin
g to present a more balanced and just 
understanding of reality. 

 
On the night before he was killed, Dr. Martin Luthe
r King Jr, a preacher as well as a civil rights 
leader, offered a sermon where he said this: ?Someb
ody told a lie one day. They couched it in 
language. They made everything 
black
 ugly and evil. Look in your dictionary and see the
 
synonyms for the word 
black
. It™s always something degrading, low, and siniste
r. Look at the 
word white. It™s always something pure, high, and c
lean. Well I wanna get the language right, 
tonight.? 

 
I resisted listening to Dr. King. I said, "Well, yo
u know what people mean when they use these 
words. You are being too sensitive. No one means an
ything by these words. And besides, the 
phrase 'in the black' is good, right? I mean, it me
ans the company is doing well economically, 
right?" 

 
Well, yeah, it refers to the color of the ink in th
e ledger. It™s actually the one lone example, and 
it™s really quite literal. King was right about how
 our language demonizes the 
dark
 and 
black
. 
Black comedy is comedy that makes you uncomfortable
, not laugh. A black mood is a 
depression. Black Tuesday is when the stock-market 
crashes. A blackened reputation is hardly a 
good one. This is even more poignant because people
 of European background are not white, but 
beige, or peach, or cream; and people with African 
or Caribbean or Indian origin are not the 
color of ink in a ledger, but chocolate, cinnamon, 
mahogany and coffee.  
 
Come to find out the venerable James Baldwin had ra
ised this issue earlier. He too had been shot 
down by people just like me.  

 
Slowly, however, I began to listen to what was bein
g said deeper than the words, deeper than the 
silence. I began to feel the pain behind King's wor
ds in my heart. I began to realize with 
Dominique, the six- year-old, that my heart does no
t lie. 
 
And so twenty years later, as I said, Mr. Resist Ev
erything was chosen to lead a team to produce 
a book for singing and worship that took this issue
 seriously. We chose words that did 
not
 lend 
their metaphorical heft to support the distortion o
f reality called racialization. Listening, I repeat
, 
takes a long time sometimes. And it has far more to
 do with the heart than any ear. And believe 
me, listening is not easy. I can only pray and hope
 that I am listening still, because it™s so much 
easier not to. 

 
Which is why I bring up the words from Sue Magidson
, which comes from a new book 
published this week by our Skinner House Press, cal
led 
Jewish Voices in Unitarian 
Universalism. 

 
Sue, a classmate of our Religious Education Directo
r Lane Campbell, has lived in the "in-
between" territory of being both Jewish and Unitari
an Universalist. Her parents are Jewish, and 
she was raised in our Westport church by them, beca
use they preferred to engage with religion in 
our way, which is looser and often asks questions w
ithout immediately offering answers based 
on rabbinic discussions. But as Sue went through St
arr King, she realized that even folks who 
had left their own Christian religious institutions
, still maintained unquestioned assumptions and 
ideas embedded culturally 
in
 many of those institutions. Things like "The Old T
estament God is 
terrible, the New Testament God is kind and compass
ionate." Things like the words "church" and 
"unchurched." She began to listen to the stories of
 Jews who come to the Unitarian Universalist 
church but never join because...although they like 
everything about it...it™s still called a 
church
, 
even though the only time Christ per se is mentione
d is in a few carols at Christmas. She doesn't 
mind the story of Jesus (without Messianic interpre
tations, of course), Jesus as a first century 
Galilean teacher clearly grounded in the Torah, the
 sacred text of the Jews to this very day. But 
she still has questions. She and other folks have c
ommunicated their stories clearly, and their 
stories overlap a lot. Oh, please, people like Sue 
are  hardly expecting, because they tell their 
stories,  that a Unitarian Universalist congregatio
n will abandon any mention of Christmas or 
Easter, even as they are truly glad that Yom Kippur
 and Passover and even Hanukkah are often 
part of our worship schedule, besides a Solstice ri
tual or Buddhist meditation. 
 
But the word 
church
 itself feels, Magidson says in her particular essa
y, feels like "a micro 
aggression." Some of her co-religionists out of the
 Jewish tradition point out that many of our 
earliest congregations were not called "churches" b
ut Societies, which once meant something 
like the modern word "community." (My first ministr
y was in the San Francisco Unitarian 
Universalist Society, founded in 1840.)  She unders
tands fully the most predominant historical 
grounding of Unitarian Universalism, its roots in r
adical Protestant and Anabaptist culture. She 
delights in the multi-cultural approach of our cong
regations, with a Hindu teacher like Tagore 
featured in one service, and Kung Zi, or Confucius 
in another. She loves the diversity of the 
music...chant, hymn, song, everything really. She h
erself is an ordained Unitarian Universalist 
minister. But she has not out and out rejected her 
whole past history.  Neither, I think, does she 
need to, if our idea of radical welcome, or as we s
ay it, "true hospitality," is to mean anything 
more than saying a kind and open hello at the door.
  
Listening to the stories of others has been one of 
the major dimensions of my whole career, I 
have discovered. I resist the implications of some 
of these stories, but eventually, I find I listen 
deeper. As my heart grows more vulnerable with time
, I find that I  cling less to what comforted 
me, or offered me safety in the past, but I turn to
ward what is not yet fully formed there on the 
horizon before me, toward which I move, hour-by-hou
r, day-by-day, month-by- month, year-by-
year.  

 
I am well aware that the idea of possibly changing 
the name of this 
church
 to 
congregation
 to 
express our hospitality is a controversial idea. I 
spent a lot of my time resisting this exact idea at
 
my former congregation in Hayward. But, I am aware 
that I am still listening...to the language of 
our transgender members, to the language of our mor
e Christian members, and to the language of 
our differently abled members. To the language of D
r. King, and to the language critiques of my 
feminist and womanist teachers through the years. 

 
Listening is not easy. It takes a long time. But li
stening is not at all the same as hearing. A 
hearing aid is not what enables me to listen. It's 
the long slow hard work of the heart alone, the 
heart which cannot, in the end, as our six-year-old
 Dominique reminded us, and as Dr. King 
reminded us, ever lie. 

 
Offering 

In a congregation with courses that help us to lear
n, music that invites us to sing, organization 
that invites us to try and see the world without di
stortions, and more just; in a congregation 
which has no higher authority than ourselves; in a 
congregation that cooks for the homeless at 
Faith Mission and the YWCA, which celebrates the ho
lidays that challenge us, which offers its 
dance floor to joyously active feet and martial art
s education; in a congregation that claims 
responsibility for itself, we now give and receive 
the morning offering, a circle that never stops 
circling. 

 
Returning: Reprise 

Between two words 

choose the quieter one. 

Between word and silence 

choose listening. 

Between two books 

choose the dustier one. 

Between the earth and the sky 

choose a bird. 

Between two animals 

choose the one who needs you more. 

 
Between two children 

choose both. 

Between the lesser and the bigger evil 

choose neither. 

Between hope and despair 

choose hope: 

it will be harder to bear. 

 
Singing 1012 When I Am Frightened 

 
Blessing 

 
Pete Seeger didn't write 
We Shall Overcome. 
But he did change one word in the song, and by 
doing so made it more popular than it had ever been
 before. He changed the original word 
will,
 We 
will 
overcome, to 
shall. 
 We 
shall
 overcome. Why? ?Because,? he said, ?it opened up t
he 
face more to sing 
shall
 than 
will.? 
Inspired by this simple change, open up your faces,
 and your 
minds, that you shall listen to the quiet voice of 
your own hearts. 
 
 
