 God and Gaps 
March 17, 2013 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 
Gathering, Greeting, Centering, Kindling, Opening
: 
 
        We are here, 

        as the days of the year tip toward spring, 

        to celebrate the very aliveness of life, 

        and yoke our longing to all that calls us 

        to deeper questions, deeper love, deeper ca
re, 
        
always keeping us open and unfinished. So, 
 
Grounded in gratitude for the cosmos that is our ho
me, claiming deepening wisdom as our 
authority, and daring to engage joy, burden, loss a
nd insight in a deliberate community of 
many ways and ages, the flame summons us to 
awaken
: to listen with our whole lives, to 
open, to serve. 

 
Singing 

 
Ingathering:  
(A Jewish fable from the Hassidic rabbis) 
 
Once upon a time, a congregation became very concer
ned because their old rabbi had  
taken to disappearing from the synagogue after the 
beginning of the Sabbath, the holy day when 
they all came together every week. Some said, "Mayb
e he is trying to escape the duties of a 
rabbi...maybe he is becoming lazy."  Others worried
 that he was actually committing some crime 
somewhere, doing something that no one, especially 
rabbis, should be doing. Some, knowing his 
reputation...for everyone seemed to love and respec
t him...denied all these worries and 
suspicions and insisted that, instead of running aw
ay from his work, he must have been taken up 
to the sky by a miracle, all the way to heaven itse
lf. They thought that perhaps he was loved even 
by one of the holy teachers of old, like Jeremiah, 
or even Elijah himself, and that they brought 
him up to heaven to discuss holy questions together
 with them. 
 
Still, the disagreements of the members of the cong
regation continued. So to settle the concerns 
among them, one Sabbath night they hired a spy to f
ollow him and report where he was going. 
Sure enough, no sooner had the holy day candles bee
n lit than the old rabbi left the synagogue, 
walked quietly down the road that led through the w
oods, and up a steep hill.  
 
Finally, following quietly behind, the spy could se
e a small house in the distance. And sure  
enough, the rabbi went straight toward it. The spy 
came closer and closer, trying not to step on 
any branches and give himself away. A few more step
s and the spy  could see the rabbi in the 
open doorway. He was lit up orange by the soft ligh
t of a dying fire. The spy tiptoed around to 
the side of the cabin and pressed his face to the w
indow. He was surprised by what he saw. There 
on a bed lay an old woman who was not Jewish at all
. She seemed to be very sick, and there was 
no indication that she lived anything but alone. 

  

 First, the rabbi took a broom and swept the floor. 
Then the rabbi chopped new wood and put it 
into  the fireplace. Next the rabbi drew clean wate
r from the well, and brought several pails of 
the clear clean water into the woman's house. Final
ly, the rabbi made a pot of fresh soup...he had 
brought all the ingredients with him... and set it 
on the bed stand by her side. He then gently 
lifted up her head with his hand, and fed her the s
oup, a spoon at a time. When she was done, she 
smiled. "Thank you, rabbi," she said softly. "You a
re always so kind to me."  "I'll see you 
tomorrow," said the rabbi to the old women as he cl
eaned her soup bowl with some of the water 
he had brought from the well. 

 
The spy sped back down the mountain and through the
 woods to tell everyone in the 
congregation what he had found out: "Well," one of 
the more suspicious members of the 
congregation said to the spy, ?did our rabbi go up 
to the sky, all the way to heaven?" 
  

The spy stopped for a moment to think. Then he said
 "O no, not at all. The rabbi did not go up to  
heaven. The rabbi went a lot higher than that." 

  

 
Welcoming  Steve Abbot 
(canvass announcement by Beth Jewell) 
 
As Unitarian Universalists, we are bound together b
y a freely chosen covenant to affirm and 
promote Seven Principles. The Second Principle is ?
justice, equity and compassion in human 
relations.? Our Justice Action Ministry carries out
 the organized social justice activity of this 
church. A designated portion of the church's budget
 provides the financial resources necessary to 
carry out this vital work in our community.  Alice 
Faryna of the Justice Action Ministry will now 
offer insights into recent and upcoming social just
ice work. 
 
JAM  Alice Faryna 
(after Nathan plays Sixteen Tons) 
 
In the mid 1960ôs I was in training as a resident i
n internal medicine in Iowa City. Technology 
was pretty primitive by todayôs standards, but even
 today, preliminary diagnoses are made by 
choosing the most obvious choice, based on known ri
sk factors.  When you hear hoof beats, it 
was said, look for  horses not zebras. So one day, 
when a woman was admitted with severe 
abdominal pain we somewhat cavalierly said, ?fat, f
orty, female and fecund...must be a gall 
bladder attack.? After a couple of days when this d
iagnosis could not be confirmed (this was way 
before CT scans and MRIs), an abdominal surgical ex
ploration had to be done. Well, they found 
a zebra. This relatively young woman had a total oc
clusion of the main artery to her small 
intestine which by now was becoming gangrenous. The
y closed the wound, and it was up to us to 
tell her that she had a short time to live and the 
only thing to offer her was pain relief from the 
inevitable peritonitis. She, who had been allowed o
nly intravenous fluids for days, said, ?Well 
can I have a dish of ice cream then?? A medically u
nsound choice, but the only compassionate 
thing we could do. Fast forward about 16 years to t
he late 1970s when my mother suffered from 
the same catastrophic condition. By this time, the 
diagnosis could be made with non-invasive 
technology, but effective treatment for an elderly 
woman with other health problems was not 
possible. 

 
Fast forward again to 2009 when the Obama administr
ation succeeded in passing legislation to 
address our costly and highly fragmented health car
e system. The 1000 page Affordable Care 
Act is an achievement which eluded Teddy Roosevelt,
 FDR, Lyndon Johnson, Harry Truman 

 and Bill Clinton because of the heavy resistance of
 private interest corporations and the 
American Medical Association. Even with partial imp
lementation of the law, and advances in 
technology which now could save the Iowa patientôs 
life, some 45,000 Americans die each 
year ONLY because they do not have access to the ca
re they need. 
 
While some good has been done by the Affordable Car
e Act, it can never provide universal 
coverage, nor in the long run can it be affordable,
 because dysfunctional features remain: 
allowing high profit margins for private insurance,
 failing to allow for pharmaceutical price 
negotiation, and creating an additional layer of bu
reaucracy of exchanges to help people find a 
private insurance plan.  These are ungodly gaps. 

 
The ?One Payer? states remain undeterred. Several a
re on the path to take advantage of an option 
under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) to offer a stat
ewide alternative plan. Vermont is 
positioned to do so in 2017; California, Oregon and
 Pennsylvania have hopes that they can 
convince state legislators to do the same. Ohio is 
not well positioned to be a leader at this time, 
because of a very conservative General Assembly and
 governor, but SPAN (the Single Payer 
Action Network) continues to work with leaders in t
he Senate and House to educate them about 
the benefits of Medicare for all. I invite you to j
oin us in writing to legislators, or even coming 
with us on days when we make personal visits with t
hem. Let us put an end to the notion that the 
most dangerous thing you can do for your health is 
to be an American.
  
Singing 
first verse of
 1012 
 
Communing 

 
Today is March 17, St. Patrick's Day. Itôs also the
 day when Italy became a nation, back in the 
19th century, the day when the men who perpetrated 
the My Lai massacre in Vietnam were 
charged; and the day apartheid ended in South Afric
a, back in 1992. Itôs also the day that the last 
great just Roman Emperor died, in the year 180 of t
he Common Era. I offer, as a gateway into 
the garden of silence we tend at the center of our 
service, these words from the Meditations of 
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus: 

 
You will find rest from your self-serving obsession
s if you perform every act in your life as 
though it were your last. 

 
Do not waste the rest of your life making assumptio
ns about other people's lives. This will 
distract you from contributing to the common good. 
Study your own life, if you must study a life; 
study how you might make your life just and holy. 

 
Life is brief; at the end of it, there is but a sin
gle worthwhile harvest I can think of: a holy 
disposition toward neighborly acts. 

 
What is not good for the hive is not good for the b
ee. 
 
Are you afraid of change? Have you ever discovered 
anything yet that takes place without it? 
 
Best to keep silence over any good you do in this l
ife. Let your actions be like grape vines, which 
quietly grow toward your neighbor, that in good sea
son they might harvest a cluster of grapes.   

  
Be like the cliff against which the waves continual
ly break; this cliff stands firm, and tames the 
fury of the water around it in complete silence. 

 
silence 

 
On March 17 like every single other day of our live
s, our own days are intertwined with others. 
We evoke this sacred reality now, by allowing ourse
lves to name...whispered or privately...the 
names of those whom we miss because they are far, w
hom we mourn because we loved them, 
with whom we struggle because we want to remember t
heir humanity, and those whose love has 
sustained us to this very day. 

 
naming 

 
On March 17, like any day, music refreshes, heals, 
delights, uplifts, reminds, and holds our 
hearts in its hands.    
anthems 
 
The First Reading 
is from the scroll of Yerimiyahu, or Jeremiah, but 
modern critics are    
convinced that these particular words were written 
quite a number of decades after Jeremiah 
lived, and were simply inserted into his authentic 
words. Whoever the unnamed writer was, this 
remains a literate masterpiece of ancient skepticis
m.  
Donôt take the other nations as your models. 

Donôt look at events in the sky above and imagine t
hat they are omens or miracles, no matter 
how impressed others are by such things. The religi
ous notions of the people who claim such 
things are nothing but curls of smoke.             
                                                   
                                                   
Why? Because they chop down a tree, have a clever w
oodcarver shape the thing into the form of 
a "god." Then they cover it with hammered silver an
d gold, and fasten it to a rolling stand with 
nails.      

Such a "god" is like a scarecrow in a cucumber patc
häit canôt talk! It can't move around on its 
own...itôs dead wood that has to be pushed on a car
t. Donôt be impressed by such "gods." They 
are totally powerless, unable to do anything really
...either to frighten you, or inspire you to do 
good things. 

Look far and wide among the elite of the nations. T
he best they can come up with is nothing 
compared to you, o Eternal. Stupidly, they line the
ir godsäbut they remain only a lineup of 
decorated tree trunks, good for nothing but making 
smoke when burned. 
Shiny with silver foil from Tarshish, 

covered with gold from Uphaz, 

draped with violet and purple fabricsä 

no matter how fancy the sticks, theyôre still stick
s. 
But the Eternal is the real thingä 

     When the Eternal is angry, the earth shakes. 

     Yes, all nations, no matter what they worship 
or do not worship, quake. 

 Make no mistake, it is our god whose power crafted 
the earth, whose wisdom gave shape to the 
world, who stretched out the sky like a tent over u
s all. Our god thunders, and rain pours down. 
Our god flings the clouds overhead, and embellishes
 every storm with lightnings, while freeing 
all the great winds from their warehouse. I say: st
ick-god worshipers look mighty foolish, god-
makers embarrass themselves by their handmade gods!
 I say: their gods are all fakeäjust a 
bunch of dead tree-trunks, driftwood deities, and t
asteless jokes. 
The Second Reading 
is from the book Welcome to the Wisdom of the World
 (2007) by Joan 
Chittister, a Benedictine nun whose books are respe
cted by both religious and non religious 
readers. 
 Being born is not about choice, true, but living we
ll is. The choices we make as life goes on---not 
where, when, or how we were born---determine the qu
ality of the life we live.  It is what we do 
with what we have...that will make the difference, 
help us to achieve what is fully human, and 
therefore, breathtakingly holy. 

 
Jewish spirituality is clear about the relationship
 between being good enough, and becoming 
something better.  

 
(Rabbi) Moshe Leib put it this way: "If someone com
es to you and asks for your help, you 
should not turn them off with pious words, saying, 
'Have faith and take your troubles to God!' 
You shall act as if there were no God, as if there 
were only one person who could help this 
person...only yourself.? 

 
Preaching 

 
OK. I admit it. Even when I was a ten-year-old boy 
and 
very
 and sincerely
 devout in my 
religious practices, I was skeptical. I was, after 
all, one of those brats who liked to make the nuns 
turn purple by asking the following questions: "If 
God is all powerful, can he make a stone so 
heavy he can't lift it?" Or, "If God is all powerfu
l, can he make a stick with only one end?" 
 
I didn't invent these questions...they were "going 
around" in those days. But I was also the one 
who would ask questions based on a more personal wr
estling with the catechism I had been 
taught:  "Well, if Jesus was God, then how could he
 be a human being as well? 'Cause I'm a 
human being, and I sometimes forget things; and if 
Jesus was a human being, he would probably 
forget things, right? But then, if he was God, he w
ould never forget things...so how can he both 
forget things and not forget things? It just doesn'
t make any sense. If he was human, he could not 
have known he was God, because I know I am not, and
 that makes me human." 
 
The nuns patiently gave me the theological answer t
o my question. This answer came out for the 
first time...in Greek... at the Council of Chalcedo
n back in 451 of our Era. But the answer made 
no sense to me, not because it was in Greek, but be
cause it was rooted in 
incredibly abstract 
Platonic philosophy.
 And I suspect it was never 
intended
 to make sense, since it relied on the 
absolute authority of those bishops who came up wit
h the answer.   
 
Now, as I have explained before to this august body
, I personally never had to deal with what 
some of my friends had to deal with when dealing wi
th our childhood religions. I never lost my 

 childhood faith because some teacher taught me abou
t evolution, since I was taught evolution in 
religion class by the nuns in the first place. I wa
s taught that reported miracles, like the splitting
 
of the Red Sea, Cecil B. DeMille style, were, at be
st, exaggerations of entirely natural 
phenomena. So my skepticism as a boy wasn't entirel
y dismissed by my teachers, but in some 
ways, was supported by the skepticism they themselv
es brought to the classroom. 
 
But my friends raised in far more conservative reli
gious congregations climbed to their 
skepticism and doubts up a much steeper and more pr
ecarious path. They  were told that God 
was in charge of 
everything
...every biblical miracle, to be sure which happene
d exactly as 
reported...but also the very storm cloud growing pu
rple with rain over their heads, the shaking of 
the San Andreas fault, the whirl of a cyclone, the 
loss of a job, or the death of a young friend in a 
motorcycle accident. All under God's power.  

 
Whatever gaps in their knowledge, about science, ab
out history, about reason itself, were 
conveniently filled by God, almost as if God was so
me sort of spiritual caulking to fill in all the 
cracks in reality. But, as they studied more and mo
re, and realized the gaps could be filled by 
scientific knowledge, or were just empty, and that 
we really don't know some things, their faith 
in their childhood religion collapsed with a feroci
ous upset I never knew quite as deeply.  
 
But skepticism is not a new invention. To hear some
 fundamentalist divines talk, you would 
think that Charles Darwin himself invented the conc
ept, and that before him, in the last century, 
or Mr. Dawkins, in the present century, everyone ju
st had clear, unswerving beliefs in the 
doctrines of the various religions claiming ultimat
e truth for themselves.  
 
But as the 2500-year-old passage now found in the B
ook of Yerimihayu/Jeremiah makes plain, 
skepticism has been around for thousands of years..
.indeed, from the very beginning. There are 
few writings from the ancient world as sassy and sa
rcastic and skeptical as this: 
The religious 
notions of the people, who claim such things, are n
othing but curls of smoke. Why? Because they 
chop down a tree, have a clever woodcarver shape th
e thing into the form of a "god." Then they 
cover it with hammered silver and gold, and fasten 
it to a rolling stand with nails.        
 Such a "god" is like a scarecrow in a cucumber patc
häit canôt talk! It can't move around on its 
own...itôs dead wood that has to be pushed on a car
t. 
Donôt be impressed by such "gods." They are totally
 powerless, unable to do anything 
really...either to frighten you or inspire you to d
o good things. No matter how fancy the sticks, 
theyôre still sticks. 

The famous skeptical lecturer of the 19th century, 
Robert Ingersoll himself, would be hard put to 
come up with a slap in the face to a particular the
ology as harsh...and as witty...as that. 
Yet the same critic stops short of out right atheis
m, right?  For the author continues: 
But the 
Eternal is the real thingäWhen the Eternal is angry
, the earth shakes. Yes, all nations, no matter 
what they worship or do not worship, quake. 
 Make no mistake, it is our god whose power crafted 
the earth, whose wisdom gave shape to the 
world, who stretched out the sky like a tent over u
s all. Our god thunders, and rain pours down. 

 Our god flings the clouds overhead, and embellishes
 every storm with lightnings, while freeing 
all the great winds from their warehouse. 

Colorful writing, certainly. "The warehouse of the 
winds." But, if the author of this passage came 
back to life today, and discovered that the earth q
uakes because of moving fault-lines, that 
weather patterns are predictable, and the sky is no
t a tent, even metaphorically, but a window on 
infinity itself, all the powers assigned to The Ete
rnal (Moffat's great translation of the Hebrew 
YHWH), the "real thing" would collapse into rubble,
 and the resulting atheism would be fierce. 
But all of this theological thinking is faulty to b
egin with, as the passage in Jeremiah points out 
with sarcastic clarity. If you make Ultimacy, or Go
d, a thing, you are done for, right from the 
get-go. A "creator" is a limited thing. A "father" 
or even a "goddess" is a limited thing. A healer 
is a limited thing. A punisher is a limited thing. 
All of these may be called metaphors, yes, but, as 
the late and radical feminist theologian Mary Daly 
pointed out so well, folks can be mighty 
possessive and testy about their metaphors...just t
ry changing the metaphor "father" to "mother" 
and see what happens. All metaphors used to describ
e God, it seems to me, in traditional 
theological language, are walking wobbly on the pre
cipice of classic idolatry, of taking a mere 
thing (a word) for Ultimacy. If taking a piece of w
ood from a tree and covering it with gold is 
foolish, no god at all, laughable...so is taking so
me ink, writing it on paper made from that same 
tree, and scribbling words like "creator," "omnipot
ent" and "father," "rainmaker," and saying 
these words are the unquestioned images of Ultimacy
. (Many modern theologians, like Sallie 
McFague, see them as playful and dispensable, not a
bsolute. I can live with that very well. I am, 
after all, an appreciator of poetry.)  

But the word "creator" for example, has been a subs
titute, a metaphor, for the word God for 
many millennia. God is the one who created somethin
g out of nothing, and is the true answer to 
the famous question, 
Why is there something instead of nothing?
 Modern cosmologists, however, 
are no longer asking the question "can something co
me out of nothing," because they are having 
a hard time demonstrating that anything called noth
ingness existed before the universe. The 
creation of the universe itself does not necessaril
y rely on the power of the omnipotent, pre-
existing and personal God. And please, the work of 
cosmologists does not prove in itself that 
God is a foolish stopgap word, never to be uttered 
again...I really think itôs swaggering and 
foolish to say such things...but it does suggest th
at this particular metaphor for Ultimacy, 
?creator,? is no longer necessary.  

But you ask, can there be any holy use for the word
 God at all?  
I am thinking now of what the editor of Bereshith, 
or Genesis, said around 500 BCE: "human 
beings are made in the 
tselem
, the image of God." 

Tselem
. A word translated precisely 
elsewhere as one of those decked out tree trunks on
 carts carried around. Human beings, 
however, are not dead wood, the author is suggestin
g. We are alive! We are the images of 
Ultimacy, despite our broken and sometimes inauthen
tic lives. Itôs a radical and amazing 
statement Genesis makes.  

But certainly, some "images" or metaphors for Ultim
acy are no longer tenable. Fred Sanders, 
talking about Mary Daly, says this: 

 ?The reconstruction of the doctrine of God is the w
hole ball game for Daly. Feminism should not 
be satisfied with token victories, but should culti
vate the full cosmic and religious vision which 
the word ?God? signals. The false gods who must be 
destroyed are the God of the Gaps (who 
explains inequalities and unjust social situations 
as well), the God of Otherworldly rewards 
(since women have been the main consumers of this p
roduct, they can take it off the market by 
living full lives now).?  

Living full lives.  

That's Daly's understanding of a potentially non-id
olatrous use for that word. A godly life that 
betters the world, not subtracts from it. Or as Joa
n Chittister put it: "It is what 
we
 do with what 
we have...that will make the difference, help us to
 achieve what is fully human, and therefore, 
breathtakingly holy." 

Holy. Sanctified. Sainthood. I think especially tod
ay of what we really know about St. Patrick 
(once we have applied a holy and healthy skepticism
 to what has been handed down to us). There 
was
 such a man. He was not Irish, however, but from a 
small town in what we now call England, 
near the Scottish border. His actual name was Qatri
cius. As a teenager, he suffered indignities... 
he was kidnapped and sold into slavery to a wealthy
 clan family in what we now call Ireland. 
After 6 years, he escaped. He trained in France to 
be a cleric, then was sent back to Ireland. 
There, because he was a foreign immigrant, he was b
eaten, kicked, and treated roughly by the 
powerful clans there. Because he was outside the cl
osed family system which dominated the 
land, he was accused of all sorts of crimes, but wa
s eventually able to prove that these were false 
charges. We really don't know any more about him. N
ot a thing. We don't even know if he was 
ever a bishop. He was never officially canonized by
 any Church that celebrates his day. And 
there never were any snakes in Ireland since the ic
e age moved north, so there were no miracles. 
But he was seen as an honorable man despite all of 
his troubles, because, perhaps, he was. Again, 
Chittester: "It is what we do with what we have...t
hat will make the difference, help us to achieve 
what is fully human, and therefore, breathtakingly 
holy." And she adds, movingly: ?Rabbi 
Moshe Leib put it this way: 'If someone comes to yo
u and asks for your help, you should not turn 
them off with pious words, saying 'Have faith and t
ake your troubles to God!' You shall act 
as if 
there were no God
, as if there were only one person who could help t
his person...only yourself.ô? 
Apply now what I have said this morning to what Ali
ce Faryna told us earlier. She was talking 
about health care for every person in the United St
ates of America. 
. 

And she suggested, not that we wait for the God of 
the Gaps to come down and heal us, or for 
some huckster tent evangelist in a white suit to to
uch us and make us fall to the floor, willy nilly. 
No, in this world where the health care systems of 
thirty-four top industrialized nations are far 
more just, and economically less idolatrous than ou
rs...profit too can be a false godñshe said, 
"Let 
us
 put an end to the notion that the most dangerous t
hing you can do for your health is to be 
an American. Let 
us
..." 
 
Exactly. Like the rabbi in the children's story, ea
rlier, bringing a message of health to the old 
gentile woman who had no family to care for her. Th
e one his supporters thought might be so 
holy that he could ascend to heaven, and talk with 
Jeremiah. As I said at the beginning, I have 
been a skeptic since I was a child about things lik
e that. But I do like what the spy in the story 

 said when asked whether he saw the rabbi ascend to 
heaven. "Oh, no,? he said, ?he went to a 
much higher place than that!"
  
Offering 

 
Ceremony of Installation for Pastoral Team 2013
 Eric 

In the life of a progressive religious congregation
, we try to put people before beliefs, and 
persons before ceremonies. Being present to each ot
her in both joy 
and
 sorrow, rejoicing 
and
 suffering is a mark of our religious practice.  

 
The called ministers of this church, Mark and I, as
 well as the local minister emerita, Carol 
Brody, our affiliate ministers, Suzan McCrystal and
 Kathleen Clark Fowler and our 
Commissioned Chaplain, Dick Dawson, embrace among t
heir ministries the pastoral or caring 
services. In this we are supported and helped by th
e Caring Committee and the Neighborhood 
Network, which help people in time of trouble with 
very tangible food, and rides to and from 
medical appointments among many other things. 

Mark 

To these ministries, we have added the Pastoral Tea
m. The first team was installed 
ten years ago
. 
Today, we hereby install the new members of our tea
m, who have received training. Some 
members of the former teams will continue to serve 
in their present manner. The new names in 
the Pastoral Team are in your Orders of Celebration
. Know that each of them understands 
confidentiality, promising to keep the sacred stori
es of every human life safe. They have been 
educated in these practices by Dick and Eric, as we
ll as Joe Pierce and Karen McGuire; and with 
those four, I hereby acknowledge these new members 
of the Team as persons of character, 
compassion and commitment, worthy of trust. 

Dick                                               
                                                   
                                   
Therefore, with Eric and Mark and the other ministe
rs of this church, and on behalf of the 
members of this congregation and its leaders, I her
eby install you into the Pastoral Team of First 
Unitarian Universalist Church. Working with the min
isters and the Caring Committee and 
Neighborhood Network to live out our values of comp
assion and service one-on-one, I commend 
you to the congregation as servants of the heart, a
s companions of the spirit who welcome the 
whole person into the embrace of our community. 

 
 
 
 
