 Resisting Our Power
     
January 22, 2012 
Rev. Eric Meter 
 
Welcome 

Centering Kindling 

Opening Words 

We are here  

 in the midst of the variety of Ohio winter days  

freezing rain, icy roads, then just enough sunshine
 to thaw things before the rain and snow return  
 we gather together to worship once again   

drawing upon the energies that are ours  

 to make our world more worthy of our deepest longi
ngs  
where justice and beauty are at home to stay  

And so, without guarantees, we lean into joy, and b
end toward a just way of life, both for our 
own sakes, and for the sake of our children and eve
ryone with whom we share the earth. We 
would engage our mission wholeheartedly, with coura
ge, self-questioning, compassion, 
vulnerability and honesty. 

Praising   #1012   
When I Am Frightened  
 Ingathering    
The Civil Rights Family     
   
by Paula Young Shelton, as told by Mark Rudoff   
Mark will be working with the children on creating 
an original musical composition based on the 
story he told this morning. It will have its world 
premiere here next week. You won™t want to 
miss it.  

Gathering  

Affirming    #648  
Beginners
    by Denise Levertov
  
But we have only begun to love the earth.  

We have only begun to imagine the fullness of life.
  
How could we tire of hope? Œ so much is in bud. 
 How can desire fail? Œ we have only begun to imagin
e justice and mercy,  
Only begun to envision how it might be to live as s
iblings with beast and flower, not as 
oppressors.  

Surely our river cannot already be hastening into t
he sea of nonbeing?  
Surely it cannot drag, in the silt, all that is inn
ocent?  
Not yet, not yet Œ there is too much broken that mu
st be mended,  
Too much hurt that we have done to each other that 
cannot yet be forgiven.  
We have only begun to know the power that is in us 
if we would join our solitudes in the 
communion of struggle.  

So much is unfolding, that must complete its gestur
e, so much is in bud.  
 
 Sequence  

Denise Levertov writes of beginners. I guess she me
ans people like us. Or people we may long to 
be.  

While we™re a couple weeks into the new year, I sti
ll like to be reminded that the beginnings of 
things are crucial times, and people who risk begin
ning anew, well, there™s courage there to be 
found.  

To begin again. To start something new. There™s a f
reedom that comes in being a novice.  
So often we pride ourselves in being expert of some
 skill or area of expertise.  
While first new steps are awkward at best, any new 
venture brings with it the excitement of new 
discoveries.  

In the reading we™ve just given voice to Levertov h
olds the tension between what is known and 
accepted and what might yet be discovered,  

We have only begun to imagine justice and mercy. Su
rely our river cannot already be hastening 
into the sea of nonbeing?  

Ah, but rivers are always hastening into the sea. B
ut along the way–
 so many twists and turns, 
so many new horizons.  

The river of justice has just started its journey, 
and there are other rivers as well: rivers of 
integrity, rivers of hope. It is a mighty thing to 
leave the safety of the riverbank behind and join 
others on the voyage of a lifetime. Is there a rive
r calling in your life?  
bell  

Let our hearts flow together into this moment of me
mory and care, where we name aloud, or 
name silently within, the beautiful names of those 
we love, those with whom we struggle, those 
who are far away, and those whom we remember with l
ove.... 
naming 

Let music now flow as well, gathering our spirits, 
restoring our dreams and hopes of a world 
growing more just and fair, as we are both simultan
eously veterans and beginners, and now the 
calls for justice are given grace to by the harmoni
es of music. 
Readings  

Our first reading is from the art and cultural crit
ic John Berger™s book 
Hold Everything Dear
.  
Before Jolinda shares it with you, I want you to kn
ow that Berger makes political claims which 
lead to a reflection on society I will return to la
ter in our time together. These are his views. You 
don™t need to share them.  

?I want to say at least something about the pain ex
isting in the world today.  Consumerist 
ideology, which has become the most powerful and in
vasive on the planet, sets out to persuade 
us that pain is an accident, something that we can 
insure against. 
Everyone knows, of course, that pain is endemic to 
life, and wants to forget this or relativize it. 
All the variants of the myth of a Fall from the Gol
den Age, before pain existed, are an attempt to 
relativize the pain suffered on earth. So too is th
e invention of Hell, the adjacent kingdom of 
pain-as-punishment. Likewise the discovery of Sacri
fice. And later, much later, the principle of 
Forgiveness. One could argue that philosophy began 
with the question: why pain?  
Yet, when all this has been said, the present pain 
of living in the world is perhaps in some ways 
unprecedented.  

I write in the night, although it is daytime. A day
 in early October 2002. For almost a week the 
sky above has been blue. Each day the sunset is a l
ittle earlier and each day gloriously beautiful. 
Many fear that before long, US military forces will
 be launching the ‚preventive™ war against 
Iraq so that the US oil corporations can lay their 
hands on further and supposedly safer oil 

 supplies. Between the announced decisions and the s
ecret calculations, everything is kept 
unclear, since lies prepare the way for missiles. I
 write in a night of shame. 
By shame I do not mean individual guilt. Shame, as 
I™m coming to understand it, is a species 
feeling which, in the long run, corrodes the capaci
ty for hope and prevents us looking far ahead. 
We look down at our feet, thinking only of the next
 small step.? 
Our second reading today is a well known passage fr
om 
The Transformation of Silence into 
Action and Language
, a speech Audre Lorde gave in December 1977, as it
 is collected in her 
later book 
Sister Outsider
.   
?I have come to believe that what is most important
 must be spoken, made verbal and shared, 
even at the risk of having it bruised or misunderst
ood.  
Less than two months ago I was told that I would ha
ve to have breast surgery, and that there was 
a 60 to 80 percent chance that the tumor was malign
ant. Between that telling and the actual 
surgery, there was a three-week period of the agony
 of an involuntary reorganization of my 
entire life. The surgery was completed, and the gro
wth was benign.  
But within those three weeks, I was forced to look 
upon myself and my living with a harsh and 
urgent clarity that has left me still shaken but mu
ch stronger. This is a situation faced by many 
women, by some of you here today. Some of what I ex
perienced during that time has helped 
elucidate for me much of what I feel concerning the
 transformation of silence into language and 
action.  

In coming forcibly and essentially aware of my mort
ality, and of what I wished and wanted for 
my life, however short it might be, priorities and 
omissions became strongly etched in an 
merciless light, and what I most regretted were my 
silences. Of what had I 
ever
 been afraid? To 
question or to speak as I believed could have meant
 pain, or death. But we all hurt in so many 
different ways, all the time, and pain will either 
change or end. Death, on the other hand, is the 
final silence. And that might be coming quickly, no
w, without regard for whether I had ever 
spoken what needed to be said, or had only betrayed
 myself into small silences, while I planned 
someday to speak, or waited for someone else™s word
s. and I began to recognize a source of 
power within myself that comes from the knowledge t
hat while it is most desirable not to be 
afraid, learning to put fear into perspective gave 
me great strength.  
I was going to die, if not sooner then later, wheth
er or not I had ever spoken myself. My silences 
had not protected me. Your silence will not protect
 you.?  
Sermon  

Earlier this week, Jolinda Stephens and Brian Hagem
ann made sure I had seen the latest nugget 
of gold making its way through the internet. It was
 so good I want to pass it on to you, and it so 
keenly matches what I™ve been wanting to talk with 
you about this morning that I™m going to 
start off with it.  

On January 3, this is what 20-year-old Kristen Wolf
e wrote in her blog, 
Sweet Up ‚N Down
 (hosted on Tumlbr.com). Kristen is a 20-year-old sh
ift manager at a video game store, and given 
the nature of what she writes about here, it is wor
th adding that she is married to a US Marine.  
This may be old news to some of you, but this is wh
at she posted earlier this month:  
Dear Customer who stuck up for his little brother, 
you thought I didn™t really notice.
 But I did. I 
wanted to high-five you.  

?Yesterday I had a pair of brothers in my store. One
 was maybe between 15-17. He was a 
wrestler at the local high school. Kind of tall, st
ocky and handsome. He had a younger brother, 
who was maybe about 10-12 years old. The only way t
o describe him was scrawny, neat, and 

 very clean for a boy his age. They were talking abo
ut finding a game for the younger one, and he 
was absolutely insisting it be one with a female ch
aracter. I don™t know how many of y™all play 
games, but that isn™t exactly easy. Eventually, I h
elped the brothers pick a game called 
Mirror™s 
Edge
. The youngest was pretty excited about the game, a
nd then he specifically asked me. ?Do 
you have any girl color controllers?? I directed hi
m to the only colored controllers we have 
which includes pink and purple ones. He grabbed the
 purple one, and informed me purple was 
his FAVORITE. 

?The boys had been taking awhile, so their father ev
entually comes in. He sees the game, and the 
controller, and starts in on the youngest about how
 he needs to pick something different. 
Something more manly. Something with guns and fight
ing, and certainly not a purple controller. 
He tries to convince him to get the new Zombie game
 ?Dead Island.? and the little boy just 
stands there repeating, ?Dad, this is what I want, 
ok?? Eventually it turns into a full blown 
argument complete with Dad threatening to whoop his
 son if he doesn™t choose different items.
??
 That™s when big brother stepped in. He said to his 
Dad, ?It™s my money, it™s my gift to him, if it™s 
what he wants I™m getting it for him, and if your (
sic) going to hit anyone for it, it™s going to be 
me.? Dad just gives his older son a strong stern st
are down, and then leaves the store. Little 
brother is crying quietly, I walk over and ruffle h
is hair (yes, this happened all in front of me).  I
 say, ?I™m a girl, and I like the color blue, and I 
like shooting games. There™s nothing wrong with 
what you like. Even if it™s different than what peo
ple think you should.? I smile, he smiles back 
(my heart melts!).  Big brother then leans down, ki
sses little brother on the head, and says, 
?Don™t worry dude.? They check out and leave, and a
ll I can think is how 
awesome
 big brother 
is, how sweet little brother is, and how Dad ought 
to be ashamed for trying to make his son any 
other way.
 Now, right off the bat, while in no way do I want t
o condone the father™s actions in this story, we 
are not here to pass judgment upon him. This may we
ll have been part of a pattern in his 
behavior, but we don™t know that.  

We can wonder, however, about what is motivating hi
m. In the reading Wes shared with us 
earlier, Audre Lorde, facing as never before the tr
uth of her own mortality, asks herself what she 
had ever been afraid of. In the face of her death, 
possibly coming sooner than later, all her former 
worries paled in comparison. All those old concerns
 vanished in light of the new one. What had 
she ever been afraid of before?  

In light of that, we can ask what might this father
 be afraid of?  
Does he feel his son™s gender expression reflects o
n his own, on what it means to be a man, as 
opposed to what it means to be human?  

Maybe. But the truth is we just can™t say.  

What we can say is that it looks like the father in
 the story doesn™t seem to understand that it is 
our uniqueness that brings what we have to the tabl
e, as the young Paula Young and Uncle 
Martin so clearly understand in the story Mark Rudo
ff told earlier. The trick is bringing those 
separate voices together in something like a sympho
ny. And that, as you can imagine, takes 
artistry, practice and a willingness for everyone t
o be part of the show, not the whole show itself.  
As you know, this is not something that happens eve
ry day.  
What I love about the everyday story from Kristen™s
 blog is that it is a snapshot of someone 
caught doing something great. And a witness is ther
e to tell the story, of a moment of family 
pain, a moment of brotherly love and courage. ?Don™
t worry, dude.?  

 How often have we witnessed similar moments where s
omeone does NOT step up to say, 
?It™s 
my gift to him, if it™s what he wants I™m getting i
t for him, and if you™re going to hit anyone for it
, 
it™s going to be me??
  
How often have we failed to step up when it is us o
r a loved one in pain? 
 So often the norm of our days is, as John Berger wr
ites, a sense of just getting by, of shuffling 
along, our eyes far from the prize ahead in the dis
tance, but focused, if that much can be said, 
down at our toes.  

?Shame,? he says, ?as I™m coming to understand it, 
is a species feeling which, in the long run, 
corrodes the capacity for hope, and prevents us loo
king far ahead. We look down at our feet, 
thinking only of the next small step.? 

While Berger™s understanding of shame may not be as
 clearly defined as we might hope, the 
sense of looking only as far ahead as where our nex
t step will land is familiar. Whether we look 
to the next step, the next paycheck, the next medic
al bill, or the next distraction, this seems an 
apt description of our age.  

What I remember about the months before the invasio
n of Iraq was a depressed sense that moral 
outrage wasn™t going to make any difference at all.
 Yes, there were protests, and powerful 
speeches in opposition to the looming war, but noth
ing said and done was able to turn the tide 
from what was clearly more and more inevitable.  

That kind of situation teaches conformity to a lie,
 teaches conformity to a certain image or will.  
At first I was amazed that the during the 2004 pres
idential campaign John Kerry never called 
Bush out on the lies he had used to move us into wa
r, the lies that prepared the way for the 
missiles, as John Berger put it. Either there was s
ome vast conspiracy to hide some hidden truth 
about Israel and the missing WMDs, or the powers th
at be, those with the money to influence our 
campaigns if not manage our government, made it cle
ar that this was not territory to be charted 
publicly.  

We may talk of the mighty river of justice, but we 
know there are other tides, other rivers as 
well.  

The kind of tide that says that there is only one w
ay to be a man. The kind of force within culture 
and history that can lead people into an unjust and
 unnecessary war.  
There are many powers at work in the world.  

Despite what we may tell our children, the lesson s
eems to be that lying is okay. Just listen to 
Newt Gingrich and notice where it got him in the So
uth Carolina primary yesterday.  
But lying remains risky at best. Even though we all
 tell some lies, lying remains a slippery slope.  
It™s another form of practicing power over, of doin
g just what the father in the story tried to do to 
his son.  

He was trying to get his son to contort himself int
o a box labeled ?manly boy.? Just as, when 
someone lies, they are putting a box around a false
 presentation of reality and attempting to sell it 
as the real thing. They are wanting to be in contro
l of what is considered to be true.  
But lies are always hard to sustain. The energy tha
t it takes to maintain them is corrosive.  
And don™t forget those other rivers, those of justi
ce and self respect.  
Let™s return to Audre Lorde now: ?While I planned s
omeday to speak, or waited for someone 
else™s words, I began to recognize a source of powe
r within myself that comes form the 
knowledge that while it is most desirable not to be
 afraid, learning to put fear into perspective 

 gave me great strength. I was going to die, if not 
sooner then later, whether or not I had ever 
spoken myself. My silences had not protected me. Yo
ur silence will not protect you.? 
The teenage boy found the strength to stand up for 
his younger brother against their father™s 
bullying.  

Had he read Audre Lorde? It™s possible, but I doubt
 it.  
I wonder where he found the strength to do what he 
did.  Was it that his father had finally pushed 
him to a place he just couldn™t abide the bullying 
any longer? Was it that in his wrestling coach 
he found a model of another way of being a man or t
hat the wrestling itself had given him greater 
confidence? Was it his mother who always told him t
o stand up for himself and protect his 
younger brother? Was it in school or in church that
 people bully when they, themselves, are 
afraid?  

I don™t doubt the young man showed initiative and b
ackbone. He™s a mensch in my book. But in 
most stories of heroism there is both the hero and 
some person or group demonstrating another 
way of being.  

Another way of being certainly seems necessary. It™
s hard to imagine the father in our story just 
having a bad day. He seems to have fallen intro a t
rap he can™t get out of.  
Brené Brown, a research professor at the University
 of Houston™s Graduate School of Social 
Work, whose work our own Tim Hooks introduced me to
 last summer, has spent most of her 
career studying women and shame. It was from her th
at I learned the expression 
shame triggers
; 
those areas each of us have that are most sensitive
 to the judgment of others. And while she has 
spent most of her time studying women, Brown has wo
rked with enough men to feel confident 
saying that shame is universal, at least in our cul
ture, among men as well.  
Perhaps the father™s shame trigger is gender identi
ty; perhaps it is control, like my father™s was.  
It seems clear he hasn™t yet learned the lesson Aud
re Lorde talks about, that learning to put fear 
into perspective gives us great strength. I hope he
™ll take a lesson from his sons. They have much 
to teach him.  

One final point, towards the end of her book 
I Thought It Was Just Me (but it isn™t), 
Brené 
Brown talks about a moment in which she learned fro
m a mentor.  
She was at the 2006 awards dinner of the Feminist M
ajority Foundation (I had no idea there was 
such a group, I have to admit), when the closing sp
eaker, a woman named Mavis Leno said, ?We 
can all make a difference,? before pausing and look
ing out at the audience.  
She had them. What was this thing they could do tha
t would make a world better?  
Finally, she continued, ?If you want to make a diff
erence, the next time you see someone being 
cruel to another human being, take it personally. T
ake it personally because it 
is
 personal.?   
The young man did just that. He chose what river he
 wanted to be part of.  
You can, too.  

Offering 

Investing in the future of our common house, and ou
r compelling vision of life and love for all 
people, we offer this time to bless the choice we h
ave made to participate in this beloved 
community.  

 
Returning   

 Singing  #1017 
Building a New Way
  
Blessing  

The worthy road ahead is not found by simply lookin
g at where our next steps will land. Look at 
those next to you now. Together, we know the better
 way. Remember, the river is mighty and it 
flows toward justice.  

 
