
  The messenger Gabri-El was sent by G-d 
  to a hamlet in The Galilee named Nazaret.
  There the messenger found a thirteen-year-old girl whose family had already
  arranged her engagement to a man named Yoseph. 
  The girl's name was Mari. 
  And so Gabri-El found Mari in the hamlet 
  and said to her, "Good morning, graceful girl. G-d's greetings to you."
  At once Mari was both startled by the greeting and confused by its meaning.
  
  "Now don't be scared," said Gabri-El. 
  "G-d chooses you above all others. 
  You will be a mother. 
  You will give birth to a son. 
  And you will name him Yesu. 
  He will be a great man, 
  and his life will be seen as showing forth 
  the goodness of G-d.
  Yet I tell you that such a good life
  shares the very same authority 
  of great king David of yore."
  
  "But what do you mean I am to be a mother?" cried Mari. 
  "You surely know I am not yet been with a man."
  
  "Well," said the messenger, 
  "the holy Breath of G-d 
  shall breathe upon you, 
  and the highest power 
  will overshadow you; and for that reason, 
  your child will be known 
  as both very holy and very good.
  
  Moreover, you should know that your kinswoman Elisa Beth is also due soon,
  even though they say she is too old to get pregnant, and even though she
  has been pitied all of life for being childless."
  
  "Let it all happen as you say," said Mari. 
  "I am at the Eternal's service."
  
  Then the messenger left. 
  After this, Mari went up to the hill country to visit Elisa Beth.
  Elisa Beth greeted her by saying,
  "How fortunate is the child now growing in your womb!"
  
  Mari responded by singing this poem: (Note: The Magnificat is the name given
  it when sung in Latin.)
  
  "The heart of my heart praises G-d, 
  and my breath quickens in the presence 
  of the One who makes me whole,
  the One who has noticed me in my low state.
  Do you see? The lofty are now scattered
  through the arrogance of their own heart,
  and the all-powerful rulers of earth
  are pulled down off their thrones;
  and poor people like me are lifted up.
  The hungry are fed now, 
  the sated go away with empty hands.
  The compassion of G-d falls upon this servant of Israel, 
  just as once was promised,
  and to all those who tremble before the truth."
  And Mari stayed with Elisa Beth for three months.

  Soon thereafter, Caesar Augustus issued a degree calling for a census to
  be taken of the whole inhabited world. This was the first census, actually,
  the one which the Syrian governor, Quinrinius, organized in the East. So
  a man named Yoseph, who had been working in the Galilee, traveled south with
  Mari his fiancée to Beth Lehem, which was where his family home was
  located. Mari was due to give birth any day. And indeed, it was while they
  were in Bethlehem that Mari gave birth to her first born child. But because
  Yoseph's home was crowded, they took their newborn to the part of the house
  where the animals were sleeping, and used their feeding trough as his first
  crib. In that manger they laid him, wrapping him up tight according to custom.

  Nearby some young sheep-herders were keeping a night-watch on their flocks.
  Suddenly a messenger from G-d appeared to them, and a bright light blazed
  around them, and they were all scared to death.
  
  But the messenger comforted them with these words, "Don't be scared. I bring
  good news! I bring you joy! For today in the village a child has been born,
  who is the chosen one of G-d, a healer. This is how you will distinguish
  him. Like every newborn he is wrapped up tight, but he alone has a cattle-feeder
  for his cradle."
  
  Suddenly, the messenger was joined by a whole chorus, singing praises.
  
  "The glory of G-d on high 
  is people of goodwill below 
  living in peace with each other."
  
  Then the young shepherd lads looked at each other in amazement, and said,
  "Let us go find this amazing thing in Beth Lehem."
  
  And so they went and found the child in the cattle-feeder and immediately
  told his parents what had happened to them. And when they heard this story,
  they were utterly astonished.
  
  But Mari kept thinking about this tale in her heart all of her life, wondering
  what it might mean.

  At dusk, everything blurs and softens.
  From here out over the long valley, 
  the fields and hills pull up 
  the first slight sheets of evening, 
  as, over the next hour, 
  heavier, darker ones will follow.
  
  Quieted roads, predictable deer
  browsing in a neighbor's field, another's
  herd of heifers, the kitchen lights
  starting in many windows. On horseback
  I take it in, neither visitor
  nor intruder, but kin passing, closer
  and closer to night, its cold streams
  rising in the sugarbush and hollow.
  
  Half-aloud, I say to the horse,
  or myself, or whoever: let fire not come
  to this house, nor that barn,
  nor lightning strike the cattle.
  Let dogs not gain the gravid doe, 
  let the lights of the rooms 
  convey what they seem to.
  
  And who is to say it is useless
  or foolish to ride out in the falling light
  alone, wishing, or praying,
  for particular good to particular beings
  on one small road in a huge world?
  The horse bears me along, like grace,
  making me better than what I am,
  and what I think or say or see
  is whole in these moments, is neither
  small nor broken. For up, out of
  the inscrutable earth, have come by body
  and the separate body of the mare:
  flawed and aching and wronged. Who then
  is better made to say be well, be glad,
  or who to long that we, as one,
  might course over the entire valley,
  over all valleys, as a bird in a great embrace
  of flight, who presses against her breast,
  in grief and tenderness,
  the whole weeping body of the world?

Do you see? The lofty are now scattered
  through the arrogance of their own heart,
  and the all-powerful rulers of earth
  are pulled down off their thrones,
  and poor people like me are lifted up.
  The hungry are fed now, 
  the sated go away with empty hands.

  How amazing that from dust and empty space, from inertia and chaos and
  possibility the universe opened like a Christmas rose.
  
  How astonishing that stars began to burn so hot and bright, and that galaxies
  spread their arms like wild dancers to a music no one could yet hear.
  
  How stunning that rocks and stones and particles gathered themselves up in
  a halo around a newborn sun and rolled themselves into the planetary miracle
  lying beneath our feet and this carpeted floor.
  
  How unbelievable that boiling seas yielded soft round life at last, which
  thickened into spines and fins and gaping mouths, creatures which struggled
  onto the land and gazed up at the steady stars without knowledge or chart.
  
  How astounding that scales stretched into feathers, and eggs became pouches
  became wombs, which opened onto Time and brought us forth with a shout.
  
  How humbling the human calendars of joy and doom, the chapel ceilings and
  wooden crosses, the singing and the uncertainty, the laughter and solitude
  and real terror.
  
  How surprising that we argue about mysteries, pose unanswerable questions,
  wrestle with imagination's angels, and pretend that we might one day be perfect
  or even find a faithful measure of perfection.
  
  O Love, most high and most deep,
  the edge of our reaching
  and the limit of our sinking,
  as this season presses us
  with pressures unnamed,
  You press us also,
  press us closer to the wonder,
  and to the amazement,
  and to the disbelief,
  and to the astonishment,
  and to the humility,
  and to the daily, hourly surprise that we were born at all,
  and are alive enough
  and aware enough to sing
  Gloria in Excelsis and Peace on Earth.
  For our lives, for the heartbreaking beauty of the stars, for the complexity
  of history,
  for our questions, our hopes,
  we offer this our praise around the manger,
  the dirty unexpected manger
  that signs the mystery of all our births,
  And we praise and praise again,
  praise by unfurling all the alleluias
  we usually keep curled up. Alleluia! amen.
