
We come together like pieces of a quilt,
  each piece a different texture and color,
each of us unique in our beliefs and paths.
  Bound together by the common thread
of our covenant of love and support,
  our separate pieces become one,
a quilt of endless variety and common purpose,
  and a reflection of our endearing differences.
We come together to worship and to acknowledge
  what distinguishes us from each other
and what holds us together,
  a beautiful and valued heirloom of tradition,
an amalgamation of individual strengths
  that form a tapestry of commitment and devotion
that will allow us to continue
  this, our shared journey.

  Trying to talk about what Unitarian Universalists "believe" offers problems
  similar to those of creating synesthesia-that is, describing one sense in
  terms of another. How to describe red to a blind person? How to represent
  the tones of saxophone and flute to a person who has never heard any sound?
  How to explain what music looks like, or colors sound like, when the senses-such
  as those of persons who have stretched, in the words of poet William Blake,
  "the doors of perception"-have been altered through inducing meditative trance
  states or ingesting mind-altering substances? How does one discuss an afterlife
  with a person who believes that our heavens and hells are made on this side
  of death? If we want to look at the lighter side, how can the characters
  from A Midsummer Night's Dream, Oklahoma! and Waiting for Godot perform their
  lines on the same stage at the same time?
  
  Some of us are lifelong Unitarian Universalists. Many others came from churches
  they grew up in or had no formal religious backgrounds. We carry with us
  the traditions of Christianity, Judaism, Buddhism, Hinduism, humanism, paganism,
  and numerous other strains of belief, a patchwork of theist and secular
  influences.
  
  One friend of mine, when I told him I'd joined this church, described our
  religion as the one in which "you can believe anything you want." That gave
  me the opportunity to open with him a discussion of our Principles and Purposes
  that continues to this day. In this service, presented by members of the
  Worship Committee, we offer the first in what will be an occasional series
  of lay-led services over the next year exploring the topic "This I Believe."
  We hope that in exploring our Principles and Purposes, we can better
  understand-and thus explain to others-the multifaceted and diverse set of
  beliefs possible in a covenental faith.
  
  The term covenental is what distinguishes our religion from many others.
  Unitarian Universalism is not based in a creed, in which a set of shared
  beliefs and agreed-upon doctrines dictate the belief systems of its members.
  Rather, we are a covenental faith. Our faith's statement of principles begins,
  "We, the member congregations of the Unitarian Universalist Association,
  covenant to affirm and promote?." This is followed by a listing of the
  principles, which appear in the front of our hymnal.
  
  A covenant is a contract, a promise, and rather than surrendering ourselves
  to a creed interpreted by specialists or inherited doctrines, we enter into
  a freely chosen agreement to work together and seek truth independently within
  the shared light of our statement of principles. In sharing a covenant, we
  agree to support these principles and not to condemn another's beliefs as
  "wrong." Rather, we agree to discover, share, and celebrate our religious
  commonalities.
  
  As you entered today, you received a small piece of cloth similar to the
  pieces that might make up the most basic and simple of quilts. Here at the
  beginning of the service, we are separate pieces with the potential to become
  a single quilt. By the end of this service, when we symbolically join hands
  in our customary fashion for the blessing, we hope that this spirit of distinct
  paths and common purpose will bring us together into the beautiful quilt
  that our faith allows us to be.
  
  Our principles are the thread that stitches together the diverse elements,
  the separate pieces of patchwork, that make up our separate and collective
  spiritual paths. By presenting today what is only a sampling of our diverse
  beliefs within our shared values, we hope to enrich our understanding our
  Unitarian Universalism and to validate and nurture the differences that make
  us strong.
  
(Meditation, and The Silence)

  We will enter now into a few minutes of reflection and contemplation. I suggest
  you make yourself comfortable, relax, and allow yourself to clear your mind
  of planning or thought by closing your eyes and making yourself aware of
  the quiet movement of your own breathing.
  
  The teacher Baba Ram Dass has suggested that modern life often feels incomplete
  because we see ourselves separate from the rest of the world, and that our
  uneasiness is the result of this lost connection, and that in recognizing
  our interconnectedness with the rest of the universe we find meaning.
  
  Simply allow yourself to breathe. Let anxiety slip away. Let plans slips
  away. Let desires slip away. Lower yourself gently the calm and quiet within
  where, in the space between breaths, you connect with the place that needs
  no words, needs no language. Let breath be the measure of meaning. Lower
  yourself gently into silence, the locus of solitude and connection, the warm
  center of the moment. Breathe. Breathe, and be still.
  
  In connecting fully with and within ourselves, we find our connection to
  the rest of creation. Into the space of silence, we now bring the names of
  those we love, of those we miss, of those we keep in the deep recesses of
  our hearts and lives. I invite you now to speak aloud, or in the silence
  of your heart, these special names?.
  
  We are parts of a greater whole, pieces of a greater design. Our individual
  silences shape a larger, shared silence. From this place of contemplation,
  we move into connection with each other, and action in the world. So be it.
  Amen.
  
This I Believe


      I believe there are mysteries I cannot understand that may or not be related
      to a deity or group of related powers
    
      I believe that prayer is a form of focused intention, and that whether TO
      something or FOR something, whether seen as a crude form of begging or a
      focused application of spiritual energy, it improves my life even without
      always producing specific results
    
      I believe that our daily struggles are shared, and that only in recognizing
      our interdependence can we find satisfaction
    
      I believe that great teachers throughout time-including the Buddha, Jesus
      Christ, Mohammed, Confucius, the writers of the Talmud, and innumerable poets,
      musicians, and other writers-have provided wisdom and guidance that inspire
      action and mediatation
    
      I believe my Catholic upbringing gave me an appreciation for faith, a respect
      for the power of ritual and religious community, and a profound sense of
      social justice
    
      I believe, knowing what it is to be and having no idea what it is to NOT
      be, that every day above ground is a good one with demands for struggle and
      opportunities for joy
    
      I believe kindness costs no more than cruelty and produces better results,
      and that it produces benefits that don't need to be banked into a place beyond
      death and that change the world in ways I will never know
    
      I believe that the bonds of individual and group caring, connection with
      the natural world, and the application of gentle humor are more effective
      palliatives than any medications
  


We shall not cease from exploration
  And the end of all our exploring
  Will be to arrive where we started
  And know the place for the first time.
  -T. S. Eliot

  I am Su Ann Farnlacher and I have been a member here for 30 years and this
  is where I discovered UU. Since high school I considered myself to be an
  Agnostic in that I?m not certain if there is or isn?t a God. The
  older I become I find that belief in a god or prophet or the son of god is
  just not important. And probably the reason I feel so at home here is because
  I believe it is one?s actions that speak the loudest.
  
  The rest of my beliefs are simple and uncomplicated.
  
  I believe that love and all of its expressions are powerful, healing and
  totally good. That this love is best demonstrated by listening , respecting,
  honoring each and every person and animal.
  
  We are linked and connected by this love and it is always striving to present
  itself. I believe this love is incredibly freeing. It is best attained by
  acceptance and forgiveness or yourself and others. I believe that loving
  yourself first is paramount and people who cannot do this have been injured.
  If we cannot love ourselves we cannot truly love others.
  
  As I said before I don?t think that it really matters what you
  ?believe? as long as your actions reflect this love and acceptance
  of each other.
  
  My sense of awe about love and nature is at times is so overwhelming it is
  hard to bear. I have wanted to share this feeling with others but to do this
  one has to give it a name and to give it a name seems to limit it.
  
  I believe each of us has to find their own way to whatever it is they believe.
  
  I was a delegate to our denomination?s international General Assembly
  during the 2 or 3 years in the 80?s when the Unitarian Universalist
  Association?s Purposes and Principles were crafted, refined and voted
  upon. They are very real and important to me. It was awesome to be a part
  of their creation.
  
  As Steve said we are a covenantal church and not a creedal church. We are
  a muscular church in that we ask our members to live by these principles.
  Since we don?t tell our members what they must believe we make our members
  think. For this reason we are not an easy denomination to belong to.
  
  So to this day I still can?t tell you if there is a god and I don?t
  feel it necessary. Yet over and over I am humbled by the incredible beauty
  and sacredness of this world and it inhabitants. I believe that life itself
  or the now is the Gift.

  On an October evening in 1987, I told my friend Worley that I'd just come
  back from a worship service at a Nazarene Church.
  
  Worley was not pleased. He was an Episcopalian. "Ray, you have a problem,"
  he said. "I've known you to attend services at Presbyterian and Episcopal
  churches, but you don't seem to stop there. You're like having affairs with
  religions. You don't care what a church believes in as long as the music
  has some melody and rhythm and the people there don't think you're an alien
  from another planet."
  
  "What's wrong with enjoying all denominations?" I asked.
  
  "Plenty. When you worship in a church, it's like signing a contract saying
  that you believe in the same things as they do."
  
  "True," I said. "But these are not exclusive contracts."
  
  Fifteen years later, I'm even more guilty of the crime Worley accused me
  of. I've been a member of one UU church or another, but I have paid an occasional
  visit to a Lutheran church that I like in inner-city Cincinnati, a couple
  of Hindu temples, and a Buddhist meditation group. My children have attended
  a Jewish pre-school, a Baptist Summer School, and a UU Sunday School.
  
  Some of my Christian friends, including Worley, may accuse me of breaking
  the first commandment, "thou shalt have no other gods before me." In that
  case, they might as well know that this sinner has had a long history. I
  was born and raised a Hindu and a polytheist. As a child, I used to go with
  my family to temples of various gods and goddesses and even a few Christian
  and Muslim prayer services. My mother prayed to any god who would answer
  her prayers. And she had a lot to pray about, with the early death of my
  father and the single-handed raising of ten children, one with polio and
  one or two with behavioral problems.
  
  Longing for a moral compass, I found Hinduism too complicated and at the
  age of sixteen, encouraged by a Jesuit priest, I fell in love with Jesus.
  But it took me a decade or so to admit to myself that the gap between Jesus
  and Christianity was at least as wide as the one between Gandhi and Hinduism.
  I became a Unitarian Universalist.
  
  Being a UU allows me to be open to all spiritual experiences. Now I could
  attend a Christian church on Good Friday and listen to the most moving passage
  I've ever found in any text, religious or secular, where Jesus, after being
  whipped, spit upon and crucified, still says, "father, forgive them for they
  know not what they do." That instant in my mind, Jesus seems to share the
  cross with Joan of Arc, Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Matthew Sheppard, and
  thousands of women and men in whom I see the triumph of love and forgiveness
  over hate and cynicism. I also consider it my civic responsibility to enlighten
  the occasional bigot that I meet in Christian churches that a) I'm not associated
  with the Al Qaeda, b) if looks indicated one's proclivity toward violence,
  then Jesus probably resembled Osama Bin Laden more than he did George W.
  Bush, and c) Jesus never said anything anti-gay or pro-Capitalist.
  
  My need to visit temples of Hindu goddesses is a bit more complex. I believe,
  because I grew up not knowing a father, I can only think of God as a mother.
  Besides, it's cool being part of the one-sixth of humanity who have no trouble
  thinking of God as a woman.
  
  Belief in God or Goddess to me is the acknowledgment of the Great Mystery
  that is the universe, the metaphor that represents among other things boundless
  Space and endless Time. A religion is like a poem full of imagination that
  revolves around this Great Mystery. Anyone who believes in only one religion
  to me is like someone who only appreciates one poem.
  
  A humanist friend of mine thinks there's another reason why I'm a polytheist.
  He said, "what better way is there to oppose religious fanaticism than to
  believe in all religions?" I hope to Goddess he's right.

  I believe any entity so intelligent that it could have started the universe
  in motion is so vast, so incomprehensibly immense that my poor little brain
  cells couldn't begin to understand it. Verifying the existence of a God or
  Not is something I wouldn't be able to accomplish in a thousand lifetimes.
  So why should I waste my precious time worrying about the presence of an
  omniscient, all knowing being today or tomorrow or next year? What I know
  for sure is that the only force powerful enough and beautiful enough for
  me to believe in is the love that human beings extend toward each other.
  And that love takes many forms--from the romantic joining of two hearts in
  a lifelong partnership, to the love of a parent for their newborn child,
  to the respect and joy that two friends experience, to the love of others
  in community or country, to the bond we all share to every other living,
  breathing individual on this planet. A case could be made for the importance
  of love between a person and animals or nature in our interconnected web,
  but that's another topic, and I only have a few minutes to speak!
  
  Instead of saying that love is an expression of faith in God, I suppose that
  I'd twist it a bit and say that the concept of God is an expression of faith
  in love. Whether or not a physical God actually exists is actually unimportant
  to me.
  
  I'd like to read modified excerpts from an article I read recently by Brian
  Doyle, entitled "Leap" (i)

 A couple leaped from the south tower, hand in hand. They reached for
    each other and their hands met and they jumped. Jennifer Brickhouse saw them
    falling, hand in hand.

 Many people jumped. Perhaps hundreds. No one knows. A kindergarten boy
    who saw people falling in flames told his teacher that the birds were on
    fire. She ran with him on her shoulders out of the ashes.

 Niko Winstral saw people free-falling backwards with their hands out,
    as if they were parachuting. Kirk Kjeldsen saw people lining up and jumping,
    flailing on the way down. Elizabeth Garcia saw people leaping and the sight
    haunts her at night. Stuart DeHann saw one woman's dress billowing as she
    fell and he too saw the couple leaping hand in hand. A fireman was killed
    by a body falling from the sky.

 But he reached for her hand and she reached for his hand and they leaped
    out the window holding hands.

 I try to whisper prayers for the sudden dead and the harrowed families
    of the dead and the screaming souls of the murderers, but I keep coming back
    to his hand and her hand nestled in each other with such extraordinary ordinary
    succinct ancient naked stunning perfect simple ferocious love.

 There is no fear in love, wrote John the Apostle, but perfect love casteth
    out fear, because fear hath torment.

Their hands reaching and joining are the most powerful prayer I can imagine,
    the most eloquent, the most graceful. It is everything that we are capable
    of against horror and loss and death. It it is what makes me believe that
    human beings have greatness and holiness within them like seeds that open
    only under great fires, to believe that some unimaginable essence of who
    we are persists past the dissolution of what we were, to believe against
    the evil hourly evidence that love is why we are here.

 No one knows who they were: husband and wife, lovers, dear friends,
    colleagues, strangers thrown together at the window there at the lip of hell.
    Maybe they didn't even reach for each other consciously, maybe it was
    instinctive, a reflex, as they both decided at the same time to take two
    running steps and jump out the shattered window. But they did reach for each
    other and they held on tight and leaped, falling endlessly into the smoking
    canyon at 200 miles an hour, falling so far and so fast that they would have
    blacked out before they hit the pavement near Liberty Street.

 Jennifer Brickhouse saw them holding hands and Stuart DeHann saw them
    holding hands and I hold on to that.


  When I read this article, I was very moved. Although we all can feel great
  love intermingled with great joy, it is often during moments of pain, of
  horror, that all the inconsequential concerns and needs filling our days
  just disappear. What is left, deep down inside, is an understanding of that
  which is most important to us, that which guides and sustains us through
  life. At traumatic times like these, the love for one another shines above
  all.
  
  What I want to do, during the few years I have on this planet, is to figure
  out how I, a very imperfect, self-centered, and ultimately very human woman,
  can best express love to others. This is what I believe, all I believe, and
  what I want most in my life.
  
(i) Doyle, Brian. "Leap", Utne Reader: The Best of the Alternative
  Press. Sept-Oct 2002, pp 37, 38. (Reprinted from The American Scholar. Winter
  2002) 

 A couple leaped from the south tower, hand in hand. They reached for
    each other and their hands met and they jumped. Jennifer Brickhouse saw them
    falling, hand in hand.

 Many people jumped. Perhaps hundreds. No one knows. A kindergarten boy
    who saw people falling in flames told his teacher that the birds were on
    fire. She ran with him on her shoulders out of the ashes.

 Niko Winstral saw people free-falling backwards with their hands out,
    as if they were parachuting. Kirk Kjeldsen saw people lining up and jumping,
    flailing on the way down. Elizabeth Garcia saw people leaping and the sight
    haunts her at night. Stuart DeHann saw one woman's dress billowing as she
    fell and he too saw the couple leaping hand in hand. A fireman was killed
    by a body falling from the sky.

 But he reached for her hand and she reached for his hand and they leaped
    out the window holding hands.

 I try to whisper prayers for the sudden dead and the harrowed families
    of the dead and the screaming souls of the murderers, but I keep coming back
    to his hand and her hand nestled in each other with such extraordinary ordinary
    succinct ancient naked stunning perfect simple ferocious love.

 There is no fear in love, wrote John the Apostle, but perfect love casteth
    out fear, because fear hath torment.

Their hands reaching and joining are the most powerful prayer I can imagine,
    the most eloquent, the most graceful. It is everything that we are capable
    of against horror and loss and death. It it is what makes me believe that
    human beings have greatness and holiness within them like seeds that open
    only under great fires, to believe that some unimaginable essence of who
    we are persists past the dissolution of what we were, to believe against
    the evil hourly evidence that love is why we are here.

 No one knows who they were: husband and wife, lovers, dear friends,
    colleagues, strangers thrown together at the window there at the lip of hell.
    Maybe they didn't even reach for each other consciously, maybe it was
    instinctive, a reflex, as they both decided at the same time to take two
    running steps and jump out the shattered window. But they did reach for each
    other and they held on tight and leaped, falling endlessly into the smoking
    canyon at 200 miles an hour, falling so far and so fast that they would have
    blacked out before they hit the pavement near Liberty Street.

 Jennifer Brickhouse saw them holding hands and Stuart DeHann saw them
    holding hands and I hold on to that.

  As a librarian I feel I must confess, I DO NOT love the Internet! I guess
  that is tanamount to blasphemy in my profession, but to tell you the truth,
  it is not where I want to spend my time. It is a fine tool however, that
  can be very useful at times. Here's a good example: Go to the website
  http://www.selectsmart.com/RELIGION/, answer 20 relatively sophisticated
  theological questions in a multiple choice format, and you too can discover
  what religion is right for you. I have taken this test several times and
  each time I come out a Unitarian Universalist. So after 44 year so soul searching
  a ten-minute survey has confirmed what I already knew, I am a Unitarian
  Universalist.
  
  I agree with many things in Unitarian theology but to be precise, I am a
  Unitarian UNIVERSALIST. It is Universalism that really resounds with me.
  As most of you probably already know the Universalists believed in Universal
  Salvation. To over-simplify, nobody is going to hell. As a kid in the Methodist
  Church I was afraid of going to hell.
  
  My mom, whom I was privileged to introduce here last Mother's Day, was very
  proud of her copy of H. W. Janson's The History of Art on the coffee table
  and I was encouraged to look at it often. I had turned to page 244 and seen
  the full color illustrations of the Van Eyck brothers' portrayal of hell.
  Frankly, I did not like what I saw. I was not too keen about Michalengelo's
  "Last Judgement" either. Meanwhile my Sunday school teachers were telling
  me, "God is Love." It was the sixties after all. But he had a special roasting
  pit ready for us if we were not careful. This was hard for a pre-pubescent
  to figure out, but I persevered. Eventually, I stopped believing in hell,
  stopped calling him "God", stopped thinking god as "him" and began to perceive
  the "interdependent web of all existence of which we are all a part."
  
  In his work The Larger Faith: A Short History of American Universalism, Charles
  A. Howe writes Universalist theology implies that all people are "members
  of one human family and worthy of salvation, not only in the next would,
  but, insofar as possible, in this world as well."
  
  "In this world as well?" What that means to me is that it is essential
  to my beliefs that I not only love and respect all people as my equals, but
  as fortune has made us un-equal, it is my responsibility to help restore
  equity to all.
  
  Universalist thinking meshes with my social values of making the world a
  better place. Political issues like child advocacy, economic-racism, reformative
  justice and stopping the rape of our planet to promote capitalist growth,
  are all things that matter deeply to me. These are the I want to give my
  energy, as well as my bucks.
  
  But making the world a better place can be as simple as giving someone else
  a break in traffic or asking the teen at the drive through window if he prefers
  the cooler weather. Seeing him, respecting him, building him up. I believe
  simple actions, as well as great political movements change the world and
  are also essential!
  
  For me Emily Dickinson said it best in those few simple lines a lot of us
  memorized in high school:
  
If I can stop one heart from breaking,
    I shall not live in vain; 
    If I can ease one life the aching, 
    Or cool one pain, 
    Or help one fainting robin 
    Unto his nest again, 
    I shall not live in vain. 


If I can stop one heart from breaking,
    I shall not live in vain; 
    If I can ease one life the aching, 
    Or cool one pain, 
    Or help one fainting robin 
    Unto his nest again, 
    I shall not live in vain. 
