 Are Experience and Faith Opposites? 
September 13, 2012 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
  

Greeting, Centering, Kindling, Opening Words  
   
We are here 

as the red maples and firebushes  

gift us once again with their light 

to worship in community
, 
  
to shift our awareness from routines 

to larger visions, from self-doubt 

to a healthy and healing humility. 

 Grounded in gratitude for the cosmos that is our ho
me, claiming deepening 
wisdom as our authority, and daring to engage joy, 
burden, loss and insight 
in a deliberate community of many ways and ages, th
e flame summons us to 
awaken
: to listen with our whole lives, to open, to serve
. 
 Installation of the Teachers 

Announcements 

 
Affirmation:  

The clouds above us join and separate.  

The breeze in the courtyard leaves and returns. 

Life is like that, so why not relax?  

Who can stop us from celebrating?    

        
Lu Yu
  c. 740 
Autumn Hymn:  

O Slowly Slowly, They Return 

 
Sequence   
(a reworking of one of the Desert Father Stories of
 the 4th and 5th centuries) 
  

Once upon a time, there were some monks who formed 
a community at the edge of the desert. 
They had thrived there for many decades.  They work
ed together, worshipped together, and 
together worked to make the world a better place by
 their quiet contributions to the community.  
One day a runner arrived with news:  The most impor
tant person in their religious order, their 
High Abbot, at once their greatest theologian and t
heir most respected and loved elder,  
was going to pay the community a visit.  The usuall
y silent and serene monks all rushed around  
to make preparation. To and fro. To and fro.  The l
ocal cleric who led the monks in their work 
came out of his cell and saw the hubbub, and asked 
them why they were running about:  "We 
have to offer the High Abbot our best.  We have to 
offer him a concert of our best songs, read 
him our best poems, preach inspiring sermons to him
, and pray beautiful prayers Œ all to 
celebrate his presence among us." 

 "Really?" said the cleric. "It seems to me if the H
igh Abbot was not "celebrated" with our 
silence, then why would our words be able to do so?
" 
                                    
silence 
 
Once upon a time, there where people who gathered f
rom all over the Columbus, Ohio area to 
celebrate together on Sunday morning. Each of them 
came with a personal story that flowed 
every week into the larger Story of the community. 
But every week they came with their hearts:  
hearts that grieved for, or congratulated loved one
s, hearts that laughed with, or worried about, 
loved ones, hearts that struggled with difficult lo
ved ones Œ these they then remembered, by face 
and by name, to hallow their silence, to hallow the
ir celebrations, and to hallow their lives. 
        
naming 
 
Once upon a time, a choir sang together, to remind 
everyone who heard them that working with 
each other always produces more beauty and delight 
than working against each other. 
     

Music/Anthem 

 
The First Reading 
is the poem 
Today 
by Ruth Stone, written in 2004 
 
October™s brilliance is half gone from the avenues,
 or, lies on lawns and gutters; 

and rain, the blessed curse in dissolved frost,  

yields ropes of mirrors. 

The cheap, chiming clock says almost ten. 

 
Then why this happiness in 
muted 
things? 
Some equation of time and space, 

a slowed perception of the battered brain 

  strips back, like leaves, to unexpected glitterin
g. 
  

The Second Reading
 is from the most excellent book Faith Without Certa
inty, written by Paul 
Rasor, arguably our best and most respected Unitari
an Universalist theologian alive today. 
 
There is no such thing as raw or pure or un-interpr
eted experience.  All of the perceptions, 
activities, thoughts, wonderings, pains, pleasures,
 and other events of our daily lives are always 
experienced in terms of the structures supplied by 
our cultures.  This is true for ordinary 
experiences, such as whether a particular kind of f
ood is appealing or nauseating; for moral 
questions, such as whether a baby girl is to be val
ued as highly as a boy; and for ?ultimate? 
questions, such as how we respond to our own finitu
de, or whether we experience the universe as 
friendly or unfriendly.  These occasions never occu
r in a vacuum; our conceptual and cultural 
frames of reference inevitably affect the experienc
es themselves.  Experience is not first had, and 
then interpreted; it is always already interpreted.
  
This principle has obvious implications for religio
us claims. We could not understand a 
particular experience as being "of God" unless we f
irst had available to us the 
linguistic symbol
 
 God, as well as supporting concepts or images of Go
d to draw on.  ?Religious experience cannot 
be identified without reference to concepts, belief
s, grammatical rules, and practices supplied by 
our cultures and our languages.? 

 
Sermon
  
"Unexpected glittering." Those two words from Ruth 
Stone's poem about her sudden burst of 
happiness in mid-autumn leapt out at me. Not just b
ecause they reminded me of the sheer beauty 
of the glittering yellow and red leaves pasted on t
he wet sidewalks by the rain, which surprise me 
every year, even though I know Fall always shows up
. But because those two words beautifully 
summarize the first time I looked up and saw the st
ars. 
 
Let me be precise. The first time I REALLY saw the 
stars.  
 
I was in my senior year in high school. My friends 
and I gathered after school one Friday just to 
hang out, when one of them abruptly shouted: "ROAD 
TRIP!" So with that as the stated reason, 
my friends and I called our folks to let them know 
we wouldn't be home for dinner.  The four of 
us drove downtown and cruised across the Ambassador
 Bridge which connects the USA and 
Canada across the straits of Detroit.  In those day
s, of course, you could go across into Canada 
without a passport; it was easy to drop over to Win
dsor for dinner back then. The four of us had 
a bite to eat, but then decided to continue driving
 on past Windsor. So we drove through the 
tobacco fields of southern Ontario, and arched arou
nd to the Canadian shore of Lake Eire. We 
found Pt. Pelee on our map, and decided to go there
, since it looked like it was the southern most 
tip of continental Canada. We thought it would be c
ool. 
 
The sunset that day lavishly painted the whole sky 
to match the October trees that lined the 
tobacco fields. It was beautiful. By the time we re
ached Pt. Pelee, the red sky had given way to 
indigo, and finally to deep black. It was about 8:3
0. We parked, followed a dimly lit path through 
a wood, always led by the call of lapping waves on 
the other side of the trees.  
 
We broke out onto the beach. We all remarked on how
 really dark it is when you get so far from 
the city lights. There was no moonlight yet that ni
ght, or maybe it was the new moon Œ I don't 
remember. 

 
Suddenly, someone, I forget who, said quietly, "Loo
k up! My God!"  We all tilted our heads 
heavenward. I was immediately bowled over. It looke
d to me as if the glittering stars covered 
more area than the black background holding them. I
 saw the Milky Way for the first time in my 
life, that night Œ clear as a path on the sand in d
aylight. The small cluster of stars called the 
Pleiades was so vivid I felt as if they were only t
he width of a face apart from my own. Near my 
house on Detroit's East Side, I was able to pick ou
t a few constellations Œ the Dipper, the huge W 
of Cassiopeia. But here at Pt. Pelee, I couldn't fi
nd them. The stars and the planets among them 
formed a whole for the first time. No patterns, no 
shapes, no fabled Greek stories across the 
heavens.   

 
 And within me, for but a moment, I felt transported
 beyond my own little life. I felt I understood 
in my whole being that I was on a small planet at t
he edge of things, suspended over an infinite 
abyss of both beauty and coldness; I suddenly could
 feel as if my skin was no longer a boundary 
between the inside and my outside, and I realized t
hat the stars, the abyss, the small rocky planet 
I was standing on, my friends next to me, the water
s of the lake, the sand on the beach made up 
but one indivisible Reality, one awesomeness that t
ranscended my capacity to speak of it. I did 
not tell my friends what I was feeling. They were m
ostly silent too on the way home Œ perhaps 
they were just as blown away as I was. 

 
However, I did recognize that even though I had not
 seen the stars before in this way, I had 
felt
 this way before Œ and that was when everything at c
hurch Œ music and chanting and ceremony 
and sermon Œ pulled together. When the perfect roun
d wafer of blessed bread finally dissolved 
on my tongue, I felt as if 
I too had dissolved Œ into something larger than mys
elf. In those days, I 
would have said I was in communion with God, the fi
rst and the last, the ground of all things, the 
main operative in the stories of parting sea and fi
ery chariot and loaves and fishes, each of which 
shaped my life and held me fast in a network of ima
ges that I could share with those around me. 
 
On the beach at Pt. Pelee, I didn't think of God, b
ut the feeling was exactly the same as far as I 
could tell. 

 
I can't say for sure if everyone has experiences li
ke that Œ although the esteemed psychologist 
Abraham Maslow certainly seemed to think that many 
of us do. He called such moments in a 
person's life "peak experiences."  Sigmund Freud, n
o champion of organized religion, lifted up 
something similar, which he poetically called "the 
oceanic experience..." a sense that one could 
feel oneself but a tiny splash on the surface of an
 infinite ocean, and that such a feeling could be 
uplifting and meaningful, without being tied to cre
ed or structured faith. 
 
Maslow's peak experience was classically called the
 
mystical experience
 in the literature of sober 
religious scholarship, even though some modern crit
ics have cruelly tried to distort the simple 
meaning of that word by associating it with people 
who see pictures of Jesus in a scorched 
tortilla, who write books about their personal reve
lations about space aliens, or who, like Pat 
Robertson, claim to hear the voice of their God dic
tating right-wing political positions to them. If 
you want to understand the word mystical in the pos
itive way used by scholars of religion, I 
suggest you look at the excellent words of Ludwig W
ittgenstein at the top of your orders: "Not 
how the world is, is the mystical, but 
that
 it is."     
 
As usual I mostly don't care what words people use 
to describe experiences like my own at the 
beach at Pt. Pelee, or even in church. Vive la diff
érence! But some days I do find myself wishing 
that some of these modern critics might take to hea
rt the kindness of the great astrobiologist and 
prolific skeptic Carl Sagan, who was careful not to
 lump the completely eccentric with the more 
common and shared experiences of humanity.  

 
Albert Einstein, like Carl Sagan, sometimes attende
d Unitarian Universalist services, without 
ever claiming to be of our community. But both of t
hem valued the kind of experiences I had, 
and spoke of their own rather frequently. They used
 the words "wonder and awe" and "the 

 mysterious" to speak of such experiences. Peak expe
riences, oceanic, mystical...all those words 
are fine with me. 

 
And although I have already invoked both Sagan and 
Einstein, neither of whom affirmed a 
personal God, let me say it plain:  mystical experi
ences, wonder and awe, deep happiness, 
"unexpected glittering" are likely not intrusions f
rom some other world, but part of the ordinary 
work of our human brains Œ in the words of Ruth Sto
ne: "
Some equation of time and space, a 
slowed perception of the battered brain..." 

 
That such experiences rise out of the material brai
n does not reduce my wonder and awe, or 
temper it, as some have imagined, but rather double
s it. 
 
This week, 
Newsweek 
magazine (which to my mind has become recently more
 and more like the 
sensationalistic 
National Enquirer
), has a cover story with the title "Heaven is Real
." The author 
of the article inside which the cover points to, ca
lls his essay "My 
Proof
 of Heaven." He claims 
to be an active neurosurgeon, and the son of a neur
osurgeon, which I have no reason to doubt. In 
2008, he dropped into what he calls a serious 
coma
 because of a rare bacterial meningitis which 
shut down his brain. 

 
For seven days he lay there, barely breathing. His 
eyes suddenly popped open on the seventh 
day, he said, contrary to medical expectations. He 
writes that while he was in a coma, he had an 
experience of what he called 
heaven
. He described something beautiful. He saw 
transparent
 creatures that he could not describe Œ were they an
gels, he asks, or birds? Against a dark blue 
sky, beautiful pastel clouds rolled under him, goss
amer as butterfly wings. Over the seven days 
he was "gone"...in his words, he heard these elusiv
e beings telling him 
You have nothing to fear. 
There is nothing you can do wrong. You are loved an
d cherished, dearly, forever.  
He talks, quite 
paradoxically and yet poetically, about a 
deep darkness brimming with light. 
 
The good doctor reports he experienced heaven. He i
nsists he was a skeptic before this 
happened. He thought all the near-death 
see the light and tunnel
 experiences were chemical 
hallucinations in the brain. He insists he was a sc
ientist in good order. He says he thought Jesus 
was just a good man, and that although Something So
mewhere may have gotten the universe 
going at the beginning, he certainly didn't think t
hat Something Somewhere was a Being looking 
out for anyone of us personally like some cosmic na
nny. 
 
In the article in Newsweek, the author works very h
ard with his excellent writing skills so that no 
one will dismiss him like they do people who see Je
sus in a scorched tortilla. 
 
I personally noted that he never says he was brain 
dead in his article. He says simply that his 
cortex was barely operating, and that normally, peo
ple in comas do not dream or have riveting, 
crystal-clear, and transformative  experiences. I s
uppose that's true. But does his experience offer 
us 
proof 
of heaven? 
 
The author says he was raised in some Christian tra
dition (he doesn't say which one), but rejected 
its teachings. Now, since his trip to heaven, he en
joys going to church again because the stained 

 glass windows and the round wafer that symbolizes w
holeness and joy remind him of the 
experience he had. And, I am happy to report that t
he heaven our neurosurgeon described was 
not a reward for good behavior, or for either ritua
lly, or emotionally, "accepting Christ." No, 
instead he describes a most unorthodox after-life w
ith an almost universalist welcome. He heard 
of nothing from the transparent winged creatures sa
ve love and acceptance. No hint of a hell, or 
of God's displeasure. Just beauty and love and wond
er. 
 
I'm happy for him. I am glad he enjoyed the experie
nce, and that it has made him not afraid. But 
his vision is not a proof of anything for me, becau
se I have had no such experience myself. He is 
misusing the word "proof," which is a word borrowed
 from geometry, and trying to convince me 
that his own personal experience has something impo
rtant to say to me. I had an experience too Œ 
under the stars at Pt. Pelee, as I told you Œ but I
 don't see what that has to do with any of you. 
You didn't experience what I did, even if some of y
ou, I have to imagine, have looked up in 
wonder and awe at the stars yourselves. 

 
And I find myself wondering if a Buddhist neurosurg
eon from Sri Lanka, or a neurosurgeon 
raised in a totally atheist family tradition in the
 Czech republic, or a neurosurgeon who was 
raised in a Sikh 
gurdwara
 in Punjab would see transparent beings and clouds 
if they had some 
experience in a coma? These images are part of some
 forms of populist Christian culture (and 
only, I want to keep on reminding you, from the 19t
h century, here in the States); Buddhists have 
no concept of a heavenly afterlife with angels, mos
t atheists don't, certainly, and Sikhs teach that 
salvation consists of "merging with the divine" aft
er a series of reincarnations. No images of 
clouds or birdlike beings for them. 

 
And that's why I offered you Paul Rasor's theology 
this morning. He begins with a clear assertion 
which I share: 
There is no such thing as raw or pure or un-interpr
eted experience.  All of the 
perceptions, activities, thoughts, wonderings, pain
s, pleasures, and other events of our daily lives 
are always experienced in terms of the structures s
upplied by our cultures. 
 
In other words, a French peasant girl named Bernade
tte Soubirous may have an experience of 
seeing a beautiful woman at the town dump at Massab
ielle near Lourdes, a vision only later 
identified as of the virgin Mary Œ but that can onl
y be because she has been raised with 
recognizable images of the Virgin at church. She co
uld not have seen Krishna with blue skin in 
that grotto. But a man named Chandra on his deathbe
d in Delhi might indeed see Krishna 
coming for him as lies there dying, and such precis
e experiences have been recorded many times 
in India by nurses and doctors and students at univ
ersities. You can call them hallucinations or 
imaginative projections if you want, since you have
 no empirical evidence of such visions either 
in Lourdes or Delhi.  Or you can join psychologist 
Carl Jung in saying that people throughout the 
world have always been looking for compelling symbo
ls of wholeness and hope to help them 
slug through their fractured lives, maybe like the 
ancient Greeks finding comforting patterns 
called constellations in the huge random complexity
 of the sky. Jung would say that a peasant 
girl in France might see Mary, a man in India might
 see Krishna, and many people in the age of 
the machine and wheel might see "round things in th
e sky" as Jung controversially called the 
then (1958) popular unidentified flying objects all
 over the news. In Paul Rasor's words: 
Experience is not first had and then interpreted; i
t is always already interpreted.
 
  
In other words, as least as far as I am concerned, 
the only honest option for me is to admit that I 
can never see things as they are, but only, ultimat
ely, as I am.  
 
This principle has obvious implications for religio
us claims,
 concludes Paul Rasor. 
We could not 
understand a particular experience as being "of God
" unless we first had available to us the 
linguistic symbol 
God 
(that is word "God"), as well as supporting concept
s or images of God, to 
draw on Œ experience cannot be identified without r
eference to concepts, beliefs, grammatical 
rules, and practices supplied by our cultures and o
ur languages. 
 
What this means to me religiously is that I have to
 locate both my belief and my unbelief, my 
faith and my doubt, in the locus of my own cultures
. I don't want to be like the tourists in the 
Prado poet Ellen Bass writes of, who look at the Pi
casso on the wall and say "
I don't like it." "I 
do."
 based upon their immediate gut experience without 
further reflection.  (For me, all 
theological thinking is long reflection on experien
ce, not a list of beliefs and unbeliefs.)  And, I 
cannot pretend to know what others experience, only
 my own response 
to their
 experience, 
which response is also, as always, rooted in who I 
am.  
 
The scientific method is one of the great tools we 
human beings have developed to help us focus 
on as much common communication about reality as is
 possible, despite our cultural and 
language differences around the world. But even the
n, a person using the scientific method can-
not be excused from being scrupulous in examining h
is or her own life, and the prejudices and 
unexamined assumptions that have shaped it. Louis A
gassiz was a great scientist from 
Switzerland, but after he immigrated here, he was a
lso a white man in a country where white 
people were just 
people
, but people with chocolate skin were 
black
 people,
 always with the 
adjective, as if white people didn't have color the
mselves. He insisted that science proved that 
black people
 were inferior to 
people,
 that is, white human beings. He made a fool out of
 himself, 
and tainted the scientific method, for refusing to 
take the time to reflect on his intimate 
connection to all other life around him, and on the
 prejudices which systematically distorted his 
own life. Trofim Lysenko in Soviet Russia was also 
a great scientist; but because he refused to 
question the assumptions with which he was raised, 
namely, that externals could force 
evolutionary changes, he ended up flying the scient
ific method he claimed to revere on a purely 
political flagpole, setting the scientific communit
y in Russia back a whole decade. 
 
So, yes, I am glad the Newsweek neurosurgeon had an
 experience that moved him and 
comforted him. I am even glad he shared it, althoug
h perhaps he too might not have been happy 
about the sensational cover.  

 
I don't know about you, but I personally am not wor
ried about what happens to me after death. I 
have absolutely no reason to think it™s unsafe.   

 
But I continue to find ways to stand under the star
s when I can, even here in the bright city. 
Doing so always seems to get me to let my selfish c
oncerns fade away for a while, as my soul 
becomes porous to the whole world.  

 
 Maybe for you it™s not viewing the stars which invi
tes that wonder in you:  just a flash of 
sunlight reflecting off a pewter dish in your kitch
en, like it was for Jacob Boehme of 
Reformation Germany; or the scents in a night herb 
garden, as it was for Juan de la Cruz of 
Counter-Reformation Spain, or the desire to sing lo
ve poetry about Krishna, as it was for Mirabai 
of medieval India; or a walk in the fields as it wa
s for 19th century English non-theistic mystic 
Richard Jeffries; or even the oceanic feeling some 
runners have described to me after they have 
run a good long time past what they first imagined.
 Maybe the 
unexpected glittering
 of this 
autumn season might be your trigger, or even just t
he feel of bobbing a stone in your hand, one 
you just fancied and picked up off the path.  

 
I admit that I'd like to think that my experience a
t Pt. Pelee under the whirling stars at least 
echoed some of the feelings of awe, wonder and the 
mysterious, which so anchored Dr. Einstein 
and Dr. Sagan.  

 
But such experiences, if we have them at all, are n
either evidence of our faith, nor proof our 
doubt, but the fortunate crucible in which our fier
ce doubts and comforting beliefs can be 
refined, released, reformed, softened, or, best of 
all, grounded in humility instead of the 
arrogance of external authority.  

  

Offering 

 
Closing Riddle 
by Muriel Rukeyser 
from Out of Silence 1994 

 
A Little Stone in the Middle of the Road in Florida
  
My son as a child saying  

God  

is anything, 

even a stone in the middle of the road in Florida. 

Yesterday Nancy, my friend, after a long illness: 

You know what can lift me up, take me out of despai
r? 
No, what? 

Anything. 

 
    

 
 
