Christmas Evensong 
December 24, 2011 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 Opening Words:
  We are here 

 to kindle candles, and kindle our lives
  just before the quietest midnight of the year. 

 The stories we tell tonight are from long ago,
  and our lives are here, now, in a different world.
  And new hope and the joys of peace still call us
  as much as when stars were brighter in the sky. 

  

So now
, 
  

let the gates of the imagination open onto
 the starlit landscape of peace, and let our
 hopes 
turn to song, and songs into joy.  Blest are you, L
ove, our call and our path.   
 
#236 O Thou Joyful Day
 Nocturne
   

The stars Alpheraz, Deneb and Regulus 

shine over folks who look forward to Christmas 

with skipping joy, 

and also over folks who dread its coming for 

a thousand unexpressed reasons. 

The stars, however, don™t give a care where their l
ight goes... 
they just do what they do: they shine silently on e
veryone. 
The stars Procyon, Betelgeuse and Sirius 

shine over those lighting Menorahs before their chi
ldren this evening 
and those who are dining at candlelit tables 

near festive trees with visiting family and friends
. 
The stars, however, never care about where their li
ght goes... 
they just do what they do: they shine silently on e
veryone. 
The stars Arcturus, Antares and Pollux shine over t
hose whose hearts cloud up during the gray 
days of winter, and on those whose hearts soar high
 as they imagine ice skating or tobogganing. 
The stars, however, never care about where their li
ght goes... 
they just do what they do: they shine silently on e
veryone. 
O Stars, without name or with several names, 

you shine down on Columbus tonight, and faintly sil
ver the rooftops. Born of the same dust from 
which you were born, we follow your example, no mat
ter our beliefs or doubts or unbeliefs, no 
matter our personal stories, memories of Christmase
s past, 
or concerns about getting through the maze of the h
olidays, and no matter what languages we 
speak or sign. We do what you do, and simply keep a
 beautiful nocturne of silence. 

  

bellsound and time of silence
                     
Music 
  

The First Reading
 for Christmas Eve 
is from the ancient Gospel, or Good News Book, of 
Loukas, whom we call Luke in English.  The author w
rites in better Greek than the other Gospel 
writers. It was written around 90 or so, and thus a
lmost a hundred years after the era he is 
describing. We think it was written in Ephesus. Luk
e is the traditional name for the author, 
dating from the mid-second century, so we cannot kn
ow for sure who the author is. The 
translations are new, and are intended to get you t
o hear what those who first heard these stories 
in Greek would have understood.
   

Long ago, the exalted Caesar issued a proclamation 
saying that the entire inhabited world was to 
undergo a census, for taxing purposes. (This was th
e first census, mind you, and it took place 
when Quinrinius was governor up in Syria.) People e
verywhere went to their hometowns to 
comply with the proclamation and to fill out the fo
rms. So Joseph, whose lineage stemmed from 
famous King David himself, was born and raised in J
udea, so left Nazaret up in the Galilee 
where he had been living, and traveled south to Dav
id™s old hamlet, called Bethlehem. He had 
traveled there with Mary, his fiancée, who was visi
bly close to term. In fact, it was while they 
were there that she delivered her firstborn son. Hi
s first crib was a cattle-feeder where the 
animals were kept, since of course there was no rea
l privacy for them in the other part of the 
house. 

  

Nearby were fields, where sheepherders camped out t
o keep a watch on their herds in the dark 
night. Without warning, a divine messenger appeared
 in a blaze of light, and brightness 
surrounded them. They were terrified by this vision
. But the voice of the messenger comforted 
them, saying: ?There is nothing to be afraid of. We
 are only offering you some good news. 
Joyful news for one and all! In David™s hamlet over
 there a healer has been born, who will be 
anointed to bring wholeness to the broken.  Here™s 
what to look for. You will find an ordinary 
baby, a baby who, as usual, is bound up in protecti
ve strips of linen. And, as is often the case, 
sleeping in a bed of hay in a cattlefeeder.? 

  

Then a whole division appeared in the sky next to t
he messenger. They were singing like a choir. 
Here is what they sang: ?The true glory of God is w
hen people on earth live in peace with each 
other.? 

 
Carol 231 Angels We Have Heard 

  

The Second Reading is from the Good News Book of Ma
tthew. This name has been attached to 
this text since the second century, but the author 
is completely unknown to us. It™s clear however 
from internal evidence, that the book was written a
round the year 85 in the village culture of 
Upper Galilee or even southern Syria. Matthew tells
 a distinctly different story than Luke.
   

Long ago, when Jesus was born in the days when  Her
od ruled, a revered party of Persian 
astrologers arrived in Jerusalem from the East, ask
ing about the town:  ?Where can we find the 
newborn Prince who will one day rule in this land? 
 We have calculated that it must be 
his
 star 
that rises up before the sun every dawn, and so now
 we have come to offer him due honor.? 

When Herod got wind of this, he was deeply aggravat
ed. So he called a council of all the 
scholars and experts on the subject, and asked them
 what their question could possibly mean. 
Would someone anoint someone other than his own son
 to rule?? 
  

?The prophetic texts point this out,? they said, af
ter they had consulted with each other: 
?Bethlehem will be the birthplace of the next princ
e, an anointed shepherd who will serve the 
whole nation.? 

  

So, having heard this, Herod summoned the astrologe
rs and interviewed them quite secretly, and 
questioned them about their observations, such as w
hen they had seen this star for the very first 
time. After he got the answers he wanted, he sent t
hem to Bethlehem, a morning™s walk from 
Jerusalem. Before they left, he whispered to them: 
?When you find him, send me news of his 
whereabouts at once. I should go and pay him honor 
myself, no??   So they left at dawn, the star 
now moving south, leading them to the village. When
 they entered the village, the star suddenly 
appeared to stand still over the house where the ne
wborn prince was, bright enough to be seen in 
the daylight. So they entered the house, and they s
aw the mother, Mary, with her babe, and were 
overjoyed at the sight. They lay at her feet gifts 
honoring her child™s future: some valuable gold, 
some rare frankincense, and some balm made from hea
ling myrrh. Warned in a dream not to go 
back to Herod, they left for Persia by an entirely 
different route. 
 
Carol 238 Within the Shining of Star 

  

The Third Reading is taken from the 2011 reflection
 called Christmas Eve by my friend Kaki 
McTigue, senior minister at our congregation in New
 Haven.
   

All these centuries after the story of the star, th
e baby, and the angels singing him in with their 
mysterious alleluias, we are wandering still.  We s
tumble over our need, or our fear.  Bethlehem 
is not a gentle city tonight.  It's people are wise
 in the ways of the clenched fist, the broken truce
. 
Marked like them with scars of ignorance or sorrow,
 we come to Christmas baffled as any 
shepherd by the music that sounds so high above us,
 the syntax foreign to our skeptical hearts. 
  

Yet we remember that the heart of Christmas is hope
: hope that a child, born homeless and in 
danger, may grow up to be wise and kind.  New hope 
in ourselves rises then too, that we will 
learn one day how to bring peace to this earth, how
 to sing 
for ourselves
 the angels' songs of joy. 
 
Carol #256 

  

The fourth reading
 for Christmas Eve comes from the pen of therapist T
homas Moore, from an 
article he wrote in 1986 for Tikkun, an excellent J
ewish social awareness magazine.
  
Understand that nativity happens in 
you
, in 
your 
family, and in 
your
 community, or, it happens 
only for show. Unless you 
are 
Christmas, then this festival is only a story to te
ll, and not 
a myth 
to live
.  This year, we can remember the good people on al
l sides who have died and have been 
hurt in war and conflict. We could allow the new li
ght to take up residence in us, and so radically 
that we couldn't 
tolerate
 the thought of bloodshed for puny political purpos
es and insane 
fantasies of ownership and belonging. You don't hav
e to be a genius to understand that there is 

another way, that peace is imaginable. But it will 
only happen if the new life represented by the 
Christmas crèche is lodged deep within our thoughts
 and feelings.  
 
Homily
  
Unless you 
are 
Christmas, Thomas Moore says to us, then this festi
val is only a story to tell and 
not a myth to live.  Those words hit me powerfully 
when I first read them.  
A myth to live
?  
Unless we 
are
 Christmas?  What do those words mean? 
 
Ten years ago I was lucky enough to visit modern Be
thlehem. It™s not a very beautiful city, to my 
eyes, nor did all the formidable rifles slung over 
shoulders everywhere I looked make me think 
much of Peace on Earth and Goodwill. 

 
You enter the church of the Nativity through a door
 you have to duck to get through. It™s more 
like a window. The door had been larger once, a bea
utiful stone arch, but folks used to ride carts 
into the place and steal anything not nailed down, 
so the custodians of the shrine made it difficult 
to get in. The building itself is very old, and loo
ks it. The wooden ceiling has visible cracks in it,
 
the floor is worn down terribly, and the columns ar
e beginning to bend. There are no seats or 
pews–sitting through services is only a North Ameri
can contribution to religious practice.  
 
Your guide will take you downstairs and then show y
ou the 
exact spot
 where Jesus was born. 
Like later, the same guide told us exactly where Je
sus said this or that. It's all nonsense, of 
course.  

 
Thing is, the early churches had no interest in suc
h Christmas, or where Jesus was born, or where 
he said what. They didn™t celebrate this night in a
ny way, and didn™t think the stories were 
anywhere near as important as the Sermon on the Mou
nt.  
 
A guy named Justin Martyr in the third century was 
the first to suggest that a cave in Bethlehem 
was the site of Jesus™ birth, but even he didn™t lo
wer himself to put an x on the exact spot where 
Jesus laid his little head. But not too long later,
 people did sink that low, charging credulous 
pilgrims plenty to see the exact spot. Christmas it
self wasn™t routinely celebrated till 300 years 
after Justin Martyr, and it was originally celebrat
ed on the 6
th
 or 7
th
 of January, the dates the 
Eastern Orthodox still celebrate it. Roman Christia
ns, however, linked Christmas with the 
beloved winter festival of Saturnalia, and thus, De
cember 25
th
became Christmas and December 
24
th
 became Christmas Eve. So it has been ever since. 
 
The exact spot they show you at the Church of Nativ
ity is depicted at the top of your orders. 
There is a marble semi-circle set into a stone nich
e in the ancient cave Justin Martyr found. In 
the marble shelf is a hole the size of an ordinary 
supper plate. Around it is a silver star with all 
kinds of designs on it. 

 
The various Christian churches, you see, who all sh
are this spot don™t much like sharing it, 
despite everything Jesus taught later in life. The 
Romans, the Greek Orthodox, the Armenians, 
the Russian Tsar, the French, the English all fough
t tooth and nail about this site for centuries. 
Eventually, in the mid-nineteenth century, someone 
stole
 the ornamental silver star, and when 

the loss was discovered, the result was what histor
ians now call the Crimean War. Tens of 
thousands died in battle because of this strange th
ing, a silver star placed by the French over a 
place which no modern scholar I respect thinks is a
ny place close to where Jesus was actually 
born. Most suggest he was born up in the Galilee so
meplace, either in Nazareth, or another less 
famous Bethlehem which is found in the hills there.
 Or perhaps up near the lake.  
 
Fighting over a holy site even if it could be prove
d makes no sense. It seems to me that none of 
the people who were killing each other in the Crime
an War had taken Christmas within 
themselves, in Moore™s words.  Killing and war hard
ly seem like the best way to exemplify the 
babe who grew up to radically preach as an adult ?L
ove your enemies.?  The Gospel of Luke 
tells us that heavenly messengers...angels is the G
reek word...sang something like this: ?The true 
glory of God is when people on earth live in peace 
with each other.? The Crimean War must 
have drained God of plenty of glory, not to mention
 the drain that followed the Civil War here in 
the States, the various World Wars, and all the res
t that have echoed through all of our lives, 
including the recent years. 

  

I™ve never fought in a violent war per se, but I™ve
 known and loved plenty who have. The war in 
Iraq is ?over? they say (although without much fanf
are, I have to say), but after dozens of 
conversations with veterans of 
many
 wars, I can™t really take that literally. War gets
 inside you, 
and doesn™t let go for a good long time. My 95-year
-old friend and colleague Farley saw his best 
friend from childhood hit the dust as they were bot
h climbing the hill at Iwo Jima, and many 
decades later, his tears still spill and his anger 
still lodges in his heart. I don™t see any reason w
hy 
that should be a surprise. 

  

Thomas Moore reminded us of this reality as the Ira
q war ends: 
This year,
 he says, 
we can 
remember the good people on all sides who have died
 and have been hurt in war and conflict. 
We could allow the new light to take up residence i
n us so radically that we couldn't tolerate the 
thought of bloodshed for puny political purposes an
d insane fantasies of ownership and 
belonging. You don't have to be a genius to underst
and that there is another way...?
  
 
He describes this whole attitude as 
letting Christmas lodge inside us
, which means beginning to 
let honest hope, a vision for real peace, and a sen
se of new life begin to displace any distorting 
anger, resentment and fear within us. Christmas is 
a powerful myth, he's saying. It™s not merely a 
sweet solstice-time story from tradition. Unitarian
 writers like Longfellow and Hamilton Sears 
knew very well what Moore is getting at way back in
 the Nineteenth Century. Henry Wadsworth 
Longfellow wrote his famous Christmas carol 
I heard the Bells on Christmas Day
 after his son 
was shot during the Civil War, suffering severe spi
nal damage. And Unitarian minister Sears 
wrote the words to 
It Came Upon a Midnight Clear 
as his response to the Mexican-American 
war which had also just ended. 

  

Longfellow™s and Sears™ carols are hardly unique ta
kes on the deep meaning of Christmas. 
Remember, I began my homily by telling you that Moo
re really grabbed me when he says that 
Christmas isn™t just a story, but a 
myth to be lived
, to be taken within as a salve, something that 
has to lodge deeper inside us than fear or ignoranc
e or, in Kaki™s beautiful phrase, the perverse 
and up-side-down ?wisdom of the clenched fist.? 

  

A myth. Disturbing words to some folks. Sometimes p
eople get upset when they find out that the 
details in the famous Christmas stories are not act
ually historical in the ordinary meaning of that 
term. They chafe against it. They say to me, ?Why c
elebrate something that isn™t literally true?? 
  

I struggled with that question for years. The fact 
that the gospel writers seemed to have crafted 
details for differing reasons really bugged me. Cae
sar was a real man, Bethlehem still a real city, 
Quinrinius was a real Syrian governor–even the name
s of the mother and child, Maryam and 
Yeshu are historical enough. But the fabricated cen
sus, the moving star, the astrologers, the 
angels singing about peace–lovely, but why not tell
 it as it actually was? What's wrong with 
that?  

 
Why not say this teenager named Mary and a teenaged
 builder named Joseph fell in love, got 
married, and voila, a beautiful baby. Isn't that wo
ndrous enough? But my professors, many of 
whom were devout Christians, made a perfect case fo
r the Christmas stories all being legendary. 
It didn't bother them one bit. 

  

But over time, and after years of spiritual struggl
e, I realized that my attitude had been hijacked 
by the loud voices in our culture who assure us tha
t if our inherited cultural scripture isn™t 
literally true word for word, then none of it™s tru
e. I wasn™t even taught such dangerous either/or 
things when I was younger, in the church of my yout
h, but somehow, it seeped in and distorted 
my spiritual life. 

  

Now I am absolutely glad that Luke and Matthew did 
what they did–and am convinced frankly 
that they knew what they were doing.  Luke and all 
of his Greek speaking readers knew very 
well that Roman censuses were nor conducted in the 
whacky way Luke describes, where 
everyone had to return to their ancestral home. The
 bureaucratic nightmare of such an idea would 
have struck folks as hilarious–and a guarantee that
 this story was not to be argued about as 
history. He tells the story of a completely ordinar
y child born into an exaggerated world, crazy 
with bureaucracy, domination, control and oppressio
n; and he says that even though this child is 
ordinary, there is hope. Ordinary. Every baby was s
waddled in those days in linen strips 
moistened with oil. Many babies were placed in stra
w to keep them from rolling around, and 
every house had straw inside the house, not tucked 
away in some cave. Luke™s hearers would 
have known what he was saying to them: nothing extr
aordinary. He was just like us–but he will 
grow up to bring healing to the world, and live his
 life peacefully, and thus, since we are 
ordinary, we can do that too. He is telling the war
mongers that peace is a better way, and we can 
walk that way, step by step, giving up our so-calle
d realism and living with hope, that is, the new 
life of Christmas, inside us. He is telling us that
 real communication between real people is better 
than any cold machinery of bureaucracy Rome could c
ome up with. ?Why put your case before a 
judge working for a system which doesn™t even know 
you or care for you?? this baby would ask 
of the peasants around him when he grew up. ?Settle
 your disputes with each other directly. Be 
grown up about it.? 

  

No matter how bad you think it is, in the world, in
 your life, he is saying, you can still do 
something about it by changing your attitude. You d
on™t 
need 
armies, swords, hierarchies, 
bureaucracies or the self-anointed telling you that
 you are wrong and they are right. Every baby, 
he is saying to first century ears who would have u
nderstood him in that way, is already anointed 

as special by power---Love, Truth--- far greater th
an mere emperors or kings. And Matthew 
knew that kings like Herod will be jealous of the p
ower of the so-called 99 percent, and will even 
send his soldiers to kill everything innocent. Hero
d's power, in Moore's elegant words, was all 
caught up in "puny political purposes and insane fa
ntasies of ownership and belonging." But 
power doesn™t make someone good. Good, however, can
 make someone both powerful–and 
peaceful. We can actually live our lives as evidenc
e of the glory of the Ultimate, whatever name 
you want to use for that, if you use any at all. 

  

And Matthew™s star. Not a conjunction of planets, a
 supernova, or anything the literalists try to 
figure out. Special stars blossomed in the sky over
 every hero and emperor in those most 
astrological days. It™s a way for Matthew to say, ?
Once upon a time–? Except he describes an 
ordinary baby in an ordinary house in an ordinary b
ackwater small town. And he says, it™s this 
peasant who will redefine the meaning of real power
 in the world one day, not kings like Herod. 
For Matthew, the very heavens themselves know and d
eclare the simple truth my friend Kaki 
wrote about in more modern language. We remember, s
he says, that the heart of Christmas is 
hope: hope that a child, born homeless and in dange
r, may grow up to be wise and kind. 
New hope in ourselves rises then too, that we 
ourselves
 will learn one day how to bring peace to 
this earth, how to sing for ourselves the angels' s
ongs of wonder and joy. 
  

Hope for peace on earth. Not a story to prove to sk
eptical minds, but, in Moore™s words, a myth 
to be lived. The myth of Christmas can be taken ins
ide us; in fact, no less than nourishing 
bread–Bethlehem after all is only the Hebrew word f
or Bakery. 
  

I used to resent Christmas, but over the years, its
 mythos has really started to ground me in a 
more mature spiritual understanding than I had allo
wed myself for years. Right now, I couldn™t 
be happier that it™s Christmas Eve, and that I can 
consume its depth as bread, welcome its power 
as light, and live out its promised new life as a m
ythic story linked by memory and hope to the 
more historic births of everyone now alive on earth
. 
  

Offering
  
The offering tonight will go to the Ministers' Disc
retionary Fund which we use anonymously to 
help those suffering hardship; or, if you put it on
 your check memo, it will go to the Holiday 
Appeal.  

 
Blessing of the Feast and the Flame
  
The open table is a sign that no one may be kept aw
ay from the nourishment they need. As said 
the man whose mythic birth is celebrated tonight: T
hey shall come from North and South and 
East and West, all of them–and feast together–?  Ou
r partner church, the Unitarian Church in 
Bolon, has already broken this bread tonight some s
even hours ago. They look at each other in 
the eye when they offer bread to each other. Perhap
s you might try that. There is nothing 
alcoholic, by the way, on the table. And there are 
all kinds of breads, including wheat and gluten 
free. 

The firelight is a sign that, though each human lig
ht is welcome and worthy, together in 
community we make a greater light, one that may ill
umine far beyond the walls of this place.  
 
Blest is the board of life, the table of love.
 Blest is the light of life, and the communion of fi
re.  
Kindling 

Silent Night with gestures 

  

Blessing:
   

Take Christmas inside you, says Moore. 

Let it overshadow your fears and your hurt. 

Allow the new light to take residence in you, he sa
ys. And no matter what you believe, live out 
your lives in peace, for the mythic angels reminded
 us, the glory of God is people here on earth 
living in peace with one another. 

  

  

  

  

   

