 How to Cross the Red Sea W
ithout a Miracle 
April 13, 2014 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini
  
 Reflections before the Celebration begins 
 
"How is freedom measured, in individuals as well as
 nations? By the resistance which has to be 
overcome, by the effort it costs to stay aloft."   
                                                   
                                                   
  
Friedrich Nietzsche, 1889
  
"You realize the futility of worry. You know your l
imitations and proceed to eliminate them; 
your abilities, and proceed to develop them. You ar
e free.''                                          
                                
Alice Foote MacDougall 1928
  
Gathering, Welcoming               

 
Today's flowers, especially the purple pansies, are
 a remembrance in part on the anniversary of 
Pat Larson's mother's death, as well as a sign of t
he garden of life we grow together. 
 
Centering 
 River Lullaby
 from 
Prince of Egypt
  
 by Stephen Schwartz
               Nathan Hamm, piano 
 
Kindling, Opening  

 
We are here 

with a bright new roof over our heads 

and the green beauties of spring uplifting us 

to worship, to be vulnerable to wisdom  

both from our rich and ancient living tradition 

and from reflecting on our own lives.  

 
And so, bearing witness 
both
 to our world as it is, 
and
 as Love can  imagine it, we would claim 
that vision of a just world in our own lives. And b
ecause of a growing sense of kinship with all 
beings, inviting our compassion, we begin in this c
elebration to engage our mission with our 
whole lives: body, mind, and heart.
   
Praising
  
#151 I Wish I Knew How v. 1 and 4 
 
Ingathering   Moshe and the People 

 
So this is an old, old story. It's been told in one
 form or another for at least 2500 years, every sin
gle 
spring. 

 
 It™s about a group of people who lived in a country
 where the majority of people didn't like their 
language, didn't like their way of dress, didn't li
ke their food, and didn't like them. The majority o
f 
people. What does that mean? It's like this picture
. A lot of dots are in this circle. Only a few dots
 are in 
this circle. The big circle is the majority.  The s
mall circles are the minorities. The majority said 
"We 
own
 the minorities in our country because there are mo
re of us than there are of them. We can make 
them do what we want. We can make them iron our clo
thes, paint our buildings, build our houses, and 
we don't have to pay them anything. We can even mak
e them go to our own house of faith, not theirs. 
We can just give them shacks to live in, some cerea
l to eat, and they can't do anything about it. Ha H
a 
Ha. 

 
So the story says that one guy didn't think this wa
s right. Well, to tell the truth, many people didn'
t think 
this was right, but they didn't speak up. This guy,
 the guy who spoke up...his name was Moshe.  
 
He himself was part of the majority. But because of
 something he did, the majority got angry and sent 
him away; and he left the country, and went somewhe
re else. And there he discovered what it was like 
to be free, to be able to build your own house, pai
nt it the color you wanted, eat the food you want, 
and 
get money for the work you did, and go to worship i
n the way that makes sense to you. And he thought 
that this freedom should be for everyone, not just 
the majority. 
 
So, excited by his discovery of the idea of freedom
 for everyone, he came back to his own country and 
started talking about what "freedom" felt like. And
 pretty soon other people, the minority people, sai
d 
"YEAH!"   

 
So, encouraged by their "yeah!", Moshe went to the 
leader of the country, sitting there in his big hou
se 
and said, "We don't want to be the minority anymore
. We want to join the majority, and have the 
freedoms everyone of you do."  But the leader of th
e country got angry and said, "NO NO NO! You 
belong to us, and that is final. Nothing is going t
o change that. So get out of here right now!" 
 
But one day, not long after that, when a lot of spr
ing storms made the muddy rivers overflow, bringing
 
fish and frogs everywhere, and when lightning and h
ail made the majority hide indoors, the minority 
said, "Who cares about the bad weather? Freedom is 
more important than being uncomfortable and 
wet. We are out of here!" And so they left, having 
packed up everything they owned, which was not 
much.  They traveled far. They went as fast as they
 could. They even crossed a big lake on a sandbar, 
knowing that the spring storms would erase their fo
otprints, and that the leader of the majority would
 
never be able to find them. And when they got to th
e other side, everyone shouted...?We're free! We're
 
free!"  But then Moshe told them they had to keep o
n going. And they looked around, and they looked 
ahead of them, and they saw nothing. No houses. No 
paint. No work. No stores. Nothing. Absolutely 
nothing. 

 
And they said to Moshe,  "We don't think we want to
 do this any more. We are not sure we want to be 
free. Maybe it wasn't so bad back there.  Look at w
hat's up ahead. Nothing. N O T H I N G. 
Nothing. Just a cloud with no rain, and a few half-
dead bushes. At least we had cereal back 
where we came from. Now we have nothing at all.  (S
how picture of nothing.) 
 
Moshe said: "Oh, you are just afraid because you do
n't know where you are going, exactly. I 
understand. It is not what you know and recognize. 
But Freedom means that. It means moving away 

 from what you know, and being open to what you will
 discover. Let me tell you what I mean. You see 
those little bushes over there? They are not superm
arkets, but look underneath them."  The people did.
 
They found little sticky pieces of sweet bread, the
 sap from the bush that had dried in the sun. They 
tasted it. It was different from the cereal they we
re used to, but it was sweet and delicious. They as
ked 
in their language (after all, our language, English
, wouldn't be invented for a couple of thousand yea
rs), 
"Man hu?  What is this stuff?" 

 
"I'm not sure exactly. But it's good isn't it? See,
 you can find things that feed you even if they are
 not 
what you are used to."  So the people called the st
uff under the bushes "Stuff," which in their langua
ge 
was 
man-na
. 
 
And even though they knew it would be difficult, an
d that everything would be new, they finally 
decided it was good to be free, and to be able to b
e in charge of your own life. For they knew that th
ere 
was only one real majority in the world, even if so
me people didn't recognize that. They knew that the
 
only 
majority
 there is, is the whole Human Race that everyone is
 part of.       
 after which
 children and teachers leave for their activities,
 while Nathan plays 
Simcha Raba
, a traditional Passover Seder song. 
 
Greeting, news of the congregation 

 
Conversation from the Heart      Chris Collins and 
Katie Collins 
Stewardship                     Susan Roscigno 

 
 Devotion:
  Welcoming Memory and Hope
  
     
please rise for unison affirmation and song 
 
Affirming:  "it's me," I say. 

  "it's us" rocks echo. 

                        Oracle
 Francisco Alarcon 1992 
 
Singing #209  

 O Come You Longing, Thirsty Souls 

       
(text: Yisayahu/Isaiah 55) 
 
Communing the Sequence,  

(preface)  
Each year on the Sunday before Easter, I lift up ei
ther the taproot of our liberal 
Christian tradition, or the taproot of our liberal 
Jewish tradition which was so interwoven with 
our Christian tradition. These are the two traditio
ns which have shaped us the most. Since I am 
doing the Judaic tradition today, and celebrating P
assover later this week, I am offering the 
questions of Jesus (removed from their context), as
 a harbinger of the communion ceremony I 
will celebrate Thursday evening in the style of our
 Eastern European ancestors.  I once heard a 
therapist recite these evocative questions before g
iving a lecture on spiritual health, and they 
moved me deeply. 

  
If you only greet those who already know you,  

what's so special about that? 

Can any of you, by worrying, add a single minute to
 your life? 
Why
 are you so anxious? 
Why
 are you so terrified? 
Do people pick grapes from thorn-bushes, or figs fr
om thistles? 
Who 
is
 my mother? Who 
is
 my family? 
Do you still not 
understand
? 
Why are you asking 
me
 about what is good? 
What do you want me to 
do
 for you? 
Why do people of our era always look for 
"signs"
? 
What are you 
thinking
? 
How do 
you
 interpret the Law? 
Who is greater? The one seated at the table,  

or the one who serves at that table? 

What is it that you are searching for? 

Do you 
want 
to be well? 
Why do you not judge for yourselves what is right? 

If even the smallest things are not under your cont
rol 
why are you so anxious all the time? 

What is your name? 

 
The Great Silence 

 
More questions from my own heart: whom do I love? W
ho loves me? When has love been lost? 
Whom do I miss?  How does grief live within me? Ans
wering these questions with the names 
that come to mind when I ask them, we offer now a t
ime to say those names within or aloud, to 
make our own stories part of the larger story of th
is community. 
 
The Naming 

 
Why is it that music has the effect that it does? H
ow does it tutor our hearts, lead us deeper into 
life, transform us with its beauty? Here is the ans
wer: 
   
                    9:15 Nigun Bialik 
(wordless Chassidic song) 
 arranged by A.W. Binder 

 Chalice, Choir, Brandon Moss, Director 

                       
 11:00
 The Drinking Gourd
, traditional,  
 arr. Andre J. Thomas 

 Spirit of Life Choir, Karen Madden, Director 

 Presentation:
  Opening to the World
  
Reading 1.  Estelle Frankel The Secret Meaning  of 
Passover SF Gate Interview 2009. 

 She is both a therapist and has been a pastoral/the
rapeutic rabbi in Berkeley at Chochmah ha 
Lev, a vital Jewish congregation there. I offer thr
ee sections from the interview. 
      

As a therapist, I use the symbols and the allegorie
s of the Exodus as a map of the process of 
transformation -- how people develop and evolve the
ir identity over time. Every single symbol in 
the story corresponds to stages in this process. Fo
r example, it shows both our desire for change 
and our resistance to it; it also shows how life 
forces 
us to change, and how if we don't 
continually change and grow, we die.  

 
   _____________________________ 

 
There is a tension between the part of us that want
s to just stay in the known, stay in the old, 
even if it's uncomfortable, even if there is no roo
m to move or grow, and the part of us that wants 
to change. But there are a number of forces that ca
n cause us to break free. One is pain itself. 
Feeling the discomfort is a great impetus to change
. Another is believing that change is possible, 
finding hope. I can't tell you how many people come
 in to therapy and really don't believe that 
they can change; they think that how they have been
 is how they will always be. 
 
              ______________________________ 

 
There are 27 million slaves on the planet today. As
 we are speaking, people are being sold into 
servitude, into forced labor. When you take in the 
reality of human suffering in the world, you 
either have to harden your heart, like Pharaoh, or 
you have to become an activist, like Moses. For 
me, recently, becoming aware of clothing made in sw
eatshops around the world has made me 
more conscious as a consumer: Where do I buy clothe
s? And can I bear to wear something that 
was made by a child slave somewhere in Bangladesh? 
You want to make sure that the workers 
around the world who live in dire poverty are being
 treated at least with a fair wage. So every 
year, on Passover, we read the story and hopefully 
make it relevant to the world today, and we 
think about where on the planet are people still no
t free, and what can we do about it?  
 
2.  The Second reading comes from the Torah, from t
he scroll of Shemoth, which is most often 
called by the Greek title Exodus in English. It was
 edited and woven from four distinct sources, 
spanning different eras hundreds of years apart, ar
ound 500 B.C.E. (possibly by someone named 
Ezra, but about that we cannot be sure). Please not
e that some passages from one tradition use 
the word Elohim for God (which technically is plura
l, namely "the gods").  Another strand in the 
tradition uses the word YHWH, which is usually neve
r pronounced, so following Jewish practice, 
I will use the word Adonai as the substitute. These
 are selections from chapters 13, 14, 15. 
 
1. Elohim led the Israelites on the wilderness road
, looping around to the Sea of Reeds.  They 
moved on out from the ridge that protected them.   

 
2. Then Adonai spoke to Moshe, "Tell the Israelites
 to turn around and make camp between 
Towerville and the sea. The Pharaoh will think, "Th
ey are confused, and lost, because now they 
are out in the open." 

 
 3. As the Pharaoh and his troops approached, everyo
ne was afraid. Totally. Terrorized, they cried 
out to Moshe, "What? Weren't the cemeteries in Egyp
t good enough for you? Now we will die 
here in the wilderness. We 
told 
you so! We told you so back in Egypt! We were bette
r off living 
as slaves...that's a lot better than being corpses 
in the wilderness."  Moshe replied, "Just be still.
 
Stand firm and watch what Adonai will do to protect
 you. You will never see an Egyptian again 
after today. Adonai is fighting for you. You just b
e quiet now." 
 
4. Elohim's presence, which had been guiding their 
way as a tall cloudy tower, moved to their 
rear. Everything got dark. The Egyptians and the Is
raelite camps were separated all night.  
 
5. Then Moshe raised his hand over the sea, and Ado
nai sent a strong wind which blew all night 
long, pushing the waves of the sea backward. Where 
there had been water, there was now visible 
earth. The sea waters were divided. 

 
And finally, 6:    I am singing my heart out to Ado
nai, the victor, who 
tossed 
horse and rider into 
the sea. Adonai is my strength, my song, the one wh
o keeps me safe. This is the kind of Elohim I 
want to portray to the world. A warrior. Pure Adona
i through and through. Pharaoh's chariots he 
just 
hurled
 into the sea. 
    Interlude: 
We're Leaving (Pesach Song)
  
   by Steve McConnell
   
 
Preaching:  How to Cross the Red Sea Without a Mira
cle   
M. Belletini
  
 
So it's Spring, finally. And with this season comes
 the major holidays, Passover and Easter, 
associated with our taproot traditions, here in the
 West.   
 
Now, as you know, these holidays mean different thi
ngs to different people. Some folks simply 
ignore the holidays, considering themselves totally
 secular, or, at best, they hold a festive supper 
with friends without stated religious significance.
 Others prefer what may be called secular
ized
 celebrations of the ancient holidays...for example,
 those who celebrate Easter might only go so 
far as eggs, and chocolate, and a big family dinner
 on Easter Sunday; for those who celebrate 
Passover, there may be a VERY non-traditional Passo
ver 
seder
 deeply influenced by gender, 
political or secular issues Œ like a radical femini
st or gay 
seder
, or pro-Palestinian 
seder
, or 
completely humanistic and non-theistic 
seder
. 
 
In any case, 
both 
holidays are joined at the hip with ancient stories
 embedded in the Western 
scriptures.  

 
Scriptures. Written stories and proverbs and rules.
 From long ago. Modern folks in the States 
have all sorts of ways of responding to the scriptu
res of our Western heritage. Some ignore them 
completely, and sincerely wish the books would just
 mold on a shelf someplace, unopened. 
Others go to the other extreme, and insist that scr
ipture is the final authority for the whole human 
race, that some literal, concrete meaning can still
 be found within them in this post-Darwin, post 
Moon-landing era. 

 
 People like me, in the middle between the two extre
mes, often don't quite know what to say. The 
whole idea of supernatural miracles makes me uneasy
, but I am completely convinced that 
attempts to throw away the stories completely are d
oomed to failure. 
 
I'm in good company here, I think, in this Unitaria
n Universalist congregation. Interpreting 
written texts from different points of view is one 
of the things we're all about. Our religious 
ancestors, when they claimed freedom as a central t
heological value, and embraced both the 
methods of science and scholarship as reliable path
ways to understanding, did not say, "Let's 
throw the baby out with the bath water" and be free
 of everything Christian and Jewish. No. 
They continued to meet on one day of the week in co
mmunity. That is very Jewish and very 
Christian. Many religions don't feature regular wee
kly communities like that. And, our ancestors 
continued to use words like minister and worship. T
hey continued even to read things during 
worship, which I personally would call scripture, a
lthough some may not. No, our ancestors 
freed themselves from the constrictions of binding 
creed and arbitrary authority. They stopped 
saying "The Bible says..." is one way of putting it
. They could then read the Bible, or anything 
else for that matter, through the lens of personal 
experience, scholarship, and engaged 
conversation with others. Truth for authority, they
 used to say, not authority for truth. I think 
that's right on. 

 
Unlike Jewish and Christian congregations, we do no
t read from the Western scriptures every 
week; some of our congregations rarely use them, bu
t I am not afraid to use them, personally, 
since I think our free tradition, much like that of
 the Jews especially, provides an excellent way 
to use the best parts of our scriptural heritage in
 the service of love, justice, compassion and 
peace.  

 
So this morning, you heard some passages from the T
orah, which consists of the first five books 
of the Hebrew Bible, or Tanak. You heard seasonal p
assages, words that have to do with 
Passover, which begins this Tuesday. You heard word
s about Moshe/Moses and the sea. The 
Reed Sea (a swamp, basically), the passage says, no
t the Red Sea (as Luther knew 500 years ago, 
incorporating that understanding in his German tran
slation). The English Bible goes for drama 
rather than honesty, and insists that it's the Red 
Sea, a much bigger body of water than a swamp, 
to be sure.  

 
But, no matter what the translation, as far as I ca
n tell, most folks in the United States have never 
really 
read
 the Bible. Even the Bible thumpers, I say. Even th
ose of us who grew up in 
congregations, Jewish or Christian, which encourage
d such reading.  
 
Now listen carefully to what I mean. I understand t
hat reading means 
more 
than the eyes, brain 
and a book all meeting together. The author may hav
e imagined some image, but the image I see 
when I read may be so far off that I cannot even re
ad words in front of my face.  What I mean is 
that it's almost impossible to read what it actuall
y says, even if we're wonderfully literate, 
because our lenses have already been clouded by pre
-existing interpretive images. I bring this up 
every Christmas. If I ask someone, believer or non-
believer, makes no difference, where 
scripture says Jesus was born, they will always res
pond "in a stable." But, if you look at the 
story, it no where says that. But the Christmas car
d you got in the mail shows that, so that is what 
the text says, whether you read it or hear it, even
 though it™s not true. And of course, specifically,
 

 this morning, I'm thinking of the indelible images 
crafted by Cecil B. DeMille, in his famous 
film 
The Ten Commandments
. Images from that film lodge permanently in the br
ains of both the 
religious and the non-religious, the faithful and t
he skeptical, and clearly proclaim the story a 
miracle story. Great big walls of water, hundreds o
f feet high, miraculously, and all at once, 
opening across the Gulf of Suez in the Red Sea, wit
h people crossing to safety, as the fish 
presumably look on through the watery walls.  

 
Nowhere does the text say that of course.  Nowhere.
  
There are 
two
 stories about the sea incident in the book of Exod
us...one says that a wind blew all 
night long, between eight to ten hours, and only in
 the morning did a visible path of dry land 
appear, the water "heaped" to the sides under a ful
l moon tide. This story describes a wonder, 
yes, like Old Faithful geyser is a wonder, or a gla
cier with blue ice in Alaska is a wonder. But it 
doesn't describe "a miracle" in the modern sense of
 the term, a suspension of the laws of nature 
in the snap of a finger. (The other sense of the te
rm, namely, EVERYTHING IS A MIRACLE, a 
wonder, an astonishment, I have no problems with.) 
The Exodus stories, with their images of 
dark cloud towers (or 
pillars of cloud
 in the conventional if awkward King James translat
ion) 
probably reflect embedded memories and legends abou
t the 
two
 great volcanic eruptions which 
happened in the years when Asiatics (what the Israe
lites were called before they were called 
Israelites) were living in Egypt, and who were sent
 away in the days of Dudimose, King of 
Egypt.  Specifically, I am talking about the catast
rophic eruptions of Santorini and Yali, for those 
who are interested in geology.  

 
Egyptian records of that time record many earthquak
es, tsunamis and windstorms, as well as 
actual names of Asiatics (or Israelites, as they we
re called anachronistically) in Egyptian records, 
according to scholar Barbara Sivertsen. (
cf The Parting of the Sea, Princeton University Pre
ss 
2009) 
 The stories as we have them now were written much 
later, edited, conflated, doctored 
polemically, and placed out of time in the era of K
ing Rameses the Great, hundreds of years after 
Dudimose. 

 
But as I said, there are 
two
 stories in the book of Exodus about the Egyptians 
and the sea which 
were linked by a later editor. You can tell because
 they use totally different words for God for 
one. The first version I mentioned doesn't sound li
ke a special miracle, at least as I see it.  The 
second, however, talks about something that sounds 
a lot more like a miracle in the modern 
sense. It talks about the Egyptian forces simply be
ing 
picked up
 and 
tossed 
into the water. It 
doesn't say how, but the words in Hebrew are clear.
..
ramah
 tossed
, as in picking up a horseshoe 
and tossing it. 
Yarah
, hurl, as in taking a frisbee and flinging it as f
ar as you can. This second 
version seems more like a poetic exaggeration more 
than anything else; Siversten suggests it is 
even referring to a story without Moses in it. But 
the first idea, of a Reed Sea crossing without a 
miraculous origin, doesn't trouble my skeptical min
d one whit. 
 
Because, you don't even need volcanoes and windstor
ms to create wonders that amaze.  
 
On the cover of your orders of celebration is a pho
to of lots of people crossing on dry land over 
the sea. This is obviously not a photo from the 13t
h dynasty in ancient Egypt when King 
Dudimose and the historical Moses were arguing with
 each other about freedom. (And yes, 

 despite the biblical minimalists, I personally 
do
 think there was an historical Moses, however 
distorted his story is!) But the photo on the cover
 IS a photo, taken in South Korea, of an event in 
the Jindo Sea. Each year, usually around this time 
in spring, and because of  a rather amazing set 
of annual tidal dynamics too complicated to explain
 here, the sea parts, and a path appears across 
the middle of the sea. And people can walk across t
he sea 2.8 kilometers (almost two miles) to 
the third largest island in Korea on foot, over a r
elatively dry, if muddy, pathway. There is a huge 
festival, with food stalls and singing, and thousan
ds cross to the island and back. No one 
imagines that either Elohim 
or
 Adonai are working miracles here. But even those w
ho don't 
believe in either Elohim or Adonai can't deny that 
people are crossing the sea on dry land, pretty 
much as it™s described in the book of Shemoth, the 
book of Exodus. 
 
You don't need a miracle, in other words, to go whe
re you need to go. 
 
But another Jewish teacher, Estelle Frankel, looks 
at these same biblical passages as the historian 
Barbara Sivertsen does, and finds something that ha
s little to do with whether ancient Asiatics 
actually, historically and honest-to-G-d, escaped f
rom chattel slavery at the hands of the 
Egyptians. 

 
First, she completely collapses the time from the 1
3th dynasty in Egypt to modern-day times, and 
points out that slavery...chattel slavery.. is stil
l going on around the world. It™s not just ancient 
history or biblical mythology. 27,000,000 is the nu
mber of slaves she offers according to her 
research. A tad more than the 600,000 slaves mentio
ned in Exodus. Children and women in 
sweatshops in Bangladesh, making our clothes for no
thing, is one example she gives. Yes, 
slavery. No overseers in Egyptian headdresses. No w
hips. But slavery nonetheless. "When you 
take in the reality of human suffering in the world
," says Rabbi Frankel, "you either have to 
harden your heart, like Pharaoh, or you have to bec
ome an activist, like Moses." Indeed. 
 
But second, she also talks about the other journeys
 that people make toward freedom. Freedom 
from difficult violent pasts in their own families.
 Freedom from the deforming wounds of the 
heart. The journeys people take when they undergo t
herapy or personal growth.  
 
And, Rabbi Frankel says, when she is doing therapy,
 folks come to her convinced that they 
cannot make this journey toward freedom. They tell 
her they are used to their suffering, used to 
their way of coping, and can't imagine really being
 free. They make excuses as to why they can't 
continue going on the journey. They resist. They pu
sh back. Exactly as in the mythic story of the 
exodus that I retold to the children this morning. 
"I can't do it. I am afraid. Maybe it wasn't so 
bad back there. Maybe freedom is just too scary. I'
d rather know something sad for sure than deal 
with all that uncertainty." 

 
But, she pushes, and insists that the pain is real.
 It cannot be denied. And the pain in itself, it is
 a 
call to freedom. It 
was
 bad back there. And yes, freedom 
is
 scary. And yes, you may not have a 
Moses always handy who can point out the nourishing
 manna in the frightful wilderness right 
before your panicked eyes. But you have to start wi
th the first step anyway...right now. 
 
I have been there myself. I have had to journey awa
y from difficult stories in my life, patterns of 
pain in my life that I truly learned to get used to
. But I would not be here today had I not chosen 

 to admit that the pain hurt a lot, and that I reall
y did want to leave its deforming power behind 
me for good.  

 
And like Estelle Frankel, I now find myself often u
sing the Exodus story when people come to 
me to tell me about changes they need to make in or
der to be free...a journey away from slavery 
to substance abuse, a journey through the wildernes
s of a terrible unloving past. A journey to a 
future they can't quite yet imagine. A scary journe
y with obstacles as wide as both the Reed Sea 
and Red Sea combined.   

 
But I find myself saying to folks:  "I think you ha
ve to go through the Red Sea. I don't think you 
can walk around it," I say. "You 
can
 go forward. You have to face the issues in front o
f you, not 
deny them, name the pain and then start moving past
 it. Start healing from it. Step by step. 
Storms may churn the water on either side of you, b
ut it's your desire to be free which is the real 
miracle, not the parting of the waters. Get going."
  
Even people who have never read the Bible, or ever 
seen DeMille's cheesy movie, usually get 
what I mean when I say that. Even people who never 
intend to crack the cover of the Bible ever 
again.  Even those who are overwhelmed about the su
ffering of others in the world, and are not 
sure what can be done about anyone else, let alone 
themselves. Even those who are terrified. For 
miracles, you see, are simply not needed. They neve
r have been needed, and they never will be 
needed.  

 
Wonders, yes. 

 
Special miracles and signs. No. 

 
Or to quote a great Jewish thinker I quoted earlier
: 
Why do people of our era constantly look for 
"signs"? 

         

 Integration:   
Recommitting to Our Mission
  Offering 
An opportunity to reinforce what is important to us
, and  
 invest in the ideals and principles we share. Your
 generous  
 contribution allows our congregation to transform 
lives  
 and impact the world around us. 

 
For all that is our lives, we give our thanks and p
raise, for all life is a gift which we are bound to
 
use to build the common good, and make our own days
 glad. With these words by poet Bruce 
Findlow, we offer the opportunity of the watering c
an of our morning offering, that we might 
grow our blossoming garden together!   

 
 Through Heaven's Eyes 
from 
Prince of Egypt  
 by Stephen Schwartz 
   Returning:  The History of So Called Civilization i
n 2 Minutes Flat:  A Prayer for the Season 

  
Oh Love, help me to remain aware in this world, whe
re what we call civilization has been built 
so much on the backs of the marginalized, the minor
ities, the mavericks, the minors. But not all 
of civilization is built on the backs of others. I 
want to name that too. I want to lift up warriors o
f 
peace, like Gandhi or King or Mandela, and turn awa
y from warriors of sadism like Pol Pot or 
Adolf Hitler. I would prefer the ethical teachings 
of Jesus to the slave-economy of Caesar, the 
simplicity of Francis of Assisi of Europe, or Abrah
am Joshua Heschel of Poland and America, or 
of Ashoka and Mirabai of India, to the power politi
cs of prelates, mercenaries and kings, or 
present day oligarchs and corporations who have cro
wned themselves almighty right before our 
eyes with the approval of high and mighty judges. 

  

I've read the story of broken people leaving their 
oppressors. I want something more, O Love...I 
want the oppressors to get out of me. I've read abo
ut the water opening so people can escape. I 
want something more. 
I want to open. I've read about grand events. I just
 want to wade into the 
water, make a small splash, and get going. I am afr
aid, sure, nothing wrong with that. But it's 
time to leave what is narrow, and journey without c
orrupted maps toward something welcoming, 
broad, and embracing, a freedom for everyone, not j
ust me, a freedom for us, as the rocks echo 
back, "all of us." 

 
Singing  #210 Wade In the Water   

                            (African American Spiri
tual, Slavery Era) 
Blessing 

 
