 1Luck - 2008.Feb.03 
 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

at the beginning of the week
 to celebrate the wonder that we live 

with song and word and silence.
 Claiming with gratitude the fortune of this day, 

we begin our time together by saying: 

 
Mindful that a growing vision of a just world calls
 us together, that a community of 
commitment, courage and care sustains us, and that 
a life transformed by depth of spirit 
may illumine our way, we have kindled this  

light as the sign of our circle of life and love. 

 
Sequence 

 
The horizon in the East was invisible on Friday nig
ht, eclipsed by bungalows and a blur of bare 
tree branches, and large snowflakes doing high-wire
 acts under the dark tent of the sky. 
 
The golden light from the South fell slant through 
the windows of my office this week, turning 
my library into an ark of the covenant, gilding the
 edges of each book until they resembled 
scripture scrolls, but some of them with words in t
hem written long before Jesus wept. 
 
The sun in the West was red this week in anticipati
on of Chinese New Year. 
The Milky Way will soon turn into a dragon 

as the stars parade down the lanes of heaven, 

and the moon will turn into a bowl full of fish. 

 
The sky in the North was thick with stars 

at midnight, their slow light reaching us 

often more than a thousand years after it left them
, their radiance leaping forth back when the 
wisdom teacher Rabi™a was making her wisecracks abo
ut God here on earth. 
This room too is filled with stardust and light 

and the past and sorrow and joy. And linking 

them all together: this breathing, this silence. 

 
silence 

 
East, South, West, North: those we love 

are around us in every direction. 

Mind, heart, memory and hope, 

those we love are within us at every  moment. 

Here let the human spirit, gathered in this room, r
estore themselves with 
remembrance and thanksgiving, 

naming aloud or inside those we find ourselves turn
ing to the most this week. 
 
 2naming 

 
What good fortune that we are here, now, 

in this place, in this minute, blessed with 

breath, blessed with community, blessed with the po
ssibility of joy and blessed with music! 
 
The First Reading
 this morning is a folk tale that existed orally for
 several centuries until 
a folktale collector named Attar wrote down one ver
sion, namely this one. The woman, 
about whom this story and so many were written, rem
ains probably the single most 
cherished woman in the Islamic Sufi tradition. She 
lived in the 700s, not really a very long 
time after Islam™s initial development
.  
One day Rabi‚a and her serving-girl were getting re
ady to break a fast of several days. The 
serving-girl needed an onion and was about to go ne
xt door and borrow one, but Rabi™a 
said: ?Forty years ago I vowed never to ask for any
thing from anyone but GodŠwe can 
do without onions in our meal today.?  

 
Just then a bird flew over the courtyard kitchen, a
nd dropped an onion into Rabi™a™s frying 
pan, already peeled, sliced and ready to fry.  

 
?Interesting, but not convincing,? she said. ?Am I 
supposed to believe that God is an 
onion-vender? I mean, really.?  So that day they fr
ied their bread without onions.  
The Second Reading
 is a beautiful piece by Edward Hirsch, a beloved Am
erican poet, 
from the 2003 edition of his work
. 
It™s called
 In Spite of Everything, the Stars  
Like a stunned piano, like a bucket  

of fresh milk flung into the air  

or a dozen fists of confetti  

thrown hard at a bride  

stepping down from the altar,  

the stars surprise the sky.  

Think of dazed stones  

floating overhead, or an ocean  

of starfish hung up to dry. Yes,  

like a conductor™s expectant arm  

about to lift toward the chorus,  

or a juggler™s plates defying gravity,  

or a hundred fastballs fired at once  

and freezing in midair, the stars  

startle the sky over the city.  

 
And that™s why drunks leaning up  

against abandoned buildings, women  

hurrying home on deserted side streets,  

policemen turning blind corners, and  

even thieves stepping from alleys  

all stare up at once. Why else do  

 3sleepwalkers move toward the windows,  

or old men drag flimsy lawn chairs  

onto fire escapes, or hardened criminals  

press sad foreheads to steel bars?  

Because the night is alive with lamps!  

That™s why in dark houses all over the city  

dreams stir in the pillows, a million  

plumes of breath rise into the sky.  

 
Sermon 

 
Friends who have known me a long time often remind 
me that I™ve developed the habit of 
repeating certain phrases over and over, almost lik
e mantras. Personal proverbs, you 
might call them. I weave these phrases into rituals
 I conduct. I spike many of my 
conversations with a sample or two. I pepper my ema
ils with them. 
 
The first of them is usually some version of ?Thank
s for being exactly who you are and 
no one else.? 

 
The second one is a version or another of this pray
er: ?I™m not asking for anyone to come 
and whisk away my troubles, only that Love thrives 
in me while I face them.? 
 
But the third phrase often surprises even me when I
 say it. ?I™m the luckiest person I 
know.?   

 
Usually when I say it, I™m expressing the still com
pletely hard-to-believe fact that I have 
been lucky enough to travel to over twelve countrie
s in this world, and all of the trips but 
one were gifts or grants of some sort. I can still 
reel when I think of it. Why? Because I 
grew up never thinking I would travel anywhere. Wor
king class family. Plane flights 
were out of the question. When I began my ministry 
in 1979, my salary was ten grand a 
year. You just don™t imagine flying on Air France o
ver to Paris with those limited 
resources. 

 
But nevertheless, I am so lucky, I™ve been many pla
ces, and had extraordinary 
experiences in every country I™ve visited. 

 
But I also say I™m lucky because I feel that, throu
ghout my life, I have always chanced to 
stumble upon, discover,  or engage with the most am
azing people, outside of  
congregations like this one, and within it too, art
ists, poets, athletes, scholars, lovers, 
singers, parents, children, families. I am talking 
about people who elicit my wonder and 
my awe even more than my beloved stars at night, an
d some of you know how much I 
love the stars and am blown away by them. 

 
Now when I say this, I am also aware that in the 19
80s and 1990s, I conducted dozens 
and dozens of funerals each year for many years in 
a row, funerals of people I loved or at 
least admired deeply.  Lots of reasons: HIV, sure, 
but other illness too, and accidents and 

 4even suicide. I embraced their wailing parents or s
pouses, I scattered their ashes over the 
hills, I wept on the floor for hours in a fetal pos
ition, and wrestled with deep depression 
entirely suitable to the cause of it. And despite a
ll that, I still feel lucky. 
 
It™s been an interesting week, looking at luck.  Lo
oking at chance. Looking at how the 
colloquial concepts of good luck and bad luck seem 
to get caught up with self-worth and 
self-loathing, with self-evaluation.  Looking at ho
w some folks are addicted to luck-based 
rituals, like gambling or Lotto.  Looking at how so
me folks really believe in the grace, 
mercy and clemency of Luck, capital L, in the exact
 same way that some people believe 
in the grace, the mercy, the clemency of an all-pow
erful God, capital G. 
 
And I have also encountered people who cast a criti
cal eye at the whole issue. Who say 
luck is just an illusion, a ridiculous concept. Lik
e Joyce Carol Oates, who thinks that 
people who believe in luck are just plain cynical. 
I also found a nifty sentence attributed 
to Franklin Delano Roosevelt (but nowhere could I f
ind the actual source, nor, in fact, I 
discovered, can any one else, so I don™t know if he
 really said this; and frankly, it sounds 
more like Mark Twain to me!).  It™s this: 
I think we consider too much the good luck of 
the early bird and not enough the bad luck of the e
arly worm.
  
I laughed when I read that quip, especially since, 
as a night person, I haven™t literally 
seen either an early bird or an early worm in thirt
y years. 
 
But this anonymous anti-proverb is not just funny, 
it™s insightful. ?The early bird catches 
the worm,? goes the proverb that echoes in most of 
our heads, I™d wager. It™s an 
invitation to get up early, work hard so you can 
make
 your own fate, your own life, your 
own luck. Stop waiting around for good luck to desc
end, the proverb preaches. You are 
your own luck. 

 
But, some folks can get up as early as they want an
d they still don™t have work, let alone 
a worm.  In a society where, as I said two weeks ag
o, there are structures in place that 
keep some people from the table, it™s pretty arroga
nt to quote proverbs about birds and 
worms when there are children crying in hunger who 
did not choose their luck.  Sure, 
good hard work is important. But I have plenty of f
riends who are out of work right now, 
and have been for some time, try as they might to f
ind work. They get up early to look for 
work and make good presentations of themselves, but
 no worm and no work. 
 
So the idea of luck is not just something personal,
 but it has social dimensions. I wonder. 
If you are black or Asian or Latino in a decidedly 
white culture, do you feel 
lucky
 to be a 
person of color? If you are gay in a heterosexual c
ulture, do you feel fortunate to have 
been born gay?  If you are a Jew or a Muslim or a U
nitarian Universalist in an 
Evangelical, Protestant and Catholic culture, do yo
u feel lucky to be a Jew or a Muslim or 
Unitarian Universalist? Fortunate? Blessed, some wo
uld say? 
 
Actually, I myself do fall into a couple of those c
ategories, and I 
do
 feel lucky. My 
various identities feel like gifts to me, sort of l
ike my unexpected travels.  
 
 5I didn™t always feel that way, of course–the larger
 world can really do a number on us, 
and often does. It certainly did a number on me. Bu
t over time, when I started to push 
away the larger world™s expectations for me and dev
elop some expectations for myself, I 
began to realize that who I am is who I am, and if 
some folks don™t like that, that doesn™t 
make me terrible. Or them terrible, for that matter
. 
 
I™ve heard the word luck used this week like it™s t
he most useful word in English. ?I™m 
lucky in the genetics department,? voiced my friend
 out West. ?I™m just lucky in love,? 
voiced another and happily long married, friend out
 East. ?You bet I™m lucky. I didn™t get 
killed in Vietnam,? voiced a third friend down Sout
h. Note that the word ?lucky? all by 
itself usually refers only to good luck, not bad lu
ck. Or as one pundit would have it: 
?Your lucky rabbit™s foot may work well for you, bu
t it sure wasn™t a lucky day for that 
rabbit, now was it?? 

 
But more surprising than anything else, I discovere
d that luck seems to be a theological 
issue. An issue that has to do with questions of ul
timacy, questions of control, power and 
identity. 

 
And people have been wrestling with this theologica
l issue for five thousand years, it 
seems to me, when I look at the literature, culture
 and art of the world. The Kethuvim, or 
Wisdom books in the Hebrew Scriptures, are a case i
n point. The famous book of Job is 
about fortune being granted, and then fortune being
 yanked away, as a test to Job™s 
identity as a good person. ?I™m a good guy,? he pro
tests to his friends. ?No, you can™t 
be,? they sneer.  ?You™ve lost everything. You are 
too unlucky to be good. Someone™s 
out to get you good.? You may try and remind me, if
 you know the book, that it™s God, 
not luck, who is throwing Job a curve.  But remembe
r what I affirmed earlier. It seems to 
me that people who talk about luck use the exact sa
me language about luck as others do 
about God. Luck, like God, is sovereign. Controls t
his world. Is omnipotent, since you 
cannot get out of the way of bad luck if it™s comin
g to get you.  
 
The 2400-year-old book of Qoheleth, also in the Ket
huvim, suggests that even if you get 
up as early as you can, you don™t always get the wo
rm. ?
Once more I observed under the 
sun that the race does not always belong to the swi
ft, nor the battle to the powerful; nor 
is there bread for the smart, nor wealth for the cl
ever, but time and chance carry us all 
along.?    

 
But what is a good example of bad luck? An illness?
 On the Fourth of July in 1939, Lou 
Gehrig spoke to a filled Yankee Stadium after being
 diagnosed with a painful and 
frightening disease, now named after him. And what 
did he say that day? ?I am the 
luckiest man alive right now!? Does a lot of illnes
ses in a row equal bad luck then? An 
accident? How about this. On November 30, 1954, a w
oman named Elizabeth Ann 
Hodges was in her home in a small town in Alabama, 
when she was hit by a shooting 
star, meteorite.  Weighing over 8 lbs, it crashed t
hrough (and was apparently slowed by) 
her roof, bounced off some furniture and hit her ha
nd and hip, bruising her enough for her 
to spend time in a hospital. It™s the only well-aut
henticated example of a meteorite hitting 
anyone. But does such an utterly unique and painful
 event mean that poor Mrs. Hodges 

 6must be the unluckiest person who ever lived? Or is
 she, in fact, the luckiest, because she 
lived to tell about it? 

 
How about good luck? What does that look like? In t
he terribly clever story of Rabi™a, a 
bird drops an already peeled and sliced onion into 
her frying pan when she needed one.  
?Interesting but not convincing,? is her response. 
?Am I supposed to believe that God is 
an onion-vender? I mean, really.?  And she refuses 
to keep the onion of her good luck, 
dropping from a bird, and goes ahead and eats her l
unch without the onions. Why? 
Because she clearly does not want to think of ultim
acy as some sort of fickle gift-giver, 
who graces some folks with amazing luck and damns o
thers. She doesn™t want God to be 
Luck, or Luck to be God. She doesn™t want chance to
 determine her character, or luck to 
create her ethical life.  

 
This is a wise understanding, I think. Let me move 
this wise idea from legend to real life. 
I am thinking about my friend David. He was once a 
student I was teaching at my old 
seminary in Berkeley. I was teaching the gospels. D
avid came to me one day after class 
with an amazing announcement of good luck. Somehow 
(and I really don™t remember the 
exact mechanism for this–sorry), he was suddenly po
ssessed of about 25 good tickets to 
a 
Grateful Dead Concert 
which was going to be taking place at a way-too-sma
ll venue in 
Oakland, the city right next to Berkeley.  He right
ly calculated that he could easily have 
sold each of these tickets for what? three, five, t
en times their worth, which, you can 
figure out, would be a LOT of good money for a poor
 seminary student. Good luck 
indeed! 

 
But, David had been reading the Sermon on the Mount
 in the Gospel of Matthew, about 
sharing the wealth, and spreading good luck and sca
ttering your fortune like seed in the 
furrows. And he was moved by the teachings of Jesus
 as he understood them. And so, 
after giving it a lot of thought, he shared his luc
k, and gave every single one of his lucky 
tickets away to those who wanted them. Gratis. Gift
. Free. 
 
The most popular, and thus, 
questionable
 way of looking at luck, at circumstance, at fate, 
at chance, call it what you will, is that it appear
s random, yes, but that it™s meaningful. It 
means something if you have good luck all the time.
 You either bring it on yourself, or 
you are loved by God. And it means something if you
 have bad luck all the time. You are 
too lazy to get lucky (as in our story this morning
), or your Karma must be bad–i.e. you 
were a Nazi in your last life. Your spiritual chara
cter is in question. Worse, people start 
trotting out my 
least
 favorite word in English, to wit ?deserve.?  And a
s soon as folks 
start hurling the word ?deserve? around, the story 
in the Book of Job is acted out over and 
over again by people who are disturbed by the reali
ty that no one controls anything, 
really, and that it™s spiritual bankruptcy to affir
m that good luck means blessing and bad 
luck means curse. ?You 
must
 have done something!? 
 
Me, I get accused of being irreligious all the time
, because I talk about how the idea of 
chance comforts me instead of upsets me. Oh, it use
d to upset me. But now, instead of 
saying, ?Why is this happening to me?? when what is
 normally called bad luck happens? 
to me, I ask instead, ?Why not me??  All of my frie
nds who died of HIV-related illness 

 7fifteen years ago eventually came to this position,
 and I sit at their feet still, holding their 
wise hands and learning from their remarkable freed
om that the only gift is the present 
moment, the only real good luck to take the next br
eath, the only real bad luck to 
refuse
 that grace and wisdom because you are cynical enoug
h to wait for a special favor from 
Fate to descend just for you–because you ?deserve? 
it. 
 
Which brings me to Hirsch™s poem about the stars. 
In spite of everything, the stars!
 he 
writes.  In spite of what? In spite of the fact tha
t some of us are behind bars, some of us 
are about to commit a crime, some of us are hard wo
rkers and wealthy, some of us are 
hard workers and poor, we are all living, as it wer
e, surrounded by the infinite stars. No 
matter what our fortune or misfortune, says the poe
t, we all look up, we are all astounded 
that they are there, like drops of milk splashed in
to the sky. And the stars themselves are 
there because of good luck that is for all that liv
e on earth. For as cosmologists have 
slowly begun to understand, the fabric of the unive
rse is fragile, peculiarly balanced and 
just right for life. The way the atoms and molecule
s work together happens only because 
of the luck that the universe unfolded from its beg
inning 13.7 billion years ago in 
precisely this way and none other. There were many 
possible ways it 
could
 have unfolded 
after the so-called Big Bang, but it unfolded this 
way. (It™s the delicate precision of the 
forces in this, our universe, which has some cosmol
ogists arguing for something called ?a 
multiverse?–implying that for this universe to teem
 with life, there must be others which 
can have no life. These ideas about precision are a
lso what gets some other folks 
cramming themselves into that Trojan Horse of Creat
ionism, the Intelligent Design 
theory, saying that they simply cannot believe in c
hance or luck and that there must have 
been a Designer to establish things just so. To whi
ch the atheist Dawkins replies, ?Then 
who designed the designer??) 

 
Me, I™m perfectly satisfied to leave all the theolo
gical fisticuffs aside, even if I do have to  
decry some of the sheer passive aggressive deceitfu
lness on the part of some of the 
Designer proponents. I am comforted and blest and h
appy to simply affirm that we™re all 
lucky, mighty fortunate to be alive on this thin sk
in of the planet earth. I am blest that we 
didn™t get up early in the morning to make it happe
n, we just opened our eyes, and there it 
was, with some of the night™s gorgeous stars still 
shining overhead, ?like a hundred 
fastballs fired at once and freezing in midair.? I™
m blest that you and I can then get up, 
come here, be looking at each other in this amazing
 room.   
 
Yes, my observant friends are right. I 
do
 often affirm that ?I™m the luckiest person I 
know.? And it™s true. 

 
Except, of course, for each one of you. 

 
Offering 

  

Our strength is a common strength. 

Our joy is a shared joy. 

Our responsibilities are joined together. 

We give of our hours to the common endeavor. 

 8We give of our hearts to the common endeavor. 

We give of our livelihoods to the common endeavor. 

We give because our strength is a common strength, 

our joy is a shared joy, 

our responsibilities are real,  

and we are joined together in promise and peace. 

 
Preface to Peace: A Prayer 

 
Not just rusting tanks, O Love, 

not just bayonets bent back on themselves, 

but real kisses. 

Not just orders ripped to confetti, 

O Love, not just men and women sleeping 

in their own beds at home, but men and women sleepi
ng soundly, without exploding 
dreams 

and echoing cries for help. 

Not just peace conferences, but peace suppers. 

Not just truces, but holding hands 

under the sky, and counting the shooting stars toge
ther. 
Not just bandages and casts, O Love, 

but health of mind, heart and body 

cherished and developed. 

Not just poems about peace,  

or songs about peace 

but whole libraries and concert halls of peace, mul
tiplying. 
Not just beginning today, Love, 

but tomorrow too, 

and even on the very day when our children  

look in their mirror and say, ?My God, I™m old.? 

Not just with an Amen, but with this song 

woven into our heartbeats, absorbed into  

our bones, taming our every breath.  

Now, Love. Let peace begin with me,  

with these people,  

with strangers on the street,  

with children, with seniors,  

with everyone.  

I mean it.  

Now. 

 
Blessing 

 
Who is going to be lucky tonight: The Patriots or t
he Giants? Are you going to be lucky?  
Is the world going to be lucky? 

No matter. Go in peace, and live in peace. 

