Accountability to Our Past 
October 20, 2013 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
  
Gathering, Greeting, Centering, Kindling, Opening: 

We are here, 

as autumn leaves slowly claim their color, 

to worship, to celebrate life in all of its fullnes
s: 
the deeply personal, the social, the ethical. 

This we do with fresh awareness, music, silence 

and stories, for all of these bear truth along. 

 
And so, bearing witness 
both
 to our world as it is, 
and
 as Love can imagine it, we would 
claim that vision of a just world in our own lives.
 And because of a growing sense of kinship 
with all beings, inviting our compassion, we begin 
in this celebration to engage our mission 
with our whole lives: body, mind, and heart.
  
  Singing #1018 
vs. 1 and 2 
 
Ingathering   

 
Sweet Clara lived 150 years ago in the State of Vir
ginia. She lived at a place called North Farm. 
She was not part of the family that lived at North 
Farm, however, she was what was called a 
slave.  The family at North Farm said that they own
ed her, like you might own a bicycle. 
 
One day, the family at North Farm sent her to a pla
ce called Home Plantation, because they 
needed  more people to work in the cotton fields. C
lara cried and cried, because her mother still 
lived back at North Farm. "I'll get back to see mom
ma someday," she would say over and over.  
 
Eventually, another slave, a woman who told Clara t
o call her Aunt Rachel, taught her to sew in 
the evenings when they came in from the fields. Cla
ra was hurting all over from the hard work in 
the sun, and her fingers were crooked from picking 
the cotton, but aunt Rachel didn't let that be 
an excuse, and taught her to sew tight and clean. D
ay after day she taught Clara, until one day 
she said, "Tomorrow I am going to take you to the B
ig House, where they can see how good you 
are at sewing. Clara was scared, but she loved the 
bright colors in the house. When the missus of 
the family in the Big House asked to see Clara's wo
rk, she said, "Oh, you are very good. From 
now on, I want you up here every day. There are clo
thes to repair, and a quilt to make for my 
daughter's wedding." 

 
So every day from that time on, Clara went up to th
e Big House. There she would hear about 
slaves running away. She heard the word Canada for 
the first time. "You can be free up there," 
someone told her. "But it™s hard to run away, becau
se there are no maps, and the swamp will 
swallow you." 

 
"What's a map?" Clara asked her friend Jack. "A map
 is a picture of the ground...the fields, the 
rivers, the forests, the roads," answered her frien
d Jack. 
 
For weeks, Clara would hear about what was outside 
the edge of Home Plantation, the roads, the 
bridges, the rivers, especially the Ohio River, whi
ch was big and wide. On the other side you 
could get to Canada pretty easy. So she started dra
wing maps of the area in the sand. Then one 
day, it occurred to her that rain would wash away t
he sand, but it would not wash away a quilt. 
The one she was working on at the Big House as a mo
del for the very big quilt she was going to 
make for the wedding.  So she came up with patterns
 to represent the river-crossings, the fields, 
the forests, the hills. And she put them on the qui
lt. Sewed them tight. 
 
Then one day she and Jack planned to run away to fr
eedom. They left the plantation with the 
quilt during a thunderstorm, so no one could see th
em going. They used the map on the quilt to 
find North Farm, where she visited her mother. They
 wept together, but her mother said, "I am 
too sick to travel, Clara, but I am not too sick to
 dream. And I would be even sicker if you didn't 
try to run away. No one has the right to own anybod
y else. I want you to be free!" 
 
So she and Jack left that night, and got away. They
 went through the fields, crossed the forests, 
climbed down cliffs, until they got to the Ohio Riv
er. The map even told them where the water 
was shallow and narrow enough to get across. On the
 other side, they found people to help them, 
and eventually she got to Columbus Ohio, where we l
ive now, where she was taken in by the 
Kelton family who lived just outside of town. They 
were members of the Universalist Church, 
and had been helping slaves to escape for many year
s. And she smiled all day when she arrived, 
because for the first time in her life, no one else
 owned her. She owned herself. 
 
Welcoming 

 
Affirming 

a. 
UUSC JAM presentation for October 20 service
 Good morning.   I™m Steve Palm-Houser, the chair of
 the Justice Action Ministry at First 
UU.  We work to further social justice in our commu
nity and in the world at large.   
Our congregation strongly supports UUSC, the Unitar
ian Universalist Service Committee, our 
denomination™s service organization.  Like JAM, UUS
C organizes activities that both undertake 
direct service actions (like helping victims of gen
der violence in Haiti), and that promote 
systemic change (like opposing the privatization of
 water from California to Kenya). 
UUSC creates partnerships with small grassroots gro
ups working on different social justice 
projects around the world.  Recently, UUA and UUSC 
have begun to collaborate to create the 
new UU College of Social Justice, which is providin
g internships and justice training for our 
youth, and organizing congregational trips to UUSC 
projects around the world.  
Today UUSC works in four focus areas, all related t
o the dignity and worth of human beings.   
Civil liberties,
 Environmental Justice,
 Economic Justice,
 Human Rights in Humanitarian 
Disasters
  

In short, UUSC is a relatively small organization t
hat upholds all of our UU principles in some of 
the most unjust places and circumstances in the wor
ld.   
And UUSC relies heavily on us
Šon UU congregations, like this one, across the nat
ion.  Some 
25% of the members of our own congregation belong t
o UUSC, and our church also makes an 
annual corporate contribution.   

Many of you look forward to UUSC™s annual Guest At 
Your Table membership drive to join or 
renew your membership or simply make a contribution
 to UUSC.   We will be initiating that 
drive as always, next month around Thanksgiving.  B
ut like pretty much everything else in the 
world, Guest At Your Table will be changing a bit t
his year as well.  
We will not have the familiar little boxes that sit
 on the dinner table and ask for 
contributions.  But we will have Stories of Hope th
at we trust you will all read and share with 
your children.  Nothing helps us better understand 
another™s life than a good story, and this year, 
our stories are about:  

Danielle Neus
, who is helping develop urban gardening in Haiti. 
 Nelson Escobar
, who came to the US from El Salvador for political
 asylum, and is now working 
to promote labor rights. 

Malya Villard-Appolon
, who is working to end gender-based violence in Ha
iti. 
George Friday
, who is working to build coalitions among grassroo
ts organizations working for 
justice. 

So look for activities between now and the end of t
he year, including web setup and holiday 
cards in Fellowship Hall, that are related to the G
uest At Your Table membership drive.   
The very simplest way to help is to go to uusc.org.
 Go online, buy a holiday gift or two at the 
UUSC store, find online actions that you can take, 
get inspired to take a justice service trip, join 
or renew your membership, and find out all the trul
y wonderful things UUSC is doing in the 
world.   

Again, watch for activities here at church, and be 
sure to check out the UUSC website. It™s easy 
enough to remember-uusc.org.   

Thanks.  And especially if you aren™t familiar with
 UUSC, be sure to take a look.  
 
b.
                     The strongest, most effective 
form of community activism is not complicated. 
It comes from a sense of family, love and urgency. 
 It comes from a sincere 
belief that we are in this world together and must 
take care of each other, as 
well as ourselves. How different my own activism wo
uld be if every time 
something happened, I asked myself, ?What would I d
o if this was my 
family?? 
  
    
Bushra Rehman 2000
    
Singing   #1018 
vs 3-4
 
 
Communing 

 
I cannot imagine living my life,  

without dreaming while I am awake.  

Not day-dreaming.  

But real dreams, 

the sails I hoist to catch the wind,  

spiritus 
as our ancestors called it,  
to help carry me along toward a destination  

that is neither a figment of my imagination, 

nor a feel-good fantasy to absolve me from reality.
 Even if I don't get to that destination in my lifet
ime. 
I'm not afraid to dream about it. 

I'm not afraid to dream about a manner of living th
at some might disparage as impractical, or not 
likely, or beyond reach; for such thinking, I've no
ticed, always fulfills its own predictions.  
But I am not dreaming of some utopia invented by es
pecially wise and clever people,  
or some heaven on earth brought about by  

some One more powerful than human brokenness. 

No, the destination I dream of is one where people 
still struggle with all of the difficult issues 
about life and death and love and loss, as they do 
now. But they struggle cooperatively, not 
competitively. The passion for winning and the disg
race of losing are no longer seen as central to 
culture, but pushed to the edge. The idea of God, o
r Ultimacy, is no longer worshipped in the 
form of profit gained at the cost of human lives an
d health, but will only be revealed in actions of 
love which embrace every single person without exce
ption. The idea of freedom at my dream 
destination is not bound up with what I am entitled
 to, but with possibilities open to all. Who 
would ever guess that dreaming is a form of waking 
up? Or that silence is a form of amen? 
 
silence 

 
I dream of a world where family and friends are sti
ll family and friends, whom we gather to our 
hearts as we do right now, those whose love nurture
d us enough to get there, those with whom 
we struggle, those whom we miss or mourn. We are fr
ee to open our hearts and name them aloud 
or in the amen of the silence. 

 
naming 

 
Come, Music, bless our dreams and set us free. 

 
The First Reading
 is a letter from Joseph Brant, who lived during the
 Revolutionary War in this 
nation. Brant, whose birth name was  
Thayendanegea,
 was a leader in the Kanien'ke'haka 
nation, a nation called Mohawks by the colonists. T
he word Mohawk, sadly, was a cruel insult 
used by a few Algonquin people about Brant's nation
, and means "those cannibals." He wrote 
this letter in response to a question from Thomas E
ddy in 1803.
  
 
In the government you call civilized, the happiness
 of the people is constantly sacrificed to the 
splendor of empire. Hence the origin of your codes 
of criminal and civil laws; hence your 
dungeons and prisons. We have no prisons; we have n
o pompous parade of courts; we have no 
written laws; and yet judges are as highly revered 
among us as they are among you, and their 
decisions are as much regarded. 

 
We have among us no exalted villains above the cont
rol of our laws. Daring wickedness is here 
never allowed to triumph over helpless innocence. T
he estates of widows and orphans are never 
devoured by enterprising swindlers. 

 
We have no robbery under the pretext of the law. 

 
The Second Reading
 comes from the most excellent book, Witnessing Whit
eness, written by 
Shelly Tochluk, for educators, about which I cannot
 offer high enough praise. It dates from 2008.  
 
When participating in debates regarding anything ev
en remotely sounding like affirmative 
action, (some) white folks regularly speak of peopl
e of color taking white people™s places. 
Generally assumed is the idea that the person of co
lor (must be) less qualified and less deserving. 
Within these issues, we see white folks protecting 
a historically created position of privilege, 
such that any mandates for the creation of an overa
ll level playing field are seen as personally 
injurious and unfair to white people. This focuses 
on the individual instead of the collective, so 
that white people only see the enactment of imagine
d race neutrality in the present, instead of 
witnessing how historical, systemic inequity contin
ues to shape generations of people™s lives. 
 
Second, the history of whiteness exists just under 
the surface of every debate concerning 
American values, multiculturalism, and diversity. V
ery often, resistance against the language of 
?American values? is quickly deemed unpatriotic. Bu
t knowing the history helps us understand 
why the same person can value democracy and freedom
, and yet resist calling them ?American 
values? at the same time. 

 
Knowing this history helps us understand why, to ma
ny people, ?American values? suggests 
support for individualistic, competitive consumers 
who privilege objectivity  to the detriment of 
people who value a cooperative, communal lifestyle,
 a resistance to environmental degradation, 
and indigenous spiritual belief systems. In short, 
knowing this history complicates our use of the 
term ?American values? as we recognize that many as
sociate those very values with oppressive 
and degrading treatment of people considered not wh
ite, not Western, or not modern enough to 
fit within our capitalistic, consumer-driven societ
y. 
 
In our larger community, when we increasingly notic
e white privilege and employ active 
responses, it would mean that we really are making 
great strides. One thing we would have to 
prepare for, however, is accountability. 

 
Sermon 

(clap) 

So, my grandfather Nazzareno was born in 1886. When
 he was alive, the painters Monet and 
Degas were still working, as was my beloved Van Gog
h. Emily Dickinson was still 

alive...barely. Albert Einstein was a child of seve
n.  The Apache leader Goyakla, or Geronimo, 
surrendered to the US Military in that year and was
 a prisoner of war until he died in 1909.  
Harriet Tubman, Frederick Douglass, and Booker T. W
ashington were all going strong. And also 
in that year, twenty African American teens were ma
ssacred in a courthouse in Carollton 
Mississippi by a group of fifty white vigilantes wh
o just didn't want any black man accusing a 
white man of murder in a court of law. 

 
But those people and events were not part of my gra
ndfather's culture. He was not a citizen of the 
world, he was part of a small mountain village in t
he Appennines. When he first immigrated to 
this country, my grandfather Nazzareno had never se
en a man with African heritage, had no idea 
who Geronimo was, or Harriet Tubman, had never hear
d of the state Mississippi, or the river, for 
that matter. He had never heard the word "race," an
d would not have understood what it meant. 
He never did, later in life, in fact. He could not 
read nor write, not one day in school. He had 
never seen a train until he first rode on one to le
ave Italy in 1902 to work in the coal mines here.  
He sometimes packed a gun. He worked in mines since
 he was 9 years old.  
 
My grandfather Nazzareno came from a totally differ
ent culture than I was born into, even 
though I am his blood grandson. He was born only 38
 years after the Italian Revolution. I was 
born 173 years after the US Revolution. He had hear
d the revolutionary names of Garibaldi and 
Manzini. I knew of Washington and Jefferson. He kne
w abject poverty in Italy, but had never 
even heard of the concept of slavery. I knew someth
ing about slavery from school, and 
understood very well that he remained poor in this 
country. 
 
His life was formed and shaped in 
his
 culture.  
My life was formed and shaped in 
mine.  
 
(clap) 

So, over twenty-five years ago, I asked my intern A
xel to come with me to the ministers™ retreat 
in Southern California. I thought it important for 
him to get to know his colleagues early in his 
career. As we drove through the desert, I got up th
e courage to ask Axel an impertinent question. 
You see, Axel was born and raised in Germany. He ha
d not attended a Unitarian Universalist 
congregation when he was young, but was active the 
Frei-Religiösen Gemeinde, The Free 
Religious Community, a progressive, humanistic reli
gious set of congregations in Germany. 
Axel was 24 when he served as my intern. A mature, 
skilled, and thoughtful young man. But I 
can do math well enough, and by doing the math, I f
igured out that if he was 24, then his parents 
and grandparents had lived through the Second World
 war while in Germany. My question to 
Axel was this, "Do young Germans of your generation
 ever talk with your families about their 
experiences in the war years?" 

 
Axel was happy to talk about it, and he told me som
e moving stories about how the war affected 
his family. But, he told me something far 
more 
remarkable, as far as I'm concerned. He told me 
how Germans of his generation worked on 
their own 
self-awareness of what transpired during 
the war. They didn't think it mattered if they were
 not born yet when it all happened.  
 
Axel spoke of what sounded like a sort of velvet re
volution that few knew outside the nation. 
You see, two Jewish psychologists, Alexander and Ma
rgarete Mitscherlich wrote a book on 

German cultural identities called "
Our Inabilty to Mourn: Principles of Collective Beh
avior."
 It 
spoke of the whole history of Germany from an analy
tical perspective having to do with the 
collective culture and psychology.  They made clear
 that the post war guilt was not dealt with 
adequately in any way. The whole issue of war crime
s and the Shoah, or Holocaust, were 
completely left out of school history books and con
versations, so that generations just once 
removed from Axel had no idea what a concentration 
camp was, or who this Hitler guy was. 
When Axel attended university however, this book 
Our Inability to Mourn
 was gaining a wide 
circulation, especially in the schools. Students in
 those schools studied the book deeply, and 
discussed its assertions with fellow students.   Ma
ny of them dared to hand it to their parents and 
grandparents. Some resisted it, but others formed s
tudy groups all over the land. These lasted for 
a decade. Articles were written, lectures offered..
.and the pattern of culture which had been so 
destructive for so long was faced full on. As a res
ult, Germany is a new country. 
 
I saw this new country clearly when I was in Berlin
 to preach to the Unitarian Universalists there 
three years ago.  In Berlin I noticed 1. the larges
t Holocaust Memorial I had ever seen any place, 
right next to the Brandenburg Gate, the center of B
erlin, and near their parliament building.  
 
2. I noticed the names of Jews and others etc. who 
had perished in the Shoah, cast in metal 
plates, that were screwed into the stoops of the bu
ilding where they had been taken, or, onto the 
walls of the buildings that replaced their houses, 
destroyed in the war. The Germans came to 
understand that it was individual lives which were 
destroyed and which were to be 
commemorated. The numbers 6 million or 11 million o
verwhelm. The name of Ernst and Anna 
Bernstein and their two children evokes grief. 

 
3. I spent a whole day in the largest and most arch
itecturally compelling Holocaust museum that 
I have seen anywhere, including here in the US, whe
re I have visited three. My visit there in 
Berlin seared my soul.  

 
4. I saw synagogues and schools being restored and 
rebuilt, as highly respected German Jewish 
cultural life flourished in all quarters of the cit
y. 
 
All this from folks who were not yet born at the ti
me of the war, but who went through the 
process of self-study, increasing their self-awaren
ess, dealing with the hard emotions of shame 
and guilt face on, keeping their careful accountabi
lity to, and with, all the individual sovereign 
lives who had been executed during those days. Live
s as important to them as my life is to me, or 
your life is to you. 

 
(clap) 

So, here I am in the United States. A remarkable cu
lture founded on the ideas of freedom for all, 
where everyone can openly dream of happiness, and l
ive their lives in pursuit of those dreams. 
And yet, as a fish living in this water, I sometime
s don't see the culture. Like water, it™s often 
invisible to me, like it is to a fish in the tank. 
I sometimes don't remember that the people who 
lived on this land first, and the people who coloni
zed this land, and the people who were brought 
over here against their will, often perceive the hi
story of this nation differently.   
They more easily see the mud and scum in the water.
  
I know this: the people who colonized this land did
 two seminal things to muddy the water...they 
brought people here who did not want to be here, an
d then created the word 
white
 to apply to 
some of the earlier colonists from several northern
 European nations, regardless of their 
nationality or ethnicity. They very well knew the w
ord 
black
 went back to Roman times, so in 
order to set up profitable conflict, the contrastin
g word 
white
 was invented by people of means, 
in Virginia, to create an artificial enmity that ha
d not been there before.  Around this time also, 
those who lived here 
first
 were being identified not as natives, but as 
savages
, which meant back 
then just what it means today. Tens of thousands we
re killed deliberately, as well as, yes, 
accidently through disease. Native villages were of
ten burned to the ground, and their religious 
practices were condemned as superstitious. The slav
ery period and the theft of native civilization 
and culture are both disgraces of our American hist
ory. Both are tied to the word 
white
. And as 
Sandy Tochluk says in the second reading: "the hist
ory of whiteness exists just under the surface 
of every debate concerning American values."  

 
Often, when these two sad events in the history of 
this nation are brought up,  I've heard people 
say: "Time to stop bringing this up. The days of sl
avery are over, and the Indians are depicted 
more fairly now, so I don't know why you keep raisi
ng this issue. It was terrible, sure, and I 
know things aren't perfect yet, but I wasn't even b
orn when all this happened, so I had nothing to 
do with it." 

 
Well, look, I wasn't born when the largest mass lyn
ching in American history happened either.  
1891. New Orleans. 11 men. All Italian immi-grants.
 But my grandfather Nazzareno was alive. 
He was five years old.  And when I was born, I was 
born into a culture where this kind of event 
had been practiced for decades. Nazzareno immigrate
d to this nation, and lived in 
this 
culture, 
not the one he was born in. But as I said, I 
was
 born here. Born into this culture. A racialized 
culture. It™s the water I swim in. And this culture
, in its present day form, seems to have retained 
some of the same cultural themes noticed and superb
ly described by Mohawk author Joseph 
Brant in 1803. 

 
The happiness of the people is constantly sacrifice
d to the splendor of empire,
 he wrote of the 
American settlers culture in 1803. In 2013, I keep 
on trying to remember how many years of my 
life when my nation has not been at war with folks 
around the world, hot, cold, declared or 
undeclared. War, the business of empires. 
We have no prisons,
 and you do, Brant then notices. I 
wonder if Brant would just faint away if he came ba
ck to life to find out that our 21st century 
prisons are run for profit. Run by private firms. A
nd there are more prisons and prisoners than 
ever before in American history. Mostly people of A
frican American descent too. The New Jim 
Crow, as Columbus professor Michelle Alexander puts
 it, as if the old Jim Crow wasn't shameful 
enough. Brant then wrote: 
We have among us no exalted villains above the cont
rol of our laws. 
No Wall Street darlings who destroyed lives by thei
r decisions, but still go to work every day. 
No Madoffs refusing to think he will be caught, and
 rather surprised when he was. Brant 
continues: 
Daring wickedness is here 
(among the Mohawk, he means)
 neve
r allowed to triumph 
over helpless innocence.
 The estates of widows and orphans are never devoure
d by enterprising 
swindlers.
 But in America they are today. The housing fiasco,
 mortgage thefts, the different 
health care systems for different classes, have des
troyed whole families, as well as widows and 
orphans. Brant sums it up in his last sentence. 
We have no robbery under the pretext of the law.  
1803, folks. 1803. Those are the American values he
 witnessed. 

 
(clap) 

So, Sherry Tochluk tells us: "Very often, resistanc
e against the language of 'American values' is 
quickly deemed unpatriotic. People like Brant, I su
ppose she is talking about, or people like me 
offering this sermon. Or maybe she means people lik
e Sweet Clara, who resisted being kept as a 
slave. Who quilted a map and escaped. Maybe she was
 resisting American values too. Maybe she 
was unpatriotic for running away. Maybe natives who
 keep their religious cultures alive, despite 
their practices being deemed superstitious by both 
Euro-American believing Christians and 
secular critics alike, also risk being labeled un-p
atriotic. Maybe the people at the UU Service 
Committee that Steve mentioned, who are working wit
h indigenous people, are unpatriotic 
because they don't drop down aid from on high in Am
erican heaven, but work side-by-side with 
the people of Haiti and Central America to solve pr
oblems together which affect us all, them and 
us. Maybe it™s unpatriotic to treat people who are 
different from me in the way I would treat my 
family if they were suffering some onslaught of inj
ustice, to quote Bushra Rehman's affirmation. 
 
(clap) 

So, here's what I think. I rather think that Americ
an values...those dreams of happiness, that 
freedom...got distorted along the way, but that the
 distortion is not permanent. I rather think that 
working together to face the totality of American h
istory honestly, like most Germans of Axel's 
generation did with German history, is a start. I t
hink for me to mourn for what the cultural 
distortions of my national culture have done, helps
 me to begin to make amends, even if I have 
never shot a gun, or enslaved anyone. I rather thin
k that Euro-Americans like me (and by the 
1940s Italians were finally considered 
white even 
though they were not considered to be white 
when my grandfather arrived) could take the time to
 be accountable to people of color. I could 
ask them to work with me, as together we question t
he cracks in the overarching culture we have 
received, and which has hurt so many. I would like 
my descendants, in blood or in spirit, to be 
one day shaped by a culture that affirms them for w
ho they are, guarantees freedom and access to 
everyone, and begins to understand that freedom doe
sn't really mean anything at all if it applies 
only to a few, and not everyone. I bet my grandfath
er Nazzareno, were he to come back to life, 
would still want to immigrate to a land like that. 

 
Offering  
  
Returning 

Oh slowly, slowly, like the autumn trees around us,
 everything turns and changes, even us, even 
the cities, even the weather, even the world, even 
our doubts, even our worries, even our habits, 
even our fears. O slowly, slowly everyone, yes ever
yone, even you, even me, can awaken, 
and dream their dreams, and be free in ways that de
epen the meaning of the word love at last. 
 
Hymn 342 O Slowly Slowly  

  

 
