   Ecstasy?
 August 30
th
 2009 
Rev. Mark Belletini 
 
Gathering 

Welcoming 

Centering 

Kindling 

Opening:
  
We are here 

to link to something larger than ourselves,  

the vastness of history, the wonder of galaxies,  

the mystery of Love, and the ecstasy of truth.. 

And so we claim this moment with these words: 

 
Mindful that we share a common world,  

but approach that world in different ways, we begin
 our celebration together by 
kindling our promise of mutual honesty, attentivene
ss, and deep courtesy. May we 
become more proficient at gratitude and awareness, 
that we might more deeply 
embody the kind of justice and peace which embraces
 everyone on earth. 
 
Singing #398 To See The World 

Ingathering  The Wonderful Happens by Cynthia Rylan
t 
Greeting 

Affirming #499 and #337 

Communing
  
There it is! The world! The earth! 

Do you see it? It™s round and blue and green. 

Watch it spin, wobbling round the sun, 

a circle dance, dip and leap, bow and bend. 

Watch the sun too, circling at the edge of 

our great disc of stars, threading its way 

allemand left, allemand right, all the way 

toward the constellation of Hercules 

in the merest flash of 75,000 years! 

There it is! The world! The earth! 

Do you see it? A misty vast patch of 

molecules and quarks, atoms and yet-to-be 

named particles and empty, empty, empty 

space all woven together to make mums and peppers a
nd whales and viruses and gingko 
trees and us. Keep your eyelids closed while you lo
ok.  
Use your 
real
 eye, the one inside you, 
the one you use to see children rollicking 

on the lawn or grandma rocking on the porch 

   remembering everything; the one you use to see a lo
ver™s face, or a beautiful hand folded in 
a lap, now or long ago. That eye. Your wonder-eye. 
And now look very carefully, and if 
you™re very lucky, you™ll catch the barest glimpse 
of the shadow of the silence as it passes 
by. 

 
silence 

 
Open your wonder eye again. Look for the loves of y
our life, the family and friends, alive 
or long gone, whose image quickens your heart. Bow 
to them with an inner bow, and say 
their names inside or whisper them aloud–and say th
anks to them for all they have done so 
that you have lived to see this day, and gaze upon 
them once more for a moment. 
 
naming 

 
Now let eye give way to ear, wonder eye to wonder e
ar. Let the dance of atoms and 
galaxies and globes give way to the dance music of 
dancers– the music of the spheres 
yielding at last to the music of musicians. 

 
 Readings
  
The First Reading
 comes from Marganita Laski™s classic book Ecstasy i
n Secular and 
Religious Experiences, written in the early sixties
. She was an atheist who succeeded in 
writing a classic text on the ecstatic experience i
n all of its forms, religious and non-
religious. 

 
I do not think it sensible to ignore, as most ratio
nalists have done, ecstatic experiences 
and the emotions and ideas to which they give rise.
 To ignore or deny the importance of 
ecstatic experiences is to leave to the irrational 
the interpretation of what many people 
believe to be of supreme value... I do not believe 
that to seek a rational explanation of 
these experiences is in any way to denigrate them, 
but rather that a rational explanation 
may prove at least as awe-inspiring as earlier inte
rpretations. 
 
The Second Reading
 comes from Lying Awake
 by Mark Salzman, a novel written in 
2000. Some of you may have read his novel Iron and 
Silk, or seen the film of the same 
name in which he starred, playing himself. He™s a f
riend of my friend Jim Vetter, and I 
met him years ago, before he started writing all of
 his wonderful novels. This novel is 
unusual. It™s about a cloistered nun who has ecstat
ic visions which move everyone 
around her. A doctor discovers that her ecstatic vi
sions are stimulated by a brain 
disorder that is operable. Despite her sense of joy
 at her experience of ecstasy, she 
humbly undergoes the surgery and loses her visions.
 This reading is taken from her 
recovery period. 

 
She dressed quickly. The wound over her ear had clo
sed, but her heart gaped. Her doctor 
was right. Life after epilepsy seemed dull. 

   She felt as if she had tumbled out of a sacred moun
tain into a ruined village. The cloister 
buildings looked institutional, piety showed signs 
of wear, and the psalms read like the 
libretto of an opera delivered as a speech. God™s p
resence was replaced by an atmosphere 
of human compromise. 

 
Sermon
  
Lots of things happened this week.  

 
Personally, first off, I got to hear a Muslim frien
d grousing about the lunar calendar used 
by his tradition. The moon sometimes puts the great
 fasting month of Ramadan in the 
winter, and sometimes, in the summer. If you have t
o fast during all the daylight hours, 
December is clearly going to be your month of choic
e! We had a great talk about the 
benefits of fasting, and his culture which supports
 that religious discipline. But was 
frustrated his culture refuses to consider changing
 its calendar so that it can be even more 
supportive of this act of fasting. 

 
My best friend who was in town last week for a visi
t–some of you met him– is soon 
going to Jerusalem to study Torah with an orthodox 
rabbi over Rosh Hashanah. While he 
was here, we talked about how his shift from a Refo
rm/ Reconstructionist Jewish temple 
to a more Orthodox 
shul
 had enriched his life with a change toward a cultu
re of more 
traditional rituals that are deepening his spiritua
l life as he weathers the tragic California 
economy right now. 

 
And, of course, beyond the personal, there is my la
rger life. All of us are aware, I 
suppose, that Senator Ted Kennedy died this week, a
nd his life was lifted up every day 
across the media. His culture too was illumined, bo
th in the Irish Catholic prayers we 
heard, and in the form of a televised Irish wake wh
ich, I have to say, sometimes 
resembled a comedy show with a flag-draped coffin p
resent more than anything else. 
Remarkable! But humor at a wake is a part of Irish 
culture I™m glad has not changed. 
 
And again, more personally, since my diagnosis with
 diabetes last June, I have found 
myself immersed–to my doctor™s delight–in a whole n
ew culture unknown to me 
previously. A diabetic culture of sugar-limited rec
ipes, portion changes, more frequent 
eating, hanging out in the supplement aisles of Who
le Foods looking for chromium and 
bitter melon extract, and grazing on dozens of book
s with titles like 
Zen and the Art of 
Diabetes Maintenance.   

 
Conversation about culture and culture change  is a
ll around us in other ways too. The 
over-the-top resistance to any rational national he
alth care conversation, with folks 
shouting vulgarities and packing switchblades, the 
continuous dehumanization of same-
sex couples who want to get legally married–culture
 change gets some folks so upset 
that they™ll say and do almost anything to keep the
 change from coming. Change can be 
terrifying. Others sometimes find blessings in cult
ure change, like me with my diabetes. 
Strange to say, I™ve actually found it exciting, al
most joyful, to be creative and come up 
with new ways of cooking that totally satisfy my go
urmet taste-buds, but successfully 

   keep the cholesterol, sugars and refined flours at 
bay. Not an easy task for a man of 
Italian heritage raised on buttery polenta and past
a, but so far, a decidedly giddy one. 
 
Cultural change featured in my summer activities to
o. At General Assembly this year, our 
annual Unitarian Universalist national gathering, I
 attended many workshops, had 
splendid meals and talks with colleagues. But the h
ighlight for me was a most unusual 
conversation about cultural change– and ecstasy. 

 
It was at a dinner for the senior ministers of larg
e Unitarian Universalist congregations, 
of which this congregation is a good example.  I al
ways enjoy these dinners–the issues 
faced by larger congregations are simply different 
than those faced by smaller or medium 
sized congregations, and it™s just great to be able
 to talk about them with colleagues 
without having to translate. 

 
Well, this particular dinner, I was seated next to 
the most wonderful man, Marlin 
Lavanhar, who is the senior minister at All Souls C
hurch in Tulsa, one of our largest 
congregations. Jay Leach was there, our minister in
 Charlotte, and Galen Guengerich, 
senior minister at All Souls in New York, and sever
al others. Marlin began by joyfully 
telling us all the story of what happened at All So
uls in Tulsa last year. 
 
Seems that a Pentecostal church in Tulsa, pastored 
by the dynamic Bishop Carlton 
Pearson, had simply fallen apart. Because the good 
bishop, once the apple of Oral 
Roberts™ eye, had become convinced that a loving Go
d could never damn people to hell 
forever. Anyone. Ever. In short, he became a classi
c Universalist. And as a man of 
integrity, Bishop Pearson naturally shared his conv
iction with his own church, which had 
the hopeful name New Dimensions. Most of them, sadl
y, didn™t buy the Universalist 
gospel, and preferred the old dimension of hellfire
 kindled by God™s vengeance. So fewer 
and fewer people showed up to church. Vibrant thous
ands became a few hundred 
stragglers. Thus, Bishop Pearson gave up the buildi
ng he helped build, and found himself 
having to rent quarters to preach to the remnant wh
o shared his theological viewpoint. He 
approached All Souls Unitarian in Tulsa, and asked 
to rent their spacious worship center 
for their summer services. Marlin graciously agreed
. The Pentecostal congregation 
arrived sufficiently earlier on Sunday than the mai
n All Souls summer service. To 
Marlin™s surprise, however, some of the All Souls™ 
folks started to come to that early 
service, where there was shouting, waving, dancing–
and speaking in tongues. After all, 
it 
was
 a charismatic style service. And some of the Unita
rian Universalists, largely Euro-
American, found themselves entranced by this boiste
rous style of worship in an African 
American congregation. A totally different culture 
than they were used to, 
even though they shared much of the theology. But s
ome of them just loved it. They 
loved the let-go-of-everything ecstasy welling up i
n the service, the sudden upwelling of 
improvisational singing.  

 
Others, you may not be surprised, didn™t like it at
 all, and were very uncomfortable. Some 
were disturbed because even a 
rationalist
 interpretation of speaking in tongues–and they 
do 
exist–was not helpful to them. They simply felt it 
was too much off the deep end for 
them. 

    
Nevertheless, while Bishop Pearson eventually left 
Tulsa, to accept a clergy call 
elsewhere from the liberal United Church of Christ,
 his remnant flock did not leave with 
him, but rather, stayed in Tulsa–and joined the UU 
church. 
 
Now mind you, the Tulsa church looks a lot like a t
raditional Unitarian Meeting House 
near Boston. Clear glass, white walls, plain design
, a standard rectangular building like 
you would see with high steeple poised on the Green
 of many a New England town. 
 
But inside, besides the elegant, poetic and rationa
l sermons offered by Marlin, there was 
singing and shouting and glossalalia–tongue speakin
g. Something so totally foreign 
from traditional Unitarian worship in New England t
hat the old saw about apples and 
oranges doesn™t begin to express the difference. 

 
Marlin told us all this at the dinner table. He was
 planning on telling the whole Assembly 
later, and there is a recording of that session whi
ch is making the rounds here at the 
church. But we, his colleagues, were fascinated rig
ht then and there, and engaged Marlin 
with our observations and questions and yes, ?buts.
? And so began a conversation about 
ecstasy in religion.  

 
Yes. Ecstasy. Not the drug, of course. But a sense 
of transport and excitement that has 
been found in many religious traditions around the 
world. And, as Marganita Laski 
reminds us by the mere title of her book, ecstasy i
s found in many secular, non-religious 
areas of life as well.  

 
The word 
ecstasy
 is almost self-defining, if you go back to its roo
ts. Ek-Stasis are the two 
Greek words which compose the singular word in Engl
ish; and they mean standing 
(stasis) outside (ek), that is, standing outside on
eself.  
 
Ecstasy has many shapes and forms–from Sufi dancers
 whirling during Ramadan or 
Jewish men on Purim spinning around till they™re be
yond dizzy, to the raptures of 
medieval nuns like Catherine of Siena or Teresa of 
Avila, who both found literate ways 
of trying to describe their transforming experience
s of ecstasy, always tending to use 
words like 
fire
 and 
flow
 and 
light.
 John of the Cross, another medieval saint of liter
ary 
accomplishments,  compared his sense of ecstasy to 
tender love-making in the middle of 
a monastery garden at night. Secular writers also d
escribe ecstatic experience– English 
poet William Wordsworth in his long poem, 
A Few Lines Written Above Tinturn Abbey,
 which we recited a small portion of earlier, common
ly experienced such transforming 
elation, a sense of connection to all things, a sen
se of permeability where he felt as if the 
whole universe was rushing in as he was rushing out
side of himself. Many other poets, 
from Tennyson to Szymborksa, and religious leaders 
like Martin Luther King, Jr. also 
described experiences of ecstasy. That trip King to
ok to ?the mountain top? where he saw 
?the promised land? wasn™t just a stray biblical im
age he was using, or worse, a 
geographic site, but it was deeply felt, ecstatic e
xperience, an empowering transport 
transforming his worries and fears, and empowered h
im to do his work, which he only 
put into words in a sermon later on. 

    
Marganita Laski, the scholar of ecstasy I quoted, w
as very clear about her theology–she 
was an atheist. But she didn™t think that ecstasy i
n all of its forms was somehow foolish, 
an escape mechanism of some sort for people who are
 afraid of life and hide in a dubious 
Deity. Instead, she suggested that states of ecstas
y could be reasonably studied; and she 
was critical of rationalists who dismissed it all a
s mere escapism, or even a form of 
mental illness. 

 
Laski theorized instead that states of ecstasy are 
often deeply related to our capacity for 
creativity, our remarkable ability to solve problem
s. I would have to agree, in part based 
on ecstatic experiences I have had in my own life. 
I™m talking about those smaller 
experiences of wonder when I stand rapt under stars
, or hear our Chalice choir sing those 
heart-breaking modulations in Fauré™s 
Agnus Dei
, to more significant experiences of 
ecstasy which really transformed my life over a tim
e through steady reflection on the 
meaning of those experiences. 

 
Sometimes, however, I have also had brief experienc
es of being outside myself when I 
have been out dancing with friends for five hours a
t the old I-Beam in San Francisco, or 
even longer  ago, participating in exhausting Bulga
rian folk-dancing circles down at the 
Detroit Institute of Arts while in college. Or more
 recently, just 
watching
 modern dancers 
like Bill T. Jones or Lar Lubevitch leap on the sta
ge. These were 
not
 problem solving 
activities exactly, so I don™t agree with Laski at 
every turn; but they 
were
 pure pleasure, 
akin perhaps to the orgasmic experiences of great l
ovemaking, which I think of as the 
most common ecstatic experiences easily know to mos
t people in their lives. But even if 
such raptures solve no problems, they are, I think,
 still fairly described as ecstatic 
experiences. 

 
But what about the charge of mental disturbance?  M
ark Salzman™s novel, 
Lying Awake,
 is about just that question. A nun who experiences 
ecstatic experiences all the time 
undergoes surgery for a kind of epilepsy, and immed
iately afterward, her rapture is gone. 
He writes:  
She felt as if she had tumbled out of a sacred moun
tain into a ruined village. 
The cloister buildings looked institutional, piety 
showed signs of wear, and the psalms 
read like the libretto of an opera delivered as a s
peech. God™s presence was replaced by 
an atmosphere of human compromise. 

 
Her rapture? A misfire in her brain. And this is in
deed true of some other forms of 
rapture. Many folks who suffer from various forms o
f mental illness routinely hear the 
voice of God sounding in their head, and it™s real 
to them, until the medication takes 
effect. Or they feel a deep ecstatic experience bec
ause of a brain dysfunction, and 
unlike
 the nun in the story, refuse to take any medicine s
o that they can continue to live with that 
riotous sense of rapture full time. They often end 
up destroying their lives because they 
never are able to put their feet on the ground.  

 
But Laski is quick to point out that while some for
ms of ecstasy are indeed pathological, 
rapture far more resembles a universal experience l
ike falling in love. You can, you 
know, tamper with a section of the brain and make 
love
 disappear too. But who wants to 

   stamp out love, for everybody, once and for all, ju
st because it isn™t always pleasant or 
healthy every time, or sometimes has pathological e
xpressions? 
 
As we ministers talked at the table, we spoke of ec
stasies we had known. I spoke of the 
ecstasy I felt during certain rituals in my childho
od faith, like when the communion bread 
was placed into a silver mandala and we simply star
ed at for an hour–.or hours. I almost 
felt as if I was lifting off the ground. Makes no s
ense to me now, but my experience was 
real as a child–and yes, culturally shaped. 

 
Just like speaking in tongues is culturally shaped.
 And NOT speaking in tongues is 
culturally shaped, as in all Unitarian Universalist
 congregations that I know 
save
 Tulsa. It 
would be pretty arrogant of us, wouldn™t it, to thi
nk of ourselves as the ?default? culture, 
the ?neutral? culture, as if we ourselves are not c
ulturally shaped. 
 
Although there is some suggestion by scholars of re
ligion that speaking in tongues is 
historically rooted in some Yoruba African religiou
s practices of trance that over the 
generations survived into the twentieth century whe
n Pentecostalism technically began, 
its also true that many historic African American c
hurches are simply against the 
practice, so its not really an ethnically rooted pr
actice by any means. 
 
It 
is
 a cultural practice–but within a religious context
. Marlin, the senior minister at 
Tulsa, is perfectly happy to apply rational underst
andings of this form of cultured ecstasy. 
It doesn™t have to be the Holy Spirit making people
 speak in different languages, but 
simply the mind letting its censoring mechanism go 
to sleep and allowing an unconscious 
flow of pure phonemes, syllables, the ones we first
 heard as children, come out of our 
mouths. I can speak that way at will, actually. But
 so can Ella Fitzgerald when she is 
singing–blissfully, ecstatically–scat music. Scat m
usic, a form of jazz improvisation, is 
not, I hope I don™t have to remind you–an illness o
f the mind.  But it 
is
 a form of play, 
as technically, all worship forms–sermons, singing,
 silence– are a kind of play, play 
wed via our Jewish roots to soulful education, yes.
 But play nevertheless. I even said to 
Marlin, ?Do you think there is room in your congreg
ation for the kind of ecstasy around 
the communion bread that I felt as a child?? He gav
e it some thought and said: ?Maybe. 
Who knows?? His eyes twinkled, and he smiled his gr
acious and always warm smile. 
?Maybe on Thursday nights?? But what I am saying is
 that when people feel ecstasy, 
culture shapes the form of that ecstasy. And cultur
e does shape a thousand forms of 
ecstasy. Can they all live together? 

 
I know. I know. You don™t like the words. Ecstasy. 
Rapture. Flow. Why not just say we 
all experience the world as wonderful sometimes? Be
cause it is. Just like our story said 
this morning. 

 
Well, fine. Use whatever words you want. Or, like t
he great ecstatics in some traditions, 
refuse to use any words at all to describe your exp
eriences of deep wonder when you are, 
as it were, standing outside yourself for a moment.
  
   But do meditate on what cultural forces shape you, 
no matter what words you use. 
Family, ethnic, religious, secular. Do try to imagi
ne what you would feel like if other 
cultural forms could be wed to Unitarian Universali
sm in this congregation. How would 
you deal with that? Is your own cultural style real
ly without critique?  Or question? 
 
I™m not offering final answers this morning obvious
ly. And I have a few thousand more 
questions I™d like to explore with you. And with Ma
rlin and my other colleagues. And 
with myself.  

 
But do wonder, this week, about this ecstasy busine
ss. Do wonder about cultural change 
and how it affects you. Do wonder about the cultura
l changes in your life as I wonder 
about mine–diabetes, friends wrestling with their r
eligious deeps, life and death.  Do 
wonder about culture, and ask yourself what the for
ces are that make you open or closed 
to change, to ecstasy, to other forms of wonder. 

 
I think all of this wonder could actually prove to 
be quite–well–you know–wonderful! 
 
Offering
: To bless the world we must also bless ourselves, 
for we are part of the world, 
and to nurture ourselves as we allow ourselves to d
eepen, become more conscious and 
aware, we support this home for the heart which emb
races us.  There are many ways to 
support this place–pledges, time, wisdom–this is bu
t one way.  But we offer this 
offering now. Thank you for all you do for our shar
ed community. 
 
Concerto for Soloist and Ecstatic Words
  
Spirit flowing, spirit flowing 

not obstructed, not dammed up, flowing, flowing, li
ke comets in the sky, 
or a thousand shooting stars, like fire leaping, 

like dancers leaping or children playing, 

like dervishes whirling or singers swaying. 

Flowing, flowing, like birds on wing, 

like flowers rising up from roots and opening, like
 the waves of the river, 
flowing toward an ocean of justice, a lake of peace
, but flowing, flowing, alive, alive, 
alive, amen. 

 
Singing  

Blessing  

Celebrating 

 
 
