 12008-1-27 Grief as a Spiritual Path.doc 

Mark Belletini 

 
Opening Words 
  
We are here 

after a week of cold days 

to worship, to lift up our lives beyond the cold 

that we might know sustaining inner warmth 

and together create anew a sacred circle 

of welcome, blessing and peace. So we begin: 

 



???
ˆ
?
 
Sequence 

 
When the wind is cold, the sky stormy,  

I am still becoming what I am becoming. 

I am still me. 

When the bell tolls or the lake-waters 

fall flat and calm beyond the sand bar, 

I am still becoming what I am becoming. 

I am still me. 

When I™m not quite sure what to do next, 

or when I am so confident I scare myself, 

I am still becoming what I am becoming. 

I am still me. 

When I am bewildered or when I am sure, 

I am still becoming what I am becoming. 

I am still me. 

When I can™t imagine what the answer is, 

let alone the question, or when I can respond 

to every request with skill and a bow, 

I am still becoming what I am becoming. 

I am still me. 

When I am in pain; or when I am trembling 

with pleasure before the circle of the moon, 

I am still becoming what I am becoming. 

I am still me. 

When I am speaking, or listening, or reading, or 

singing, or sitting in a common silence, 

I am still becoming what I am becoming. 

I am still me. 

 
 2silence 

 
When I am alone, or circling with many, 

I am still becoming what I am becoming. 

I am still me. 

When I remember everyone who ever loved me, 

or the faces of people who hurt me, or whom I have 
hurt, when I see before me again 
those whom I dearly miss,  

I am still becoming what I am becoming. 

I am still me. 

May this opportunity to remember and speak 

the names of these people who have helped me to be 
me, and to become, be a blessing.  
 
naming 

 
When I sing, or keep silence, or listen to music 

I am still me. But I am a me who is moved–
  
Readings 

 
The First Reading comes from David Wolpe™s book Mak
ing Loss Matter: Creating 
Meaning in Difficult Times
, 1999 
 
?A great religious tradition does not deny the pain
 of loss.  In the words of the Kotzker 
Rebbe, ‚The only whole heart is a broken one.™  No 
awake spirit can move through this 
world without enduring a broken heart.  There is no
thing real that makes life painless.  
Accepting the pain of living, knowing one™s heart w
ill Œ and should Œ be broken, is the 
beginning of wisdom.? 

 
 The Second Reading is a poem, called
 The Hug
 by Tess Gallagher
 1984
  
A woman is reading a poem on the street 

and another woman stops to listen.  We stop too, 

with our arms around each other.  The poem 

is being read and listened to out here 

in the open.  Behind us no one is entering or leavi
ng the houses. 
 
Suddenly a hug comes over me and I'm  

giving it to you, like a variable star shooting lig
ht off to make itself comfortable, then 
subsiding.  I finish but keep on holding 

you.  A man walks up to us and we know he hasn't co
me out of nowhere, but if he could, 
he would have.  He looks homeless because of how 

he needs.  "Can I have one of those?" he asks you, 
and I feel you nod.  I'm surprised, 
surprised you don't tell him how it is - that I'm y
ours, only yours, etc., exclusive as a nose 
to its face.  Love - that's what we're talking abou
t, love that nabs you with "for me only" 

 3and holds on. 

 
So I walk over to him and put my arms around him an
d try to hug him like I mean it.  
He's got an overcoat on so thick I can't feel him p
ast it.  I'm starting the hug and thinking, 
"How big a hug is this supposed to be? How long sha
ll I hold this hug?"  Already we 
could be eternal, his arms falling over my shoulder
s, my hands not meeting behind his 
back, he is so big! 

 
I put my head into his chest and snuggle in.  I lea
n into him.  I lean my blood and my 
wishes into him.  He stands for it.  This is his an
d he's starting to give it back so well I 
don't know if my lover has walked away or what, or 
if the woman is still reading the 
poem, or the houses -what about them? - the houses.
  
Clearly, a little permission is a dangerous thing. 
 But when you hug someone you want it to be a master
piece of connection, the way the 
button on his coat will leave the imprint of a plan
et in my cheek when I walk away,   
when I try to find some place to go back to. 

 
Sermon: 

 
Wendy:  

 
"We bereaved are not alone,"
 wrote Helen Keller in 1929.   
"We belong to the largest 
company in all the world - the company of those who
 have known suffering.  When it 
seems that our sorrow is too great to be borne, let
 us think of the great family of the 
heavy-hearted into which our grief has given us ent
rance, and inevitably, we will feel 
about us their arms, their sympathy, their understa
nding."  
 
I've read that passage at more than one memorial se
rvice, but it would be just as 
applicable to share with someone who has just learn
ed that her or his marriage is ending, 
that a job has been lost, or a pet has died, or at 
any time when someone's universe is 
shattered, and they need strength and courage to ca
rry on.  Grief is a very real part of all 
our lives at one time or another. (Sometimes 
too 
often, you might be saying under your 
breath.)   

 
But, each of us loves; therefore, each of us grieve
s. 
 
Each winter since I've been here, my colleague Mark
 and I have addressed the topic of 
grief and loss in one form or another from this pul
pit.  Each time we've chosen the winter 
months for such a focus since many of us mark that 
season by going deeper within 
ourselves to plumb the depths of our minds and hear
ts.  It's often a time of remembering 
and searching anew. Many among us focus on what mat
ters deepest in the cold of winter, 
noting where the tender points are within our lives
. We're not out and about, but we're 
rather more sedentary and still, and, in the stilln
ess, the heart lets loose with feelings and 
images it cannot release underneath the busy sun of
 August.  Thus, this has always 
seemed a good time of year to shake hands with thin
gs that are, well, sobering. 

 4 
Less than two weeks ago I made my decision about be
ginning a new chapter in my 
ministry. I will be pulling up roots in Columbus, l
eaving this thriving church community 
come summer.  Only days later, I was called on to o
ffer some closing words at the 
Program Council meeting, only the words caught in m
y throat.  Clearly, I'm grieving 
about ending my professional relationship with you,
  even though 
I'm
 the one who has 
initiated this move, this change. 

 
Although it™s only a coincidence that we chose this
 topic in August, and are now actually 
dealing, in a most un-theoretical way, with the gri
ef of transition today, I have to be 
thankful for that coincidence. For now both you and
 I can test some of the ideas we are 
lifting up in this joint sermon. 

 
In my growing up years, I was taught not to "feel b
ad," not ?to cry.?   In my teen years, 
when hard things came my way, I was encouraged just
 to ?give it time.? I was told to 
?keep busy.?  In short, I didn't learn much about e
xpressing grief. But I have come to 
believe we can study grief, we can learn and adopt 
new ways.  I've come to appreciate the 
inevitability of grief, and that there's no way aro
und grief, but rather that we must just 
push on through the feelings
 to the other side.  Something else I've learned, a
nd I've 
learned this in Unitarian Universalist communities,
 is that we really are not alone when 
we grieve.  Ever. This is perhaps the most importan
t spiritual learning I've done. 
 
Part 2 Mark 

 
I agree with Helen Keller, and Wendy, and so many m
ore: grief is the universal human 
condition.  And that it™s always something that tea
ches us afresh in every age of our lives. 
 
But, since we chose "Grief as a 
Spiritual
 Path" as a title for this sermon back in August, 
there is another word to unpack at this juncture. A
nd I'm not talking about "path." 
 
Understandings of the word ?spiritual? are not at a
ll universal. In my first year here I 
offered a sermon where I spoke of the 13 mutually e
xclusive definitions I drew out of 
some 200 Unitarian Universalists gathered at a Dist
rict Conference. Each of them 
expressed surprise that others 1. either liked the 
word so much, or 2. hated the word, or 3. 
felt so differently about the meaning of the word t
han they did. 
 
Personally, I was hardly surprised that the variety
 was so great. After all, I have found the 
word ?spiritual? used in a startling variety of way
s all of my life. For example, I found 
"spiritual" threading through plenty of writings I 
encountered in the officially atheistic 
Soviet Union when I visited there in 1987. I've see
n it used by Jungian psychologists, 
theologians, drug-addicts, people who hate ?religio
n,? poets, and  both runners and 
golfers. And I have heard people who claim to have 
utterly private revelations from what 
they call a ?spirit world,? like Sylvia Browne for 
example, claim it mostly for themselves 
and their kinds of experience. So I can't really pr
etend that the definition of this great and 
ancient word based on the Latin word for "breathing
" is clear and obvious to everyone at 
the get go. 

 5 
So, 
I am going to have to decide which under-standing th
e word makes the most sense to 
me while speaking in this pulpit about grief.  And 
the meaning I choose is the most 
excellent one offered by psychologist David Richo i
n a number of his writings, and 
which I used earlier this year. To wit: To live a s
piritual life is to be committed to 
constantly shedding one's illusions. 

 
I like the image of shedding illusions for many rea
sons: 
 
One: As I have never met a person who has escaped g
rieving, so I have never met a 
person who forgoes the comfort of an illusion or tw
o. (Or ten.) Like grief, illusions seem 
to be universal. Even the most hard headed, so-call
ed "realist" persons can turn some of 
that toughness into a crust they think protects the
ir flanks from pain. But that is an 
illusion too. So, I like the universality of the im
age of shedding illusions. 
 
Two: The illusion that the earth was the center of 
the universe perished via the insights of 
Mikolai Kopernik/Copernicus. And if the earth is no
t the center, then human beings who 
live on the surface of that earth cannot be the cen
ter, either. Another illusion tossed.  
 
And thus, since those days of Copernicus, the beaut
iful strength I call 
humility
 was not 
just humming within a few great saints and seers, b
ut proved to be an invitation issued to 
everyone.  The chance to know oneself through humbl
er self-awareness suddenly became 
more democratic. This invitation to shed illusions 
sounded something like this: "The 
earth is not the center. You are not the center. Yo
u are not an exception. Welcome to the 
real world. All of you. Together." Thus, I like Ric
ho™s image of ?shedding illusions? 
because it clearly can lead to communion rather tha
n alienation, as many seem to fear.  
 
And three: I like the image of shedding illusions b
ecause it results in the most productive 
movement through the grief.  When my best friend di
ed on February 14, 1995, I talked 
with his rabbi about the Jewish ritual procedures. 
Then I went home. What did I do when 
I got home? I went over to the phone and dialed my 
best friend's number. Why? To tell 
him my best friend had died. I mean, that's what yo
u do with your best friend, right? You 
share your most important, heart-centered feelings?
 But I had not yet accepted 
consciously that he really had died. So I just did 
what I would normally do. When I shed 
the illusion he was still alive, my journey through
 grief began. 
 
Same thing applies to moving across the country, li
ke Wendy will be doing come 
summer. I know something about moving and grief. Wh
en I moved here from across the 
country, I kept the same pattern of thinking I alwa
ys had in the Fall of each year. ?I am 
going to have 20 people over for Thanksgiving,? som
ething I had thought and done every 
year for 20 years. When Thanksgiving came up that f
irst year here in Columbus , I still 
hadn™t met anyone outside the church. Now, a number
 of folks in the church kindly 
invited me to share their holiday supper, but I dec
lined, claiming other plans. And I really 
did have other plans. Just none involving dinner. I
 sat alone in my place, and called 
everyone who used to come to my place out West, and
 talked with each of them for a half 
hour at least. This was a necessary action to come 
to terms with my grief, to shed the 

 6illusion I was still out there. Turns out, every si
ngle one of the people I called also spent 
Thanksgiving by themselves, since they too were gri
eving for 
my
 loss, but they had not 
shed the illusion I was really gone.   

 
But the spiritual path of grief invites us to shed 
illusions, to move from unconscious ways 
of living to conscious ways of living. I could no l
onger hold the illusion that my best 
friend was still alive. I had to face his young dea
th and wail. And, I had to face that I had 
moved two thousand miles across the country. The lo
ve my friends felt from me had not 
ebbed a bit. And thus they hadn™t shed the illusion
 that I was still there. And this helped 
create the illusion that everything would stay the 
same. But they ate alone. And I ate 
alone. And thus we grieved, together, even though f
ar apart. The next year in Columbus, I 
had friends over. And my friends in California each
 established new holiday traditions 
too. And Stefan, my friend who died, became more an
d more a central source of 
interior 
joy and memory
, even though his ashes were scattered on the golde
n hills of California. 
My love for him never ebbed either, which helped cr
eate the illusion he was not really 
gone. But I learned to shed the illusion without sh
edding the love. And I found ways to 
love his image within me in a new and wonderful way
. 
 
A path has many steps. In a spiritual path of grief
, each step is the shedding of an illusion. 
And each step is a step of health, wholeness and gr
atitude. Sort of like the ten steps the 
boy took about his beloved pet Barney in this morni
ng™s story. 
 
Part 3 Wendy 

 
If we think of the work of sorrow, the artistic for
m of grief, what I sometimes call the 
liturgy of care
, the first thing to say is that the form is not li
near.  The form grief takes is 
spiral, or forward and back, more like the rhythm o
f a dance than a march.  And, as we 
know from our own experience, it's not a ready-made
, one-size-fits-all kind of form. 
Grief work may be brief or take years.  There is no
 right pace. 
 
 ‚Will I always feel like this?? we sometimes wonde
r when grief is intense. ?Will I 
always feel numb, disbelieving, in despair, lonely?
?  Grief can stop us in our tracks. It 
may be some time before we regain our customary ski
lls of navigating life. We may feel 
confused.  We may take a long time to come to a dec
ision, or not be able to make many 
decisions.  Mark and I, in our individual support t
o parishioners, often encourage folks to 
use the sentence, "This is grief talking" and not t
o expect too much during intense times 
of dealing with grief. 

 
A sound or image or smell can trigger intense feeli
ngs and surprise us with a flood of 
emotions.  Just when we feel like we're figuring a 
way to rebuild our lives, another wave 
of grief appears.  That's just how it is sometimes.
  And so we begin again. 
 
Tess Gallaher, the poet whose words I read earlier,
 speaks of the man who has 
approached the woman as standing for the hug he is 
being offered.  The woman puts her 
head into his chest and leans into him.  She leans 
her blood and wishes into him.  Often, 
not always, there's some stabilizing force that's a
vailable for us to lean into when we are 

 7feeling out of balance --grieving.  For you, might 
that be a stranger such as the woman in 
the poem? Might it be an individual who you know to
 be a rock solid support from past 
experience?  Do you turn to prayer, or the Spirit o
f Life or the love of God at times of 
shock or grief?  To the strength of the universe, s
ome unending Wholeness at the heart of 
everything? 

 
To move beyond grief, as we are ready, we have to m
ove in new directions, adapt to the 
loss, restore balance, rebuild our personal world. 
 In the poem 
The Hug,
 Gallagher says 
the man is starting to give the hug back, so well I
 know he's getting it, and we stop having 
arms.  We can endure loss and begin again.  Knowing
 we are part of a larger whole can 
give us the strength we need to explore our loss an
d move through it.  
 
Part 4: Mark 

 
David Wolpe affirms that ?A great religious traditi
on does not deny the pain of loss.? I 
don™t always imagine that everyone in the world min
es the riches of their great religious 
tradition, if they belong to one, but I agree that 
for traditions to be great (as I believe our 
tradition is) they have to have something to say ab
out loss. They have to say it™s real, that 
it hurts, and that it™s part of life, not something
 unexpected.  ?There is nothing real,? 
Wolpe writes, ?that makes life painless.? Exactly. 
That™s why I like to think of grief as 
the shedding of illusions, because all spirituality
, including the spiritual path of grief, is 
about reality. Fantasy, denial, pretense and whimsy
 are not real, and therefore they can 
disguise grief, and make it seem as if pain is not 
real, or that there are folks in this world 
who are exempt from pain and loss. They are not. No
 one is. And this is true 
no matter 
what we think
 lies after death (heaven or the grave). Or beyond 
any loss. 
 
But also, I say no one is exempt from the joy of pl
easure, and the beauty of the sky, and 
the hugs that hold us close, or the path of celebra
tion. Grief is not set apart from life, but 
is squarely within it. When my best friend died, Ri
chard, his partner and I sat Shiva, the 
Jewish custom of staying home for a long week, whil
e people bring you food, and gather 
in the evening to pray with you, and support you in
 your grief, a custom illustrating most 
excellently Wendy™s statement that ?we are not alon
e.?    
 
Folks cooked like crazy, and brought us dishes of s
uch distinction and pleasure that in 
any other situation they would be considered over-t
he-top. And people came with fierce 
hugs, and moving stories that made us laugh, and la
ugh and laugh till we begged them to 
stop. 

 
Joy is not absent from grief. Grief is not absent f
rom joy. Sometimes I think they depend 
on each other, like loving siblings. There are time
s, of course, when the proportion isn™t 
balanced–I think of what™s happening to young peopl
e in Kenya, or in Iraq. I think of 
the utter desolation of folks like Heath Ledger™s p
arents, who lost their boy this week, but 
who, in fairness, also join other parents in both t
he States and Iraq who have lost their 
children this week too.  Such losses are disproport
ionate, certainly.  But still, joy is not 
erased from the world just because loss is real. Jo
y™s not sent packing when grief arrives 
at our doorstep.  

 8 
The 
rebbe
 who Mr.Wolpe writes about was right. There cannot 
be
 any hearts 
but
 broken 
hearts in a world where love matters at all. But a 
broken heart is still a heart. It still beats, 
it churns up life, it finds ways to celebrate the o
ther things that make a world: sky, earth, 
trees, children, dogs and cats, friends, strangers,
 embraces, affection, stories, laughter, 
food, sleep, poetry, dance, art, sport, play, circl
es of love, of celebration, of community, 
and yes, the precious, precious gift of tears. 

 
And although some may fear that the spiritual path 
of grief, the shedding of illusions, is 
itself painful, I™d like to differ. Think of it thi
s way–
 the caterpillar may fear that it™s 
locked away in its pupa for ever. But as soon as th
e creature risks shedding the illusion 
that the pupa is permanent, it can unfold new wings
 and fly. 
 
In other words, the spiritual path of grief is alwa
ys about transformation. And if a 
congregation like this, where we can be companioned
 in our grieving, is not about 
transformation, then what™s it for? 

 
Offering 

 
People agree to make this congregation. 

They may not share beliefs. 

They may not share a past. 

They may not share fields of knowledge. 

They may not share emotional similarities. 

But they all share one thing:  

the responsibility to keep this place 

thriving, transforming and true. 

People agree to make this congregation. 

They make it by promises, participation, 

presence and patronage. 

The offering is a sign of those promises, 

even if folks contribute by different methods. 

Thus, the morning offering will now be  

given and received: our circle of responsibility. 

 
 
