 
  Did Jefferson Mean What I Mean? 
April 10, 2011
 Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 
 Welcome, Centering, Kindling, Opening Words: 

 
We are here 

after a week of sun and gray, rain and warmth, 

to worship, to claim once more our responsibility 

in making history, in engaging the wide world, 

and to be strengthened  

by the vision of universal love and justice 

which so quickened our courageous ancestors 
 
And so, we pledge to journey together along the way
s of truth and affection, 
as best as we can name them now, or may learn them 
in days to come; that 
we and our children may be fulfilled, and that we m
ay speak to our world in 
words and lives of peace, justice and goodwill. 
 
Story (Henry™s Freedom Box), News, Affirmation, Son
g, the Sequence: 
 
O Love,  

you are neither the shake of earthquakes  

nor the roar of battle helicopters. 

You are neither the incense of the magnolia 

nor the rain-water scent of new clover, 

nor the purple of a pansy-blossom,  

although they certainly offer hints. 

Red roses do not finally define you, 

nor does the cruel death of an ancient Galilean 

proclaim you. 

The lyric of a beautiful song 

is like your echo, echo, echo; 

the laughter of children at play, a flashing glimps
e 
of you in the corner of my eye. 

O Love, 

you are a map, a path, a compass. 

You are a goal and an inn on the way. 

You are the womb that births freedom, 

the seed that blossoms as forgiveness, 

the power that pulses our hearts 

when we see ourselves in the mirror of others, 

or return to others the truth of their own face. 

 
  You are muscles in the neck that refuse to flinch 

and turn away from the broken heart, the homeless c
hild, or the visible practices of hatred based 
on appearance, status, affection or doubt. 

You are the muscles in the arm and leg, 

which call us to move forward to salve the wounds 

and rectify the brokenness as best we can.  

You are the gravity that gathers us 

when we need to be together,  

in power or praise, 

and the confidence we need  

when we go deep 

within our alone selves,  

and risk the honesty  

of silence. 

 
silence 

 
Love, you are in our lives. Sometimes bright, 

sometimes hidden. But you are there.  

In the names and faces of those whom we love, or wh
o love us. 
As our spirit prompts us, may we see, before our in
ner eye,  
the faces of those who rise now out of the 

treasure-house of our hearts, naming them in love o
r 
care or conflict or grief---spoken aloud  

or spoken in silence–
  
naming 

 
Love, the beauty of a song is your echo–but that ec
ho reverberates through our hearts for 
days–
  
Choral Music 

 
The First Reading
 is from a letter that Thomas Jefferson wrote to Isa
ac Tiffany in 1819. Tiffany 
was a young man from a small town in  New York stat
e who asked the former president about the 
quality of a certain translation of Aristotle. Afte
r several exchanges, Jefferson offered the 
following definition of freedom, of liberty.  

 
?Liberty, I would say, is unobstructed action accor
ding to our will.  But rightful liberty is 
unobstructed action according to our will 
within limits drawn around us by the equal rights o
f 
others.
  I do not add 'within the limits of the law,' beca
use law is often but the tyrant's will, and 
always so when it violates the right of an individu
al." 
 
 
  The Second Reading
 comes from the excellent work by Annette Gordon-Ree
d, called Thomas 
Jefferson and Sally Hemmings: An American Controver
sy which came out in 1997-8. This is a 
longer reading, but it tells an amazing story I had
 not heard before. 
 
In October 1994 the Association of the Bar of the C
ity of New York sponsored a mock trial of 
Thomas Jefferson.  The issue to be decided by the t
rial was whether examples of hypocrisy in 
Jefferson™s life significantly diminished his contr
ibutions to American society.  Charles Ogletree 
of the Harvard Law School served as a prosecutor of
 the case, and Drew Days, the solicitor 
general of the United States  was the attorney for 
the defense.  William Rehnquist of the United 
States Supreme Court presided as trial judge. The j
ury consisted of audience members, including 
myself and my husband; we arrived early to get a se
at.   
 
The irony was exquisite.  Two distinguished black a
ttorneys stood in front of a predominately 
white audience, and presented the cases for and aga
inst Thomas Jefferson, a man who had owned 
blacks and disparaged their mental abilities.  That
 this event was made possible because of some 
of the other loftier ideals Jefferson expounded is 
clear.  What is less clear is whether he would 
have been delighted or horrified at that thought. 

 
After presenting their opening arguments, the lawye
rs called historians as expert witnesses to 
make their respective cases.  Each talked about Jef
ferson, the author of the Declaration of 
Independence, with his plantations worked by black 
slaves; Jefferson the republican, with his 
royal tastes in food, wine and property; Jefferson,
 proponent of the rights of man and opponent 
of the rights of women.  When it came to a vote, my
 husband and I, along with the overwhelming 
majority of the other members of the audience, vote
d in favor of Jefferson. 
 
Note that the trial was not about whether Thomas Je
fferson was prone to hypocrisy, which seems 
to have been taken as a given.  The question for th
e evening was whether we were willing to 
forgive him for it.  That the answer would be yes w
as never in doubt; even the ?prosecutor? 
expressed relief at the decision. (After all,) Jeff
erson™s authorship of the Declaration of 
Independence lifted him above the rest of the Found
ing Fathers.  His vision of life, liberty, and 
the pursuit of happiness has been taken to heart by
 Americans, many of whom seem to think this 
triumvirate of rights is guaranteed by the Constitu
tion.  Thus, it is often said that Jefferson is the
 
personification of America.  His strengths are the 
strengths of the country, and the same can be 
said for his weaknesses.  For this reason, the know
ledge that Jefferson himself did not live up to 
the vision he set before us has troubled some Ameri
cans, from his time until today. 
 
Sermon  

 
It was more than four decades ago that I went with 
my family, on a summer vacation trip, to visit 
Monticello, Thomas Jefferson™s plantation home in h
is beloved Virginia. I remember that my 
folks were delighted, naturally, that it was an Ita
lian word (meaning ?little mountain?) and were 
overjoyed to find out that Mr. Jefferson not only k
new Italian fluently, but was the first on these 
shores to eat both pasta and tomatoes regularly in 
his diet. Everyone else here in those days had 
convinced themselves that tomatoes, being of the Ni
ghtshade family botanically, were 

 
  poisonous, and so refused to eat them. Jefferson ha
d noticed on his travels that neither the 
Italians nor the French were the worse for wear for
 eating these crimson globes, and so cultivated 
them himself in his magnificent gardens.  These gar
dens also impressed my folks, who kept on 
wishing aloud that my grandfathers (the two VERY gr
een thumbs in the family) could be there to 
see the intricate beds and garden structures. 

 
I don™t remember much more than that now. I suppose
 we saw the inside of the place, with its 
many Jeffersonian inventions of delight, and perhap
s we were told about his slaves, and shown 
their quarters–I just don™t remember now. I sort of
 remember the outside of the house, and its 
dome, which delighted me. But that™s all. 

 
In trying to unpack the meanings of the word ?freed
om? this month, I naturally thought of Mr. 
Jefferson. Although my memory of Monticello arrived
 in fragments, my memory of his mighty 
words on liberty were still echoing majestically th
rough my soul years after I first read them. I 
don™t know about you, but my schooling was filled w
ith Jefferson–not just 
life, liberty, and the 
pursuit of happiness
 in the 
Declaration of Independence
, but his masterwork, the 
Statute of 
Virginia on Religious Freedom. 
He actually had the names of both these works engra
ved on his 
tombstone to serve as his principle memorial.   

 
His understanding of 
political 
freedom and his understanding of 
religiou
s freedom, represented 
by these two amazing writings, seem to contrast.  F
or Jefferson, political freedom meant the right 
and power of the citizens to check the government a
s often as they needed to. ?God forbid,? he 
wrote to William Smith in 1787, ?we should ever be 
twenty years without–rebellion. The 
people cannot be all, and always, well informed.   
If they remain quiet under such 
misconceptions, it is lethargy, the forerunner of d
eath to liberty. And what country can preserve 
its liberties if their rulers are not warned, from 
time to time, that their people preserve the spirit
 
of resistance??  So I have to imagine that he would
 have loudly applauded the 11,000 of us who 
were down by the Statehouse yesterday afternoon pro
claiming– without any lethargy– our 
own ?spirit of resistance? to the recently passed a
nd deeply controversial bill SB5. Jefferson, in 
fact, went a lot further in his understanding of re
bellion than we did yesterday. He called for the 
shedding of ?patriot blood? in such purifying upris
ings of the people. 
  

But his understanding of 
religious
 freedom is 
entirely
 distinct from these political notions of 
spilled blood or rebellion. Religious freedom in fa
ct, wants NO spilled blood. Rather, it focuses 
instead on the right of religious individuals to fr
eely live next door to people of wildly differing 
viewpoints, with the caveat that all of these diffe
rent religious have to leave each other alone. For 
Jefferson, no one can be forced to support or aband
on any religion. No one can be forced to 
believe anything they do not believe. And, Jefferso
n wanted non-believers in Virginia to trust 
that religious freedom 
existed for them too
, and that they too could run for office and be ele
cted, 
since there could be no religious test for public o
ffice. In 1779, he wrote in his essay on religious 
freedom: ?our civil rights have no dependence on ou
r religious opinions, any more than our 
opinions in physics or geometry.? He went on for pa
ges uplifting that principle. 
 
 
  Of course, Jefferson™s rather high opinion of relig
ious freedom has fallen on hard times. In Ohio, 
I am one of many not allowed to get married, nor wo
uld my marriage be considered a civil right. 
My own religious institution, my Unitarian Universa
list congregation, has no present problem 
with such ceremonies; and I myself have performed t
hem since 1979, despite the state™s view of 
my religious beliefs. But only religions which are 
against such civil rights
 are allowed to affect 
policy in Ohio on this and on many other issues. Th
ere appear to be ?right religions? and ?wrong 
religions? in our state. Ours is obviously on the w
rong side of some issues, according to the 
legislation and presently elected leadership of our
 state. 
 
Jefferson relished his own religious freedom as wel
l as protecting the religious freedom of 
others. He took pleasure in describing himself with
 a variety of religious views. He never 
claimed to be an atheist, although he was certainly
 vehemently labeled as one by his critics 
during election campaigns. Despite that label, he s
till managed to get elected President.  Today, 
200 and some years later, I™d need paddles to resta
rt my heart if even a mildly agnostic Unitarian 
Universalist was considered for the presidential of
fice for longer than two minutes. 
 
Yet, Jefferson didn™t let other people describe his
 religious views. He offered his self-evaluation 
many times. In a letter to Charles Thompson, he off
ered, in his words, ?proof that I am a real 
Christian.?  The proof?  His privately printed litt
le edition of the gospels with all the miracles 
and resurrection stories removed with scissors. Thi
s is the so-called Jefferson Bible, still 
available today at your local bookstore or Amazon.c
om. Of course, no modern ?mega-church? 
pastor down the street would agree that Jefferson w
as a Christian in their present understanding 
of the term. To lift up Jesus as a sort of Jewish S
ocrates, a philosopher of the good life, as 
Jefferson did to ?prove? his Christian credentials,
 would hardly keep him out of eternal hellfire, 
according to many modern preachers, especially the 
ones with television shows. 
 
But Jefferson™s personal religious freedom proved e
clectic indeed. To John Adams, in 1820, he 
boasted of his ?creed of materialism.? To Ezra Ely 
in 1819 he wrote, ?I am a sect by myself.? 
But, he also claimed to be an anti-Trinitarian in a
n 1816 letter to a man named Van De Kamp, 
referring sarcastically to the idea of the Trinity 
as the ?abracadabra of mountebanks.?  And of 
course, he also self-defined as a Unitarian, in a l
etter to Benjamin Waterhouse in 1822, and, of 
all things, an Epicurean in a 1819 letter to Willia
m Short. (Epicurus was the Greek philosopher 
touting a simple, elegant life of virtue and humani
stic calm. Jefferson loved the Greek and 
Roman philosophers, and was taken, not just by Epic
urus, but by Seneca the Younger, whose 
writings on liberty clearly inspired his own.) 

 
So Mr. Jefferson found a half-dozen ways to express
 himself about his religious proclamations. I 
don™t think this means he was wiggling out of some 
religious commitment–after all, all of his 
religious claims are in the same general ball-park.
 It™s not like he™s saying that he™s a Shia 
Muslim, a Christopher Hitchens atheist, a Krishna-c
entered Hindu and a Lakota shaman all at the 
same time. To think 
that 
would be a distortion of Jefferson™s personal relig
ious freedom. It™s 
simpler for me to think that Jefferson just had a l
ively, eclectic vocabulary, and used different 
words to say similar things to very different peopl
e. He™s not hurting anyone, or restraining 
anyone with all of this spiritual vitality. 

 
   
And, frankly, this fits the definition he offers of
 liberty to Isaac Tiffany very neatly. Remember? 
?Liberty, I would say, is unobstructed action accor
ding to our will.  But rightful liberty is 
unobstructed action according to our will 
within limits drawn around us by the equal rights o
f 
others.? 

 
This is a brilliant definition, based on Greek and 
Roman philosophy to be sure. I do have to 
admit that it heavily stresses the individual as pr
imary and the community as secondary, 
something I often question. But all in all, it™s pr
etty clear and clean. And this is where Jefferson 
gets into trouble. 

 
For it™s clear to me that for Jefferson, ?unobstruc
ted action,? according to his will, meant 
refusing
 to let those equal rights of others–namely his sla
ves–deprive him of his own need to 
do whatever he wanted, whenever he wanted.  

 
And this is why Jefferson, despite his undeniable b
rilliance around religious freedom and the 
Declaration, has always had a troubling reputation 
in the later years of the nation. He was often 
vilified during the Civil War because of his hypocr
isy in keeping slaves, while writing so 
magnificently about liberty. His individualistic be
nt got him into trouble during the New Deal 
era, where his patrician class attitudes smudged ov
er his brilliant cadenzas on liberty and 
freedom. And recently, there has been this whole th
ing about his slave, Sally Hemmings. 
 
Frankly, Annette Gordon-Reed makes it clear that th
e actual evidence about Sally Hemmings 
and Jefferson having children together is inconclus
ive. The DNA tests don™t prove anything 
finally, since there were other men with the same D
NA (his brother, for example) who could 
have fathered those children. I tend to think he di
d, because of the dates of her pregnancies, but 
the fact is, in the end, whether or not he had chil
dren with Sally Hemmings 
is not the issue that 
matters. 

 
The issue is that he 
preached
 liberty and 
kept
 slaves.  The issue is that he claimed to OWN Sally
 
Hemmings. The issue is that many of the white histo
rians who have written about this were 
troubled more by the fact that Jefferson, a man of 
English ancestry, bonded with Sally 
Hemmings, a woman of African ancestry.  A black and
 white person in a bed together. That™s 
what bothered many white historians. And please, th
is is not some outdated ante-bellum attitude 
from the distant past. Just this week, some of you 
may have read, April 7, 2011, a reliable poll 
showed that 46 percent (!) of the Republican voters
 in Mississippi think that black and white 
marriage 
should be made illegal again. 
Forget that gay marriage thing. Bring back the old 
days 
when blacks and whites were separate and unequal! 

 
At first I thought that Jefferson might have agreed
 with the voters of Mississippi, since he didn™t 
have a very high opinion of black people. He though
t they were inferior intellectually and limited 
in what they could achieve. Yet, I just don™t know.
 When a white friend of his wanted to marry 
one of his slaves, he gladly 
approved
 the selling of this black woman to his friend so t
hey could 
get married. He never dissed their marriage, and re
tained friendship with this man and this 

 
  woman for years afterward. There can be no doubt th
at Jefferson was the most complex of 
human beings. 

 
But here we™re back to the original problem– Jeffer
son, father of our liberty, kept slaves. In 
1782, he wrote: ?In a warm climate, no man will lab
our for himself who can make another 
labour for him. This is so true, that of the propri
etors of slaves a very small proportion indeed are 
ever seen to labour.?  

 
So there you have it. Virginia was his home. Virgin
ia has a warm climate. So Jefferson had 
others labor for him. He didn™t 
hire
 a housecleaner. He 
owned
 a housecleaner. He didn™t 
hire
 a 
gardener. He 
owned
 a gardener. And there is nothing good or just or f
ree in such a notion. 
Jefferson simply could not put into practice his un
deniably brilliant definition of liberty in his 
letter to Isaac Tiffany:  ?rightful liberty is unob
structed action according to our will 
within limits 
drawn around us by the equal rights of others.?
  
With lines drawn around us by the equal rights of o
thers.
 GREAT LINE!  Rightful freedom is 
not doing whatever you want, whenever you want. The
re are others in the world. 
Rightful
 freedom sometimes surprisingly demands that we box 
ourselves in, restrain ourselves, hold back 
a bit. The children™s story about the young slave H
enry mailing himself to freedom in a box is a 
brilliant image rising from an absolutely true hist
orical story. After losing so much–his wife, his 
children–all due to the true evil of slavery, Henry
 found his freedom by allowing himself to be 
constrained in a box. It was the box that brought h
im to liberty. 
 
In the same way our liberty entirely depends on the
 limits, the box, that we are willing to draw 
around our own freedoms by valuing the equal rights
 of others as the honest and sensible cost of 
our own. My capacity to marry is related to your ca
pacity to marry. My capacity to be free is 
related to your capacity to be free. There are, you
 see, no classes of humanity that the title ?fully 
human? does not apply to. Every color expresses ful
l humanity. Every sexual preference 
expresses fully humanity. Every gender or age or ab
ility expresses full humanity. Every broken 
mind and wounded heart expresses full humanity. And
 yes, even a deeply flawed practitioner of 
liberty like Thomas Jefferson expresses full humani
ty. 
 
Thomas Jefferson is a cautionary reminder of –.. ou
rselves. As Annette Gordon Reed put it in 
the first reading, ?it is often said that Jefferson
 is the personification of America.  His strengths 
are the strengths of the country, and the same can 
be said for his weaknesses.? I agree. In other 
words, any human being here in America who claims t
o be perfect–all strength, no weaknesses 
–misses the boat. But any human being who doesn™t w
ork at trying to practice a stronger 
liberty, stronger love, stronger justice and strong
er honesty has also missed the boat, and tossed 
aside the best and most brilliant dreams Jefferson 
himself had for this nation. 
 
Like I said, I don™t remember seeing the slave quar
ters near the gardens of Monticello. But I 
know they were there, inhabited for many years by p
eople who were as wholly an expression of 
full humanity as was Jefferson. The mock court tria
l, while acknowledging his hypocrisy, voted 
to forgive Jefferson in the end 
because 
of that common humanity.  

 
   
I wonder, after spending so much time this week wit
h this amazing, aggravating man, how would 
I have voted at that trial if I had been on the jur
y?  But since I too am a fully human American 
with flaws aplenty, I wonder how Jefferson would vo
te if I were the one on trial instead? Or, 
you? 

  

Offering 

 
New Member Ceremony on Insert 

 
Song 

 
Blessing, Choral Response 

 
