Christmas Evensong 
December 24, 2013 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
  
Welcome       

 
Prelude 
for Piano and Flute  
Pastorale de Noel
   
by Akira Tanaka           
  Nathan Hamm, piano 

  Sarah Wurdlow, flute 

 
Kindling the Grail     
the sign of our heritage   
 
Opening Words         
please rise   
 
We are here 

on a winter night  

to celebrate that life can thrive 

beyond circumstance and place 

and that peace and goodwill 

are not just our roots, but wings. 

 
And so, lit by an ancient star 

tonight,  and visited by the 

angels of story, flame, carol, 

and table, we begin in peace. 
 
Carol          #256 Winter Night
  
Sequence 
Nocturne for 2013
      

   So what might an angel look like? 

         Take out your palette and paintbrush 

         and have a go, even if you don't think 

   you have much skill at this kind of  thing. 

   Try to imagine this. It™s late at night. 

   A winter night. It™s quiet. 

   And then all of a sudden,  

   an angel shows up. 

   What do you think that angel looks like? 

   Well, maybe you'll tell me that you are  
going to leave the page  
   completely blank. 

   After all, you'll say, there are really 

   no such things, so why paint them? 

   People just imagine such creatures. 

   Invent them out of whole cloth. 

   Or misinterpret a cloud.  

   

   Or, maybe you'll be the one 

   who'll paint a beautiful creature with   

   great wings, wings with deep blue,       
almost indigo, feathers almost blocking 
   out the stars, and wearing a gown the      
color of opals... 
   you're trying to show us 

   a really impressive being, one 

   that anyone would be foolish to ignore. 

 
   Or maybe, just maybe, you are more      
the metaphor type, and never thought 
   of angels as beings with wings in the     
first place. You might paint images from 
   the last dream you remember that shook 

   you up when you remembered it;  

   or the last time you laughed 

   so hard that you learned something new; 

   maybe you'll try to paint the feeling you      
felt when you saw that version 
   of Dickens' famous Christmas Carol 

   down at CATCO where Tiny Tim was      
played by a marionette,  
   and you found your throat 

   catching as he said, "God bless us, 

   everyone," and Uncle Scrooge, now       

   transformed, sang carols with his 

   suddenly amazing voice. 

 
   Maybe you'll paint a star that glistens 

   in your tears of gratitude that you live 

   at all beneath such a bright and glorious      
sky; or maybe you'll paint your best 
   friend, or a grandparent you loved. 

    

   In any case, maybe just trying to 

   picture an angel might give you some 

  sense about how truthfulness blossoms      
in every image and no image,  
   no matter who the artist is,  

   even you, even me.  

   And maybe the next angel 

   that descends might not be on paper, 

   nor in the paint, but in something much 

   quieter, like this silent, silent night. 

 
 
Silence for a Time 

 
Musical Nocturne
  
Bright and Glorious Is the Sky 
       (a Danish Melody) 

 
The First Lesson
 for Christmas Eve 
is from an ancient Gospel, which means 
great news!
 when 
translated from the Greek, but when translated from
 the Aramaic, the language Jesus actually 
spoke, the same idea is better translated as "Great
 Hope!" in English. This book of Great Hope 
was written, it is said, by Loukas, whom we call Lu
ke in English.  The author writes in better 
Greek than the other Gospel writers, which is all w
e really know about him. The first version 
was written as early as 90, perhaps even a decade l
ater, and thus almost a hundred years after 
the era he is describing. We think it was written i
n Ephesus, a great metropolis in what is now 
Turkey. Luke is the traditional name for the author
, dating from the mid-second century, so we 
cannot know for sure who the author was. Paul, in o
ne of his authentic letters, talks about a 
certain Luke, whom he calls a "beloved and brillian
t physician," but that fellow would have been 
long gone by the time the gospel was written. The t
ranslations are new, and are intended to get 
you to hear what those who first heard these storie
s in Greek would have understood by this 
story.
   

Long ago, the exalted Caesar issued an order saying
 that the entire empire was to undergo a 
census, for taxing purposes. (This was the first ce
nsus, mind you, and it took place when 
Quinrinius was governor up in Syria.) People everyw
here went to their hometowns to comply 
with the proclamation and to fill out the forms. So
 Joseph, whose lineage stemmed from famous 
King David himself, was born and raised in Judea, a
nd thus had to leave Nazaret up in the 
Galilee where he had been living, and travel south 
to his home village, David™s old hamlet, 
called Bethlehem. He traveled there with Mary, his 
fiancée, who, embarrassingly, was visibly 
close to term. In fact, it was while they were ther
e that she delivered her firstborn son. His first 
crib was a cattle-feeder where the animals were kep
t, since of course there was no real privacy 
for them in the other part of the house where the o
ther family guests were staying. 
  

Nearby were meadows, where sheepherders camped out 
to keep a watch on their herds in the 
dark night. Without warning, a divine messenger app
eared in a blaze of light, and a certain 
brightness flashed around them. They were terrified
 by all this. But the voice of the messenger 
comforted them, saying: ?There is nothing to be afr
aid of. We are only offering you some 
unexpected hope. Joyful news for one and all! In Da
vid™s hamlet over there, a healer has been 
born, who will be anointed to bring wholeness to th
e broken.  Here™s what to look for. You will 
find an ordinary baby, a baby who, as usual, is bou
nd up in the traditional strips of linen. And, as 
is often the case, you'll see the child sleeping in
 a bed of hay within a cattle-feeder.?
   

Then a whole division appeared in the sky next to t
he messenger. They were singing like a choir. 
Here is what they sang: ?The true glory of God on h
igh is when people on earth live in willing 
peace with each other."   

 
Carol 231 Angels We Have Heard 

 
The Second Lesson 
is the poem 
On Angels
 by Czeslaw Milosz, winner of the Nobel Prize. One 
of 
the last great events in my days in California was 
a night when I got to hear Milosz, Alan 
Ginzberg, Adrienne Rich and so many other great poe
ts read their own work. I heard Milosz 
read this poem that night.
 On Angels 

All was taken away from you: white dresses,  

wings, even existence.  

Yet I believe you,  

messengers.  

 
There, where the world is turned inside out,  

a heavy fabric embroidered with stars and beasts,  

you stroll, inspecting the trustworthy seams.  

 
Short is your stay here:  

now and then at a matinal hour, if the sky is clear
,  
in a melody repeated by a bird,  

or in the smell of apples at close of day  

when the light makes the orchards magic.  

 
They say somebody has invented you  

but to me this does not sound convincing  

for the humans invented themselves as well.  

 
The voice -- no doubt it is a valid proof,  

as it can belong only to radiant creatures,  

weightless and winged (after all, why not?),  

girdled with the lightening.  

 
I have heard that voice many a time when asleep  

and, what is strange, I understood more or less  

an order or an appeal in an unearthly tongue:  

 
day draw near. 

another one.  

do what you can.  

Carol #233 Bring A Torch, Jeannette, Isabella 

The Third Lesson is the poem "Eight. Doing the Dish
es" 
by Jeanne Lohmann   2007   
Jeanne Lohmann used to live in Columbus OH, as many
 of you will be able to tell from the street 
names. I thank my colleague, the Rev. Kathleen Fowl
er, for bringing this amazing poem to my 
attention
. 
We lived in so many houses, Gloria; Indiana Avenue,
 Summit and Fourth, the double on Hudson 
Street. And that upstairs apartment on North High w
e rented from Armbrusters. Mother thought 
it Elizabethan, romantic, with its leaded glass win
dows and wood-beamed ceilings. Our entrance 
was at the side, at the top of stairs that creaked 
late at night when we came home from our dates. 
You had more of these than I did, even if I was old
er. It was 1943, and our brother Harry was in 
the Navy. I'd had a year away at college, and you w
ere still in high school. On this particular 
night in the kitchen, doing the supper dishes, you 
drying while I washed, you told me that your 
friend Monabelle had a premature baby, and you'd be
en there, helped to find a shoebox to put the 
baby in. I tried to imagine this, kept seeing the c
ardboard box with the baby, Monabelle bleeding 
and crying. You didn't want our parents to hear, so
 we talked softly while we put the dishes in 
the drainer on the sink and hung the towels to dry.
 The pilot light on the range burned purple 
blue and I saw both of us new in that light, you wi
th so much to teach me, my self-absorbed 
studious life, so intent on saving the world.  

Carol 227
 Creche Flickers Bright Here 
Homily 

 
None of us, I have to imagine, actually 
remember 
anything about the day we were born. If we 
know anything at all about that day, it™s because s
omeone who was there told us about it.  
 
As I mentioned once before at this service, my moth
er told me many times about my own birth... 
naming the doctor (Dr. Powell) and the Nurse (Pauli
ne).  Back in those days before Lamaze, men 
like my father didn't really know much about the bi
rthing process, so when I was brought out to 
him, my head all distorted by the forceps and just 
the birthing process per se, he got all-a-fluster, 
terrified, really, and my grandmother had to calm h
im down forcefully. 
 
My mother didn't tell me about any angels singing t
heir halos off, or making announcements. I 
don't suppose your mother told you such things eith
er. And, Alexander Blaine Hospital, I have to 
imagine, was a bit, well, 
cleaner,
 than any place where you might keep sheep supper i
n a feeding 
trough. And although my grandmother 
had
 actually been an honest-to-God shepherd back in th
e 
old country, she was no longer a shepherd when I wa
s born. 
 
So even if you never heard a single story about you
r own human birth, it™s a safe bet to guess 
that not too many angels and shepherds showed up at
 your debut anyway, stories or not. 
 
After all, you and I, we're only mortal.  

 
But then, so was the babe whose fabled birth we rec
ount every year at this time. His birth legend 
is the 
only
 story I tell over and over again over the years. T
oday is the 37th time I have read this 

tale. And when the first people heard this story, r
ecounted a hundred years after it happened, not 
one of them, not one of them, mind you, thought tha
t all these angels and shepherds meant 
something theological, namely, that this baby was n
ot 
really 
a fully human, mortal being, but the 
second person of the Trinity disguised as a baby. 

 
Virginal conceptions were not "miracles" in those d
ays, either...everyone seemed to be doing it, 
from Caesar on down. The story of his mother's unus
ual pregnancy is one story set amidst a 
thousand such stories in ancient times. It was simp
ly a way of saying Œ in the language they used 
back then Œ that, well, 
this child is important
. Really important. Our 21st century fussiness abou
t 
biological issues was never their concern. 

 
Same thing with angelic visions and the visiting as
trologers. Magi told the fortunes of several 
Roman emperors too, and the Emperor Constantinus sa
w a vision in the sky no less than the 
fabled shepherds.  Such stories were simply another
 way of saying that something really 
significant was going on. In Luke's case, he was sa
ying quite clearly that this baby was really 
important, and equal in dignity to the grand poobah
 of the Roman Empire himself. Not a bad 
message that. Inherent worth and dignity we say tod
ay, much less dramatically. Even peasants 
like Joseph and Mary, who had to eke out a living f
rom stony ground, instead of sipping rose-
petal wine by a marble pool, were equally significa
nt and important. 
 
Wrapping up a baby? Something the midwife did to 
every
 baby. Laid in straw? A common 
medical piece of advice even back then, and not jus
t for poor families. This is a totally human 
being...like we all were when we were born. And ver
y important, like we all still are. Each in our 
own way. Each with our own gifts. 

 
The poet Jeanne Lohmann gets this message very well
; she is living in Columbus during the 40s, 
the war is going on, her brother is in the military
...lots of tension there. And what happens? Her 
younger sister, Gloria, still in high school, has a
 friend named Monabelle who gets pregnant. We 
don't know the details...we just know that back in 
the 1940's, having a baby "out of wedlock," as 
they used to say, was pretty close to being the "en
d of the world," a focus of shamefulness we 
can scarce imagine these days. 

 
Worse, the pregnancy suffers some medical complicat
ion, and the babe is born prematurely. We 
don't know how much...again, the technical details 
are not important to the poet. What impresses 
her is that her sister took the tender young babe, 
frighteningly helpless, and finds a shoebox to 
put it in, presumably filled with some sort of blan
ket. We don't know what happens next. Again, 
to the poet, not as important as what she says to h
er sister to close the poem: 
You didn't want our 
parents to hear, so we talked softly while we put t
he dishes in the drainer on the sink and hung 
the towels to dry. 

The pilot light on the range burned purple blue, 

and I saw both of us new in that light, you 

with so much to teach me, my self-absorbed 

studious life, so intent on saving the world.  

 
So intent on saving the world. Wow.  

 
Jeanne, the poet, is off at college and has great i
ntentions as to what saving the world might look 
like. Peace initiatives, perhaps; maybe some protes
t envisioned against the rampant racialization 
of that era. Her sister, however, without any fuss 
or bother, apparently, steps right into an 
embarrassing and very messy situation (at least as 
such a situation was defined in those days), 
and wraps the baby up and puts the child into a sho
ebox. No visible panic...just responding to the 
world as it really is, directly and intimately. Glo
ria is a messenger of a different kind of salvation
 
than the one so often lifted up these days in bully
 pulpits...salvation from eternal torture in hell, 
or salvation from the undeniable fact of death.  

 
Gloria turns out to be a angelic messenger to her s
ister Jeanne...the Greek word for messenger is 

 or 
angel 
as we say in English
. It's meaning: not a creature with wings in a white
 dress, 
but this: envoy, bringer of exciting news, announce
r of the hope that is right before your eyes. I 
even have to wonder about the irony of the younger 
sister's name. Gloria. The song sung by the 
choir of messengers in the ancient story. Luke comp
osed their song lyrics like this: ?The true 
glory of God on high is when people on earth live i
n willing peace with each other.? Which in 
the famous Latin translation we sang earlier, begin
s "Gloria!" 
Gloria in excelsis Deo, et in terra. 
Pax hominibus bonae voluntatis.
  
This is exciting news. There is hope here. When you
 think of Ultimacy, or the Sublime, or G-d... 
forget Caesar with his purple robe and rose-petal w
ine by the pool. Forget the CEOs of 
corporations gobbling each other up as fast as lion
s eating carrion. Forget the great bejeweled 
preachers at the mega-churches wearing Rolexes as t
hey lounge around their mansions, as their 
driver brings around their Rolls. Forget Power and 
Glory that shines, shakes, punishes, excludes, 
threatens and swaggers with entitlement. If you wan
t to see a picture of Ultimacy, Gloria's 
message goes, you might want to look at a baby in a
 shoebox, and start there. Or as Luke put it, a 
baby in a cattle feeder. An ordinary baby that, lik
e all of us, no matter rank or class, is important 
simply by being. Gloria is, her sister thinks, some
thing of a messenger, an angel, for doing what 
she did. 

 
The poet Milosz talks about messengers, or angels w
ho have come to him. Oh, he is a modern 
fellow all right. He tells us so right at the begin
ning of his poem ?On Angels?: 
All was taken 
away from you: white dresses, wings, even existence
.  
Yet I believe you, messengers.
  
 
Sounds a bit ironical, doesn't it? And Milosz drove
 some of his colleagues up the wall because he 
used to attend mass at St. Mary Magdalene in Berkel
ey CA almost every day when he was in 
town. I used to see him walking to the place, or co
ming home from there frequently.  "You don't 
really believe that stuff?" his colleagues scoffed.
 And he would say, "Oh, you're right. They don't 
exist, those angels, but I believe them: I have fai
th in their message." 
And what did the messengers, the angels say to him?
 He addressed them directly again as he 
begins to answer that question: 
They say somebody has invented you but to me this d
oes not 
sound convincing, for humans invented themselves as
 well.  
 
The voice -- no doubt it is a valid proof,  

as it can belong only to radiant creatures,  

weightless and winged (after all, why not?),  

girdled with the lightening.  

 
I have heard that voice many a time when asleep  

and, what is strange, I understood, more or less  

an order, or an appeal, in an unearthly tongue:  

 
day, draw near.   another one.   do what you
 can.  
Do what you can. Do what YOU can. In the new day. E
very day. They will keep on coming, you 
know. One day after the next. Don't think you need 
to be Caesar, saving the world by power and 
might. Don't think you need to be the CEO of Salvat
ion Incorporated, or preach to a stadium of 
people who think you are dispensing God's own truth
 once and for all. The Christmas message 
undermines all of that thinking. The poets undermin
e that kind of thinking. 
 
Do what YOU can, every day. As it draws near, make 
a plan to respond to the real world as it 
is...the real world as it is today, so accurately p
ortrayed, I always say,  in the ancient story. It's
 all 
there, isn't it? Poverty. Oppression. Exclusion. Mo
nstrous financial practices that keep the 
powerful in place.  Respond to this real world only
 as YOU can. Intimately. Directly. Face your 
friend with an alcohol problem honestly. Admit your
 own struggles with addiction to yourself. 
Give what you can to a homeless organization even i
f it™s five bucks, or come cook meals for the 
homeless here at the church or at the YWCA. Talk to
 someone who is ashamed about something, 
and let them know you are not ashamed of them at al
l. Visit a homebound senior for a half hour. 
Do what YOU can do, not what Caesar can do. He usua
lly makes a shambles of it anyway. 
 
Keep your eye on the babe in the box, or in the man
ger. And yes, then bring this message to 
others...be an angel yourself without lightning gir
ding your cloak, or a Latin song on you lips, or 
even wings on your back. But live out the message o
f the season....each of us is important, 
inherently worthy, by being born...in a hospital or
 barn...makes no difference... into a world we 
all share. Keep on doing that...and the sky indeed 
may open up, right before your eyes, and you'll 
catch a glimpse of something you never thought was 
there. 
 
Offering
  
The offering tonight will go to the Ministers' Disc
retionary Fund which we use anonymously to 
help those suffering hardship; or, if you put it on
 your check memo, it will go to the Holiday 
Appeal, which this year partially benefits the fami
ly shelter of the YWCA.  
 
Blessing of the Feast and the Flame
                                                    
                                                   
                                                
The open table is a sign that no one may be kept aw
ay from the nourishment they need. As said 
the man whose mythic birth is celebrated tonight: ?
They shall come from North and South and 
East and West, all of them–and feast together–?  Ou
r partner church, the Unitarian Church in 
Bolon, across the sea, has already broken this brea
d tonight, some seven hours ago. They look at 
each other in the eye when they offer bread to each
 other. Perhaps you might try that. There is 
only a little bit of white wine, by the way, on the
 table. There's lots of scented water, grape juice,
 

and almond milk and honey. And there are all kinds 
of breads, including wheat, with and without 
raisins, and gluten free puffs. 

The firelight is a sign that though each human ligh
t is welcome and worthy, together in 
community we make a greater light, one that may ill
umine far beyond the walls of this place.   
Blest is the board of life, the table of love. 

We give thanks this night together, for the nourish
ment that sustains us as we make our way. 
Blest is the light of life, and the communion of fi
re.  
Carol:  The Holly and the Ivy 

                   (getting the candles ready, and 
the communion table ready) 
Kindling the Christmas Candleabrae  

   
as Messiaen plays quietly 
Silence 

Singing Silent Night together, humming it first. 

Silence 

Blessings  
(the readings on the cover) 
All leave the Meeting House silently, taking commun
ion to nourish you on your way. 
 
