
  And I remembered the words of Vincent Van Gogh
  "What a mystery life is, and love is a mystery
  within a mystery. I want to live, to give life,
  to renew, to restore and preserve it, and to work
  and to be useful and give spark for spark,
  to give a glass of water to one who suffers,
  or a slice of bread and butter to a child."

  Every morning I woke in dread, waiting for the day nurse to go on her rounds
  and announce from the list of names in her hand whether or not I was for
  shock treatment, the new and fashionable means of quieting people and of
  making them realize that orders are to be obeyed and floors are to be polished
  without anyone protesting and faces are made to be fixed into smiles and
  weeping is a crime.

  The last time I was really bad it was like being in an endless dark tunnel,
  no end in sight, although there might have been some light. So I had two
  directions to choose from, front and back.
  
  This time it was totally different and much worse. Imagine an endless plain,
  hard and smooth. Now imagine another plain, about 20 inches above the first.
  It is high enough so that you can crawl, or lie down, but you cannot sit
  or kneel. There is very dim uniform illumination all around. No direction
  is any different from any other. There is no way to tell where you have been,
  where you are, or where you are going. Everything is featureless and endless.
  
  It is hard to keep going through each day.

  So he goes back to his own house, and once again a large number of people
  so crowds the place that Jesus cannot even grab a bite to eat. When his relatives
  hear about it, they come down to take him back home to their house?for
  you see, they are convinced he is completely out of his mind. Even the scholars
  who had come up from Jerusalem think this too: "He is totally under the control
  of the Lord of the Flies!" they say. "And the only way he can cast out demons
  from folks is because he has got a big old demon inside of him himself."
  
  So he called them over to his table and said: "So tell me, great scholars,
  how can a devil drive out a devil? After all, does a government that is deeply
  divided like that long endure? And how about a family?if they are throwing
  each other out of the house, they won't survive long either, right? So since
  you think what you think of me, I guess you must be telling me that the devil's
  house is about to fall?"

