Listen, Listen, Listen To My Heart™s Song 
February 9, 2014 
Lane Campbell 
  
Opening 

We are here, 

Coming out of the cold into the warmth of this plac
e,
 Clearing our minds and hearts as we begin, 

Open to gratitude for this day and every day, 

Knowing that each life is precious, 

And that our lives are worth listening to. 

And so, bearing witness 
both
 to our world as it is, 
and
 as Love can imagine it, we 
would claim that vision of a just world in our own 
lives. And because of a growing 
sense of kinship with all beings, inviting our comp
assion, we begin in this 
celebration to engage our mission with our whole li
ves: body, mind, and heart
. 
Singing #1010 We Give Thanks 

Ingathering 

Teacher Appreciation Litany 

DRE
:  Do you know what day it is?  Today is a day when
 we get to thank the people who 
have volunteered their hours, their creativity, and
 their passion to make our church a 
better place.  Today is a day we get to thank our R
eligious Education Teachers.  And I 
want to invite everyone here to join us in a celebr
ation of the many gifts our teachers 
bring to this church. 

Will all of our Religious Education and Adult Enric
hment teachers please rise to be 
recognized? 

Minister
:  Today, I bring to you gratitude for your creativ
ity.  For your artistic talents, for 
your quick thinking, for the ways you bring people 
together to consider fresh ideas and 
perspectives.  Thank you. 

RE Council
:  Today we bring to you an appreciation for your b
oldness.  For your 
leadership, for stepping forward to guide people of
 all ages along the path of lifelong 
learning, for the courage it takes to be a teacher.
  Thank you. 
AEP Committee
:  Today, we bring you gratitude for your innovatio
n.  For creating new 
ways to teach, for facilitating the classes that co
nnect this community, for inspiring and 
off-the-cuff moments that have moved us towards tra
nsformation.  Thank you. 
Children
:  Today, we thank you from our hearts for being ou
r teachers.  We have laughed 
together, grown together, played together, and lear
ned together.  Thank you. 

Adults
:  Today, we also thank you for being our teachers.
  For the compassion you have 
shown us, for the generous gifts of time, talent, a
nd knowledge shared with us.  For your 
dedication to our growth and to our community, we t
hank you. 
Minister and DRE
:  Today, we bring you appreciation for your stewar
dship.  For the 
responsibility you hold as an integral part of this
 congregation, for your eyes and hearts 
ever-watchful of safety, for your service to this c
hurch and to our community, and finally 
for your thoughtful offerings.  Thank you. 

RE/AEP Teachers
:  Today, we renew our commitment to the ministry o
f teaching.  We 
covenant with you all to continue on the path of li
felong learning, to lead you with justice 
and compassion towards creating and re-creating the
 beloved community. 
Congregation
:  Today, we renew our commitment to support the te
achers of this 
community.  We bring to you our promise that we wil
l encourage you and continue to 
learn from you.  We appreciate the gifts you bring 
to this church and we value you.  
Thank you. 

Greeting 

Chanting
  
 Words from Paramahamsa Yoganda, the founder of the
 Self-Realization 
Fellowship, an early yoga master to bring yoga to t
he West.  For those of us that have 
experienced yoga practices, it is an opportunity to
 listen to our bodies and to listen to 
ourselves.  Let us join in chanting once through to
gether, then twice in a round. 
Listen, listen, listen to my heart™s song (2x) 

I will never forget you, I will never forsake you. 
(2x) 
Communing 

Sequence 

A moment to breathe in and out, a moment for reflec
tion, a moment to hear our own 
stories play back through our minds Œ one precious 
moment.  Our bodies move slightly 
up and down with the breathing, relaxing into our c
hairs, perhaps closing our eyes.  This 
time, this listening time that belongs to just us. 
 Lay your back into that chair and 
continue to breathe with me, to share in our humani
ty, to share in this simple act of 
breathing in and out.  Open your heart that it may 
be fed by the richness of shared silence 
together.  A hallowed moment to sit in silence with
 one another and to just be.  Let us 
join in this silence together now. 

Silence 

As we continue to sit, our hearts are drawn to thos
e that rest heavy within them.  The 
people who have touched our lives throughout this w
eek and beyond, who have flitted 
through our days, or been that consistent presence 
for us.  We remember those this 
morning who are sick, who have sat with us when we 
needed them, who had been there, 

but now are gone.  Our hearts grow heavier in the r
emembering, so we join in releasing 
those names silently or aloud into this space.  We 
call out the names held within, that we 
may be heard. 

Naming 

This moment, this one moment, is ours for the liste
ning.  We open our ears and our spirits 
to recognize beauty in the joining of voices, in th
e strumming of a guitar, in the midst of 
this precious moment. 

Reading 

Just Listen
 by Rachel Naomi Remen from  Kitchen Table Wisdom: 
Stories That Heal
. 
I suspect that the most basic and powerful way to c
onnect to another person is to 
listen. Just listen. Perhaps the most important thi
ng we ever give to each other is our 
attention. And especially if it™s given from the he
art. When people are talking, there™s no 
need to do anything but receive them. Just take the
m in. Listen to what they™re saying. 
Care about it. Most times caring about it is even m
ore important than understanding it. 
Most of us don™t value ourselves or our love enough
 to know this. It has taken me a long 
time to believe in the power of simply saying, ?I™m
 so sorry,? when someone is in pain. 
And meaning it. 
One of my patients told me that, when she tried to 
tell her story, people often 
interrupted to tell her that they once had somethin
g just like that happen to them. Subtly 
her pain became a story about themselves. Eventuall
y she stopped talking to most people. 
It was just too lonely. We connect through listenin
g. When we interrupt what someone is 
saying to let them know that we understand, we move
 the focus of attention to ourselves. 
When we listen, they know we care.  
Many people with cancer talk about the relief of ha
ving someone just listen.  I 
have even learned to respond to someone crying by j
ust listening. In the old days I used 
to reach for the tissues, until I realized that pas
sing a person a tissue may be just another 
way to shut them down, to take them out of their ex
perience of sadness and grief. Now I 
just listen. When they have cried all they need to 
cry, they find me there with them. 
This simple thing has not been that easy to learn. 
It certainly went against 
everything I had been taught since I was very young
. I thought people listened only 
because they were too timid to speak or did not kno
w the answer. A loving silence often 
has far more power to heal and to connect than the 
most well intentioned words. 
Reading 

 Soulidarity Ep. 00: Life-2:25-6:27 

 Today, we will be listening to one of our readings
 via podcast.  The podcast is 
called 
Soulidarity
 and it comes from a Unitarian Universalist communi
ty out in 
Washington DC.  These words are the beginnings of a
 conversation between Rev. Eric 
Martinez Rezly and his colleague, Osa. 

Sermon 

Listen, Listen, Listen To My Heart™s Song 

 For the remainder of this 24-minute podcast, these
 two men, Rev. Erik Martinez 
Resly and Osa tell their life stories.  They talk a
bout where they have come from, about 
what their lives have been telling them.  It is a c
ompelling listen and I encourage you to 
find out more about them.  Both Osa and Rev. Erik a
re part of a new young adult 
Unitarian Universalist community out in Washington,
 D.C. called 
Sanctuaries
.  When I 
visited their Facebook page this past week, their c
over photo reads, ?Our stories matter.?   
In the introduction to this podcast entitled ?
Soulidarity
,? the quote goes: 
?Soulidarity is more than just a name.  It™s the ra
dical idea that every story holds a 
profound spiritual truth about the world we share.?
  This group of UU young adults have 
taken on a spiritual practice of listening deeply t
o each other™s stories, of listening to the 
profound spiritual truth contained in what each one
 of us and each person has to share.   
 For a long time, I have wondered how to live a spi
ritually devoted life as a 
Unitarian Universalist.  Does it mean daily prayer?
  Does it mean meditating more?  Do I 
need to go on a spiritual retreat?  Spend more time
 in silence?  It™s a question I wrestle 
with often and the answers are rarely the same.  An
d this morning, I am here to give you 
a small glimpse into one of the ways I believe each
 of us can live a more devoted life as 
Unitarian Universalists Œ through listening. 
This morning, I want to own with you all just right
 up front that I have not always 
been the best listener.  Call this a confessional m
oment (ha! In a UU church!), call it a 
moment of actually being responsible for the way I 
have acted.  I have not always been 
the best listener.  Listening has taken me some pra
ctice.  It has taken me time to pay true 
attention to what others are saying and it has take
n me a while to learn to listen to myself. 
 It is life-saving to hear the experiences of other
s.  I am going to say that again 
because I believe it matters- it is life-saving to 
hear the experiences of others.   
A few years back, I was part of a sharing circle wi
th some other women in my 
community.  Each week, we would pick a topic to sha
re on and go around in a circle, 
taking turns, sharing for seven minutes, uninterrup
ted on various topics that were relevant 
to our lives.  We shared parts of our stories Œ our
 histories, our cultural experiences.  
Oftentimes, people shed tears in articulating what 
had been held inside of them for so 
long, and actually being listened to while they sha
red it.  It is a difficult practice to devote 
your attention to another person for seven minutes 
straight.  I had to get used to the 
experience.  But when I did, I recognized, that, in
 listening to others, I was given a gift.  
In listening without feeling the pressure to respon
d, I was able to just be there with 
someone else, to truly, fully be there, and to be p
resent. 
Do you know what I am talking about?  Have you ever
 had the experience of 
listening to another person and truly hearing what 
they are saying? 
I join with the opinion shared in the reading from 
this morning from Dr. Rachel 
Naomi Remen.  The most basic and powerful way to co
nnect to another human being is 

just to listen to them.  To open our ears and our e
yes to what another person is saying, 
that we can fully take in what is being shared, and
 that someone feels fully heard.  When 
I listen to someone, I benefit in hearing them out.
  I benefit in understanding them.  There 
is a part of our core that is touched, transformed 
in the experience, just the same as the 
person being listened to. 
When I have felt fully listened to, it has been a h
ealing experience.  It is at the 
center of pastoral care and many therapeutic practi
ces.  When we are listened to, there is 
a sigh of relief within.  We are recognized.  Our w
ords and feelings are validated by this 
sacred act of expressing what is inside of us, and 
experiencing connection with another 
person.  It is an act of the heart, one where we op
en up when we know we are being 
listened to. 
Theologically, listening is one of the vehicles tha
t binds us together.  It is an act 
that connects my human experience with yours.  It i
s a practice that brings us into further 
knowing each other, and possibly knowing ourselves,
 but I will get to that a bit later.  
Even if we cannot physically hear, we can recognize
 body language, recognize shared 
experience, recognize when we are being understood.
  Sharing our stories puts us in 
touch with the humanity of another person. 
Today, as you were listening to the story Osa share
d of what his life has been 
telling him he should do, I wonder if there was a p
oint of connection for you.  I wonder if 
there was a time where you heard a spiritual truth-
 perhaps that making music is 
important, perhaps a value of diverse voices and pe
rspectives, perhaps another aspect of 
his story rang true to you.  It is amazing to me th
at someone can share their story from 
another part of the country, sometimes from another
 part of the world, and it can ring true 
to us. 
Listening to someone else is an act that takes prac
tice for some of us Œ we do not 
begin listening in this way overnight. Remen writes
 about listening, ?The simple thing 
has not been that easy to learn.  It certainly went
 against everything I had been taught 
since I was very young.  I thought people listened 
only because they were too timid to 
speak or did not know the answer.  A loving silence
 often has far more power to heal and 
to connect than the most well-intentioned words.?  
 We must first unlearn our 
interpretations of another™s silence.  We must firs
t unlearn our kneejerk response to react 
and to say something that conveys we are listening 
or we know the experience of another. 
How many people here have had a similar experience 
to the one described by 
Rachel Naomi Remen™s client in our reading today?  
An experience of telling your story 
and being interrupted, only to hear that person say
 they have been through the exact same 
thing?  How did you feel in that moment?  When this
 has happened to me, I experienced 
hurt- no one knows exactly what has happened to me.
  I experienced anger that my story 
was cut off.  I experienced a jarring shift of gear
s that made me want to give up also. 
To go back to the experience of listening to Osa™s 
story, if there was a point of 
connection, we know still that his story is his sto
ry and our stories are our own.  There are 
shared experiences to be heard between humans Œ it 
speaks to a common thread that runs 
through us all.  However, listening to someone and 
fully hearing them also means 

allowing another person™s story to belong to them, 
to refrain from the impulse to interject 
my story, which communicates that I am not fully li
stening.  My attention is now 
elsewhere.  This listening can be difficult stuff. 
I wonder what it would be like if each one of us en
gaged in group or paired 
listening practices, like sharing circles or covena
nt groups.  If we took intentional times 
here in church or elsewhere to just practice listen
ing to others.  As a church we host 
covenant groups because we know the importance of l
istening, we value the connections 
that can be formed between people in the act of lis
tening and sharing with each other.  
This can happen in any myriad of spaces and places,
 though the opportunity must be 
intentionally created. 
To switch gears here for a moment, there is another
 aspect to listening as a 
spiritual practice, as a way to connect, and that i
s in a deeper connection with ourselves.  
Remen reminds us, ?We connect through listening.?  
I think this applies to listening 
others alongside ourselves.  Each Sunday, when we h
old space for silence in this room, I 
can feel the energy that is created by just taking 
a silent moment to listen to ourselves.  I 
feel the importance of this practice each Sunday wh
en I am able to partake in this 
moment of silence with you all. 
In my attempts to live a more devotional life as a 
Unitarian Universalist, I always 
turn back to one of the first tools in my toolbox. 
 It is a book, one that was given to me 
when I graduated high school in a Unitarian Univers
alist church where I had grown up.  
The book is called 
Awakening the Soul
 by John C. Morgan.  It is a book of daily readings
, 
no longer than a paragraph, with a question and a m
editation or prayer.  It has been my 
strongest, most tangible tool that is rooted in Uni
tarian Universalist values and identity.   
I have had an ?on and off? practice of regularly re
ading through this book.  One 
evening, when my daily reading was on an upswing, t
here was a passage about the little 
time we spend listening, sitting in silence in our 
daily lives.  In the place of a question 
was the challenge to sit for five minutes and just 
to listen.  To quiet one™s mind, to open 
our ears and just to listen.  At first, I read it a
nd was like, ?You have got to be kidding 
me.?  I don™t have time for that.  But I decided to
 make time that day, just that once, and 
it transformed the rest of that day.  I heard thing
s outside of my window that I had not 
stopped to listen for, and, in Oakland, California,
 there can be many interesting sounds 
outside of one™s window.  I heard birds whizzing by
, the hum of cars, the breeze against 
the window.  I heard the shifts in my house, the qu
iet hum of the lights that were on, paid 
attention to my breathing.  There were so many thin
gs going on right there, where I was 
standing, that I had not taken the time to notice b
efore.  Listening to one™s self is about 
deepening our awareness of what surrounds us and wh
at is within us.  
 Today, I want to encourage you, to challenge you, 
to do the same Œ to take just 
five minutes to listen to yourself, to listen to th
e world around you.  It can happen in your 
car, before bed, when you first wake up in the morn
ing, it can happen anywhere.  Just 
take five minutes to listen.  I™ll be interested to
 hear about what you experience. 
What is your life telling you you should do?  I lov
e this question inspired by 
Parker Palmer™s quote, ?Before you can tell your li
fe what you want to do with it, you 

first have to listen to your life telling you who y
ou are.?  What is your life telling you you 
should do?  A worthy question and one that deserves
 intentional time to listen for an 
answer.  This doesn™t need to be solely about grand
 scheme life direction (though that is 
important), it can also be about what the next step
 is, what decisions need to be made.  
We all Œ each of us Œ always have the option to sto
p and to take a moment to think about 
what we are going to say or to do next.  That optio
n is always available and it brings 
more thought and intention to where our lives are h
eaded. 
The key is to listen to ourselves.  Last week, Rev.
 Mark talked about listening to 
our consciences, about hearing with our whole selve
s, about listening to others even 
when it is painful, even when we feel resistance.  
It is time for us to take this practice 
inward.  To listen to what is going on inside each 
of us, whether it is painful, joyous, 
afraid, exhausted, or any number of feelings or sen
sations.  We can be better in touch 
with both our hearts and our heads by just listenin
g. 
In listening to our inner selves, we build a relati
onship with our inner-knowing, 
that voice that resides inside every human being.  
The voice that helps us choose between 
right or wrong, that instinct of where to go next o
r what to decide.  A voice of justice, 
propelling us forward into further action, a voice 
of kindness when we are in need of 
care, a voice of questioning when we are uncertain.
  Inside each of us is a spark of truth, a 
piece of knowing that only we have Œ perhaps that p
rofound spiritual truth they refer to in 
the Sanctuaries movement. 
Listening is at the center of many religious tradit
ions in the meditation of 
Buddhist and Hindu practices, in the moment of sile
nce following a prayer in the 
Christian tradition, in sharing sacred texts as peo
ple engage in the practice of hearing 
stories told over and over again.  So it is both in
 listening to others and listening to 
ourselves that we can take one more step along the 
path of living a more devoted 
Unitarian Universalist life.  As we continue to pra
ctice listening, we grow deeper in our 
connection to others and in our connection to ourse
lves. 
That is what spiritual practices are all about Œ gr
owth, maturity, deepening our 
connection to ourselves and each other.  We deserve
 to be listened to by others and by 
ourselves.  We deserve that gift of attention that 
we may live more full lives.  May our 
hearts and ears remain open to the beauty that surr
ounds us and is within us.  Take time 
to listen and may you always be heard.  Amen 

Offering 

With this offering today, our church may continue i
ts work toward justice and fairness for 
all.  With this offering today, our church continue
s to provide a home for many 
community events, bringing people together for laug
hter, fun, and deeper engagement.  
With this offering today, our church continues its 
commitment to offering a spiritual 
home to people of all ages.  With this offering tod
ay, we re-commit to being a part of this 
beloved community.  The offering will now be receiv
ed, in gratitude for all you have 
given to help continue the work of this church. 

Returning 

Spirit of wonder and growth, ever inviting us into 
connection, 
We lift up gratitude today for the gifts we have be
en given, 
For moments of quiet where we travel down deep to o
ur hearts, 
For the people who share their stories with us, and
 for the opportunity to share our own,  
For this precious life, in all its hardships, oppor
tunities and surprises, 
We are truly grateful. 

 
A Very Special Celebration- 
Jackie Angelino™s 100
th
 Birthday 
Singing #128 For All That Is Our Life 

Blessing 

Here in this place, in this community, let us go fo
rth this week ever listening, devoting 
our attention where it needs to be, caring for ours
elves and each other.  Go in peace, 
blessed be, amen. 

