
  We are here
with our whole lives, our troubles and joys
  to receive the gifts our living tradition gives us:
freedom in form and image,
  reason as faith's weighty anchor,
and a loving community of concern and care.

  Word! Open our minds and hearts like doors! 
Silence, empty us of what we do not need!
  Song, unify us in uncommon delight.
And at worship's end?

(together) may our reason and our passion
  keep us true to ourselves, true to each other
  and true to those shared visions of what we can together
  become?.

  Here we are together in this great room.
  We are all under the many warm colors
  braiding through the wood in the ceiling.
  
  We are all above the carpet enriched with 
  turquoise and red.
  
  Together we can note dozens of green plants 
  many of which came from lands far from Ohio,
  
  Together we can note shuttered windows opening up onto the local day;
  together we can slowly breathe in the air
  which yesterday wafted over the Rockies,
  and tomorrow will arch over Labrador.
  
  In the air, molecules and atoms and empty space, molecules and atoms and
  emptiness
  which once may have been part of the hand
  which the Dutch heretic Spinoza called his own, 
  and another atom of air may have been breathed
  by Buddha's wife over the crib of their son,
  and still a third may have been part of the
  wooden house in Chicago where Jane Addams sat down to read the text in the
  gospel:
  
  "Blessed are you poor."
  The whole history of the world 
  is in this room, 
  not just by the imagination of the human heart, but by the revelation of
  the physicist and statistician. 
  Thus, this is indeed a sacred place.
  
  But no more sacred than everything outside 
  its louvered doors, from the Memorial Garden ten meters from this pulpit
  
  to the star Epsilon Eridani ten light years away, a beautiful star
  which itself is washed in a silence that is much like this sacred silence
  
silence 

  Remembering that our common history 
  is in this sacred room in a sacred universe, 
  we dare to lift up our own personal history, 
  and link it to that greater, embracing history, 
  by naming in our hearts or aloud 
  the people in our own lives whom we remember, 
  revere, struggle with or are blest by...
  people without whom we are not who we are.
  
naming

  Blest is our common world.
  Blest is our common story.
  Blest is each individual story.
  And blest, the music that hallows it all with beauty.

  In the words of Sir Julian Huxley, religion is a way of life founded upon
  the apprehension of sacredness in existence. This apprehension of the sacred
  is accompanied by the emotion of awe, a blend of wonder, dread and love,
  and is always characterized by self-forgetfulness. Joseph Addison summed
  up this state of mind well in his phrase: "I'm lost in wonder, love and praise."
  
  Are there different kinds of religion?
  
  Yes. There are undoubtedly different kinds of religion. But I do not divide
  religions into Christianity, Buddhism, Islam, Hinduism - and so on. Rather,
  I see two fundamentally different kinds of religion in each of the religions.
  
  In the first place, I differentiate between firsthand religion and secondhand
  religion. Firsthand religion arises from the direct and immediate apprehension
  of the sacred by the individual. Second-hand religion is the acceptance of
  something as sacred on the authority of another. You believe it to be sacred
  but you have not experienced it for yourself. There is a great deal of secondhand
  religion among the believers in all religions. But it is firsthand religion
  which is, to me, authentic.
  
  In the second place, I differentiate between the kind of religion which makes
  a distinction between the sacred and the profane, and the kind of religion
  which apprehends not just sacredness in existence but the sacredness of
  existence. In the former, the church or temple is sacred. The market place
  is not. In the latter, everything is regarded as sacred. This kind of religion
  sees that sacredness lies not in the nature of particular objects but in
  our attitude to them, which is one of wonder, dread or admiration. Authentic
  religious experience, in the words of the English Unitarian L. P. Jacks,
  "is not an exceptional thing reserved for privileged souls, not exceptional
  even in the sense that it occurs only at rare moments in life. It is the
  normal experience of an ordinary person grasped in its entirety and deeply
  felt."
  
  What is the function and relevance of religion to us today? The answer to
  this question arises out of our description of the religious experience.
  We are experiencing negatively what our world becomes when there is no reverence,
  no sense of the sacred. We see what we have done to our planet because we
  have no reverence for nature. And when we have no reverence for human beings,
  have we not reason for lament?
  
  We do not need a new concept of God, but a living sense of the sacredness
  of existence itself which can awaken in us the admiration, hope and love
  by which we can live.

Old Woman Being Interviewed

  You think I'm just an old lady.
  You don't know nothing, nothing,
  young man, with your little machine there
  whirring around, you telling me
  
  "Forget it's there,
  just forget it's there
  and tell me how you feel,
  how you feel.
  
  Were you ashamed to work as a maid?
  Were you humiliated to scrub toilets?
  Do you have low self-esteem
  because you ironed the
  boxer shorts of rich men?"
  
  You don't know nothing,
  nothing, young man.
  You're bored with me.
  And I'm bored with you.
  Why don't we end this thing right now
  so you can find someone who really
  interests you,
  and I can go about my business.
  
  You want me to tell you
  my secrets, but you think I don't have any.
  You think I'm just an old lady
  with red hands.
  Wait till you're ninety years old and
  we'll have a stranger with a machine
  ask you a lot of questions,
  ask you to sum it all up in forty-five minutes.
  You don't know the half of it, young man.
  
  "It's best you go now, I think,
  Yes. Nice to meet you, too, young man."
  
  But you didn't find out 
  nothing, nothing, young man.
  
  You don't know that I was young once
  with full lips and two lovers.

  Bagatelle, Waltz, Foxtrot, Pavane
  a thousand ways, a thousand ways to dance.
  Improvised, choreographed, im-pro-vised 
  a thousand, thousand ways to dance.
  O Love, as I leave this place to-day
  show me, show me, show me, that there are
  that there are, a thousand ways to love.
  To tell the truth, to live the truth, 
  to sing the truth, to resist, two, three,
  to resist, two, three, all the temptations 
  of pessimism, and hand-wringing,
  that try and tie weights, two, three 
  to my feet, two, three?
  show me, show me all the thousand ways
  to notice, to notice, the precise green, two, three
  green two, three, of a locust tree on my street,
  Help me to see that as many said no as said yes,
  and that as many said yes as said no,
  and that I too/ can decide/ to say yes, yes, yes
  to you. O Love, I am here. We are here.
  I pray we might so live our lives that in
  days to come they might say, they lived their
  faith, they loved their lives, they dared to
  trust that joy was for them, two, three, joy
  was for them, two, three, joy was for the world.
