  2008-1-20 MLK 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

to lift our voices and sing, 

indeed, to make of our lives a song, 

each person a note 

harmonizing with their sisters and brothers 

to overcome the sad noise of injustice. So, 

 
Mindful that a growing vision of a just world calls
 us together, that a community 
of commitment, courage and care sustains us, and th
at a life transformed by 
depth of spirit may illumine our way, we have kindl
ed this light as the sign of our 
circle of life and love.
   
Sequence
  
Every day is different from the day before. 

Every night is different from the night before. 

Every day the body gives up its cells. 

Every night, the body grows new cells.  

Every day the clouds change: they seem to boil  

or spread like batter, or fade or thicken. 

Every day, memories are created,  

memories are forgotten. 

Every day, change, movement, becoming. 

Becoming. Every moment, coming to be. 

I say, there are no human beings anywhere, 

only human becomings. 

I say I am not finished, I™m only beginning. 

I say that families, congregations, 

cities, and the world are not frozen 

in ice, fixed in amber, nailed down for good. 

I say that everything rises and sinks, 

circles and soars,  

every day we are saying goodbye,  

every day we are saying hello.  

I say, even the very silence becomes, moves and cha
nges. Let that silence now flow–. 
 
Silence 

 
I say there are many worlds in the one world, many 
eras in every moment, many 
windows in our hearts where we open up to everythin
g outside our heart.  Imagining the 
images of those we love, those we miss, those with 
whom we struggle, those we 
honor, or saying their names in our hearts, or in t
he common air, let us move through 
this moment with open hearts, thankful for our live
s. 
 
Naming 

   
I say, every piece of music has many notes, not one
. And these notes move along the 
lines of time and change as we do, for there is no 
melody without change, as there is no 
humanity without becoming, and there is no justice 
without growth. 
 
Readings: 

 
The First Reading comes from Beverly Daniel Tatum™s
 phenomenal 1997 book, which, if 
I could, I would make required reading for everyone
 in the church, heck, everyone I 
know. It™s called ?Why Are All the Black Kids Sitti
ng Together in the Cafeteria?? 
  

Many people use the terms 
prejudice
 and 
racism
 interchangeably.  I do not, and I think 
it is important to make a distinction.  Author Davi
d Wellman argues convincingly that 
limiting our understanding of racism to prejudice d
oes not offer a sufficient explanation 
for the persistence of racism.  He defines racism a
s a ?system of advantage based on 
race.?  In illustrating this definition, he provide
s example after example of how Whites 
defend their racial advantage Œaccess to better sch
ools, housing, jobs Œ even when 
they do not embrace overtly prejudicial thinking.  
 Racism cannot be fully explained as 
an expression of prejudice alone. 

 
This definition of racism is useful because it allo
ws us to see that racism, like other 
forms of oppression, is not only a personal ideolog
y based on racial prejudice, but a 
system
 involving cultural messages and institutional poli
cies and practices as well as 
the beliefs and actions of individuals.  In the con
text of the United States, this system 
clearly operates to the advantage of Whites and to 
the disadvantage of people of color.  
Another related definition of racism, commonly used
 by antiracist educators, is 
?prejudice plus power.? 

 
Peggy McIntosh, a White feminist scholar, identifie
d a long list of societal privileges that 
she received simply because she was White.  She did
 not ask for them, and it is 
important to note that she hadn™t always noticed th
at she was receiving them.  They 
included major and minor advantages.  Of course she
 enjoyed greater access to jobs 
and housing.  But she also was able to shop in depa
rtment stores without being 
followed by suspicious salespeople, and could alway
s find appropriate hair care 
products and makeup in any drugstore. She could als
o be late for meetings, and talk 
with her mouth full, fairly confident that these be
haviors would not be attributed to the 
fact that she was White.  She could express an opin
ion in a meeting, or in print, and not 
have it labeled the ?White? viewpoint.  In other wo
rds, she was more often than not 
viewed as an individual, rather than as a member of
 a racial group. 
 
My oldest son, Jonathan, was enrolled in a day care
 center where he was the only 
Black child in his class.  One day, as we drove hom
e Jonathan said, ?Eddie says my 
skin is brown because I drink too much chocolate mi
lk.  Is that true??  Eddie was a 
White three-year-old in Jonathan™s class who had ob
served a physical difference and 
was now searching for an explanation. 

 
?No,? I replied, ?your skin is brown because you ha
ve something in your skin called 
melanin.  Melanin is very important because it help
s protect your skin from the sun. 

  Everybody has melanin, you know.  But some people h
ave more than others. At your 
school, you are the kid with the most!? 

 
In fact, Eddie™s question, ?Is your skin brown beca
use you drink too much chocolate 
milk?? represented a good attempt to make sense of 
a curious phenomenon that he was 
observing.  All the kids in the class had light ski
n except for Jonathan.  Why was 
Jonathan™s skin different?  It didn™t seem to be di
rt Œ Jonathan washed his hands before 
lunch like all the other children did, and there wa
s no change.  He did often have 
chocolate milk in his lunch box Œ maybe that was it
.  Eddie™s reasoning was first-rate for 
a three-year-old. 

 
The Second Reading comes from a recently published 
essay written by colleague David 
Bumbaugh, who now teaches at Meadville Lombard Scho
ol in Chicago. It™s called 
Cherish the Dream and it was just published this ye
ar. 
  

I suppose that every American of my generation has 
a ?Dr. King? story.  Here is mine.  I 
had graduated from seminary in 1964 with a clear id
ea of my ministry.  I spent my time 
reading, reflecting and crafting sermons. 

 
Then came the day that Martin Luther King sent out 
his invitation to clergy to come to 
Selma, Alabama.  Now, I did not for a moment believ
e he meant me.  I had grown up in 
a community in which we had been carefully taught t
o avoid attracting attention to 
ourselves. It never occurred to me that an invitati
on to the clergy to come to Selma 
meant me, too.  I did not go. 

 
Then came the terrible news that James Reeb, one of
 our Unitarian Universalist 
ministers who did respond to that call, had been cl
ubbed to death in the streets of 
Selma.  Another call went out.  Once more, it never
 occurred to me that I was included. 
 
The next Sunday, two members of my congregation ask
ed if I was going to Alabama.  I 
must have looked very confused.  I explained that w
e had a small child, and another 
child on the way, and I really did not have the mon
ey to spend on a plane ticket, and–.  
They interrupted my ramblings to say, ?We have the 
plane ticket; will you use it??  And 
so I went to Alabama. 

 
The years have passed. I have grown older and watch
ed what has happened to the 
image of Martin Luther King, Jr.  First we made him
 a hero. Then, we softened his 
message so that it would not challenge us in any fu
ndamental way. Gone is his concern 
about the morality of an economic system in which t
he rich get richer and the poor get 
poorer.  Gone is his challenge to examine our cultu
ral life. And then, having made him a 
hero, we have proceeded to find his feet of clay.  
We poke each other in the ribs and 
suggest that he was really a womanizer.  We point o
ut that he was less than meticulous 
in crediting his sources in writing his thesis.  Af
ter a while, we have demythologized and 
anesthetized his legacy so that we need no longer f
eel or hear the challenge of his life 
and work. 

 
I tell you, as one who was there on the fringes of 
this history, that all the critiques may 
well be true.  Martin Luther King, Jr. was, like al
l human beings, flawed and imperfect.  
He was a creature of his times. His reach often exc
eeded his grasp. But despite this, or 

  perhaps because of it, he remains one of the few tr
ue heroes.  He was a man who rose 
above his limitations. He taught me what it means t
o live a life of integrity and courage.   
 
From him I learned that the invitation to be engage
d in the life of the world, in the issues 
of the day, in the challenges of the times, is 
always 
addressed to me. 
 
Sermon 

 
Like David Bumbaugh, and like many of us in this ro
om, I can remember where I was 
when the Rev. Dr. King was killed. I was a first ye
ar student at Oakland University in 
Rochester, Michigan. The April sun was just setting
. I was coming out of the library into 
the blue light of evening, after studying for a fin
al the next day. 
 
Someone, I don™t remember who, came running up and 
said, ?Oh boy, there™s gonna be 
trouble tonight in the city!? (meaning Motown, mean
ing Detroit).  ?Why? What™s going 
on?? I asked. 

 
?Someone just killed that guy, you know, the guy wh
o went to Washington with all those 
people. It™s gonna be worse than it was last year, 
I tell you. (He was referring to the 
Detroit riots, or uprising, of 1967, which tore the
 city apart.) 
 
?Oh, that guy,? I said, ?That™s 
awful
! But hey, do you 
really
 think there™s gonna be riots?? 
 
?Well, I dunno, for real,? the guy mused. ?To tell 
the truth, I don™t know much about what 
he™s all about, but it sure is gonna shake things u
p. Almost as bad as when Kennedy 
was shot.? 

 
Well, sad to say, that pretty much summed up all I 
knew about King when I was 19. Civil 
rights? How about pulling an all-nighter to pass my
 French finals instead. A march?  
How about finding a good summer job to earn enough 
to pay my tuition. And, besides, it 
wasn™t really my problem anyway, I thought. After a
ll, 
I 
wasn™t some fool racist down in 
Selma wearing a pillow-case over my head. 

 
?But, time has passed,? summarizes David Bumbaugh w
ith notable economy. ?That 
guy,? namely Rev. King, ?was turned into a hero.? T
hen little by little - Rev.Bumbaugh is 
right about this - his radical understanding of how
 economics and war are intimately tied 
up with the racialization of America, was almost to
tally lost. 
 
Racism itself was trivialized into mere prejudice, 
something which perhaps a little 
scolding from a wise parent or teacher could erase 
in a trice. And, yes, some folks 
indeed found ways to snicker at Dr. King, tossing h
im away as both a cheat and 
womanizer. They found his ?feet of clay.? 

 
But, you know, time has passed for me, too.  And I 
cannot think of anything in my 
experience these last 30 years that undercuts what 
Dr. Tatum asserts and what I totally 
believe: 

 
Many people use the terms 
prejudice
 and 
racism
 interchangeably.  I do not, and I 
think it is important to make a distinction.
  Author David Wellman argues 

  convincingly that limiting our understanding of rac
ism to prejudice does not offer a 
sufficient explanation for the 
persistence 
of racism. Instead, he defines racism as a 
?system of advantage based on race.? Or as others s
ay: ?Power 
plus
 prejudice.? 
 
I think that when Dr. Tatum quotes Peggy McIntosh, 
she describes with feminine 
references what I could describe using masculine on
es.  Peggy McIntosh ?did not ask 
for? any advantages, ?and it is important to note t
hat 
she hadn™t always noticed that she 
was receiving them
.?  They included, you will remember, ?greater acce
ss to jobs and 
housing.?  But she also was able ?to shop in depart
ment stores without being followed 
by suspicious salespeople, and could always find ap
propriate hair care products and 
makeup in any drugstore. She could also be late for
 meetings, and talk with her mouth 
full, fairly confident that these behaviors would n
ot be attributed to the fact that she was 
White.  She could express an opinion in a meeting o
r in print and not have it labeled the 
?White? viewpoint.  In other words, she was more of
ten than not viewed as an individual, 
rather than as a member of a racial group.?   Exact
ly. I don™t usually go around thinking 
of myself as a member of the white race. I think of
 myself as an individual. A person. If I 
claim any shared cultural identity, it™s usually my
 Italian heritage. But, my God, 
especially as a Unitarian Universalist, I announce 
my individuality first and foremost. But 
the point Peggy McIntosh is making, I think, when ?
white? people associate that word 
?race? with anything, they usually associate it wit
h brown skin tones, or saffron skin 
tones, or chocolate skin tones, 
not
 their own paler skin tones. White people tend to t
hink 
of themselves as just people–not people with color.
 And this association is 
systemically 
taught to all of us who have very little melanin in
 our skins. And to those who have 
plenty – and every variation in between –  in this 
blended era. 
 
We who live in the United States (and by this ?we,?
 I mean blacks, whites, Asians, native 
Americans, Latinos etc) learned that white is 
normal
 and black is a 
race
 when we were 
children. Tatum tells that story about her son™s fr
iend Eddie and the chocolate milk. And 
she says, when three-year-old Eddie reasoned about 
why one child had brown skin and 
the others paler skin, it 
was
 pretty fine reasoning for a three-year-old. Childr
en naturally 
and wisely want to figure things out about perceive
d differences.  
 
When I was just a year older than her son Jonathan 
and his friend Eddie, that is, when I 
was four, my mother took me downtown, on the now-ba
rely-remembered streetcar 
system, to get my eyes examined. She promised me th
at, if I was well behaved when 
the ophthalmologist dilated my eyes, she would buy 
me a hot dog for lunch, the hot dog 
being the only typical ?American food? I enjoyed ea
ting as a little Italian American kid. 
Well, I survived the dilation and all the brightnes
s, and my mother kept her promise. But 
when the woman behind the hot dog cart handed me th
e hot dog all covered with 
mustard and relish, I refused to eat it. Why? 

 
Because I had never seen an African American person
 before, up close. And I saw that 
her palms were lighter than the back of her hands. 
And I assumed she had mud of 
some kind on her hands, mud like I used to get on m
e as a child. And so I was afraid to 
get mud in my lunch. I was using the reason of a fo
ur-year-old to explain what my sight 
showed me. My mother told me I was just ?silly,? in
stead of saying anything about 
melanin, of course, like Jonathan™s mother. And you
 know, I really don™t remember if I 
ate the hot dog or not.
  
  But, listen, my mother simply would not have known 
in those days what we know now– 
which is that, since our ancestors 
all
 came out of central Africa before migrating around
 
the world, our most remote ancestors were 
all
 black once. That melanin protected us 
from the bright light of the sun drying up the last
 ice age.  As some of us moved north, 
we slowly lost the melanin and became paler, since 
pale skin allowed the slanted and 
weaker sunlight of the northern climates to enter o
ur skin and generate necessary 
Vitamin D. In Africa, the rivers and lakes, then fu
ll and thriving, had plenty of fish, which 
generated that same Vitamin D. But despite that one
 simple difference, based on  
migration more than biology per se, there really is
 no such thing as ?race? biologically. 
Things like skin color or hair color are merely sup
erficial–I mean, obviously, since no 
one goes around talking about a ?race? of redheads,
 do they? It was a European named 
Francois Bernier who first used the word race to di
vide human beings into distinct types 
back in 1684. Not so long ago. But we know that all
 human beings, of whatever color, 
are genetically related to all other human beings. 
Period. No exceptions. 
 
The 
idea
 of ?race? however, is real. It was constructed ove
r a few hundred years here in 
the United States as a way of claiming normalcy, ad
vantage and privilege for one group 
of people, while denying it to others, markedly tho
se with more melanin in their skin. 
Both Blackness and Whiteness are entirely invented 
social categories, created, as Dr. 
King would preach, to establish economic advantages
 for some, disadvantages for 
others. The two words are obviously not even the sl
ightest bit descriptive. Even famous 
liberals like Thomas Jefferson and famous scientist
s like Louis Agassiz participated in 
the racializing of the United States, and to read a
bout its origins is simply painful.  
 
But although such academic education about the stor
y of racism is important, today it™s 
far 
more 
important that people of whatever melanin count fre
ely begin to tell their own 
life stories in regards to this issue. However, stu
dies have shown that African 
Americans, Asian Americans and Native Americans tal
k about this subject far more than 
Euro-Americans do. 
Far
 more. Time for so-called White people, of all ages
 and 
ethnicities, to get on the band wagon. The good new
s is that many already have. The 
younger members of our Unitarian Universalist congr
egations, no matter their ancestry, 
have also led the way and engaged with this subject
 with studied deliberation at their 
?cons? (weekend retreats) and other venues. Thus, a
ny movement to create a society 
where there is no systematic advantages for some, a
nd clear disadvantages for others, 
must begin with all people, of whatever color, tell
ing their own stories, having their own 
conversations. 

 
Ever thought about inviting a group of friends over
 to your house for dinner and 
conversation about race? Ever thought of helping th
is congregation to take a course of 
self-examination and study on these issues?  Ever t
hought of looking at aspects of your 
life and thought through an anti-racist lens?  Ever
 thought about what to do next? If not, 
it™s time. Not because any ?white person? in this r
oom goes around with a pillow-case on 
his or her head. But because no matter our color, t
his issue calls to us all.  My 19-year- 
old self finally grew up and learned that. And no m
atter that we are, every one of us, 
flawed creatures. All of us. So was Martin Luther K
ing, as Bumbaugh said. Big deal. 
That didn™t hold him back. Anyway, you and I know t
hat anyone waiting for the perfect 
time, the perfect motive, the perfect character, is
 pretty ridiculous anyway.  
  

  For David Bumbaugh is certainly right about this to
o–when the call goes out to face 
this issue, to take it seriously, make it central, 
and really make a difference, it comes to 
us. Each of us. And I tell you truly, it calls us e
ach by name. 
  

Offertory 

 
No walls without a foundation. 

No earth without sky. 

No thirst when there is water. 

No defeat when there is hope. 

No joy without facing reality first. 

No church without generosity from 

those who agree to be a congregation.  

The offering of gifts in support of this congregati
on will now be received. 
 
Prayer 

 
We shall overcome, Love, 

starting with ourselves. 

We shall overcome, Love, 

starting with ourselves. 

We shall overcome, Love, 

starting with ourselves. 

Oh, may we have the strength 

to believe with great confidence 

that everything begins 

when we start with ourselves. 

  

