 Evolution 
February 13, 2011 
Rev. Mark Belletini 
 
 
We are here 

with a welcome warmer week ahead of us, 

to worship together faithfully, and in peace,  

to celebrate both learning and those who learn, 

teaching, and those who teach, 

and to let our wonder before the river of time flow
, 
and flow freely, that we might be refreshed.  

 And so, we pledge to journey together along the way
s of truth and affection, 
as best as we can name them now, or may learn them 
in days to come; that 
we and our children may be fulfilled, and that we m
ay speak to our world in 
words and lives of peace, justice and goodwill. 
 
Teacher Thanksgiving:   

Jolinda
: 
(introduces the new FDA™s and then Mark explains) 
Religious Education governance is 
moving from spending time in meetings to doing and 
sharing ministry. Our three Faith 
Development Associates, along with Jolinda, our Dir
ector of Religious Education, spend their 
volunteer hours working directly with children, you
th, parents and teachers. By the end of our 
three year process we will have several more Faith 
Development Associates for children and 
youth, and several more for adult faith development
. They will receive special training in anti-
racism and in other excellent ways that will help a
ll of us–of every age–to go deeper in our 
religious knowledge and practice. This morning we e
nter into formal covenant with them. 
 
Carolee and Marla, recognizing that our ministry wi
th children, youth and their families is sacred 
and brimming with community and promise, do you aff
irm and agree to support the faith 
development of each child, youth and teacher with w
hom you are in relationship? Do you affirm 
and agree to prepare yourself with training, and to
 enter into this three year commitment with 
love? If so please say, "Yes." 

 
Carolee
 and 
Marla
:  Speaking for ourselves and for our partner Deb B
aillieul–.Yes! 
 
Mark
 and 
Eric
: As the elected ministers we welcome you in this s
pecial role in the shared 
ministry of the congregation. We agree to support y
ou, to be there to listen, to help, and to 
welcome your gifts and labor as we move together to
 fulfill the challenge of our mission and 
vision.  

 
[To the congregation]
 Will you, the gathered congregation of First Unita
rian Universalist, join 
with us in pledging encouragement and support for o
ur Faith Development Associates? If so, 
please say Yes Yes!  

 
 Congregation:
 Yes Yes! 
 
Jolinda
 (to the children:)
  
The adults have agreed to help one another. These F
aith Development Associates have promised 
their special care for you in Sunday School. Do you
 agree to care for them as well, to be honest 
with them?  If you will, please say, 
"Yes, yes, yes." 
 
Children:  Yes! Yes! Yes! 

At this point the FDA's and Jolinda will call out c
ategories of volunteers and ask them to come 
forward to receive their gifts. So we'll say ?will 
all committee and council members come 
forward?? etc. We will refer everyone to the list i
n the order of celebration
.   
 
Jolinda:
 Therefore, ever mindful that, in our fullness, we 
each live with experiences and 
understandings from every stage of our lives; 

 
Marla: 
and mindful that a congregation in its wholeness we
aves the spiritual lives of all ages 
and stages into a radiant and wonderful whole; 

 
Carolee:
 and mindful that learning how to live with questio
ning, loving spirits, in a wondrous, 
amazing and tough world, is a joy as great as love 
itself, 
 
Jolinda:
 we thank each of you for opening the gate to such 
joy. We know this is the work of a 
lifetime. 

 
Mark:
 Blest are those who dare to teach; 
(clap onetime) 
blest are those who dare to learn; 
(clap 
twotimes.)
 and blest are those who know that they are merely 
the lead learner in a community of 
learners. 
(clap three times) 
 
Children and Youth
 (led by Jolinda) 
We thank you for taking this journey along the rive
r of life with us 
(wave hand along the air like 
a river), 
for living out the great questions with us 
(lift arms up above head), 
and for seeing those 
questions and asking them 
(put palms on either side of eyes).  
We thank you for being good 
examples of what it means to be Unitarian Universal
ist 
(hold up thumb & index finger on each 
hand, forming U's).  
We learn from you.  Thank you. 
 
(applause, one and all) 

  

Sequence: 

 
The river Nile flows past the tombs of history.  It
 moves through Cairo now, past the present 
tumult, past the young people that will shape the f
uture. The thing is, the river flows. It does not 
stay still.  The river Rio Grande flows, at least w
hen it is not dammed and siphoned off. It forms 
a barrier that many cross and many patrol, and yet 
it flows. It does not stay still. And even where 
the water is gone, the dust itself blows in the win
d and flows. 
 
 The river Scioto flows through parts of Columbus.  
Once it was wide and navigable, but now it is 
little more than a shallow waterway in most places.
 Sometimes it is frozen, at other times it 
floods. Once it did not exist, and there was a grea
t sea here, with creatures called trilobites 
everywhere. Now there is no sea, just a river. One 
day the Scioto River may disappear again. But 
right now, as the ice melts, it flows. It flows. It
 does not stay still. 
 
The river of time is all around us. We are currents
 in its flow, which never ceases, never freezes, 
never pools. Those who built the tombs of Egypt, an
d those who shall one day sail on the 
currents of space to the far stars, flow in that ri
ver along side us.  In witness and wonder of that 
magnificent river, may we keep silence for a time. 

 
silence 

 
The river of time in which we flow is filled with f
aces young and old, some in the past, some 
growing into a future we cannot know, but present i
n our hearts. May we bring them into our 
communion of hearts right now, by naming them withi
n our hearts or sounded aloud as we wish. 
For we are all flowing together in the river of lif
e. 
 
naming 

 
The river of life flows eternally through this time
 of worship. May we set down our rage and 
defenses by its shoreline. May we feel the stars cr
owning our heads as we wade into it.  And as 
St. Gregory once prayed, may we find in its silver,
 watery flow, a healing, saving sense of 
humility.           (Music:  9:15 Prayer of St. Gre
gory 11:00 Down By the Riverside) 
 
The First Reading
 this morning comes from a letter written by Albert 
Einstein in 1941. This 
letter is often edited by people in such a way as t
ry to make Einstein say something that would 
please them better, but this is the whole section o
f the letter that people sometimes fraudulently 
edit.  

 
?I was barked at by numerous dogs who are earning t
heir food guarding ignorance and 
superstition for the benefit of those who profit fr
om it. Then there are the fanatical atheists whose 
intolerance is of the same kind as the intolerance 
of the religious fanatics and comes from the 
same source. They are like slaves who are still fee
ling the weight of their chains which they have 
thrown off after hard struggle. They are creatures 
whoŠin their grudge against the traditional 
‚opium for the people™Šcannot bear the music of the
 spheres. The Wonder of nature does not 
become smaller because one cannot measure it by the
 standards of human moral and human 
aims.?    

 
The Second Reading
 is a most excellent poem by Lucille Clifton, publis
hed 19 years ago. 
 
i am accused of tending to the past 

as if i made it, 

as if i sculpted it 

with my own hands. i did not. 

 this past was waiting for me 

when i came, 

a monstrous unnamed baby, 

and i with my mother's itch 

took it to breast 

and named it 

History. 

she is more human now, 

learning languages everyday, 

remembering faces, names and dates. 

when she is strong enough to travel 

on her own, beware, she will. 

 
Sermon  

 
I was backpacking many years ago in Yosemite Nation
al Park with my friend Ken. We were 
ambling on a narrow path along the Merced River, wh
ich was incredibly beautiful, leaping like 
molten silver next to us. As we moved past huge roc
k outcroppings, we suddenly chanced on the 
most amazing sight. Above us, a flat curving shelf 
of granite was jutting out about twenty feet 
from a steep rocky cliff. The shelf appeared to be 
about five feet thick or so.  
 
Now, growing 
underneath
 that shelf was a pine tree. The pine tree had grow
n 
upside-down
 out of 
some little crack in the rock. Tender white roots m
ust have found some nutrients there, enough to 
grow a sapling downward for a few years. Then it hi
t the sweet-spot where the morning and 
afternoon sun made it past the shadow of the shelf.
 From that time on, the little pine trunk curved 
so that the tree grew out toward the sunlight. And 
now, there it was above us, larger by far than 
any Christmas tree I have ever seen, its U shaped t
runk at least five inches in diameter, growing 
out of a shadowed rock, but now green and bright in
 the daylight. Both Ken and I just shivered 
with wonder at the mysterious sight. How tenacious 
and stubborn life is, we said. How strong 
and insistent! How impossible to hold back! 

 
For Ken and me, this amazing sight was a wondrous n
atural occurrence, like all of life–flora 
and fauna, in the vast history of evolution. Volcan
oes erupt, storms destroy, and now and then, 
an asteroid strikes the earth, wiping out a million
 species or two. Yet life defies the horror, rises 
through the smoke and clouds, adapting, adjusting, 
and taking on new forms and new faces. For 
a few hundred million years, trilobites everywhere.
 Now, not a one. And now, for but a few 
million years, creatures called human beings have b
een becoming themselves, changing, growing 
taller, stronger and smarter. Will we humans last a
s long as the trilobites? 
 
I don™t know. I know that we are here right now.  

 
I know more intimately that 
I am here right now. And I know that 
my
 capacity for wonder and 
amazement at this mystery of life stubbornly growin
g, developing, evolving through the age is 
central to my religious life.
 Absolutely central.
 Its fountain, its source. 
 
 The iconic Albert Einstein constantly asserted a si
milar idea. In fact, it amazes me how much 
time this scientist took from his other work to wri
te about his religious views. For example, in 
1930 he wrote: 
I maintain that the cosmic religious feeling is the
 strongest and noblest motive for 
scientific research.
  (9
th
 November 1930 New York Times Magazine)  
 
Wow. I understand him suggesting that his inner sen
se of religious wonder has actually served as 
his principle diving board, the place from which he
 dove into the deep waters of scientific study 
and theory.  

 
Now, Dr. Einstein seems to have intuited that some 
folks were going to give him a hard time for 
using the word ?religious,? since many of the resea
rchers he spent time with associated that word 
with rigidity, cruelty and mindless credulity. Yet 
he insisted, and relatively late in his life, ?
I 
have found no better expression than ‚religious™ fo
r confidence in the rational nature of reality 
as it is accessible to human reason.?
 (Letter to Maurice Solovine, 1 January 1951)   
 
And just so 
that
 wouldn™t be misconstrued, he penned the following 
very clear words in a letter 
to a freethinking questioner a short time later: 
?The idea of a personal God is quite alien to me 
and seems even naive. However, I am also not a "Fre
ethinker" in the usual sense of the word 
because I find that this is, in the main, an attitu
de nourished exclusively by an opposition against 
naive superstition. My feeling is religious insofar
 as I am imbued with consciousness of the 
insufficiency of the human mind to understand deepl
y the harmony of the Universe which we try 
to formulate as ‚laws of nature.™  It is this consc
iousness and humility I miss in the Free-thinker 
mentality.?
( Letter to A. Chapple, Australia, February 23, 1954)
  
But Dr. Einstein, as the first reading made clear, 
got clobbered from both sides. Einstein himself 
works with the surprisingly strong verb ?to bark,? 
in fact. 
?I was barked at
 by numerous dogs, 
who are earning their food guarding ignorance and s
uperstition for the benefit of those who 
profit from it.
? He is referring to the fundamentalists of his era
 who berated him for daring to talk 
about religion in a way they didn™t like.
 These controlling and reactionary religious people,
 he 
boldly accuses, were not only 
guarding their own ignorance
, but were 
profiting
 from it. (If the 
dogs were barking at him in 1954, think of what the
y would do to him in 2011, the sad era of 
Prosperity Preaching!) 

 
But poor Dr. Einstein got it from the other side to
o. His 
fanatical atheist
 critics, as he put it, were 
clearly from the Soviet Union of Stalin, because he
 describes them as hiding behind the Marxist 
phrase 
opiate of the masses.
 These critics really got to him. They were so fren
zied with the idea 
that all religion is evil that they ridiculed Einst
ein for maintaining, as he did all of his life, tha
t 
the cosmic 
religious
 feeling 
preceded and supported
 his scientific endeavors.  Oh, I have to 
suspect that the undercurrent of anti-Semitism whic
h oozed through Stalinist Russia may have 
intensified this critique of Einstein, but neverthe
less, no one can deny that Einstein really got 
clobbered from all sides. 

 
But he was hardly the first person to describe a 
cosmic religious feeling
. He was hardly the first 
person to link it to reason and a rational explorat
ion of the harmonies of the universe. The 
famous Pythagoras (of the Pythagorean theorem you m
ay have memorized in school) expressed 

 the same ideas. He considered his reasonable approa
ch to the universe entirely rooted in his own 
religious feelings. Einstein and Pythagoras had sev
eral things in common. Like Einstein, 
Pythagoras praised and practiced vegetarian eating 
practices. Like Einstein, Pythagoras went so 
far as to suggest that everything in the cosmos was
 connected in ways that could be described 
best mathematically. But Pythagoras went further. H
e said that everything in the cosmos was 
connected the way the notes and intervals, when con
nected, make music, create a song. 
Pythagoras™s most recent biographer explains the sc
ientist™s famous phrase ?The Music of the 
Spheres? this way: 
?Thus,? (he said) ?the planets and stars moved acco
rding to mathematical 
equations, which corresponded to musical notes and 
thus produced a symphony.?
  
(Christoph 
Riedweg, Pythagoras: His Life, Teaching and Influen
ce, Cornell: Cornell University Press, 
2005) 

 
Einstein, you may remember, quotes Pythagoras™s exa
ct phrase in his letter, insisting that his 
fanatical atheist critics suffer because they canno
t ?bear? the ?Music of the Spheres.? He is 
saying that, because they put Party truth before al
l else, they allow themselves no personal sense 
of wonder, no inner feelings, thus refusing to list
en to the beautiful harmonies of the cosmos. 
This leaves them as arrogant and as rigid as the mo
st fanatical fundamentalist.  
 
Now Charles Darwin, the great scientist (who was bo
rn, by the way, 202 years ago yesterday) 
didn™t use the word ?religious? in the way that Ein
stein did, or Pythagoras. Oh, he understood 
that he had been raised 
in
 a religion, the Anglican religion; and he realized t
hat his wife was 
raised in and practiced the Unitarian religion of t
he famous Wedgewood family in England. But 
he himself was not religious in the sense of either
 religious group. Nor was he given to the kind 
of imaginative, almost mystic feeling which grounde
d both Einstein and Pythagoras.  
 
But this doesn™t mean that I think Darwin™s spiritu
al ear wasn™t attuned.  I just don™t think he was 
listening to ?the music of the spheres.? I cannot f
ind any evidence that he experienced any 
?cosmic religious feeling? as he set sail round the
 world on his famous voyages.  
 
But I 
am
 convinced he indeed listened to something. I think
 that from the very time he was a 
child, he found himself listening, not so much to t
he music of the spheres, as to the great 
symphony of humane justice.  
Here™s why I think so. 
 
Just as Einstein, a European Jew, offered his theor
ies in an age hostile to Jews and many other 
minorities, just as Pythagoras offered his ideas in
 an age of warring Greek city states, city states 
founded entirely on the institution slavery, so Dar
win offered his understanding of the origin of 
species in an era when chattel slavery was rife, an
d when many were not embarrassed to profit 
from the sale of human beings as property.  

 
And so, I say that Darwin heard movements from the 
symphony of humane justice all of his life. 
That™s what moved him. It was magnificent spiritual
 music, but filled with passages of bitter 
dissonance. The dissonance, for example, of hearing
 the Unitarian author Harriet Martineau at 
his dinner table, reporting her horrified observati
ons on slavery in the American South after her 
journey there. The dissonance of listening, with hi
s actual ears, to the crack of whips, and loud 
screams from slaves in Brazil, in every port, as he
 made his way along the coast of Brazil. And 

 perhaps, worst of all, the dissonance of hearing an
other world-famous scientist, Louis Agassiz,  
proclaiming that Africans, Asians and Islanders all
 had entirely different origins from European 
people, and were inferior in every way. 

 
But, in most great music I know, dissonances always
 move toward final resolution and profound 
harmony.  So, I say Darwin also heard achingly beau
tiful themes in the symphony of justice as 
well–I think of Thomas Clarkson, the chief force be
hind the abolitionist movement in England. 
You can see him also sitting at Darwin™s table, hol
ding forth passionately on abolition–
 Darwin™s stated life-long personal hero. I think al
so of Darwin learning so much from his dapper, 
well-spoken Hottentot guide while in South Africa, 
never daring to tell him that in England and 
America, he was not even considered entirely human 
by people like Agassiz.  
 
I think even of Darwin taking abolition so seriousl
y that he read children™s book on the subject to 
his own kids, especially 
Our Cousin in Ohio
, an 1849 book outlining the work of the 
Underground Railroad here in our own state, so far 
away from England. All of these beautiful 
melodies in the symphony of justice moved through t
he dissonance toward resolution.  These 
themes in the spiritual symphony of justice moved t
hrough Darwin™s days, strengthening him as 
he made his scientific observations that led to his
 famous book 
Origin of Species
. Just as 
Christian abolitionists, like the great Wilberforce
, were inspired by the story of Adam and Eve, 
the parents of 
all
 humankind no matter their color, so Darwin, in off
ering his well-documented 
understanding of the origin of our human species, r
ecognized that a common ancestry meant 
equal 
inherent 
dignity, which precluded even the slightest support
 for malevolent institutions like 
slavery. 

 
Einstein and Pythagoras heard the music of the sphe
res. Darwin heard the music of justice. Each 
of them, moved by either their emotional or thought
ful spiritual experiences, went on to do 
scientific research, perféct theories, and change t
he world.  But not one of the three of them 
confused their religious, ethical or spiritual grou
nding with the scientific work they did. Neither 
Einstein™s relativity nor Darwin™s evolutionary the
ories are religious doctrines, but the words of 
science. For science is not a creed. 

 
Darwin never offered something for us to ?believe i
n,? as if the idea of evolution was a tenet 
of some religion, as its fundamentalist, creationis
t  critics insist. It is not. Einstein™s religious 
feelings 
preceded
 his scientific study. Darwin™s ethical commitments
 preceded his scientific 
scrutiny. My own religious life is preceded by feel
ings about the universe–wonder and 
awe–which are supported by observation– that beauti
ful river and curving pine at Yosemite, 
for example. And, yes, by
 my own personal delving into the majesty of evoluti
on as Darwin and 
many other scientists have described it.    

 
I am also quite aware that the evolution of life in
 its various species on earth is not cuddly and 
warm. I know that. Lucille Clifton calls this histo
ry ?a monstrous unnamed baby.? Apt metaphor, 
monstrous. After all, the death of whole species do
es not make me think of the word ?cute.? The 
plagues and catastrophes which have wiped out life 
are scary. But please, when Einstein and 
Pythagoras proclaimed the harmonies of nature, they
 knew all this. They were not uplifting soft-
focus romantic harmonies –mere elevator 
muzak–
they were speaking of a great, complex and 

 profound symphony of life. Both of these people wer
e grown ups–they knew the tougher sides 
of nature–the mauling by wild beasts, the fact of w
ars, or the explosion of star in the sky. But as 
Einstein put it in his letter to the Freethinker, h
e saw these harmonies as deeper than humanistic 
needs: 
The Wonder of nature does not become smaller becaus
e one cannot measure it by the 
standards of human moral and human aims. 

 
Sadly, over forty percent of the citizens of our co
untry utterly reject Darwin, and accept 
Creationist mythology as fact, confusing the religi
ous literature of Genesis with hard science. 
Remember, religion is not science. And worse, they 
often accuse people like me, of arrogance, 
insisting that if I accept Darwin, then I have some
how overstepped my bounds, as if Darwin and 
I were supplanting every possible notion of God. Ag
ain, I find Lucille Clifton™s words helpful: 
i 
am accused of tending to the past as if i made it, 
as if i sculpted it with my own hands. i did not. 
this past was waiting for me when i came. 
That™s right. I am simply a new current dancing bri
efly 
on the surface of a stream of life that was flowing
 a billion years before I opened my eyes, and 
will be flowing, I hope, a billion years after me. 
I am part of nature, not over nature. I don™t 
expect justice from nature, or soft-focus romantic 
responses to my human needs; but I am awed 
by it. And I stand in wonder before the vast proces
sion of life. And that™s hardly overweening 
arrogance, to think I am but a small speck in the m
ysterious vastness of things, but, I™d like think, 
an echo of a bit of humility. 

 
But, personally, I am not embarrassed to say that I
 personally 
need
 the warm and cuddly side of 
things. I 
do 
depend on feelings associated with the wondrous bea
uties of the natural world, as 
well as loving relationships with others. And I do 
require visions of humane justice, which 
evolution simply does not offer me. So I choose to 
mine the spiritual languages of the various 
historic religions within the embracing context of 
Unitarian Universalism. I do that with a liberal 
hand, of course, and turn to the parables of Jesus,
 the tales of Buddha, Mirabai or Nanak, the 
poetry of mystical or prophetic poets, and even the
 letters of lovers, to give shape to my awe and 
wonder. And to give me the strength to get through 
my day. I am not like the Freethinker that 
Einstein pushed away–intent on scouring God from th
e English language as if that word could 
only
 be understood superstitiously, or as if there was 
demonstrably nothing else to religion but 
lunacy. 

 
I have no problem if someone wants their deep liber
al understanding of God, and the process of 
evolution, to be related. But I do have problems wi
th people who not only reject Darwin™s 
Origin 
of Species
 because their rather idolatrous vision of God dema
nds it, but who then accuse the poor 
man of being the spiritual impetus to everything ev
il ever done by the Nazi Party in Germany. If 
you don™t already realize this, the internet is jam
-packed with this nonsense; and 
that 
folks, is
 lunacy for real. Lunacy that scares me at times. 

 
Me, I™m not much of a backpacker anymore. Never was
 much of one to begin with, truth be told.  
So I™m much more likely these days to stoke my sens
e of awe and wonder by turning to the deep 
green, three-inch high shoots of some glorious spri
ng flower (crocuses?) in the glassed-in 
courtyard down by our classrooms. Nothing so grand 
as the roaring Merced river, or U-shaped 
pine growing out of a rock. Just a simple song of c
oming spring that calls me to my deeper life, 
which Einstein dared to call ?religious.? 

  
Maybe your most compelling music is a dream of just
ice, like Darwin™s. Maybe the symphony 
you listen to daily is indeed the music of the sphe
res, like Pythagoras heard within him, or 
Einstein. To me, (and this is important) one is not
 
more
 valid than the other, and we need all 
kinds of depth to build a humane world. I can think
 of many other songs, symphonies, or sonatas 
of spirit that might call you as well. But all of t
hem, and each of them, I™m convinced, evolved 
within the nature that you and I are part of. And h
ow wonderful is that? 
 
Offering 

We give to share the responsibility for this place,
 its mission and its vision. 

No one else is going to take care of these things. 

No one else is going to change the light bulbs, 

repair the roof, or fix the copy machine, 

or impact the larger community on our behalf. 

We are all in this together. 

So whether we contribute behind the scenes, or on S
unday mornings, we celebrate that we share 
this beautiful responsibility. 

 
Music of the Spheres: A Pythagorean Prayer 

Proportion of the planets, prostrate me to the grou
nd. 
Sonata of the stars, solitude me. 

Jazz of justice, judge me. 

Concerto of courage, console me. 

Chant of challenge, cheer me. 

Rhapsody of the river of life, restore me. 

Lovesong of the meaning of life, light the long pat
hways of my liberty. 
Song of spirit, spring me, and sing through me. Now
. 
 
#13 Songs of Spirit   

