 How Things Have Changed: The New Friendship 
February 19, 2012 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 
  

Greeting, Centering 

Kindling 

Opening Words  
  
 
We are here 

together to celebrate our lives 

in the spirit of love 

that we might befriend again 

our ancient vision 

of a just and kinder world. 

 
And so, without guarantees,  we lean into joy, and 
bend toward a just way of 
life, both for our own sakes, and for the sake of o
ur children and all beings 
with whom we share the earth. We would engage our m
ission 
wholeheartedly, with courage, self-questioning, com
passion, vulnerability 
and honesty. 
Story 

 
This is a true story of two great friends, a baby h
ippopotamus named Owen and a 130 year old 
giant Tortoise named Mzee. (EMzay)  Now, the hippo 
was not 
always
 friends with Mzee. He 
wasn't always famous. Here is how it happened. 

 
Owen lived with his pod, the hippopotamus family.  
There were about twenty of them. They 
didn't welcome strangers, that is stray hippos, int
o their pod because hippos are very clannish, 
that is, they don't welcome anyone that doesn't loo
k like their own family. And very few other 
animals mess with the hippo pod å they are very big
 å some of them weigh 8000 pounds!  
 
One day, a very sad thing happened. A giant wave ca
lled a tsunami hit the coast of Kenya, and 
many villagers by the beach lost their boats and ho
uses. But the pod of hippos near the village 
was the worst off. They were all washed away except
 for one baby. Because a man named Owen 
helped to save him, they named the baby after him. 
 The people who rescued him couldn't bring 
him to another pod, since they wouldn't accept him,
 even though he was a baby hippo. He wasn't 
one of theirs.  So they took him to a wild animal p
ark in Kenya, and put him in a place with mud 
(which hippos love) and running water and a few oth
er animals, including a very old tortoise 
name Mzee. Owen went right up to Mzee and lay down 
beside her. Mzee hissed at Owen, but 
Owen wouldn't move. In the morning, the men and wom
en who ran the park found Owen 
snuggled up against Mzee. And from that time on, sl
owly the 600 lb baby mammal and the 130-
year-old reptile became friends. They ate together,
 slept near each other, and learned to trust each 

 other. They like to swim together, play follow the 
leader together, and they even rub noses 
sometimes, to show how much they like each other.  

 
The animal experts have tried to explain this odd f
riendship, but in the end, they canôt agree, 
since tortoises like to live by themselves and are 
not social, and hippos definitely only hang out 
with hippos. But what they can't explain, the heart
 already knows: sometimes our most important 
friends are those we least expected. 

 
Sequence: 

 
Known and unknown. Public and Private.  

A beloved singer dies. Magazines feature her portra
it on their covers, Facebook and YouTube 
tributes overflow. Real tears flow. 

The 12 year old orphan in Kenya who dies of AIDS is
 on the cover of nothing, and the tributes 
are quiet prayers by the last nurse to attend him. 

Sister and brothers, both, the famed and forgotten.
 Women who want to tell the stories of their own liv
es, speak aloud of their own health, are shut 
down and kept from microphones by calculating men, 
and it hits the news. The 16 year old girl 
who is pregnant by a forcible family member is asha
med to tell anyone, and keeps a private and 
terrified silence. 

Sisters all, those in the news, those unnamed. 

A French soldier serving in Afghanistan goes back h
ome and everyone knows his name and 
hometown. A young child shot accidently by one of t
he village militia near him is simply buried 
first in the ground and then in a box of statistics
. 
Brothers both, those acclaimed in the papers, 
those reduced to a number
. Oh Love, as a Universalist I proclaim that a liga
ment of spirit, of 
common humanity, ties me to all people whether I he
ar about them or not, since their lives are as 
important to them as my life is to me. 

Love, open a window in my heart now, and let the si
lence that touches everyone who ever lived, 
rest there for a time right now. 

 
silence 

 
Sitting in a place of shared and famous stories whi
ch can be told and retold does not mean we do 
not have a private inner life with stories that are
 only our own. Mindful of that, we are free for a 
moment to lift up, either within or whispered aloud
, the names of those who embody our griefs, 
our loves, our losses, our struggles, our hopes.  

 
naming 

 
Whether the tune is famous or heard for the first t
ime, good music is a gift that we can never tire 
of opening. Receive the gift in gladness. 

  

Music/Anthem
  
Readings: 

 The First Reading 
this morning comes from a most excellent essay by C
hristine Rosen, written 
in 2007 in New Atlantis Magazine, a journal of Tech
nology and Society.
 For centuries, the rich and the powerful documented
 their existence and their status through 
painted portraits. A marker of wealth and a bid for
 immortality, portraits offer intriguing hints 
about the daily life of their subjectsäprofessions,
 ambitions, attitudes, and, most importantly, 
social standing. Such portraits can be understood a
s ?painted anthropology,? with much to teach 
us, both intentionally and unintentionally, about t
he culture in which they were created. 
Self-portraits can be especially instructive. By sh
owing the artists both as they see their true 
selves, and as they wish to be seen, self-portraits
 can at once expose and obscure, clarify and 
distort. They offer opportunities for both self-exp
ression and self-seeking. They can display 
egotism and modesty, self-aggrandizement and self-m
ockery. 
Today, our self-portraits are democratic and digita
l; they are crafted from pixels rather than 
paints. On social networking websites like MySpace 
and Facebook, our modern self-portraits 
feature background music, carefully manipulated pho
tographs, stream-of-consciousness musings, 
and lists of our hobbies and friends. They are inte
ractive, inviting viewers not merely to look at, 
but also to respond to, the life portrayed online. 
We create them to find friendship, love, and that 
ambiguous modern thing called connection. Like pain
ters constantly retouching their work, we 
alter, update, and tweak our online self-portraits;
 but as digital objects they are far more 
ephemeral than oil on canvas. Vital statistics, gli
mpses of bare flesh, lists of favorite bands and 
favorite poems all clamor for our attentionäand it 
is the timeless human desire for attention that 
emerges as the dominant theme of these vast virtual
 galleries. 
Although social networking sites are in their infan
cy, we are seeing their impact culturally: in 
language (where 
to
 friend
 is now a verb), in politics (where it is 
de rigueur 
for presidential 
aspirants to catalogue their virtues on MySpace), a
nd on college campuses (where 
not
 using 
Facebook can be a social handicap). But we are only
 beginning to come to grips with the 
consequences of our use of these sites: for friends
hip, and for our notions of privacy, 
authenticity, community, and identity. As with any 
new technological advance, we must consider 
what type of behavior online social networking enco
urages. Does this technology, with its 
constant demands to collect (friends and status), a
nd perform (by marketing ourselves), in some 
ways undermine our ability to attain what it promis
esäa surer sense of who we are and where 
we belong? The Delphic oracleôs guidance was 
know thyself
. Today, in the world of online social 
networks, the oracleôs advice might be 
show thyself
.  ?Friendship? in these virtual spaces is 
thoroughly different from real-world friendship. In
 its traditional sense, friendship is a 
relationship which, broadly speaking, involves the 
sharing of mutual interests, reciprocity, trust, 
and the revelation of intimate details over time an
d within specific social (and cultural) contexts. 
Because friendship depends on mutual revelations th
at are concealed from the rest of the world, 
it can only flourish within the boundaries of priva
cy; the idea of public friendship is an 
oxymoron. 

The Second Reading 
comes from Ignazio Silone's 1942 novel "The Seed Be
neath the Snow." 
Silone's books made a big impact on me when I was i
n seminary. 

 The man named Bastiano is talking to his mother. 

 
?Excuse me, Ma, but you donôt seem to understand th
e world we are living in.  Thereôs no 
private life any more, and even the peasant on the 
land is a sort of employee who canôt work 
without permission.  And then, Iôm not old enough t
o turn into a hermit; I need to see people.  
Really you must excuse me, but you do seem to be li
ving in another world.? 
?Have you no friends, my boy?? 

?Friends??  Now I see that you want to make me laug
h.  Thereôs been no such thing as friendship 
in our part of the world for a 
long
 time, Ma; havenôt you noticed?  What we have now i
s 
Çconnections.ô  Yes, thatôs the word:  Çconnections
.ô   Let's not close our eyes to what's 
happening around us å yes, right here in our own pa
rt of the country.  For the first time, perhaps 
in the whole history of this land, Çconnectionsô ha
ve taken the place of friendship.    I'm sorry, 
thereôs no such thing as friendship around here any
 more.? 
 
Sermon 

 
I confess that I'm a suspicious type. And I have no
t given up my immediate, and severe,  
suspicions and reservations about the social networ
ks. You know, like MySpace, Friendster, 
Facebook and so many more. Mostly, my suspicions bi
t me when I noted that if I joined 
Facebook, someone I barely know, or don't even know
 at all, could be my  ?Friend.?  The image 
that came to me as I read more and more about Faceb
ook, for example, frightening.  I could see 
the path Iôve deliberately taken most of my life å 
the path of friendship å suddenly slanting off in 
a totally different direction, depositing me into a
 flat, un-flowered field with thousands of people 
I donôt really know crying out ?Welcome, friend!? a
s they busy themselves commenting wryly 
on my day to day life, which for some reason I have
 made visible on the network. The image 
gave me chills. 

 
I know many of my colleagues do not recoil from thi
s new way of communicating as I do. Email, 
I hear from them, is almost entirely passÈ. This is
 the new way. Best get with it. Most of my 
colleagues, and indeed, many people in this congreg
ation (and every other congregation I can 
think of) accomplish 
good
 things with Facebook especially, communicating urg
ent news quickly, 
getting swift news about people's health which they
 can communicate to the lead ministers or 
pastoral team. All of this is terrific and I admit 
it. And although not being on Facebook does 
tend, I hear, to slow my communication with many yo
ung adults, for whom Facebook has been a 
norm for some years now, I don't think this is real
ly ?a generational thing? either. While itôs true 
that the five year old girl I was sitting next to a
t a dinner after a Memorial I conducted this week 
taught me things about my up-to-date iPhone I never
 knew nor imagined (because she has grown 
up with such savvy technology from birth). I know p
lenty of people in their 70s and 80s who 
enjoyed mastering iPhones and the social networks t
o keep up with distant grand-children, and 
they seem to have got the hang of it pretty fast. N
o, itôs not because Iôm older, itôs because Iôm 
me. 

 
So I'm just exploring my 
own 
reservations here, which rise from reflecting on th
e journey of my 
own life of 62 years. In other words, I am thinking
 out loud here å for myself å but, hopefully 

 prompting each of you to reflect on your own patter
ns of friendship. And contemplative self-
questioning is never a bad thing to do anyway. 

 
I told you that the strained usage of the word ?fri
end? is the main focus of my suspicion. I 
suppose that this is because its the most grounded 
way I've been moving through the world for 
these last 50 years.  I've been deliberate about be
ing open to friendship, including surprising 
ones, and I've dedicated a lot of my days to the cu
ltivation of deep relationships with friends Iôve 
grown to love.   

 
The story of Owen and Mzee this morning suggests th
at something like friendship is found even 
outside the human community. They are different, no
t alike, yet they become friends. I've 
witnessed dogs and cats, historic enemies according
 to folklore, relating to each other as friends 
in their common house, at least according to human 
interpretation. I especially like the last line 
in the story: 
Sometimes our most important friends are those we l
east expected. 
 
I know that every individual in this room has a his
tory of friendship in their lives. Some find it 
hard to make friends, and value them very much when
 they do. Some have maintained long 
friendships since childhood, from Kindergarten even
. Others, because they moved around so 
much as children, developed the skills, either of m
aking new friends fast, or choosing only one 
or two friends they could communicate with even if 
they were at a distance. Some find their 
friendships in their relationships to spouse or eve
n in-laws. I know one woman whose best friend 
had married her ex husband and they all vacationed 
together. And friendships of a deeper kind 
can, yes indeed, be cultivated despite great distan
ce with the help of technology: e-mails, Skype 
å just wanted to be sure you understand Iôm not bei
ng a luddite here, hopelessly crabbed and 
cranky about all things that glitter. I admit that 
technology å in any age å has given us all many, 
many boons. I know my own friendship with Bonni Car
ryer down in Chile was almost entirely 
based on a very effective, if older technology: lon
g-hand written letters delivered by planes when 
she and her husband were working in the deserts of 
Algeria, and then the jungles of 
Mozambique. I never went to either country, or spen
t any time with her in person for over 20 
years. Yet our friendship deepened only because of 
the technology of airmail. 
 
Three friendships in my life have developed almost 
immediately, without any slow buildup. I am 
thinking of my friends Doug Robson in California, W
illiam Green in San Antonio, Michael Buck 
in Cincinnati, and my Columbus friend Andrzej Baran
ski. One conversation with each of them, 
and we were drawn onto the bright path of friendshi
p, which we have walked together. Other 
friendships developed because we had important work
 to do together å Richard Sinkoff and I 
took care of his partner (and my best friend) Stefa
n Mistler for a year before he died. We had 
known each other of course, and I liked him, but I 
think friendship is something deeper than just 
?liking? somebody. We became friends by shouldering
 the responsibility of going to doctor visits 
and hospital tests with Stefan, and cooking for him
, or just sitting with him as he suffered. This 
week, on Valentineôs Day, we marked the 17
th
 anniversary of Stefanôs death; Richard cooked a 
kosher supper out in San Francisco for friends who 
both knew Stefan and didn't know him, and I 
wrote and emailed a portrait of our friendship that
 Richard read at the dinner. Me, I lit the 
yahrzeit (or anniversary) candle, read 
kaddish
, the Jewish prayer of mourning, and wept in my 
office. 17 years, 17 minutes å the heart of friends
hip and love scarcely knows the difference. 

 Like Owen and Mzee, Stefan and I were very differen
t from each other and had almost nothing 
in common å but our friendship was a gift to us bot
h. 
 
Some folks have the emotional make-up to befriend m
any people, and maintain and cultivate 
those friendships. Others are so made that they pre
fer to call few people their dear friends, and 
share nothing intimate with acquaintances. There ca
n be no rules about this, because we are all 
different of course.  One approach is not better th
an the other, either. 
 
Since itôs Presidentsô Day weekend, I'll quote the 
presidents of the holiday to support what I just 
said. President Washington, for instance, kept few 
friends, but they were important to him. Here 
are his elegant words. This is from a letter to Bus
hrod Washington on the 15
th
 of January, 1783: 
Be courteous to all, but intimate with few, and let
 those few be well tried before you give them 
your confidence. True friendship is a plant of slow
 growth, and must undergo and withstand the 
shocks of adversity before it is entitled to the ap
pellation.
  
 
But unlike Washington, Abraham Lincoln used the wor
ld 
friend
 so often and so freely that it 
seems to have been one of his favorite words. He ev
en called his bitter opponent Stephen 
Douglas ?my good friend,? and he meant it. In 1849 
he even wrote this summary sentence to his 
friend Joseph Gillespie: 
The better part of one's life consists ofñ friendsh
ips. 
And Lincoln really 
cultivated many, many friendships, including, he on
ce wrote, ?friendship with myself,? which he 
deemed most important of all. 

 
But despite the broad continuum in friendship pract
ice between Lincoln and Washington, I 
thought  it best to offer a definition of friendshi
p to balance both poles. I found this recently 
while reading Christine Rosenôs observations that y
ou heard earlier. 
Friendship is a relationship, 
which, broadly speaking, involves the sharing of mu
tual interests, reciprocity, trust, and the 
revelation of intimate details over time and within
 specific social (and cultural) contexts. 
Because friendship depends on mutual revelations th
at are concealed from the rest of the world, 
it can only flourish within the boundaries of priva
cy;
 and then she adds:  
the idea of public 
friendship is an oxymoron.
 She writes that admittedly opinionated last senten
ce because she 
shares with me a suspicion of using the word 
friend
 to mean anything which does not begin with 
respect for nurturing boundaries of privacy. 

 
Ignazio Siloneôs novel ?The Seed Beneath the Snow? 
was written in 1942 as a sequel to his great 
novel 
Bread and Wine
. Long before computers, websites, and social netwo
rks, in the days of 
Mussolini and war, Silone was bemoaning the thinnin
g out of the concept of friendship. ?
Thereôs 
been no such thing as friendship in our part of the
 world for a long time, Ma; havenôt you 
noticed?  What we have now is Çconnections.ô  Yes, 
thatôs the word:  Çconnections.ô   Let's not 
close our eyes to what's happening around us å yes,
 right here in our own part of the country.  
For the first time, perhaps in the whole history of
 this land, Çconnectionsô have taken the place of 
friendship.? 

 
Again, these are strong and critical words, but the
y are worth reflecting on.  
 
 In some ways, long before I was reading novels by S
ilone or essays by Rosen, I was reflecting on 
this whole idea of friendship, and pretty much all 
the time as I made friends and lost them. I 
think I rather agree with President Lincoln that re
flecting on friendship has defined my life. 
There were times in my childhood when I had few fri
ends, or lost friends due to the overwrought 
emotions that seem to permeate many of us when weôr
e middle-school age. I had to thread my 
way through neighborhood ?friends? who were more bu
llies than real friends, or who were hard-
to-decipher ?fair-weather friends,? or even some th
at I myself turned from when I was a teen, 
because no one had ever told me you might be erotic
ally attracted to someone you've called a 
friend. That scared me to death, since in that era 
I didnôt know how to deal with such confusing 
realities as I do now. But even then I knew that fr
iendship was an almost sacred concept, because 
in church I heard that the teacher Jesus himself ca
lled his students ?friends.? I even heard that 
one religious group called the Quakers was actually
 called ?The Society of Friends? after that 
statement attributed to Jesus in the Gospel of John
. Such things made me realize how profound 
friendship must be. 

 
Ms. Rosenôs worries about the new friendship are wo
rth considering, I think. She raises many 
thoughtful questions. Like Silone, she thinks that 
many of the social sites are more about 
?connections? than necessary friendships, and she u
ses Silone's exact word. She further asks: 
Does this technology, with its constant demands to 
collect (friends and status), and perform (by 
marketing ourselves), in some ways undermine our ab
ility to attain what it promisesäa surer 
sense of who we are and where we belong? The Delphi
c oracleôs guidance was 
know thyself
. Today, in the world of online social networks, the 
oracleôs advice might be 
show thyself
. 
 
I know that a surprisingly large number of people i
n this congregation are mourning because of 
sick friends, or friends who died this week. These 
were not small photos of semi-strangers on a 
social network page, but people with whom they shar
ed supper at holidays, people with whom 
they shared the intimacies of the heart during the 
week. They are grieving deeply, and will for 
some time. As I said, 17 years later, I am still we
eping for my best friend Stefan. I understand. 
 
Oh, I suppose there is a chance I might get over my
 suspicion one day and get onto some social 
network å after all, some of you know how long I re
sisted getting a cell phone, and now I am 
using my iPhone several hours each day. I guess I c
an be worn down eventually and perhaps 
"catch up" with the rest of culture. But right now,
 Iôd rather spend my time cultivating 
friendships in real time, face to face where possib
le, reflecting on the spiritual nature of my life 
in terms of friendship, and finding my center and s
trength in the love. What might you be doing? 
 
Offering: 

Blest is the privilege we claim, to support a congr
egation where there can be no fencing of 
thoughts and no denial of dignity to any human bein
g. Such a church has an important role to 
play in a world that grows stingier every day in lo
ve, friendship and peace. May we support such 
a church gladly and with generosity.  

 
Prayer:  
SsapÛ Ûmahk sika
, 
a First Nation leader we call by the English transl
ation Crowfoot, 
offered this amazing question and a set of answers 
as his last words as he lay dying.
  
 ?What is life? It is the flash of a firefly in the 
night. It is the breath of a buffalo in the wintert
ime. 
It is the little shadow, which runs across the gras
s and loses itself in the sunset.?  To which I add,
 
it is the briefest flash in the eye of a friend who
 gets it, a mourning cloak butterfly dancing 
around the first lilacs and then flying away, the s
alt of tears fading on the cheek, the disappearing 
halo around the moon, and the gossamer of the milky
 way you see for a second from the corner 
of your eye. Let us befriend the world of our lives
, and notice it, and be glad for it.  Let peace 
and brightness now take us deeper into those lives 
in peace. 
 
#1057 

 
    

 
 
