Morning Celebration  

for the Fourth Sunday: June 27, 2010 
 Art by Delaney Myers 
Mother Spirit, Father Spirit, take our hearts. Take
 our breath and let our voices sing our 
parts. Take our hands and let us work to shape our 
art.        
Norbert Capek
  
Everything vanishes around me, and works are born a
s if out of the void.  Ripe, graphic fruits 
fall off.  My hand has become the obedient instrume
nt of a remote will.     
Paul Klee
  Preparation:  Affirming Loving Community
  
Gathering
until the temple bell calls us to mindfulness
 Welcoming         
       David Easter 
Centering    
An Arc of Doves
 by Harold Budd and Brian Eno 
     
                         
  Nathan Hamm, piano 
Kindling
  the grail which signs our heritage
               Jay Hebner
 Celebration 
Celebrate the Arts with Me!              Don Jones 
  (based on a work by Kenneth Patton) 

I have come to think of the doing of art as a sacra
mental activity, perhaps because I am 
witness to the gradual desacralization of the world
.  Art activity is my grounding - my space, 
my resource to cope with stress and chaos . . . whe
n life, nature, human relationships are 
profaned.  Artôs role in healing is a sacred endeav
or (and obligation). 
 
Celebrate the ARTS with me!!    Let us sing for sin
ging and dance for dancing. This is our 
gratitude, being creatures fashioned of delight and
 enabled with passion.   Forms and shapes 
are insight and wisdom.   We bring beauty from the 
mating of mind and emotion.  The images 
of our inner landscapes are unknown, unique and gra
ceful creatures.  
 
 Our arts are keys to doors, wings for flying.  Poe
ms are feet for running on new paths through 
valleys of questions.  Our paintbrushes are lighten
ing, opening our souls to see the awesome.  
Sculpture reveals secrets in the fullness of altern
ating sunlight and shadow.    Dancing is the 
story of a dream, the dancer,  a lively imagination
.  Plays and stories invent a history of people 
in uncreated worlds.   Musicôs voice sings a greeti
ng from the heart.  
 
Come, walk with me on this aesthetic journey to art
ôs hidden places.  Listen to my song.  The 
melody will speak to you of more than your minds ca
n remember, or my brain knows how to 
tell.
  
 Experience
 A New Awareness of
 Hymn 123 Spirit Of Life 

   
           Jo Dickinson 
Yes, Don, this Sunday service is, indeed, a celebra
tion.  A celebration of our capacity to be the 
makers of every kind of expressive medium inherent 
in our human abilities and in our spiritual 
awareness. 

Now, come back with me to this hymn  number 123 we 
have just sung for the singing.  I'd like 
to guide you with the help of your imagination in t
hat part of our brain which gives us 
pictures, colors, actions.  The goal here is to enr
ich deeper, more personal meaning from this, 
perhaps, all too familiar hymn. 

Please sit back, relax, and let me be the talking v
oice which invites your inner TV screen, your 
movie making minds.  I'll speak those familiar word
s slowly and with pauses.  You will invite 
and stay open to what picture, colors, actions your
 wonderful imagination offers you - only 
you.   Now turn on the TV screen of your mind, clos
e your eyes, and be aware with your 
imagination and these words. 

[Reads 123] 

Before you open your eyes, hold on to especially cl
ear, sharp images/pictures.   
 
Now turn to a person near you and share your advent
ures.
  
Affirming
  
We are here this morning to observe and to celebrat
e the creative spirit within 
humankind, the creativity which is standard equipme
nt in each of us here, the natural 
inventiveness of our childrenôs minds, the creative
 gifts from the worldôs musicians, poets, 
writers, painters, carvers, stitchers, and weavers 
and makers of every other form of art.   
 
We seek ourselves, every one of us, to create meani
ng and order in our lives; beauty in our 
environment; truth in our thinking; and balance in 
all things we touch.  We teach our children, 
and each other, to create a world and all things in
 it worthy of our sacred lives and heritage.  
And so . . . 

 
Mindful that we share a common world, but approach 
that world in different ways, we 
begin our celebration together by kindling our prom
ise of mutual honesty, attentiveness, 
and deep courtesy. May we become more proficient at
 gratitude and awareness, that we 
might more deeply embody the kind of justice and pe
ace which embraces everyone on 
earth. 

 
Singing Together
#330 The Arching Sky of Morning Glows
   Ingathering
 Ish 
by Peter Reynolds     Jeannie Sperling
  
Greeting  
news of the congregation   
        Steve Abbott 
This first Sunday of summer is the first of our sum
mer series of lay-led services on the theme 
of spirituality. Today a group of artists from the 
congregation will explore the interwoven 
dimensions of Spirituality and Creativity, and how 
each of us, viewing the world through the 
unique perspective of our own mindôs eye, has acces
s to an artistic temperament that can 
enrich and deepen our experience of this universe t
hat we share. 
       Devotion:
   
Welcoming Memory and Hope 
 
Statements 
Spirituality, Creativity and awareness      Judy Fe
ttman 
 From the time I was a little girl I was fascinated 
by photographs of sunrises, sunsets, 
mountains, clouds.  I ripped out pictures of colorf
ul landscapes from 
Ideals Magazine
 and 
taped them into my scrapbook.  My father often took
 my brothers and me on Sunday afternoon 

rides in the country and took our pictures in front
 of brilliant autumn trees or sitting upon a 
huge rock.  I often protested, but secretly I was f
iling away in my mind those brilliant images 
of natureôs splendor.  When I was given a camera at
 age ten, I began capturing my own 
moments with nature.  And now that I have the time 
to return to that childhood interest I find 
the inspiration for my photographic creativity in m
y awareness of the beauty and power of 
nature.   

 Artist William Sommer said ?Art is the creation of
 our spiritual, inward vision.  Nature 
just starts us off.? 

 And Rachel Carson wrote, ?Those who dwell among th
e beauties and mysteries of the 
earth are never alone or weary of life.? 

 Let me tell you a story.  I was feeling sluggish a
nd depressed one December morning, 
and had trouble getting out of bed.  As I headed fo
r the coffee maker, I noticed the sun peeking 
out from behind the clouds.  I opened the kitchen w
indow and found it exceptionally mild for 
December.  A buck stood staring at me like some sta
tionary yard ornament in the grassy hill 
above the deck.  Neither of us moved å our eyes rem
ained locked until he was bored or hungry 
and moved on. 

 Then I noticed the thick fog.  The live oaks reced
ed and eventually disappeared in the 
mist, creating layers of trees, one upon the other.
  The first of the winter rains had allowed 
tender young shoots of grass to grow thick beneath 
the branches.  December in California felt 
like spring in Michigan å and I began to remember w
hy I had wanted to move here. 
 Something bright in a tree caught my eye.  Between
 two leafy branches a spider had 
spun a perfect plate-sized web.  The low morning su
n was glistening on each fine strand of the 
web, the spokes of a perfect wheel, connected by in
numerable filaments, each one glowing 
with light against the dark, foggy trees. 

 Slowly I began to take in this miracle of the morn
ing.  After gazing at it in wonder for 
some time, I thought, ?Someone should take a pictur
e of this.?  I tried to remember where I 
had left my cameraädownstairs.  I didnôt feel like 
going downstairs and up again, and 
besides, the camera probably wouldnôt work, the bat
teries were low.   
 Nevertheless I found the camera, climbed upstairs 
once more, nearly tripping on my 
old fuzzy bathrobe.  I pulled a kitchen chair over 
to the window, threw off my bathrobe, and 
climbed higher onto the counter, kneeling before th
e open kitchen window.  The web was still 
glowing there against the fog, its fine elastic thr
eads trembling in the breeze. 
 ?Probably wonôt come out,? I grumbled to myself as
 I snapped the shutter. 
 As I sipped my coffee I couldnôt quite let go of t
hat amazing scene.  I snapped on the 
camera again to see if I had caught anything.  Ther
e on my one by two-inch screen I could 
make out the fog and the dark trees, and a white bl
ob where the spider web had been. 
 Curiosity led me to my computer for a better look.
  On my screen appeared the foggy 
trees, and between the branches, that perfect spark
ling web!  I felt the stirrings of excitement 
rising within meñhere was the picture of Christmas 
in California å the sun, the warmth, the 
live oaks that do not lose their leaves å and spide
r webs as ornaments!  Pure joy stirred in me.  
The photo conveyed that sense of awe I had finally 
felt at the sun shining down in a new day.  
And with gratitude I thanked Mother Nature å or Who
mever å who had indeed presented me  
with peace and delight.  All I had to do to see it 
was to open my 

eyes
  Our UU sources include ?direct experience of that 
transcending mystery and 
wonderñwhich moves us to a renewal of the spirit an
d an openness to the forces which create 
and uphold life,? and ?spiritual teachings of earth
-centered traditions which celebrate the 
sacred circle of life and instruct us to live in ha
rmony with the rhythms of nature.?  In the UU 
Visual Artistsô group, and in the Artistsô Way cour
se, here at First Church I have found 
important support for my own developing art. 

 Photography, has made me look closely, has develop
ed in me a creative awareness of 
nature that surrounds me.  As photographer Paula Ch
amlee writes, ?I love looking at the world 
å there is so much to learn from looking.  I see th
e world as if it were one continuous canvas, a 
constantly unfolding painting å and I stop now and 
then to selectively put edges around parts 
of itñ.? 
 
Statements  
Poetry and Awareness         Steve Abbott 
As a poet and teacher of poetic technique in colleg
e and community workshops, I 
explain in the first class or first few minutes of 
a workshop what seems a harsh approach to the 
work that aspiring poets will produce. I explain th
at, if their view is that poetry is a vehicle for 
expressing their feelings, they are about to be dis
appointed.  I tell them this in a direct and 
possibly cold way: ?I donôt care about your feeling
s.? 
This might appear to be a bad beginning, but I move
 quickly to try to remove the 
shocked or disappointed looks from their faces.  I 
note that, although their feelingsätheir 
emotional responses to the world and their experien
ce of itäare central to creative expression, 
they canôt expect me to understand what they mean w
hen they say experienced love, or pain, 
or loneliness.  My pain and my loneliness are diffe
rent from theirs.  They understand better 
when I point out the difference between what women 
and men can mean when they say, 
?Love.?  When a guy says, ?I love you, baby,? he pr
obably means something very different 
from what most women mean when they use the word.  
In fact, a woman may respond with, 

?You donôt love me.  I know what you mean.  If you 
loved me youôdä? and then start a list of 
ways that he can show his love. 
This brings us to the concept of representation: Wh
at represents ?longing??  What 
represents ?joy??  Poet Ezra Pound said, ?Go in fea
r of abstraction.?  Poet William Carlos 
Williamsô primary statement of his approach to poet
ry was direct: ?No ideas, but in things.? 
 That is, poetsäand yes, there is a poet inside eac
h of usämust use the things of the world to 
convey something intangible: our highly personal re
actions to the world and our lives in it. 
There is no way to effectively convey emotion excep
t in terms of the things of the 
worldäphysical objects, expressive verbs, and the r
eactions they evoke.  Each of us 
understands how our own emotions make us feel, but 
we cannot assume that what we feel is 
the same as what anyone else feels.  Poet Marvin Be
ll has taken a stab at defining how poetry 
works, and one statement he came up with is, ?What 
people say there are no words for? Thatôs 
what poetry is for.? 
That is, poetry seeks not to explain what is but to
 suggest a connection that exists not 
above the neck but in the chest, in the gut.  Altho
ugh poetry employs the intellect, it is not so 
much an intellectual process as it is one that dema
nds that we leap beyond the literal into the 
figurative, or associative.  The awareness produced
 by the best poetry taps into our sense of 
things rather than the meaning of them. Poetry prov
ides a way to express how the world is to 
an individual writer, or to ourselves.  And if that
 resonates with others, so much the better. 
          Weôre all familiar with the basics of thi
s awareness: similes that allow us to convey the 
unfamiliar in terms of the familiar (?The river twi
sted like a dark snake through the hills?), or 
metaphors that convey the same comparison as if itô
s fact (?The river was a dark snake 
twisting through the hills? or the implied metaphor
 of ?The dark river snaked between the 
hills?), or personification that uses human actions
 to express the workings of the animal or 
inanimate world.  And with such comparisons, unstat
ed associations arise: ?The river was a 
dark snake? does not directly state that the speake
r found the river threatening or menacing, 
but allows it to be suggested just below the surfac
e of the language. Thus, we come to an 
enlarged awareness, not so much of what the world c
an tell us, but what is can suggest to us 
through, as poet Jennifer Bosveld has phrased it, ?
making words dance together that never 
danced together before.? 

          Another of poet Marvin Bellôs efforts at 
explaining how poetry works on our awareness 
states, ?Prose is prose because of what it includes
. Poetry is poetry because of what it leaves 
out.? A poetic awareness allows us fill in those sp
aces with our own reactions to an enhanced 
awareness of our world. This awareness is an expans
ive one, one that enhances our capacity 
for ambiguity, for multiple and possibly conflictin
g responses to images. The allowance for 
ambiguity in poetry sweeps away dualistic thinking 
and opens us to a world that is not either 
black or white, but is both black and white; to emo
tions that are not either loving or resentful, 
but are both loving and resentful. And in this way 
we become more aware of our capacity for 
nuance, for empathy, for compassion. 
As we practice such awareness, we begin to apprecia
te the interconnectedness our 
subconsciousäour ?mindôs eye?äcreates from the thin
gs of the world and the behaviors of 
ourselves and others. These non-literal, non-linear
 ways of seeing are in tune with the Seventh 
Principle of Unitarian Universalism: respect for th
e interconnected web of all existence. In 
allowing ourselves to explore these connections, we
 tap into a way of thinking and seeing that 
captures our own unique and highly personal ways of
 interpreting the universe. 
A poetic awareness allows us to understand, without
 being able to put it into words, 
why the wind-driven movement of trees, in full leaf
 or stripped bare in winter, brings to mind 
the silent applause of upraised hands by a deaf aud
ience. It allows us to know what an 
immigrant student meant when he wrote, ?I went outs
ide and smoked down my anger.? Poetic 
awareness allows us to share the emotion of the poe
t who wrote, ?You touch me the way an 
autumn leaf sets the sky afire.? 
 
Speaking Together #492 Fragile and Rooted 

 
Communing 
 the Sequence: the Silence, the Naming, the Music 
          As we move into this brief period of sile
nce and contemplation, I encourage you to 
relax, to close your eyes and simply allow yourself
 to breathe. And as you tune into that 
natural rhythm, allow yourself to release the world
 and those around you, to move inward. To 
move inward, where each of us keeps a creative spar
k. It is like a small portable radio, a 
camera, or a TV in our mindôs eye. Usually we donôt
 think about it. We donôt consciously see 
ourselves as creative. So we donôt tune in that lit
tle radio, that little camera, that little TV. We 
donôt hear the quiet signals that seem to come from
 another place but that are in truth 
ourselves speaking to us. And so we donôt tune into
 ideas. They shoot across the ether and are 
lost. Ralph Waldo Emerson noted that ?in every work
 of genius we recognize our own rejected 
thoughts.? 
So as we move into this brief period where we can e
xist within ourselves and listen 
to
 ourselves, be interested. Be willing to be a recei
ver. Turn on your receiver. Receive, not the 
ideas of another but of yourself. Believe that you 
are a receiver, a valid receiver, and that the 
ideas you are receiving from somewhere within are t
rue and valid. Believe, in your own 
inspiration. 
Be courteous in pursuing this truth and the realiza
tion of your own ideas. Be free 
and reckless in this pursuit. Be quietly determined
 and relentless in the face of your own 
doubts and memories of supposed limitations. Releas
e and abandon those statements that your 
own creations are not good enough. Open your mindôs
 eye, your internal ears, the creative 
hand that shapes images of its own creation. You ar
e unlimited. You can go anywhere. Now. 
[         silence           ] 
 As part of the powerful energy created by silence,
 we now call to mind those for whom we 
care deeply. We remember those whom we have mourned
 and imagine those whom we still 
hold to us. Those whom we love and those whom we ha
ve difficulty loving. Those with whom 
we are blessed to share time, and those whom we can
 only long to see. We now speak their 
names aloud or whisper them in the quiet rooms of o
ur hearts, in the knowledge that our 
attention and our mention are ongoing acts of creat
ion and re-creation for those named and for 
ourselves. 
[    names    ]  
We keep these names, spoken or cushioned in silence
, close to us, as we look to this day, these 
clustered moments, and offer to each other the comp
assion and understanding that keep us 
whole. 

 Dream A Dream,
  words and music by Ed Robertson 
Summer Choir, Dee Keller, Director 
          Presentation:   Opening to the World 
 
Readings 
1. from 
Letter to Agnes deMille 
by
  Martha Graham 
Despite her distinguished theater family (Cecil B. 
deMille was her uncle), Agnes deMille had 
many years of struggle and failures in trying to be
come a dancer and choreographer.  After 
one of her ballets failed, Martha Graham wrote this
 letter of encouragement.  It has become a 
mainstay of artistsô inspirational literature.
  
There is a vitality, a life force, a quickening tha
t is translated through you into action, 
and there is only one of you in all time. This expr
ession is unique, and if you block it, it will 
never exist through any other medium; and be lost. 
The world will not have it. 
 
It is not your business to determine how good it is
, not how it compares with other 
expression. It is your business to keep it yours cl
early and directly, to keep the channel open. 
You have to keep open and aware directly to the urg
es that motivate you. Keep the channel 
open. 
   

 2. from 
In the Eye of the Artist  
by
 Ken Wilber  
 ?The secret of all genuinely spiritual works of art
 is that they issue from nondual or unity 
consciousness, no matter what "objects" they portra
y. A painting does not have to depict 
crosses and Buddhas to be spiritual. This is why, f
or example, Zen landscapes are so 
profoundly sacred in their texture, even if they ar
e Çjust landscapes.ô They issue from a 
nondual awareness or unity consciousness, which is 
itself Spirit. At the height of 
transcendence, Spirit is also purely immanent and a
ll-pervading, present equally and totally in 
each and every object, whether of matter, body, min
d, or soul. The artwork, of no matter what 
the object, becomes transparent to the Divine, and 
is a direct expression of Spirit.?   
 
Wilbur also quotes a source in Eastern philosophy, 
"He who cannot become an object cannot 
paint that object". 

 Statements 
Spirituality and Creativity å Where It All Began   
 Tom Baillieul 
 Look around you at our community, our nation, our w
orld, at buildings and bridges, galleries 
and restaurants, museums and music halls.  We human
s are a creative lot.  And in our 
creativity, we've brought into existence hundreds o
f distinct religions.   So far as we can 
tell,we are the only species that both discusses ma
tters spiritual, and perceives beauty.  
 This should not be surprising since spirituality a
nd creativity are two sides of the same 
coin.  They both arise from an ability to think and
 communicate symbolically, and to imagine 
things not yet present.  How is it  that we came to
 possess these traits?   
 It turns out that, like all human characteristics,
 our creative and spiritual sides have 
their origins deep in our biological ancestry å our
 behaviors are different in magnitude and 
degree from other species, but not in kind.     

  Consider those animal species that share an aware
ness of self with us.   Dolphins have 
brain to body mass ratios on par with modern humans
 and are known to exhibit inter-species 
altruism.  However, dolphins don't make art.  Whale
 song can be heard over vast distances, but 
the meanings of these ever changing vocalizations a
re beyond current human understanding.  
Elephants have been observed to display apparent gr
ief over the death of a family member, a 
precursor of moral thought. Some zoo elephants also
 apparently enjoy brushing bright colors 
onto large canvases. Chimp groups in the wild use u
p to 20 types of tools for various functions 
of daily life, including sociality, subsistence, se
lf maintenance, and sex.   Chimpanzees create 
in a social context and have been shown to have a s
ense of humor, and to transfer cultural 
knowledge.  Further, chimps in the wild will respon
d to a thunderstorm the way they would to 
an animal predator, such as a leopard.  In other wo
rds, the they assign an animate ?purpose? to 
the storm å different from their reaction to, say, 
a wildfire.  This is the beginning of religious 
thought.   

 Still, to the extent that we can put ourselves int
o the minds of other species through 
observation of physical behaviors, no other animals
 appear to ponder their origins, the 
meaning of life, or the existence of the divine.   
  It is very difficult to pinpoint the precise momen
t when human beings began to express 
imagination and to reason symbolically.  Prior to t
he development of writing, our knowledge 
of the earliest humans is largely limited to durabl
e materials such as stone and bone.  The 
physical evidences for the existence of a symbolic,
 and thus a potentially spiritual culture 
include: cave paintings, rock engravings, personal 
ornamentation, decorated tools, the use of 

natural pigments, engraved bones and stones, burial
s with grave goods, systems of notation, 
musical instruments, and complex bone and wood tech
nologies.   There are hints that species 
ancestral to modern humans may have had the capacit
y for complex communication, and 
imagination.  Brain size appears to be key.     

 At a  400,000 year old site in Zambia associated w
ith the large-brained human 
ancestor, 
homo heidelbergensis
, archeologists  discovered 300 lumps of ochre and 
other 
pigments - yellow, pink, red, purple, brown, and bl
ue-black - some gathered far from the site.   
Ochre can be used as a binding agent for attaching 
stone points to wooden shafts; but for this 
use one color is sufficient.  Why collect a range o
f colors?  
Homo heidelbergensis
 also has 
been associated with an 8-step manufacturing proces
s for wooden spears, and with a change in 
the quality of craftsmanship of stone tools å movin
g from the simply utilitarian forms used by 
earlier human ancestors to ones of striking symmetr
y, suggesting an aesthetic sense.   
 From Neanderthal
 sites in Europe, dated to between 30,000 and 40,000
 years ago (a 
time when our own species was present), comes evide
nce of body ornamentation (shell and 
bone beads), complex tool making, ritual burials, a
nd the creation of musical instruments.  
These were people capable of symbolic reasoning and
 practice, of making music, and of 
questions about the meaning of death.  Yet, evidenc
e about how their habitation sites were 
configured suggest that Neanderthals had thought pr
ocesses very different from those of 
modern humans.  

 Our immediate ancestors, anatomically modern human
s, arose in Africa somewhere 
between 160,000 and 200,000 years ago, and their re
mains have been found in the Levant, 
dated to around 100,000 years ago. However, the Lev
ant 
homo sapiens 
sites do not show 
cultural remains any more sophisticated than nearby
 Neanderthal sites.  It's in sites in southern 
Africa dating to around 75,000 years ago that we st
art seeing objects  associated with 
homo 
sapiens
 remains which strongly suggest a new way of thinkin
g about themselves and the 
world around them. From the Blombos Cave on the Cap
e Coast of South Africa comes a set of 
worn shell beads indicating an interest in bodily a
dornment. From this site also comes the first 
known human artwork, a piece of ochre engraved with
 a geometric linear pattern.  
 In a time span covering the next 40,000, years and
 from sites throughout Africa, the 
Middle East, Australia, and Europe archaeologists h
ave uncovered an increasing treasure trove 
of artifacts demonstrating that early 
homo sapiens
 possessed self-awareness, imagination, 
abstract thinking, and the ability to communicate s
ymbolically. By 35,000 years ago, art and 
spiritual expression were in full swing in Europe, 
Africa, and Australia.  Cave paintings and 
rock engravings of both realistic images, and  fant
astical creatures, part animal, part human, 
are evidence of fully modern imaginative abilities 
and of religious expression.  This is what 
separates humans from all other species on the plan
et today. Our ancestors created art, music, 
bodily adornments, stone tools with aesthetics rath
er than simple utility in mind, and also 
complex social structures. They buried their dead w
ith care and placed in these graves food, 
jewelry, and weapons, strongly suggesting a belief 
in an afterlife.  
 As anthropologist Ian Tattersall  points out, only
 modern humans have the 
demonstrated ability to divide up the world around 
them into a huge number of discrete 
elements - and then to name those elements. This al
lows us to rearrange those elements in our 
minds and imagine a variety of different realities.
   How did this ability come about?  Tattersall 
believes that it arose as 
homo sapiens
 began to express an understanding of the world in 
ever 
more complex language. Language - words and syntax 
- is the mechanism of our conscious 
thoughts.  Try thinking deeply about something with
out thinking in words.  
   Spirituality and creativity, symbolic thought an
d the ability to ask the ?Great 
Questions? å we are the species that not only think
s about ourselves and our relation to the 
universe around us but expresses our understandings
 and imaginings in myriad ways.   

 Embrace your humanity - go forth, ask questions, s
eek answers, and create beauty. 
 
Statements   
Creative Awareness And The Spiritual World Of The U
nitarian Universalist:   
        John Dickinson  
 
I never imagined when I choose art as a retirement 
hobby that it would become my spiritual 
journey.  At first, I naturally thought about image
s I wished to portray, about materials to use, 
and the romantic image of myself with brush in hand
 before the easel.   
 
But experiences in creativity, reading, and contact
 with others brought realization that the 
images were not the things Iôd be painting.  For pa
inting was not the challenge; it was seeing, 
seeing into a deeper reality, a reality not seen be
fore by my eyes. And true seeing came only 
from a heightened awareness of reality.  As William
 Blake said, ?He who does not imagine in 
stronger and better lineaments and in stronger and 
better light than his perishing and mortal 
eye can see, does not imagine at all.?    

 
At a time in life when I expected to become less en
gaged in the world, I found myself falling 
in love with the world, becoming entranced through 
creative awareness.  I knew from 40 years 
of museum going that looking at art made me see thi
ngs much differently.  Looking at people, 
I recognized qualities that Iôd seen in portraits. 
 Looking at nature, I saw it as though it was a 
landscape by a favorite artist. 

 
Perhaps the most startling awareness came after a c
lass in visual perspective.  After that class I 
saw straight lines shooting everywhere: eaves conti
nued their lines into the sky; rooms 
developed a dizzying array of surfaces, angles, and
 corners.  I was aware for the first time 
where everything was and how it related to where ev
erything else was.  And I sensed my place 
in ?the interdependent web of existence?.  

 
People who receive their reality from creativity tr
ansmute this experience into a distinctive 
awareness.  Reality moves through them and becomes 
another reality.  American poet Wallace 
Stevens said, ?Reality is not what it is.  It consi
sts of the many realities which it can be made 
into.?   

 
So this new reality became integral to my lifelong 
religious journey.  Thankfully, the Unitarian 
Universalist faith supports a journey rather than r
equiring a destination, and it encourages 
exploring and thinking about oneôs own reality. 

 
Creative people in their statements about their pro
cess reflect the same three source of 
awareness as the spiritual inspirations in liberal 
religions.  First, the more traditional, or one 
might say ?religious?, consider the source of their
 creations to be outside of themselves, to 
come from a God, from a transcendental essence of t
he universe.  Second, many consider their 
source to be within themselves, to come from an ind
welling spiritual presence that they seek to 
find and honor.  Like the people who make the often
 quoted statement, ?Iôm not religious, but 
Iôm spiritual?,  they make this distinction å they 
find their own sense of immanence from 
intuitive inspiration.  And third, many feel themse
lves outside of these religious or spiritual 
traditions -  their source is rational and humanist
.  They do not see their inspiration coming 
from a divine or inner spirit but from intellect, r
eason, and compassion.  Now, listen to the 
words of creators reflecting the same three sources
. 
 
Handel composed Messiah in 24 days, an amazing act 
of creation.  It is a monumental work, 
complex, long,  and rich.  He must have been writin
g in a frenzy of awareness. How did he see 
this?  In his own words, "I thought I saw all Heave
n before me and the great God Himself."  
Handel is telling us that he received awareness fro
m outside himself.  About writing its best 
known part, the Hallelujah Chorus, Handel said, ?Wh
ether I was in my body or out of my 
body as I wrote it I know not. God knows.?   These 
are profoundly religious statements. 
 
Then, there is the great American dancer and choreo
grapher, Martha Graham, whose letter we 
read earlier. Graham told people that her dances ha
d always existed.  She only invoked them.  
Nor did she choose to; she was chosen.  As she reco
rded in her ?Notebooks?, she had been 
given ?lonely terrifying gifts?  which were followe
d by, as she said in the first reading, a 
?divine dissatisfaction; a blessed unrest that keep
s us marching and makes us more alive.?  So 
Graham sensed a source outside of herself, a religi
ous source. 
 
A spiritual source from within was cited by Ken Wil
bur in the reading when he said that one 
could sense ?nondual awareness? from works of Zen a
rt, the spiritual oneness of the creator 
and the created.   "He who cannot become an object 
cannot paint that object". 
 Intuitive awareness also is a source of innocence, 
an openness to begin again, to see the world 
as though it were new and fresh.  Listen to creativ
e artists about their surprise at their 
awareness. 

 
Marcel Proust penned, ?The real voyage of discovery
 consists not in seeking new landscapes, 
but in having new eyes.?  

 
The sculptor Robert Kuhn said, ?I canôt wait to exp
erience the surprise of what my hand 
creates.?   

 
Some of you may remember the Columbus sculptor, Joh
n Freeman.  His wife sang in our choir 
for years.  John said, ?Why do I go to my studio?  
I go so I will be there for the next surprise!?  
 
When my wife, Jo, read this talk she said that thes
e last two statements reflected her own 
experience: what surprise awaits her when she begin
s to create her abstracts, her collages?  
What new awareness will come?  Members of the First
 Church artists group were challenged 
to create works in black and white for last fallôs 
show.  Each had to become aware of a world 
without color and create a work in black and white 
for that show.  And they did!  Their pieces 
were exciting!  And each very different. 

 
This openness quality of awareness is also expresse
d as the individualôs ability to receive 
visionary creations from their subconscious.  The A
merican painter Edward Hopper wrote, 
?So much of every art is an expression of the subco
nscious, that it seems to me most all of the 
important qualities are put there subconsciously, a
nd little of importance by the conscious 
intellect.? 

 
And finally, the famous writer Rod Serling, once a 
member of this congregation, said, ?Take 
truth for authority, not authority for truth.?  I f
ind this a reference to a distinctly humanist 
source, one which is dubious about revelation but r
elies on intellect and reason. 
 
And for myself, when called to write an artistic mi
ssion statement, I found it easy to describe 
my response.  I believe that excitement flows from 
every point in the universe, energy from 
the creation.  I believe that with the awareness wh
ich comes from creativity we can perceive 
this excitement as beauty, as awe, as grandeur, as 
order, as ultimate reality.  So I seek to 
become aware of places where this excitement can be
 seen and to create works which can 
transmit it to others.  When I am asked, ?where do 
you get your ideas??, I have to say, ?I donôt 
get ideas - ideas get me.?  It is as though they we
re outside looking for a home, looking for 
someone who will give them expression.  Once they i
nhabit me, I become their servant, not 
questioning the master, just committed to the idea.
  
I might classify this in the religious tradition.  
Or maybe spiritual.  Or, as I struggle with 
figuring how to get the effects I want, it is just 
plain human intellectual figuring.  Perhaps all 
three!  How very human!  And what fun! 

            Integration:   Recommitting to Our Missi
on 
 
Offering 
The work of this church is the act of re-shaping ou
rselves, society and human 
relationships. This creative activity requires a pl
ace similar to the period of silence at the 
center of this service, a space in which our creati
vity is given room to take root and grow, a 
place where each of us can feel safe in exploring t
he individual and collective acts of creation 
that  make us whole. To build and strengthen our fa
ith community and its work both within 
these walls and in the larger world, the offering t
o nurture and sustain the creative work of 
justice, compassion, and community will now be give
n and received. 
  
 
La terrasse des audiences du clair de lune
 from 
Preludes Book II
  
 by Claude Debussy 

 
Singing
 #326 Let All the Beauty We Have Known 
 
Blessing
 Go now with awareness.  Go now and see what you hav
e not seen before, go with 
new eyes prepared for new visions.  Go to sing a ne
w song, loudly and with 
all the gusto of your life, for the way you sing is
 your song.  Go now and 
move, for the way you move is your dance.  Go now, 
live Ishfully,  and be 
surprised at your life.
   
Celebrating  
we gather to deepen community in Fellowship Hall
  
