
Some---
  not all that is.
  Not even the majority of all, but the minority.
  Not counting school, where one must,
  or the poets themselves,
  there'd be maybe two such people in a thousand.

Like---
  but one also likes chicken-noodle soup,
  one likes compliments, or the color blue,
  one likes an old scarf,
  one likes to prove one's point,
  one likes to pet a dog.

Poetry---
  But what sort of thing is poetry?
  Many a shaky answer has been given
  to this question.
  But I do not know, and do not know,
  and hold onto it as to saving banister.

They are only boys
  who used to frolic and play
  releasing in the Western wind
  their blue red green kites
  the color of the rainbow
  jumping, whistling, exchanging spontaneous jokes and laughter, 
  encing with branches, assuming the roles of great heroes in history.

They've grown suddenly now,
  grown more than the years of a lifetime,
  grown, merged with a secret word of love,
  carried its letters like a Bible or Quran
  read in whispers. They've grown more
  than the years of a lifetime, become the
  trees plunging deep into the earth
  and soaring height towards the sun.
  They're now the voice that rejects.
  They're the dialectics of destruction
  and building anew, the anger burning
  on the fringes of a blocked horizon,
  invading classroom, streets, city quarters,
  centering on the squares
  and facing sullen tanks with a stream of stones.

With plain rejection they now shake
  the gallows of the dawn,
  assailing the night and its deluge.
  They've grown, grown more than the years of a lifetime,
  become the worshipped and the worshipper.
  When their torn limbs merged
  with the stuff of the earth,
  they became a legend.
  They grew, and became the bridge.
  They grew, grew, and became
  larger than all poetry.

America, I do not Call Your Name
  Without Hope. When I hold the sword
  against the heart, when I live with the faulty
  roof in my soul, when one of your new days
  pierces me coming through the windows.
  I am and I stand in the light that produces me.
  I live in the darkness which makes me what I am.
  I sleep and awake in your fundamental sunrise:
  as mild as the grape, and as terrible,
  carriers of sugar and the whip,
  soaked in the sperm of your species,
  nursed in the blood of your inheritance.

The targets of your arrows,
  o Divine Hunter,
  are the hearts of your lovers.
  The people are concerned about you.
  And you remain absent from them.
  I retire sometimes to a monastery.
  And at times I reside at the mosque.
  I see you constantly from house to house.
  You are my goal, whether I go to Mecca
  or some Temple.
  You are my aim.
  What is Mecca? What is any temple?
  They are mere pretexts.
  Everyone praises you in his or her own way,
  in his or her own manner:
  the heartbroken love in sorrowful laments,
  the composer in beautiful tunes.
