  Martin Luther King 
January 16, 2011 
Rev. Mark Belletini 
Welcome, Centering, Kindling, Opening:
 We are here 

to worship on a rare sunny morning 

amid the gray days of winter, 

to lift up the wisdom born of vision and struggle, 

to call ourselves to deeper questions 

and to respond to those questions 

with the full integrity and amen of our lives. 
 
And so, we pledge to journey together along the way
s of truth and affection, 
as best as we can name them now, or may learn them 
in days to come; that 
we and our children may be fulfilled, and that we m
ay speak to our world in 
words and lives of peace, justice and goodwill. 

 
  
 
The Sequence for the Day 

 
So much beyond my control–. 

So much beyond my will–. 

I can say I™m tired of the gray clouds 

obscuring the healing radiance of the sun. 

My tiredness doesn™t change a thing. 

I cannot wave my hand and push the clouds away. 

I cannot fold them up and save them for later. 

What I can do is live each day  

as if it™s a gift, speak honestly, 

love attentively, be accountable, 

be merciful to self and others,  

and be satisfied with the little things I can do. 

So much beyond my control–. 

So much beyond my will–. 

I cannot heal my friends who are deadly sick 

by saying ?Be well.? 

I cannot get employers to hire my friends with 

felonies on their record by being mad about it. 

What I can do is live each day 

as if it™s a gift, speak honestly, 

love attentively, be accountable, 

  be merciful to self and others, 

and be satisfied with the little things I can do. 

Love, there is so much beyond my control. 

Bid my heart to open enough  

to admit, without shame, that my power is limited. 

Then bid it open up just a bit more, 

so that the power I do have,  

the power which most resembles you.. 

provides a deeper radiance and health in this silen
ce. 
 
silence 

 
There is so much I cannot control. 

But I can find ways to express my love and care, 

which transcends issues of limits and loss. 

May we each feel free here to call to mind and hear
t 
the faces and names of those we love and miss, 

or even speak their names softly in our common hous
e.  
May we make plans to call or write them if we can, 
 light a candle for them if we cannot, 

that our worship be not confined to a Sunday mornin
g,  
but stretch out through our week of days.  

 
naming 

 
Control is not mine, but rejoicing 
is
 mine, and 
celebration with the very great power of song. 

 
The First Reading
 comes from web edition of the book Search for the B
eloved Community; The 
Thinking of Martin Luther King Jr., Kenneth Smith/I
ra Zepp 1974 
In speaking about the possibility of actualizing th
e Beloved Community in history, King 
attempted to avoid what he called "a superficial op
timism" upon the one hand, and "a crippling 
pessimism" on the other. He knew that the solution 
of social problems is a slow process. At the 
same time, he was confident that, through God™s hel
p and human effort, social progress could be 
made. He said,   
Although our moral pilgrimage may never reach a des
tination point on earth, our never-
ceasing strivings may bring us ever closer to the c
ity of righteousness. And though the 
Kingdom of God may remain not yet as universal real
ity in history, in the present it may 
exist in such isolated forms as in judgment, in per
sonal devotion, and in some group life. . 
[Struggle to Love 
(Harper & Row, 1961). p. 64]. 
Thus, though acutely aware that the Beloved Communi
ty is "not yet," but in the future -- perhaps 
even the distant future -- Martin Luther King belie
ved that it would eventually be actualized, and 

  already he saw approximations of it. That is why he
 worked unceasingly for the realization of his 
dream and never lost hope that "there will be a gre
at camp meeting in the promised land.? His 
hope was rooted in his faith in the power of God to
 achieve his purpose among humankind 
within history. 

The Second Reading
 consists of excerpts from two linked poems by the g
reat poet Gwendolyn 
Brooks. The poems are the First and the Second Serm
ons on the Warpland, and they were 
written in 1968. 

Build now your church, my brothers, sisters. Build 
never with brick– nor with granite. Build 
with lithe love. With love like lion eyes. With lov
e like morningrise.  
This is the urgency: Live! The garbageman is as dig
nified as the diplomat. Big Bessie™s feet hurt 
like nobody™s business, but she stands–bigly–under 
the unruly scrutiny. It is lonesome. Yes. 
Nevertheless, live.  Conduct your blooming in the n
oise and whip of the whirlwind. 
Sermon 

My dear friend Jane Rzepka (who preached in this pu
lpit 11 years ago) was awarded the 
Distinguished Service award last June, at our Gener
al Assembly. Only one such honor is awarded 
each year, so it™s a singular recognition, and much
 respected across the Association.  
 
Several people spoke during the luncheon that follo
wed the award ceremony, including Bill 
Schulz, (who also just preached here a few months a
go), and Denny Davidoff (who, when she 
was Moderator, preached here some ten years ago).  
  
I was sitting next to Gail Guisenhainer, our minist
er in Ann Arbor (who herself preached here just 
two years ago–ours is a pretty well-filled pulpit!)
.  When it was time for Jane to get up and 
respond to all of the accolades, Gail started to qu
ietly count down, as if a rocket was going to go 
off. Ten, Nine, Eight, Seven–When she got to One, J
ane said to those gathered to honor her: ?Of 
course, this award is all about you.?   

 
?Right on time,? Gail said to me. ?Jane believes wi
th all of her heart that it™s not about her. It™s 
never about her. It™s about all those with whom she
 shares the world, friends and strangers both, 
all those with whom she relates day in, day out. He
r Beloved Community. And she gets to that 
point faster than anyone else I know. Usually ten s
econds or less.? 
 
I realized that when Gail said that, she was articu
lating with precise and witty language what I had 
noticed about Jane since I first met her 40 years a
go, before she and I were ordained ministers, 
when she was ?only? the fiancée of my best friend f
rom high school. 
 
No matter what happens to Jane, it™s never about he
r. It™s about the Beloved Community of which 
she is part. 

 
  Now Martin Luther King used that phrase–Beloved Com
munity–a lot. He didn™t invent it, mind 
you. It was first used by a Euro-American philosoph
er at Harvard University in 1913–Josiah 
Royce–and it was kind of a secularized form of the 
Christian concept of the Kingdom of God. 
But this great phrase was given an even broader mea
ning by the African American philosopher 
Alain Locke, the founder, and first chair, of the p
hilosophy department at Harvard, in the 1920s. 
His view of the world as a possible ?Beloved Commun
ity? was very inclusive indeed, and 
ambitious, especially for that era. He understood, 
as was made clear in the children™s story this 
morning, that the needs and feelings of people of e
very culture around the world echo each other, 
even though their languages, styles, clothing, arch
itecture and religions may be different. We all 
need to eat. We all need shelter. We all need work.
 We all need love. Locke felt that the 
struggling Soviet peasant on a collective farm, and
 the urban sophisticated Bostonian in an 
apartment had more basic things in common than not.
  
 
Royce™s and Locke™s phrase ?Beloved Community? echo
ed loudly through American social 
writers all the way to Martin Luther King Jr. In fa
ct, King used the phrase so much that our first 
reading came from an essay actually entitled 
?Search for the Beloved Community:  The Thinking 
of Martin Luther King Jr.? 
There, after quoting King himself talking about the
 more Christian 
concept of the Kingdom of God, the authors offer th
ese remarkable words: 
though acutely aware 
that the Beloved Community is "not yet," but in the
 future -- perhaps even the distant future -- 
Martin Luther King believed that it would
 eventually be actualized; and already he saw 
approximations of it. That is why he worked unceasi
ngly for the realization of his dream and 
never lost hope that "
there will be a great camp meeting in the promised 
land.? 
 
This month, I™ve been exploring the concept of auth
ority from different angles. This morning, I™d 
like to suggest that the highest authority in Marti
n Luther King™s life was not his personal image 
of God, nor even the texts of the scriptures (he wa
s after all, a liberal Protestant Christian 
minister), but was rooted in this whole idea of the
 
Not Yet
, the 
Not Yet Beloved Community.
 His 
daily decisions and judgments were ruled by his all
egiance to that invisible concept of a not yet 
realized ?camp meeting in the promised land.? 

 
These images 
promised land, camp meeting
–are images he heard his father use frequently in t
he 
Baptist church in which he was raised– and they are
 indeed biblical. They are both rooted in the 
Exodus stories of the Torah, which, in the historic
 African American churches of his day, were 
the most appreciated and valued scriptures. Why? Be
cause, dealing as they did with the whole 
idea of the Israelites leaving slavery in Egypt alt
ogether, they dealt clearly with liberation for 
a 
whole population
. Real 
physical
 liberation. Release from real economic and social 
slavery. The 
Exodus narratives dealt with food in the belly and 
justice in the community. No private pie in the 
sky when you die. That sad individualistic post-dea
th idea of salvation forced its way into the 
center of evangelical Christianity around 1850. A c
ouple of preachers on the tent circuit 
developed this whole strange notion of ?receiving? 
Jesus Christ as one™s ?personal? savior, a 
notion not found any place in the scriptures.  No, 
as an African American, King grew up in a 
Christian culture that was rooted firmly in the Exo
dus idea of liberation (another word for 
salvation) for the 
whole 
community. Thus, he naturally gravitated to Royce™s
 and Locke™s phrase 
?Beloved Community,? as a way of naming this larger
, more inclusive view. 
 
  But he was not naïve. He was clear it was not a 
present
 reality. He felt it was a 
not-yet
 reality. 
And he over and over again consulted the authority 
of that 
not-yet
 reality. What is it you want to 
do with your life? What™s your next best decision? 
 To save your own soul?  To go to heaven? 
NO! Your next decision is to choose to do anything 
that helps to make the Beloved Community 
more real than our present communities–
without
 resorting to violence. And, as you go about that 
work, always be quick to look through the lens of l
ove when confronting anyone or anything. 
(These last sentences could be the sum of  Dr. King
™s approach.) 
 
Moreover, he felt that the dawn of the Beloved Comm
unity to come will not only reveal a day 
when men, women and children of many colors and bac
kgrounds can live and work together. No, 
it™s that (as the vision of Selma made clear) 
but it™s much more as well.
 It™s also a time when we 
can deliberately turn from the terrible violence of
 the wars of ideology– remember, King came 
out against the Vietnam War when it was not popular
 to do so. And the Beloved Community will 
be real when the workplace is fair too, and salarie
s are just, not divisive, and those who labor can 
proceed in honor and dignity through realms of coop
eration and joint effort, not into landmine 
strewn battlegrounds of competition and class separ
atism.  Remember the selections from 
Gwendolyn Brooks? She wrote:  
The garbage-man is as dignified as the diplomat.  
Nice phrase, 
great rhythm, but why did she write it? 

 
The date of her poem was 1968. That will tell you s
omething, I™d guess. It™s the year King was 
shot in Memphis. And why was he there? Was he worki
ng on civil rights issues? No, not exactly. 
He had worked on civil rights issues years earlier 
in Memphis. War issues? No. On that particular 
day in April, he was in the middle of complex negot
iations about a strike by sanitation workers 
who had been mistreated by management, partially al
ong racial lines to be sure. (That™s always in 
there somewhere, isn™t it?) But Dr. King had been t
old about two horrible deaths caused by total 
disregard on the part of management for worker safe
ty. And since he was concerned about every 
aspect of justice, he showed up in Memphis. 

 
For King, you see, the Beloved Community was about 
everyone, no matter their color, their 
religion, their class– or even, I™d have to surmise
, their sexual orientation. Remember, his chief 
strategist was a totally open gay man, Bayard Rusti
n, a man he stubbornly turned to as an advisor 
even after Adam Clayton Powell threatened to spread
 a rumor that the two of them were having 
an affair. No King™s whole approach to the authorit
y of not-yet Beloved Community is 
summarized in Gwendolyn Brook™s great line–
the garbage-man is as dignified as the diplomat. 
King was interested in a 
whole
 Beloved Community, not some new segregated communi
ty, with 
management and sanitation workers living in separat
e cities, with Protestants, Catholics, Jews and 
Unitarian Universalists each hiding out in their ow
n walled-off circles, etc.    
 
I mentioned Unitarian Universalists in that last li
ne because Dr. King and his wife Coretta Scott 
King used to attend Unitarian and Universalist chur
ches while he was in school in Boston. Many 
of my older colleagues knew him personally; one was
 even a roommate with him for a time. And 
he preached in our congregations now and then. He g
ave the WARE lecture at General Assembly 
one year, and was very attuned to liberal theology,
 writing in his dissertation about the Unitarian 
Universalist theologian, Henry Nelson Wieman. Altho
ugh he appreciated Wieman™s theology, 
King™s view of God was far more personal than Wiema
n™s more naturalist idea of God, and so he 

  and Coretta chose not to affiliate with us, althoug
h they kept many friends among our ministers 
right until the day of his death. In fact, he was s
cheduled to preach the Installation of my friend 
Farley up in Cleveland a bit later that April. Thus
, for King, once he accepted the Christian church 
of his youth, the idea of the Beloved Community and
 the New Testament idea of the Kingdom, 
Empire or Domain of God could flow together, inform
ing each other easier than they could have 
had he chosen to link himself to us.  

 
Now the authority of the Not Yet, the authority of 
the Beloved Community over any life may 
seem like a faded idea to some of you. After all, t
here has been progress in many areas that 
claimed King™s concern, no question. Some things ha
ve been realized, bit by bit. I admit that. But 
I also remember what our authors wrote about King™s
 attitude toward progress: 
 
In speaking about the possibility of actualizing th
e Beloved Community in history, King attempted 
to avoid what he called "a superficial optimism" up
on the one hand, and "a crippling pessimism" 
on the other. He knew that the solution of social p
roblems is a slow process. 
 
Right.  The ?middle path,? as Buddha might have sai
d.  Neither superficial optimism.  Nor a 
crippling pessimism.  

 
And yet, despite my own appreciation of a middle wa
y between the two cynical extremes, and 
despite my understanding that the Beloved Community
 is in the future, I have to say that the 
present community in which I live still invites me 
daily to long deeply for an immanent dawn of 
King™s long dreamed Beloved Community.   

 
I don™t know about you, but this is the community 
I live in. I live in a city where a man in a 
threadbare parka stands at the top of the Morse roa
d freeway exit with signs telling me about his 
four hungry children and telling me that he is out 
of a job. I have no rational reason to think he™s 
lying as he stands there shivering in the cold.  So
 I long not for my community, but for the Not 
Yet, for the Beloved Community.  I live in a commun
ity where a woman who talks to herself 
because of severe mental health problems drinks her
 steaming coffee in front of my local 
McDonald™s, right near the metal box with newspaper
s in it headlining budget cuts for all social 
services and mental health agencies.  So I long not
 for my community, but for a Beloved 
Community.  I have a three friends who have a hard 
time finding  work not just because of the 
economy, but because of prison records from their y
outhful years that stay with them permanently 
like some awful tattoo of a life sentence. Every se
ntence in our state is a life sentence, after all. 
So 
I long not for my community, but for a Beloved Comm
unity.  I could go on, of course, but you get 
my point.  The authority of the Not Yet, the author
ity of the Beloved Community, still addresses 
me and I find I too want to acknowledge its authori
ty in my life.  The poverty I see around me is 
real, the economic injustices I see around me are r
eal, the issues around mental health are real. 
But my point is that I want to yield to the authori
ty of something far more real than that. I want to 
yield to the more powerful authority of King™s visi
on of the Not Yet in my life. I want to claim 
that vision of a Beloved Community which is, yes! M
ORE REAL than what I see with my eyes 
and hear with my ears. The man at the Morse exit, t
he woman at McDonalds, my jobless friends 
are all windows I can see through, windows that ena
ble me to catch brief glimpses of that Not Yet 
world, windows in the whirlwind of the present orde
r that enable me to see what could be.   

   
And Gwendolyn Brooks reminds me to 
Conduct (my) blooming in the noise and whip of 
that
 whirlwind
.  The whirlwind of the present world in which I li
ve. She™s not saying that blossoming 
will be easy, because the realities of the present 
world are sharp, cruel for many, and often hurt. 
But I still feel that the Beloved Community holds m
ore reality, more authority than even the harsh 
present world which wants us to bow to it as the fi
nal authority, and sacrifice each other to it. The 
Beloved Community is  the one which is not about us
 as individuals, but about justice and 
equality for all as a community. As King put it, th
e Beloved Community is about love, not fear; 
about cooperation for the common good, not competit
ion to get it all for oneself. But King also 
wrote, as quoted in the first reading: 

And though (it) may remain 
not yet
 as a universal reality in history, in the present 
it may exist in 
such isolated forms as in judgment, in personal dev
otion, and in some group life.
 In other words, the Beloved Community anticipates i
tself some isolated forms even in the 
present, whenever, like my friend Jane Rzepka, we r
ush, taking ten seconds or less, to point out 
that it™s not all about me, it™s not all about you,
 but it™s about everyone. It™s not all about the on
e, 
but the many. The community.  Of which– Glory Be!..
 there are 
already anticipatory
 examples 
here on the earth, says King. Even in some ?
group life,?
 he says. Like even, in some cases, can I 
dare say it...? this church.  

This is why Gwendolyn Brooks, who knew how much the
 word Love was important to King, 
and how the church was important to King, wrote, ju
st after he died, this magnificent benediction 
to us all who often try to build Beloved Community 
here at this church and in the community 
that hold us: 

Build now your church, my brothers, sisters. Build 
never with brick–nor with granite. Build with 
lithe love. With love like lion eyes. With love lik
e morningrise. This is the urgency–Live! 
Offering 

Closing Affirmation by Martin Luther King Jr. 
This is where we are.  

Where do we go from here?  

First, we must massively assert our dignity and wor
th. We must stand up 
amidst a system that still oppresses, and develop a
n unassailable and majestic 
sense of values. What is needed is a realization th
at power without love is 
reckless and abusive, and love without power is sen
timental and anemic. Power 
at its best is love implementing the demands of jus
tice, and justice at its best is 
power correcting everything that stands against lov
e. And this is what we must 
see as we move on.                                 
Martin Luther King Jr., 1967 
 
Singing
  
#1014  Standing on the Side of Love 
   
