
  We are here
after a week of white snow lacing the tree, 
  and after the sad loss of lives in the air,
to worship, to climb high and dig deep,
  to refuse to stay on the surface of things,
to let feelings and thoughts teach each other,
  and to join the stories of our own lives
to that greater story called the Universe.
  Thus we worship for our very lives, 
to the end that we can pray each day

may our reason and our passion keep us true to ourselves,
  true to each other
  and true to those shared visions of what we can together
  become?

  Snow falls, drapes across branches,
  clears the stubble off frozen fields,
  scatters itself on evergreen bushes, 
  melts into puddles and drips into drains.
  Wet are the streets for Chinese New Year.
  There are children in both Shanghai 
  and in Columbus who dream of dragons 
  turning into spring kites,
  who relish the scent of oranges and green garlic
  wafting from the kitchen.
  
  Snow still melts off the lawns,
  but candles burn indoors on this day called old Candlemas, a day to invoke
  
  the coming end of winter, 
  a day to mark the final days for necessary flames in the dark, 
  and to be a harbinger of spring's warm breath.
  Imbolc this day is called by some,
  a sound robed in ancient Celtic prayers
  and the swift shadows of the groundhog.
  
  It's a day unbound by calendars too, this Sunday in February,
  a day when what might happen on any other day, also happens, the loss of
  human lives in the air
  in a starburst of pain to the heart,
  and the loss of lives on the earth, on streets 
  of poverty, and degradation and violence.
  
  For the calendar days, the holidays, there 
  is noise and laughter, oranges and candles.
  
  For the non-calendar day that it is, 
  a day of loss and mourning for all the deaths in the heavens and on the earth
  that hit us hard,
  we can only offer our silence.
  To a time of silence we go, 
  on the path of silence, 
  with wings of silence,
  into hearts of silence?.
  
(silence)

  Joining the stories of our own days
  to the larger story of humanity through the ages,
  we enter a safe time for expressing our love,
  when we are free to name aloud, or in private silence, those human beings
  whom we know personally, with whom our lives are bound together by love,
  struggle or care.
  
(naming)

  Candlemas or Imbolc or Chinese New Year or Groundhog Day or Lupercalia or
  just a sad winter Sunday in February?it makes no difference the name
  of the day, only that it is like every other day I can think of? a day
  that, no matter the losses, still invites our love. A day that invites our
  kindness. A day that invites our nurture. A day that invites our intemperate
  praise and adoration. Adoration, you know, like that of a parent for a child,
  a friend for a friend, a lover for a lover, and like that leap of the human
  heart at the sublime mystery called music.

   Each weekend during the fall of 1864, Horatio Alger Jr. came down to
  Brewster from Boston.
  
  On Sunday morning he preached the sermon and led the services at the Unitarian
  Church of Brewster. He visited around the parish on Sunday afternoons. During
  his social calls he discoursed on the state of Unitarian affairs. The parish
  committee found young Alger soft-spoken and likable. They voted to have him
  come as the settled minister, offering him a salary of $800 per year.
  
  He did all that ministers are supposed to do?he visited the sick, and
  comforted the aged, and ran the May festival. He doted on the boys of the
  parish. Unlike other adults, he was never too busy for a walk in the woods
  or a game of ball. His love of boys and the boys attraction to him were well
  known.
  
  In March, a year and a half later, the Rev. Mr. Alger Jr., trained for the
  ministry, abandoned it forthwith and did not seek a parish again. This is
  because the parish committee of the First Unitarian Church of Brewster had
  sent a letter to the American Unitarian Association, charging him with "gross
  immorality?with young boys."

  The victim of family incest who does tell is almost always asked, "Why didn't
  you tell sooner?" The answers are:
  
    I didn't know anything was wrong.
    I didn't know it was illegal.
    I didn't know who to tell.
    I did tell and no one believed me.
    I was ashamed.
    I was scared.
  

  The abuser keeps the event secret through threats:
  
    If you tell, I won't love you anymore.
    If you tell, you'll be sent away.
    If you tell, no one will believe you.
    If you tell, I'll go to jail and you'll starve.
    If you tell, they'll give you to someone who will really hurt you.
    If you tell, you will go to hell.
    If you tell, you will go to an insane asylum.
    If you tell, I will kill your dog.
  

  Mostly, children act like other small creatures, who deal with overwhelming
  threat, by freezing, pretending to be asleep, and playing possum.
  

    I didn't know anything was wrong.
    I didn't know it was illegal.
    I didn't know who to tell.
    I did tell and no one believed me.
    I was ashamed.
    I was scared.
  
    If you tell, I won't love you anymore.
    If you tell, you'll be sent away.
    If you tell, no one will believe you.
    If you tell, I'll go to jail and you'll starve.
    If you tell, they'll give you to someone who will really hurt you.
    If you tell, you will go to hell.
    If you tell, you will go to an insane asylum.
    If you tell, I will kill your dog.
  
  Yes, I do know. This is not an easy subject for a sermon. It's not even an
  easy subject for a private thought in one's head.
  
  Yet I have to note how often this topic has been in our newspapers this last
  year, tied, not to blood families, but to what even so many of us call the
  "church family."
  
  Our Roman Catholic friends and co-workers may have even raised the subject
  themselves, expressing their disgust and sorrow at the way that the abuse
  of power via sex in the parish translated to another abuse of power in the
  episcopal offices. In Boston last September, Catholics I met were so mad
  at Cardinal Law for his hemming and hawing around the issue of abusive priests
  that I am frankly surprised they did not storm his office with torches and
  staves.
  
  Many now grown men and women have had their faces spread across magazines
  and papers, talking in the open about things that for many years were sealed
  tight. The amount of sheer emotion, the cascading feelings unleashed by all
  of these revelations, has left many a soul feeling swamped, depressed and
  certainly betrayed by the powers that be, both by the original perpetrators
  and the bishops themselves.
  
  But we are not Roman Catholics in Boston. Or any other town for that matter.
  We are Unitarian Universalists in Columbus, Ohio. We can be sympathetic to
  our Catholic friends, but what has this to do with us?
  
  A lot, I think. But I will speak only for myself right now.
  
  I have to admit that this whole issue of child abuse was the first surprise
  of many to ambush me in the ministry. Not once was this subject mentioned
  in the seminary classes I took back in the mid-seventies. Not even in counseling
  classes. But you have to remember that this was back in the days when no
  one talked about such things in public.
  
  This was long before Oprah interviewed folks on television about this, making
  it a "real" topic for conversation. This was before there was a half a mile
  of shelves of books on the subject in the public library. And this was a
  very long time before some "skeptical" magazines joined Sigmund Freud himself
  in suggesting that, when women in particular report such things, they had
  the idea placed in their head by a therapist, and have recovered memories
  of something that really didn't happen at all, in any way, shape or form.
  
  In my first parish, the number of folks who came in day after day to tell
  me stories of powerful sexual assaults when they were children or young teens
  simply astounded me. You have to remember I was a 28-year-old young man who
  was naïve as he could be, and fresh off the turnip truck. So mostly
  I just listened, startled and quiet, and asked clarifying questions now and
  then. No, once I did more than that. I actually helped a young woman move
  into a temporary shelter with my own hands at two o'clock in the morning.
  
  But these stories stayed with me. They haunted me whenever I preached sermons.
  At my second church I continued to hear more of them. I heard from folks
  who were in their 80's. I heard from folks who were in their 20's. I heard
  them from peers. I even had one young woman brag about the sexual attentions
  given her by her minister when she had been only 15. I found out that one
  of my ministerial mentors had been defrocked, not for his sexual power over
  younger folks, but for his sexual power over dozens of women in the churches
  that he served. I began to feel feelings I had no ability to figure out,
  and I myself entered therapy for a few years to help me sort out all of the
  broken boundaries I had come to witness because of my calling. I realized
  that this was not the world I thought it was.
  
  Little by little, other colleagues let me know that this was something they
  heard all the time too. Articles and television shows and journals described
  the scenarios over and over again. I began to feel less unique in my ministerial
  experiences, and began to respond to the women and men before me with a few
  greater skills and less shock.
  
  I learned about the hidden history of this issue even in our own heritage.
  When all of the uproar about Cardinal Law's irresponsible decisions were
  filling our newspapers to the edge, I remembered the story of the 19th century
  Unitarian minister Horatio Alger Jr. who had done what many Cardinal Law's
  priests have been accused of doing. His parish board interviewed the boys
  and families to find out the facts. Then they sent a letter to the American
  Unitarian Association in Boston in the language of the day, and Alger left.
  Throughout the rest of his life, Alger wrote books for young boys, and became
  the most popular author in American history. He took many boys into his own
  house, and helped them to achieve some portion of success. We are not sure
  if he ever pressed sexual advances on other kids later in life?I tend
  to think he did not, myself, from the remorse he expresses clearly in a poem
  he wrote later in life.
  
  But this is hardly some new event in history, some new phenomenon caused
  by sexy advertisements on television and ravishing naked beauties on the
  screen, as religious conservatives would like to suggest. This has nothing
  to do with freer sexual mores hammered out in the sixties, or with gay or
  lesbian life, or the brokenness of some heterosexual marriages. You can find
  this theme explored thoroughly even in the Bible, in the Hebrew scriptures.
  
  Here, in words written over 2500 years ago, the story of Tamar and Amnon
  and Absolom forms the central shaping narrative of the whole Hebrew testament.
  It's not read much in the pulpit or even privately, but I assure you, it
  surely is the most modern sounding story in the whole of the western scriptures.
  Here it is.
  
  Amnon is the crown prince, about 20 years old. He is hot for his younger
  half-sister, who is at most eleven or twelve years old. One of his friends
  urges him to come up with a scheme to get her. He pretends to have a cold,
  and asks his father King David to send Tamar into his room to cook some healthy
  food for him. She comes in, tentatively, almost as if she fears what will
  happen. He feigns weakness in his bed and asks to be hand fed. She comes
  closer and he grabs her and overpowers her. She protests clearly and says,
  "How can you do this?" But the text says soberly, "But he would not listen
  to her voice, and being stronger than she, he overpowered her and lay with
  her."
  
  Then it says the following amazing thing. "Then Amnon hated her with unutterable
  hatred. 'Get out!' he cried." She would not, but he has his slave come and
  throw her out. Later her full brother Absolom saw her tattered condition
  and her torn sleeve, and immediately guessed what happened. He counseled
  her, "Be quiet about this. Don't take it personally?he is your half-brother
  after all."(I Told you this sounded modern!)
  
  King David heard about it, and was angry, but did nothing about it. Eventually
  the brooding Absolom, biding his time for over a year, took revenge against
  his sister's attacker, kniving Amnon, the crown prince, in his throat. Later
  Absolom, still angry, declared war against his father, and died in that attempted
  coup. Thus, not only was a young almost-teenager violated, the whole Davidic
  dynasty basically crashed and burned because of this event. This makes it,
  by my lights, the central story of the whole Tanakh. Complain as you will
  about the Bible if you are not fond of it?the families portrayed within
  its covers reflect every single thing I have encountered in the ministry,
  without flinching. It is a sad, but unfortunately honest, collection of stories,
  as far as I am concerned. If you want to read the story for yourself, it's
  found in Second Samuel, chapter 13.
  
  You can see in the Biblical story of Tamar all the elements that experts
  on this subject will describe to you in these later days:
  

      the overpowering of the younger by the older and stronger,
    
      the caution to be silent, to say nothing,
    
      the shame,
    
      the real misery, so often not believed or acknowledged, or minimized.
  

  In some cases there are threats, as the reading from Lears suggests. Most
  often these threats are never carried out?the shame and fear stifle
  any expression. This happens to boys as well as girls, and women perpetrate
  such actions as well as men, although rarely as many times. This is not about
  what sex or gender you are, after all. It's about what power you have or
  don't have. It's about the abuse of power and the confusion of sexual affection
  and power. It's about the false power of those who count themselves powerless.
  
  I am not talking about power games in the variant forms of sexual practice
  enjoyed by some consenting adults. There is nothing consenting about this
  at all, although I certainly admit that teen boys and girls have a real and
  powerful sexuality which they are exploring and trying to understand. I think
  adults should encourage them not to be afraid of their sexualities. And I
  well understand that there have been cultures, such as in ancient Athens,
  where there were culturally accepted forms of moderate intergenerational
  sexuality which were often, if not always, consensual.
  
  But this is not ancient Athens.
  
  It is true that sometimes the young people subjected to sexual abuse enjoy
  the attention they get around the act. They sometimes convince themselves
  that the act is something they can put up with for the greater good of close
  connection to a beloved adult. But again, this greater good does not make
  the abuse itself a good thing.
  
  And I also understand that there have been mistakes and exaggerations and
  even misinterpretations in regards to such things too. No human reality I
  can think of is untouched by fallibility, error, tragedy and sadness. I wish
  it were otherwise, but I am too realistic to actually hope to live to see
  the end of human errors.
  
  And I do not think that every clergy person, boss, parent, uncle or aunt,
  grandparent or older sibling who has done such a thing is a pedophile, that
  is, someone who fantasizes about sex with children. There are such predators
  who are very fractured people, like some of the priests sheltered by Cardinal
  Law. But there are some folks who have just had fractured situations in their
  lives, when they were vulnerable to the breaking of sacred boundaries in
  a singular way. In both cases a child is abused, but they are very different
  things, I think, for the perpetrators.
  
  For example, I know one man in a Unitarian Universalist church out east who
  was jailed for a time for abusing his daughter, but who confessed this truth
  to the church, as soon as he started to come to services. He talked to the
  minister and board chair first, and convinced them that this had been a singular
  event in his drinking days, and that it would not happen again. He wanted
  the church to know and set whatever limits for him would make them feel
  comfortable with him in the church, even if that meant sending him away
  completely. And then the minister and board chair went, with his permission
  and encouragement, to the Board and Religious Education council. It was agreed
  that this man would not ever teach, or work in the classroom wing of the
  building. It was agreed that he was to have nothing to do with the children
  of the church, but that he could become a member.
  
  He joined the church, and became, not just a member, but a magnificent member,
  helping and serving on several committees, working on the church gardens
  on Saturday, and bringing some joy and energy to the church. He was restored
  to his daughter, and had, and still has, a good relationship with her. He
  eventually served on the most important committee in the church, elected
  by the congregation, so great was the trust that he built. He was, and still
  is, an extraordinary human being, and an active member over decades.
  
  There are many folks like this man. And yes, there are many folks who are
  not like this man. But often through no will of their own, I must hasten
  to add. Statistically, a very large percentage of adults who abuse children
  were abused themselves. Such behavior is often re-enacted, if you will, from
  generation to generation, the perpetrators often picking kids the very same
  age they were when they were abused. But some one has to stop the flow of
  the abuse through history. Decisions of will have to be made. And it can
  be done, for most men and women, even if not for all, with proper support
  and good therapeutic help.
  
  Predators sometimes obsess about what they will do with a young teen. Some
  of the accused priests, like Fr. Shandley, seem to fall into this pattern.
  But non-predator perpetrators, which are the largest number of those who
  do such things, abuse young ones during certain situations only. And for
  all sorts of reasons. Some may even confuse it with their very real love.
  
  But in every case, no matter the struggling reasons, it's an issue of power
  over, not power with. No child, and yes, no fifteen-year-old, can be expected
  to make an informed consent about sexuality with a grown up, even though,
  yes, I know many teens these days who are smart, educated and sophisticated
  beyond any one I knew when I was a teen, myself included.
  
  As a Unitarian Universalist, I see several religious responses to this reality
  that lives among us all in this world, regardless of class, ethnicity, culture
  or religion, as every statistic affirms.
  
  First, safety for our children is first and foremost?the worth and dignity
  of every person that we proclaim is especially resonant when we speak of
  children. Their capacity to feel their feelings and express their feelings
  must be safeguarded by all of us, for it is only such a strength, the strength
  of feelings, which can make its way across the wilderness of silence and
  shame that surrounds this subject. Many of them will still not speak of this
  until they are adults, twenty years later, as the statistics support. But
  it seems to me we have to be ready to listen carefully and with care to our
  children.
  
  Second, the man or woman who abuses, even the most broken, is also a human
  being with inherent worth and dignity. If they were abused as children, and
  grow up to do the same, our compassion reminds us that their inherent dignity
  was distorted by their own upbringing. Limits need to be set, certainly,
  but help and sympathy need to be offered, even if it is at first rejected.
  It's an awful lonely road to health without companionship.
  
  Third, our own feelings need to be safeguarded, and honed, so we can actually
  understand the stated feelings of our children and respond to them without
  fear or denial. How often women and men have come into my office more frustrated
  by the reception they got from friends and family than from the actual event,
  terrible as it was.
  
  Fourth and last, this is a subject that does not need any more shame heaped
  upon it. There has to be room to talk about this, and that room has to be
  offered by everyone in this room in order for safety to be present. Please
  do not think for one second that what Cardinal Law did is something a
  congregation of people cannot do. Perpetrators can be sheltered in all sorts
  of silence. Yes, of course, some silence is good. No one, for example, goes
  up to that church leader on the east coast I told you about and throws his
  singular behavior back in his face. It would be inappropriate. But it does
  not require either celibacy or a pointed miter on one's head to keep secrets
  that harm the larger good. And so, in the end, we are reminded that in this,
  as in everything, we are all in this together. No one is left outside. No
  one is outside the embrace of the tough but embracing love our Universalist
  heritage has proclaimed, without shame, for two thousand years. No one. No
  one. No one.

  We are a community of people who come together to worship, to learn, to connect,
  to recognize, to help, to face, to sing, to enjoy, to give, to support, to
  bless, in the name of that Love which is greater than any of us can offer
  alone. To this end, we collect our offered support for the institutional
  needs and programs and outreach of this, our beloved congregation.

  O Love and Truth Unbroken
  Let hearts be open.
  Let peace shape our circle.
  Let feelings be gifts for the living of life.
  Let fear not press us to be who we are not.
  Let the dream of wholeness
  become the process of growth and letting go.
  Let the past release the future,
  and the future release the past,
  so that fate shall perish and life is free again.
  Let our separate lives be like you, 
  O Love and Truth: Unbroken. Amen.
