 Authority and Fear 
January 5, 2014 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 
 
We are here, 

as winter slows us with bitter cold, 

and bright landscapes and slippery roads, 

to worship,  that is, to pause for a time,
 to go deeper, struggle with questions 

which find their home in our hearts, 

questions which call to us to deeper loving. 

 
And so, bearing witness 
both
 to our world as it is, 
and
 as Love can imagine it, we 
would claim that vision of a just world in our own 
lives. And because of a growing 
sense of kinship with all beings, inviting our comp
assion, we begin in this 
celebration to engage our mission with our whole li
ves: body, mind, and heart.
   
Praising
 #123 Spirit of Life 
 
Ingathering  
What Is This? And How Do You Know? 
  
What is this? A turtle? Wonder if I told you it was
 a lion?  
No? How do you know itôs not a lion? 
 What is this? A piece of pie? How do you 

 know? Have you ever tasted pie like this before? 

 Does this look like what you have tasted? 

 What is this? A car? But it says right here, ?This
 is NOT a car.? 
 Here is a much harder questionñ
  What is this? Is this a young woman?  

 Or is this my great grandmother Ersilia?
   Greeting  
news of the congregation 
 
 
 Devotion:
  Welcoming Memory and Hope
  
Affirming  #1056 Thula Klizeo   

   
(with spoken words between repetitions) 
a.
 Be still my heart. I am at home here. 
b.
 At home in my own authority to say yes, or no. 
c.
 Heart and mind are not at war in my home. 
d.
 They teach each other. They learn. They hold hands 
and dance 
and sing. 

  Communing 
the Sequence,  
 Everyone in the world I call home  

has a face; behind that face, a story 

in which is threaded grief and love, 

aggravation and joy, and a sense of self 

which may be, as some Buddhists  

and brain-scientists say, 

something of a illusion, but which 

I, at least, find to be a pretty darn convincing on
e. 
The cashier at the Krogerôs has a face; 

she wishes me Happy New Year with a smile.  

The amazing guy named Nonstop dancing, via a YouTub
e video, 
right on top the Great Wall of China has a face.  

My own face opens like a rose when I see him move l
ike that. 
The guy at the top of the freeway exit 

holding a cardboard sign in hopes of surviving the 
cold has a face. A bit 
scruffy, you're right, but a face. With a rather de
feated ?I am? behind 
his eyes. 

The woman in Malaysia who packed the little Star Tr
ek plastic toy my 
son gave me as part of his Christmas gift has a fac
e too, but I will never 
see it. 

The 36-year-old woman, giving birth to her daughter
 right now at 
Riverside, has a face. She will gaze upon her daugh
ter's face for the first 
time soon enough. 

The guy who used his gun to hold up the Speedway ga
s station on 
Cleveland Ave, night before last, has a face too; n
o mask covering it. 
The store camera reveals someone who resembles a mo
vie star. 
The transgender teen in Newark has a face, a beauti
ful one she sees in 
the mirror each day. 

A very, very smart guy in German Village, who never
theless shoots 
heroin almost every night, has a face too. 

And whether each face finds a shelter, a home, in o
ne place or another, 
under a roof like this, or in a shelter, or under S
outhern constellations 
few in Ohio have seen, or in a building like this, 
silence, at one time or 
another, receives all of us who look out from our f
aces and then look at 
the deeper face behind our eyelids..ñ 

 
silence 

 
Everyone in our lives has a face. 

Even if they are no longer with us, their faces oft
en rise up in our 
memories and float over our hearts like guiding sta
rs. So we give names 
to these faces nowñ
 the tender faces, the courageous faces, the 
supportive faces, the challenging faces, and missed
 faces, the 

 remembered faces. Silently within our hearts, or wi
thin this room, we 
make the sound that is their namesñ
  
naming 

Those who play trombone and piano have faces too, a
nd right now they 
are set on performing the rather vibrant miracle we
 call music right 
before our very eyes. 
 
       the Music 
Sonata for Trombone by Benedetto Marcello
  Tony McDonald, trombone 

 
 
First Reading 
   Judith Butlerôs 
Precarious Life,
 2004, has been an influential book in 
the life of the mind for a decade now. I will quote
 from it today, and also next week. Ms. 
Butler is talking about the controlling, but unname
d, authority of the media in shaping 
our response to crucial issues. She wrote these wor
ds during the post 9/11 war on Iraq. 
 
In the initial campaign of the war against Iraq, th
e United States government advertised 
its military feats as a 
visual
 phenomenon. That the US government called this a ?
shock 
and awe? strategy suggests that they were producing
 a visual spectacle that numbs the 
senses, and, like the sublime itself, puts out of p
lay the very capacity to think. This 
production takes place not only for the Iraqi popul
ation on the ground, but also for the 
consumers of war who rely on CNN and Fox, the netwo
rk that regularly interspersed its 
war coverage with the claim that it is the ?most tr
ust-worthy? news source on the war. 
 
But graphic photos of US soldiers, dead, and photos
 of children maimed and killed by US 
bombs, were both refused by the mainstream media, a
nd supplanted with footage that 
always took an 
aerial
 view, a view whose perspective is established and 
maintained by 
state power. And yet, the moment the bodies execute
d by the Hussein regime were 
uncovered, they made the front page of the New York
 Times, since 
those
 bodies must be 
grieved. The outrage over their deaths motivated th
e war effort. 
 
In the Vietnam war, it was the pictures of children
 dying from napalm that brought the 
U.S. public to a sense of shock, outrage, remorse a
nd grief. These were pictures we were 
not supposed to see. These images pointed beyond th
emselves, to a life and to a 
precariousness they could not show. It was from a s
ense of the precariousness of those 
lives we destroyed that many US citizen began to de
velop an important consensus against 
the war. But if the media will not run those pictur
es, and if those lives remain unnamable 
and ungrievable, if they do not appear in their des
truction, we will not be moved. 
 
The Second Reading
 is a Pericope, that is, a section from Gospel of Ma
rk 11: 27-35 c. 
71 CE. This is the first of the five books that giv
e us a glimpse of the life of the Jewish 
teacher Yeshu bar Maryam, or Jesus, Maryôs son. The
 authorôs actual name is unknown, 
but he has been called Mark since the middle of the
 second century. This particular 
extract from the book is one of the cleverest satir
es on traditional concepts of authority 
that has come down to us from the ancient world. Th
e John in this passage is John the 

 Baptist, an historical figure who is still worshipp
ed as a prophet greater than Jesus in 
parts of Syria.  

Then when they were back in Jerusalem once again, a
s they were walking through the 
Temple plaza, the ranking clergy came up to him and
 demanded, ?Show us your 
credentials. Who authorized you to speak like you d
o, and act like you do?? 
 Jesus responded, ?Tell you what. Iôll ask you a que
stion first. Answer it, and then in 
return Iôll present my credentials. Here is my ques
tion: The ritual of immersion which 
John used to offer out by the Jordan Riveräwho auth
orized it? Was it blest by heaven or 
was it only a human invention? Tell me.? 

They were on the spot, and they knew it. They pulle
d back into a huddle and whispered 
to each other, ?If we say Çheaven,ô heôll ask us wh
y we didnôt undergo Johnôs baptism 
ritual; if we say it was just a human invention, we
ôll be up against it with the people here 
in the temple because they all seem to hold John up
 as a great prophet.? They decided to 
concede that round to Jesus. ?We donôt know,? they 
said. 
Jesus replied, ?Well then, I wonôt answer your ques
tion either.? 
  Interlude: 
 Intermezzo in e minor Op. 116 no. 5*
  Preaching Fear of Authority ñin Others, In Ourselve
s   
Rev. Mark Belletini 
 So, early in December I get a letter in the mail fr
om the BMV, that is, the Ohio Bureau of 
Motor Vehicles.  It began with large letters, to wi
t, "Notice of Suspension," in a 
rectangular frame. Then, in much smaller lettering,
 it told me I had to send proof of 
insurance to their office for my vehicle, or otherw
ise lose all driving privileges for 
three 
years. 

 
My eyeballs popped out of their sockets, like in a 
cartoon. In my hands was a simmering 
threat, lobbed like a grenade, into my mailbox, by 
a state bureau with the authority to do 
as it wants.  

 
The car in question is a car that I technically own
, but which is driven by a good friend 
who I have mentioned many times, a guy who got into
 trouble a couple of times when he 
was 18, and who will now, according to Ohio law, li
ve with those felonies as a straight-
jacket around his life for the rest of his days. Fo
urteen years ago I decided to help him to 
get some wheels, for he is a good man, a good fathe
r, a good athlete, and a good friend.      
 
The BMV listed several ways of proving insurance co
verage, true. But the tone of their 
letter felt accusatory to me..."Notice of Suspensio
n" is like a smack in the face. It opened 
up the part of my soul that feels reactive fear in 
the presence of certain kinds of 
unquestionable authority. I wasn't even able to res
pond to the letter for a few days 
because I was so put out by its tone. The small pri
nt several paragraphs down told me it 
was just a routine thing, but all I could feel was 
a threat.  
 
 This reactive fear felt shameful after a while. I t
hink it brought back all the conflicts I had 
with larger authorities in the past...the IRS, for 
example. I had proof positive that they 
made a mistake, not me, but it took eight months of
 daily phone calls and Xeroxes from 
me, and threatening letters from them, to resolve t
he issues. Thankfully, my proof was 
indeed proof. They were the ones who made the mista
ke this time. Not that anyone on the 
phone even said "Sorry" when it was finally resolve
d.  
 
Right after I put the letter to the BMV in the mail
, my sister called and told me that the 
men and women who did my brother-in-law's cataract 
surgery botched it, and that his eye 
had been swollen and purple for a week. Sure enough
, when he went back in to complain 
that he couldn't read anymore, they looked at the m
easurements they had used, and 
discovered they had misread the digits somehow, and
 were off by 73 points, whatever 
that means. 

 
So now, my brother-in-law is reacting with pure ter
ror to the idea of getting it fixed..."if 
such a thing is even possible." His sense of the re
liable authority of the man who did his 
surgery has been diminished, even though he did gre
at on the left. And this is his right 
eye, for goodness sake, not something about which a
nyone might say, "Oh, well...better 
luck next time." 

 
Of course, millions of people did not get threateni
ng letters in the mail from the BMV 
during December. And for everyone I have talked wit
h, at least in this congregation, who 
has had cataract surgery, it went so smoothly and s
uccessfully that I hear nothing but 
grateful kudos afterward. Authority is not crumblin
g willy-nilly all over the place. 
 
And mistakes as I often say, are just part of life.
 I have made them. You have made them. 
Doctors have made them. The police have made them. 
Bishops have made them. Writers 
have made them. I haven't met an errorless person y
et. 
 
But while mistakes by some authority might make us 
nervous and fearful about their 
authority for a time, authority loses far more when
 it goes off in a direction no one saw 
coming. I remember that both of my parents were und
one for years once the authorities of 
the Roman church decided that you didn't have to fa
st from meat on Fridays anymore. 
"We've been doing this for a thousand years," my fa
ther ranted with great frustration. 
"How can they say that to eat meat is a serious sin
 one day, and not a sin the next day. 
What's wrong with these people?"   

 
And of course, something similar has been happening
 to the very authority of the United 
States government with all the reports about the NS
A, that is, the National Security 
Agency.  The accusations of spying, not just on Ger
man and Brazilian presidents, but on 
the citizenry of our own nation, has left many of u
s confused.   Probably some of the 
accusations, at least, are questionable, because pu
ndits are stretching the meaning of 
those accusations all over the place like sticky po
litical taffy. 
 
You have all seen the famous bumper sticker "Questi
on Authority." I told you once that it 
was the brain child of a Unitarian Universalist bac
k in the 1960s. Someone with great 

 authority in my life assured me that was so. But, i
f you go on-line, seven other origin 
stories are proclaimed, all of them insisting 
they 
have the authoritative version. Why? 
Because they say so. As I often say, hard evidence 
is found even less on the internet than 
in Guantanamo. 

 
But no matter who composed the simple bumper sticke
r, some Unitarian Universalist, 
who bows to neither bishop, council, synod, patriar
ch, or singular Holy Book as the final 
authority, certainly 
could
 have written it. 
 
But this hardly means we Unitarian Universalists re
ject the word "authority" outright. We 
question authority...only as it is imposed from the
 outside with little knowledge of our 
community as it is. Only when it is bullying. 

 
Our historic practice, in fact, for hundreds of yea
rs, has been to 
share
 authority among 
our whole membership. This is mostly through our el
ected leadership. And frankly, this 
has worked very well in the years I have been here.
 I have loved working with our elected 
officers and Board members. The sharing is real, th
e support for each other and for the 
whole congregation bespeaks dedication. Often I am 
moved by our meetings, and the 
care shown to each other. And although the capacity
 for shared authority is granted by 
election, it is also validated, earned and made rea
l by thoughtful and honorable practice 
of that authority. Honed leadership abilities, and 
cooperative practices 
verify
 authority.  
Staff and lay leaders are working authoritatively t
ogether, with mutual support and deep 
love for this place and its people and mission. 

 
But this 
question authority
 bumper sticker, no matter who came up with it, doe
s show 
clear evidence of being crafted in the 1960s. All s
even origin stories agree it arose in the 
era of the Vietnam War. 

 
And Judith Butler very clearly tells us what affect
ed the ending of that war. It was 
citizens here in the States finally seeing in magaz
ines and on television the broken faces 
of children in a napalm-destroyed land, faces that 
had not been visible at the beginning of 
the war when our presence in South-East Asia consis
ted of only a few "advisors."  In 
1965 soldiers were sent, and they saw the violence 
of war first hand, saw the faces first 
hand, had their hearts broken first hand. Many of t
hem were never the same again in body 
or spirit after what they saw. 

 
But because Stateside journalists were a bit bolder
 then, they began to make the invisible 
visible. They did this so that people in Omaha, or 
Bangor, or Columbus could also see the 
faces which the soldiers had seen. And eventually, 
Butler says, we began as a citizenry to 
question the authority
 that led to this war, in her words, "a consensus a
gainst that war 
began to coalesce around outrage and grief."  Yes, 
true, some people, especially at the 
universities, had been against the war from the beg
inning. But not as many as you might 
think. Many of our own congregations were divided b
y it, different factions claiming 
different authorities in support of their view. But
 in the end, those who had originally 
been for the war began to change their mind, becaus
e of what they saw. The faces. The 
tears. The misery. Seeing changes everything, as th
e returning soldiers knew in their very 

 bodies. 

 
But, Butler cautions us, the authorities that be le
arned their lesson. So during the recent 
Iraq war, we were given only aerial views of all th
e bombings. No faces. No children.  
 
This time, the press and media cooperated with this
 separation of the war-dead into those 
who could be grieved, and those who could not be gr
ieved. When Hussein's killings were 
unearthed, the venerable, trustworthy New York Time
s itself, says Butler, posted the 
horrific pictures on the front page, because, she s
ays, "The outrage over their deaths 
motivated
 the war effort." The media have great authority in
deed over how we see the 
world. 

 
Authority. We usually use our own authority to make
 decisions, literally, to 
author
 decisions. That authority is most often based on re
al experience, much of it based on the 
experience of seeing with our own eyes. If we see a
 car sitting in the parking lot, and 
someone in a graduate gown and doctoral hood comes 
up and tells us with urgent passion 
and conviction that itôs 
not 
a car, but a 
pine
apple, we don't believe him. No matter how 
convincing this guy is, quoting Nietzsche in German
 and Kierkegaard in Danish, our eyes 
have seen both cars and pineapples before, and we c
an tell the difference. 
 
This idea that seeing, by eye or by fingers, change
s things, and bestows us our authority, 
is a terrifying concept to many, which is why Bibli
cal literalists, young earth creationists, 
holocaust deniers, race-baiters, anti-Semites and a
nti-Muslims, and theocratic politicians 
are so loud, panicked and powerful. To see the worl
d as it actually is frightens them, and 
knocks their own authority å scripture, party line,
 natural law etc. å out of the ball park. I 
have no fantasy that these folks will evaporate eit
her.    
 
But nevertheless, I hope that most of us who claim 
some authority in our lives å parents, 
a board member, a PTA leader, a judge, lawyer, doct
or, dentist, nurse, mechanic, 
professor, psychologist, minister, etc. å don't cla
im the authority we claim as something 
infallible, never assailed by doubt or fear. I have
 often been doubtful and fearful, both as 
a parent and as a minister, when I have had to make
 tough decisions, especially since few 
decisions are 100/0, that is, perfectly clear.  Mos
t of them are 30/70 or even 40/60. I can 
often even see both sides of an issue. But my elect
ion by this congregation back in 1998 
has given me the strength to make decisions that ar
e tough, even as my knees clatter 
together. I don't have to do that often, mind you, 
but I've not gotten any less fearful over 
the years. Itôs a good fear, mind you, a healthy on
e. But I lose sleep in those days. 
 
Why? Because my authority is not a simple thing. Th
ere are always competing authorities 
in everyone's life..."My grandma always used to say
..." "My economics professor used to 
hold that..."  "What if what I say makes her mad? I
 want her affection...yet I have to tell 
the truth, right?"  Is telling the truth a higher a
uthority than the need to be loved? 
Different authorities pull at our behavior. And itô
s true...if my grandmother said 
something to me that I found truthful...even if she
 was wrong...my adoration of her will 
not easily allow me to let go of what she says, eve
n if the evidence is scanty.   
 
 Itôs this complexity about the multiple authorities
 in our lives that makes taking 
on 
authority, or bowing 
to
 authority, a source of honest doubt and fearfulnes
s. Good 
doubtfulness, mind you. Good fear. 

 
The story from the gospel of Mark points this out p
erfectly.  The high ranking religious 
leaders in the Temple of the day were skeptics by o
ur standards and by their own people's 
standards. They didn't believe in life after death,
 they didn't believe in angels, or that 
human beings had a supernatural soul, they didn't b
elieve in upstart prophets like John the 
Baptist who found the desert more likable than the 
Temple run by them. These are the 
priests, the story goes, who interrogate Jesus. "Sh
ow us your credentials! By what 
authority do you do and say all these things?" they
 demand. What they were actually 
saying was something like this: "Look at our white 
linen robes. We're the authorities 
around here. We think youôre just another credulous
 anti-authoritarian fanatic like that 
guy in the desert."   

 
So Jesus...and I have to see him smirking a bit her
e...returns with this. "I'll answer your 
question if you answer mine. Do you think John's ri
tual of immersion, or baptism, was 
something sacred, approved by heaven? Or did he jus
t make up this little ritual all by 
himself to take people in?" In other words, "tell m
e if he is a true prophet, or just another 
charlatan." 

 
They immediately know they've lost. Why? Because to
 say he was a prophet would 
expose them as two-faced for not getting immersed t
hemselves, and thus undermining 
their own claimed authority completely. But if they
 said, "the guy was a charlatan," the 
people before them, who definitely thought otherwis
e, would have pelted them with 
insults, and, once again, they would lose all their
 authority. The only thing they could do 
was retreat. And even in doing that, they lost a lo
t of their authority...for authority 
without clear principles is simply bullying. Their 
real authority was not their G-d, as they 
claimed, but rather three other things: 1. fear of 
the crowd's opinions, 2. fear of appearing 
foolish to their fellow skeptics, and 3. fear of th
is bonafide hick from the Galilee who had 
done them in neatly...with a truly 
unmistakable
 authority of his own. Itôs the kind of 
authority shown by anyone who refuses to play games
. Itôs the kind of authority who 
questions the authority of those who do not tremble
 in some fear when they go about 
questioning the credentials of everyone else, witho
ut producing any of their own.    
 
You see, I think itôs actually ok to be a bit fearf
ul in claiming authority for oneself, even 
if one is appointed, as the ranking priests were, b
y the local Roman governor, not the 
people. This fear is a good fear, not a reactive on
e. The fear does not in any way keep you 
from acting with authority; but it 
does
 help to clarify the questions you are facing. It 
helps you to ask "What's really going on here?" Am 
I seeing what I am seeing, or what I 
have been taught to see by some unnamed authority I
 am not admitting? Am I afraid I 
will not be liked if I make a tough decision about 
a child, a student, a patient, a rowdy in 
the court? Does my decision serve the dignity of th
e authority entrusted in me, and the 
institution, child, patient or client who trusts me
? 
 
 My brother-in-law being cautious and fearful about 
getting his eye fixed is 
understandable. For a while, his faith has been sha
ken. His eye hurts, and is swollen. But 
he also knows that a medical professional's authori
tative decisions for how to fix the 
problem will have to be accepted eventually. 

 
And when I sent the letter and credentials back to 
the BMV, I did send an enclosure 
letting them see 
my
 face, verbally at least, on getting a letter the f
irst week in December 
that began with the phrase, "Notice of Suspension,"
 followed only then by the outline of 
what I needed to do to comply with a rule I had nev
er heard of before, even though I 
never missed an insurance payment once. I started o
ff with reactive fear, but I have 
moved passed that. And I want to guard my doubt and
 honest fear as beautiful gifts 
anytime I need to act with authority. 

  
Integration:   
Recommitting to Our Mission
  Offering 
An opportunity to reinforce what is important to us
, and  
 invest in the ideals and principles we share. Your
 generous  
 contribution allows our congregation to transform 
lives  
 and impact the world around us.
  
 Whether itôs the learning of our children, 

 the insights of our various circle groups, 

 the meditative joy of weeding, the shared 

 potluck of First Friday, the music program, 
the justice-work opportunities, or just a place  

where we can come midweek and sit  

in silence for a time, this, our common house of li
fe and love, thrives 
because of generosity in time, thoughtfulness and t
reasure.  
May we now share the responsibility for this house,
 as we 
 share the authority for co-creating its  

 welfare, and living out its mission. 

 
 Intermezzo in e minor Op. 119 no. 2* 
  
Returning What Is This? Prayer 

 
 What is this place, O Love,  

with a golden ceiling, louvered doors,  

clerestory windows and purple chairs? 
 Who are these faces beside us, 

 who remember things about us, 

 who sometimes let our names slip, 
but who are clearly glad that weôre here? 

With whom do we share the planet 

of our birth, the homeland that stretches  

from this place to both poles, 

 from this place to the swelling equator? 

What are these sounds we sing, 

these questions we ask, indeed, 

the breaths that we breathe, 

if they are not our struggle to recognize a  

common home for all of our hearts? 
 
Singing
  
#309 Earth Is Our Homeland 
 
Blessing
  
 
*All solo piano selections are by Johannes Brahms. 
  
 
