 Justice and Compassion 
January 3, 2010 
Reverend Mark Belletini 
 
Opening Words
  
We are here, 

in winter, at the turn of the year, 

to worship, to cultivate a deeper life, 

and claim once again our part 

in the ongoing work of making the world just,  

and, at the same time, loving the world more. 

 
So, mindful that we share a common world, but appro
ach that world in different ways, we begin 
our celebration together by kindling our promise of
 mutual honesty, attentiveness, and deep 
courtesy. May we become more proficient at gratitud
e and awareness, that we might more deeply 
embody the kind of justice and peace which embraces
 everyone on earth. 
 
Sequence 

 
It™s amazing. A whole year of yesterdays is past.  
So many experiences, so many memories both 
tough and sweet, so many wonders I haven™t fully di
gested yet.   But with all that experience,  
I™m still not any better at predicting what will ha
ppen next Tuesday, or the following Friday. 
 
The air around us is transparent as glass, but it™s
 not a crystal ball–breathing it in and breathing i
t 
out only serves to keeps us alive– in the present m
oment only.  It does not help me to foresee the 
future.  But the air 
is
 definitely here. It surrounds you and me, enfolds 
us, reliably bearing the 
light of color and shape to eyes which can see. 

 
And I am convinced that even if the very stars sudd
enly arranged themselves in letters so as to 
spell out tomorrow™s name plain as day, the frequen
t grey skies of January would still block our 
view of them, and we would be none the wiser about 
tomorrow.  So let tomorrow come 
tomorrow– as it will. And let yesterday wash away l
ike writing in beach sand, and let us 
welcome the present moment with the praise we know 
as silence–
  
    silence 

 
The silence breaks with these words, and as the pre
sence of those who help shape our lives   
crowds around us, the living and the remembered.  N
ow we can welcome them as we welcome 
the next moment; may we feel free here to name them
 quietly or see their faces flashing in our 
heart to affirm that both past and present may not 
predict tomorrow, but they certainly illuminate 
it. 

 
naming 

 
 Who can tell what the next note in the score of lif
e will be? The spirit, and the spirit alone! 
For behold, it™s 
all
 improvised, – it™s all pure jazz and it always was
 jazz, even before we had 
that word. 

 
The First Reading 
consists of a pericope, that is,a singular gospel s
tory, from the New 
Testament, in this case, it™s free-floating and tot
ally anonymous, a pericope which is not found in 
any of the ancient manuscripts. In our era it™s fou
nd in the gospel of John, inserted there by some 
unknown scribe in about the 4
th
 century. It may have been written down as late as 
the year 200 or 
as early as 100, but more than that, we cannot gues
s. The textual evidence is too scanty to say any 
more than the authors responsible for John™s gospel
 are not responsible for this. This translation of 
the Greek text makes the legal language explicit.
  
In the early morning, he came again to the temple p
recincts. There, he sat down, as teachers 
usually do, and began to teach. Some local scribal 
authorities and rigorous religious leaders then 
approached him. They were dragging a woman with the
m whom they charged with the crime of 
adultery. Thrusting her into the midst of the gathe
red students, their spokesman said: ?Teacher, 
the evidence is quite clear: this woman has committ
ed adultery. Our Laws clearly lay down the 
punishment for such a crime: death by stoning. What
™s you™re opinion in this matter?? 
 
They asked him this question to see if they could p
ut him in a bind, or even expose some legal 
charge against him.  But Jesus only bent over, and 
started to record something, using his finger to 
write in the earth at his feet. When he ignored the
m, they pressed him all the more to answer their 
question. So he stood up, and said to them, ?Why no
t ask the innocent among you to throw the 
first stones?? And then immediately he sat back dow
n, bent over and continued writing in the 
earth, as if recording something. But after hearing
 what he had to say, one by one they simply 
went away, the elders leaving first. Even his stude
nts left, leaving Jesus alone with the woman 
standing there before him. So he looked up at her a
nd said, ?Madam, where is everybody? Is no 
one passing sentence against you??  ?No one, sir,? 
she answered. ?Well, I™m not passing sentence 
either. Go your way now, and be careful not to make
 that mistake again.? 
 
The Second Reading
 is a remarkable poem by Colorado activist Laura He
rshey, with a truly 
amazing track record in social justice issues havin
g to do with GLBT and disability issues. 
 
You get proud by practicing. 

If you are not proud for who you are, for what you 
say, for how you look; 
if every time you stop to think of yourself  

you do not see yourself glowing with golden light; 

do not, therefore, give up on yourself.  

You can get proud. 

 
You do not need a better body, a purer spirit, 

or a PhD to get proud. You do not need a lot of 

money, a handsome boyfriend, or a nice car. 

You do not need to be able to walk, or see, or hear
, 
or use big complicated words or do any of the 

 things you just can™t do to be proud. 

A caseworker cannot make you proud, 

or a doctor. You need only more practice.  

You get proud by practicing. 

 
There are many ways to get proud. 

You can try riding a horse, or skiing on one leg, 

or playing a guitar, and do well or not so well 

be glad you tried either way. 

You can show something you™ve made to someone you r
espect and be happy with it 
no matter what they say. You can say what you think
, though you know other people may not 
think the same way, and you can keep saying it 

even if they tell you 
you
 are crazy. 
You can add your voice all night to the 150 others 

at a jailhouse where your brothers and sisters 

are being held for blocking busses with no lift, 

or you can be one of the ones inside the jailhouse,
 knowing of the circle outside. 

You can speak your love to a friend without fear. 

You can find someone who will listen to you 

without judging you or doubting you or being afraid
 of you, and let you hear yourself, perhaps, 
for the first time. 

These are all ways of getting proud. 

None of them are easy, but all of them are possible
. 
You can do all of these things, 

or just one of them again and again. 

You get proud by practicing. 

 
Power makes you proud, and power comes in many fine
 forms, supple and rich as butterfly wings. 
It is music when you practice opening your mouth 

and liking what you hear because it is the sound of
 your one true voice. 
It is sunlight when you practice seeing strength an
d beauty in everyone including yourself. 
It is dance when you practice knowing that what you
 do and the way you do it is the right way for 
you and can™t be called wrong.  

All of these hold more power than weapons or money 
or lies. All these practices bring power,  
and power makes you proud.  

You get proud by practicing. 

Remember, you weren™t the one who made you ashamed,
 but you are the one who can make you 
proud. Just practice, practice until you get proud,
 and once you are proud, keep practicing  

so you won™t forget. You get proud by practicing. 

 
 
 
 
  
 
Sermon 

 
I don™t know about you, but I™ve begun to wonder ho
w anyone ever understood modern culture 
here in the States before the invention of the ice-
cube tray. You know, those little oblong things in 
our freezer before our freezers got so techno-snazz
y with their automatic icemakers and all that. 
I™m talking about those old-fashioned ice cube tray
s, once made of metal, but now, more likely, 
plastic, the ones with 16 ice cubes paired in two n
eat side-by-side rows. 
 
I say this because, for me, the ice-cube tray is a 
perfect picture of the cultural system of metaphors
 
that we use here in the States. We speak of black o
r white people as if the 600 real colors of 
everyone else in the world didn™t exist, or as if b
lack and white were actually descriptive, which 
they indeed are not. We speak of male and female, a
s if they were two rigid categories, although 
any anthropologist of human cultures or physician o
r biologist can tell you that ?gender? is a 
hundred times more complicated than that. We speak 
politically of being either on the left, or 
being on the right. We speak of gay or straight, ol
d or young, introvert or extrovert, theist or 
atheist, believer or unbeliever, love or hate, comp
assion or justice, guilt or innocence. There you 
have it. The ice-cube tray theory of North American
 metaphor and culture. Two by two by two by 
two by two by two by two by two. Frozen solid.  

 
However, thirty-one years in the ministry and sixty
 years of living have inspired in me a desire to 
thaw the ice cube tray. To melt the metaphors. To l
et things flow a little, questioning the easy 
definitions, and getting clearer about others. 

 
Take Justice, for example, January™s theme word.  S
o many things get in the way of any easy 
definition of that frequently used word. 

 
First, I don™t want to confuse justice and fairness
, which is indeed often done. It may not seem fair 
to us that some people die at age 22 and others liv
e to a ripe 102. But this state of affairs is not 
what I mean by justice, unless you have the rather 
cold theological opinion that the actual date of 
one™s death is somehow the judgment of an arbitrary
 God. Unequal length of life doesn™t strike 
most of us as fair, but it™s not unjust. Although (
and here™s where things get complicated–), there 
are 
elements
 of justice involved in some length-of-life issues.
 For example, if a destitute 60-year-
old woman won™t be able to thrive another ten years
 because she can™t afford the best medical 
care to treat a specific illness, an illness that 
is
 curable, and someone else 
can
 because they™re 
privileged with sufficient means, then justice does
 at least 
interface
 with fairness. But really, they 
are not the same thing. 

 
Second, the Chinese story about the pear seed you h
eard earlier, points out another complexity 
involved in getting clear about the meaning of just
ice. Although the ice-cube theory of guilt and 
innocence implies that a person is either one or th
e other, the story suggests that guilt and 
innocence are mixed in every person–both the poor w
oman who stole in order to survive, and the 
judges that sought to punish her for her crime. Jus
tice and innocence, says the story, are not a 
couple of frozen ice cubes totally separate from ea
ch other.  They kind of melt together. Why? 

 Because there is always some larger context over-ar
ching any particular justice story like a fine, 
hot sun. 

 
The story of the first reading, the free-floating a
nd, for many, very well-known story of the 
teacher, the woman and what has been described by o
ne theologian as a ?lynch-mob,? suggests to 
me where I might look for such a context, such a su
n to start the melting process.  
 
Now, as you know, there are many ways to interpret 
any story. You can bring many points of 
view to the understanding of such a tale. When I fi
rst read this story, it was easy to see it as 
simply a tale of a bunch of arrogant and sexist men
 making cruel decisions about a woman as if 
she wasn™t even there to speak for herself. This mi
ght be called a 
feminist
 reading by European-
rooted thinkers, or, in African-American terms, a 
womanist 
interpretation. Or, you could give the 
story a post-modern reading, namely: this story rev
eals that these punitive laws about our private 
sexual lives proves that  religion is wicked and sh
ould be destroyed off the face of the earth. Then 
there™s the anti-Jewish variant reading, namely, th
at this story of the potential stoning proves that 
the Old Testament God of strict law and order is so
 much more nasty than the New Testament 
God of sweetness and light; but I have most often f
ound that™s the opinion, usually, of people who 
cherry pick their way into the standard bigotries o
f the Western world, which they were steeped in 
to begin with, and which they are often not even aw
are of themselves. There is also what might be 
called the literate reading of the story: it™s a ta
le with a witty and surprising comeback line, a sto
ry 
of verbal comeuppance, if you will. What folklorist
s like to call ?a wisdom tale.? 
 
Here however, is the historical context of the stor
y.  Here is the first ray of hot sunlight to start 
melting things together.  

 
Though we don™t know who wrote the story, the histo
rical sensitivity in its writing suggests total 
familiarity with the precise political situation in
 which Jesus lived. 
 
In the year 30, the Roman occupation government off
icially stripped the Jewish court system of 
its authority, and put Judea under Roman law. No re
ligious judge had the right to impose sentence 
on anyone without taking it to the Roman magistrate
. Now, the Jewish law system prescribed 
capital punishment in a variety of cases which were
 deemed disruptive to the larger society. 
Murder, certainly, but adultery was taken very seri
ously, too. Both parties, male and female, were 
first tried, and then taken out to a quarry. The wi
tnesses of the crime themselves threw stones 
first, then people who had experienced the result o
f adultery in their own family lives were invited 
to throw stones next.  By making this a community e
xecution, there could be no clarity as to 
which stone struck the fatal blow, and thus, there 
could be no vendettas or tit-for-tat revenge. You 
can see that such a practice, although undeniably h
orrific, was sociologically different from the 
State-sponsored murder, or capital punishment favor
ed by Rome, or by the State of Ohio, for that 
matter.  

 
The story as we have it is filled with legal langua
ge such as ?to pass sentence,? ?evidence,? 
?crime,? and ?innocence.? Even the odd image of Jes
us bending over and writing with his finger 
on the ground uses the Greek verb ?katagraphein,? w
hich means to ?record,? something even in 
our own day done by someone we call a ?court record
er.? Now here™s the issue: if the teacher had 

 offered an opinion 
in favor
 of the Jewish court practice, the lynching would h
ave taken place, and 
Jesus would have been arrested for bucking Roman le
gal sovereignty. If he had said, ?Just follow 
Roman law! They™re in charge, you know!? his studen
ts would immediately lose faith in his 
authority as a Jewish teacher. Why? Because he woul
d clearly be favoring Caesar over Moses, 
and this would effectively sabotage his teaching ca
reer. Either way, the religious elders figured, 
he was out of the picture. And please, don™t go thi
nking of these religious leaders as cads and 
monsters either.  The storyteller in no way paints 
them as villains. The loss of their capacity to 
practice their interpretation of their own Law, how
ever I might disagree with its provision of 
stoning, must have been deeply painful and disorien
ting to them. Losing one™s identity is deeply 
painful, and I can understand the desperate impulse
 to preserve it. Being occupied by a foreign 
military presence with imposed laws, customs and as
sumptions was no picnic either–there are 
probably people all over the world living at this v
ery moment that could tell you what that feels 
like, if you could find a way to ask them. No, Jesu
s™ looser interpretation of the Law at other 
times made him seem scary to many people. So the co
ntext of the story is very complex, and easy 
judgments on a first reading are probably not very 
accurate. 
 
The core of the story, however, is neither the cont
ext, nor the defense of cultural identity. The 
core of the story is the Teacher™s clever way of ge
tting himself–and the woman–out of a jam.  
He doesn™t criticize the Law, or their interpretati
on of it. He simply invites the ?innocent? among 
them to cast the first stone. He actually treats th
em as honest, self-reflective peers, not his bitter
 
enemies. He trusts them to realize that guilt and i
nnocence are not neat ice-cube categories. He 
does not force a clean separation between guilt and
 innocence, or, for that matter, between his 
compassion for the woman™s plight, and the demands 
of justice under law. He asks each of them 
to take an honest assessment of their lives, and as
ks them how different they are from the poor 
woman they are using as a political symbol. And one
 by one they drop their rocks–and their 
charges, and go home, leaving the woman alone with 
the Teacher. ?Is no one pressing charges?? 
he asks. ?No one, sir,? she answers. ?Well, I™m not
 pressing charges either; and then he warns her 
?not to make that mistake again.?  Not ?sin,? sorry
 for the traditional types who love to turn 
everything into hard-core theology.  
A mistake
 is what it means. 
 
I have a friend who made a couple of mistakes once.
  He was 17, got in with what my parents 
used to call ?a bad crowd,? and was charged with co
mmitting two crimes within a three month 
period. Felonies. He served time too. Almost a year
, I think. 
 
But since then, he has made his own way. He got his
 GED all on his own, has taken classes at 
Columbus State. He pays child support for his daugh
ter and throws her nifty birthday parties. He 
pays his rent–mostly on time, if he™s got work. And
 he has become a pro bodybuilder, requiring 
the kind of almost scary discipline that™s foreign 
to me. He™s been a good friend for the last ten 
years, and he wouldn™t think of turning down Thanks
giving dinner at my house. He™s family. 
 
Whenever he gets a job interview–
he just had one at a large local company; they love
d his work, 
his personality, his initiative–
 they eventually turn him down because their comput
er check lifts 
up the felonies on his record from 15 years ago. On
e of which, he claims, and I believe him, was a 
set up in the first place. He freely admits breakin
g the law the other time. But since there are, 
officially, two felonies on his record, both dating
 from the very time in our lives when many of us 

 make ?mistakes? as part of the growing up process, 
he cannot have them expunged from his 
record, despite his exemplary life since then. The 
Law, Ohio Law, makes that clear. Give a 
thousand bucks and one felony can be removed from y
our record. If you have two, too bad, you 
are tattooed for life with your past mistakes. He h
as a life sentence in other words. Oh, he tried. I 
lent him the money to pursue it, and he tried. The 
judge admitted that the law was a bad one, but 
there was nothing he could do. 

 
My friend came back from Springfield and said to me
: ?I give up.?  But you know, he really 
hasn™t. Right now he is working with a few friends–
 ?a good crowd,? to open up a new gym 
down at the Seneca Building on Broad. A training gy
m.  They have more money to invest, but my 
friend has been working hard to paint and build wal
ls and do the things he 
can
 do very well. He 
has pride in what he does. He has pride in what he 
has done these last 15 years.  And sorry, 
although the Medieval theologians thought of ?pride
? as one of the Seven Deadly Sins, I don™t see 
it that way, except when it™s a delusional pride. I
n fact, I see the kind of pride that Jimmy has 
about his athletic ability, his work skills, his GE
D, his initiative, despite everything that has pull
ed 
him back, as his safe pathway between the frozen de
finitions of Justice and Compassion that wall 
him in and have permanently damaged his life. Ohio 
law permits no compassion for someone 
with his record. Unlike the record Jesus was making
 with his finger in the dirt at his feet, my 
friend™s record will never blow away in the breeze 
or melt in the rain. And though I know his 
situation, and have compassion for his plight, that
 love cannot magically rewrite Ohio law and 
change the world of his reality. So what saves my f
riend is his sacred pride. And, as far as I can 
tell, he practices that pride every day. Because, ?
You get proud by practicing,? says poet Laura 
Hershey.  If you are not proud for who you are, for
 what you say, for how you look; if every time 
you stop to think of yourself  you do not see yours
elf glowing with golden light; do not, therefore, 
give up on yourself. You can get proud.?  Poet Hers
hey lists many ways and then finally says: 
?Power makes you proud–  It is music when you pract
ice opening your mouth and liking what 
you hear because it is the sound of your one true v
oice.  It is sunlight when you practice seeing 
strength and beauty in everyone including yourself.
 It is dance when you practice knowing that 
what you do and the way you do it is the right way 
for you and can™t be called wrong. All of these 
hold more power than weapons or money or lies. All 
these practices bring power, and power 
makes you proud.  You get proud by practicing. Reme
mber, you weren™t the one who made you 
ashamed, but you are the one who can make you proud
. Just practice, practice until you get proud, 
and once you are proud, keep practicing so you won™
t forget. You get proud by practicing.? 
 
I wish I had written that. I intend to read it to m
yself every day for a while. I intend to give it to
 
my friend so he can read it every day too. For me, 
her poem does to my heart what Jesus™ famous 
words in the story did to my heart the first time I
 heard them. They melted the icy barrier 
separating justice and compassion into conflicting 
worlds. For me, compassion and justice are not 
at odds. It is never a matter of either compassion 
OR justice, any more, as Dom Crossan says, 
than there can be a matter of a coin with only one 
side. So for me, the definition of justice has to 
do with equal access to power, and the definition o
f compassion has to do with equal access to 
pride. Together, they sow the seeds for a new life 
on earth, for my friend, for that poor ancient 
woman, a life of justice deeper than written law, a
nd a life of compassion deeper than mere 
sympathy, a partnership that can resist the frozen 
obstacles of an ice-cube tray civilization and get 

 on with establishing a growing human covenant of tr
ust, honesty, peace, justice and love here on 
this earth. Let the sun that melts the ice continue
 to shine throughout all of our new year days–. 
 
Offering 

The days to come remain unknown to us. 

We cannot control them by will, 

nor predict their every turn and surprise. 

But today we bless them by giving of our substance–
.some give in other more electronic ways,  
others prefer this ancient way. 

In all cases, what we give, we give freely 

as a tangible sign that our ancient free tradition 

resists coercion in all matters of the spirit. 

The morning offering is now given and received. 

 
Closing Prayer Heretical Imperatives 

(Decisions
 by Slovenian poet, Boris Novak) 
 
Between two words, 

choose the quieter one. 

Between word and silence, 

choose listening. 

Between two books, 

choose the dustier one. 

Between the earth and sky, 

choose a bird. 

Between two animals, 

choose the one who needs you more. 

Between two children, 

choose both. 

Between the lesser and bigger evil, 

choose neither. 

Between hope and despair, 

choose hope. It will be harder to bear. 

 
 
 
 
 
