
  We are here
as learners and teachers, as growing persons,
  to worship, to let the bud of our being
blossom like a rose in midwinter,
  through praise and silence, thanks and singing.
Knowing that we are kin to each other,
  as well as to whales, robins, lizards and flowers
we celebrate our place in the family of things.

And at our celebration's end,
  may our reason and our passion keep us true to ourselves, 
  rue to each other,
  and true to those shared visions of what we can together
  become?

  "When I talked to her mother, Marge Brown, on the day of the tragedy, she
  told me Laurel really loved her work. She believed in what she was doing.
  
  I think Laurel and her companions have a message for our warring earth. When
  I was in Houston for the last couple of days, I met a number of Laurel's
  fellow astronauts and I came to see how much of a family they had come to
  be to each other. And I thought about how these seven astronauts were from
  different cultures and different religions. One was from India, one from
  Israel, black and white, male and female?so different from each other
  in many ways?yet they loved each other, and with all their differences,
  they knew how to get along."

  "The perspective (from up here) is truly awe-inspiring. Lightning spreading
  over the Pacific, the Aurora Australis lighting up the entire visible horizon
  of Australia below. Magically, the very first day we flew over Lake Michigan
  and I saw Wind Point, (where I grew up). I feel blessed to be here representing
  our country and carrying out the research of scientists around the
  world?our shared planet."

  Let the difficulties of the week
  take their sabbath now, 
  their brief and simple rest.
  Let the worries of the week 
  lay their heft gently onto the dark earth 
  below this carpeted floor
  which can bear them with greater ease
  than any one of us can by ourselves.
  Let the tangle of feelings,
  the pull and push of these last seven days
  sit still for a minute, 
  stop writhing in my heart,
  and move no more than a Buddha 
  at rest under a tree.
  Let there be stillness in my heart for a moment,
  the balance point between breathing in
  and breathing out, like the pause of a dancer
  between movements in the music.
  Let the breathing in this room be free and flowing.
  Let pulses trance a slower rhythm in the wrist.
  Let the coming silence be like hands 
  pulling back a curtain, 
  revealing the nourishing table of the feast of life
  which is present here and now 
  and has been the whole while,
  present to those who give up living in either the past or the future?
  
(silence?)

  Calling to mind those I love,
  the kith and kin with which I am bound
  in this life, I bless them by saying their names
  in my heart, or in this safe and sacred time.
  
(naming)

  Blest is the music, which bids us join heart to heart, hand in hand, to go
  forward together,
  to go forward together, from this moment on,
  toward the fire which warms, toward the flowing water which quenches our
  thirst.

  Pessimists argue that the family is collapsing. Optimists counter that it
  is merely diversifying. Too often, both camps begin with an ahistorical static
  notion of what "the" family was like before the contemporary period. Thus
  we have one set of best sellers urging us to reaffirm traditional family
  values in an era of "family collapse" and another promising to set us free
  from traditional family traps if we can only turn off the "old tapes" and
  break out of old ruts.
  
  I am not going to argue that the more things change, the more things stay
  the same. There have been many transformations in American history of the
  family, but they haven't been as linear as many accounts claim. Some changes
  have resulted in gains for one family member and losses for another. One
  thing is clear though:
  
  There is no one family form that has ever protected people from poverty or
  social disruption, and no traditional arrangement that provides a workable
  model for how we might organize family relations in the modern world.
  
  When I go out to lecture on family history, I sometimes feel that half of
  the people I talk to are trying to figure out what they did wrong in their
  families and the other half are torturing themselves trying to figure out
  what their parents did wrong. Maybe our family pains are not all our family's
  fault?or our personal fault. Seeing our family pains as part of a larger
  social predicament means that we can let ourselves---and our parents---off
  the hook. We may discover that the best thing we will ever do for our own
  families, however we define them, is to get involved in community and political
  action to help others.

  I have made brothers of my two oldest friends. I'm not sure where the line
  between friendship and brotherhood is drawn and crossed, but it has to do
  with trust and time.
  
  Barney and Chris and I have surface things in common. We were raised in
  comfortable, upper-middle-class circumstances. We all attended prep school
  and universities (here in Canada).
  
  Barney and I are gay. Chris is heterosexual. He and his partner, Claire,
  have a small perfect miracle of a little blond boy named Alex. Alex is the
  next generation of my family. My nephew, Alex. My brothers, Chris and Barney.
  At night sometimes, before I sleep, I move my mind across the years (thinking
  of my family.) It warms me with every breath, every heartbeat.
  

  A few years ago, I was at a conference in a city half-way across the States.
  I was chatting with some colleagues during a break. We were sipping coffee
  in the wide hallway of the hotel where we were all staying, as other colleagues
  streamed by. It was the fifth day of the conference, and frankly, it was
  over for me. I mentioned that I was anxious to get back home.
  
  "Really?" asked one colleague. "All you have is piles of work on your desk
  at the office. Why are you anxious to go home to that? It's not like you
  have a family you're chomping at the bit to get home and spend time with."
  
  I shot her a glance calculated to stop her in her tracks, and immediately
  I said something to lead the conversation in another direction.
  
  Later she came up and apologized for what she had said to me. "I really put
  my foot in it, didn't I." she said. I nodded. "I know you do have a family.
  A very close family. They don't live with you, but that hardly means they
  are not your family." The she apologized again and said, "I just wasn't thinking.
  Sorry." I accepted her apology and then asked about her family. Then she
  asked about mine. We had a good long talk that day. And I went home energized
  after our conversation.
  
  Of course, that story, and the apology, has been repeated many times in my
  life.
  
  Family. Another important word in the English language, which, like some
  other great words "God," "love," "faith" and "peace," seems to bear quite
  a variety of definition and nuance.
  
  Now, like everyone in this room, I had a family of origin. I was born, not
  adopted, into that family of origin, first-born, to be exact, if you want
  to know.
  
  But the edges of that family of origin were maybe not drawn in the same way
  yours were. I don't know. So in order for me to answer the question "What
  is a family?" I have to start with my earliest learning on the subject.
  
  When I was 8 or 9 years old, I called a number of people Uncle and Aunt.
  (And yes, where I grew up, everyone always said Ant not Awnt like so many
  seem to say here in this city and its environs.) My parents, however, were
  each single children in their families of origin, that is, neither of them
  had brothers or sisters. So I learned very early that the words "Aunt" and
  "Uncle" could be safely used to refer to people to whom I was not technically
  related.
  
  When my father's first cousin was very sick, so sick that they kept him in
  the intensive care unit for over five months, my father went to visit him
  every day. When the nurse asked my father who he was, he always replied,
  "I'm his brother." Now this man in intensive care had several siblings by
  blood, who loved him and visited him too. My father was his cousin. But he
  felt that their relationship was so close that only the English word brother
  expressed the reality of their relationship in any authentic way.
  
  My parents also had many, many coupled friends who had no children. Armondo
  and Funcine, and Leo and Anita come to mind first. But they also knew two
  men who had lived together all of their lives, whom they now recognize as
  a gay couple. And, they knew plenty of single women and men who were neither
  widowed or divorced, just single all of their lives. These people were never
  presented to my brother or sister and me as odd or unusual or lacking anything.
  
  These lessons about the nature of family were clear to me when I was growing
  up. They still make sense to me. And so, thus, when my best friend Richard
  comes to visit me, as he did over New Years, I introduce him to my other
  friends as "my brother." He often calls me brother too, as it really seems
  like the appropriate word for both of us?all that "time and trust" makes
  it so for us, I guess. He is part of my family and I am part of his.
  
  Now clearly I am not the only person who learned these lessons when they
  were young. Our Canadian author, Michael Rowe, actually titled his book,
  Looking for Brothers, suggesting he shares the same understanding I received
  from my family of origin. He writes of his two discovered brothers, Barney
  and Chris, as well as his discovered nephew, Alex.
  
  But some will protest that this Michael Rowe and this Mark Belletini are
  confused. They will tell us, "You cannot discover family, you can only inherit
  it." And of course you can call people " brother" if you want, but it does
  not make them your real brother any more than a homeless street man is your
  sib when he calls out to you from his tarry doorway on High St., "Hey, brother,
  can you spare a dollar?"
  
  Well, I am not so sure if this protest makes any sense, spiritually. Maybe
  one of the reasons the world of our lives is so tragic and wacky these days
  is because the homeless man in a doorway is not our brother, and the welfare
  mom working two minimum wage jobs is not anyone's sister in any significant
  meaning of those terms. And yes, when Tony Larson says that the astronauts
  he met in Houston were like "family" to each other, he was using a metaphor.
  But I think he used it because it was a precise expression of how he experienced
  them. He was not just waxing romantic. He was describing the sober truth.
  
  Family structures have taken on different forms, morally and relationally,
  in every era and in every culture. The fidelity which we claim is so important
  to us was not as important to other civilizations. This is one reason white
  people from Europe called members of some of these civilizations "savages."
  For example, a Jesuit missionary, appalled at the way the Naksapi Indians
  defined family outside bounds of conventional Christian morality, spent an
  entire winter in a Naskapi lodge trying to convince them of the error of
  their ways. "If you do not impose tighter controls on your women," he said
  to one of the male leaders, " you will never know for sure which of the children
  your wife bears actually belongs to you." To which the chief replied "You
  French don't have the sense you were born with. You love only your own children,
  but we love all the children of the tribe equally."
  
  Now this is not a romantic slap at modern mores, as some might rush to say;
  this is an actual attitude toward family values that predominated in many
  national areas for many centuries. It is not our own kind of family, but
  it was family to them.
  
  The so-called "nuclear" family, in fact, dates only from the beginning of
  the so-called "nuclear age," which began in the '40s of the last century
  in Alamogordo. Leave it to Beaver and Ozzie and Harriet, which portrayed
  certain family forms on television, were entirely creations of the post-War
  era, a kind of social engineering, you might say, as Stephanie Coontz establishes
  well in her book. In the years before the war, many smaller family groups
  shared housing, and the grandparents and nieces and nephews were often under
  the same roof. And before the World Wars, in the era of Western expansion,
  families of every description were torn apart by vast distances beyond the
  reach of the telegraph, and reconfigured by disease and disaster. This was
  also true for immigrant families. I know my own grandparents never saw or
  talked to their beloved parents and aunts and uncles again once they arrived
  on these shores from the European continent. For thirty years, their blood
  family existed only at the other end of the trail of an onion skin letter
  shipped slowly across the Atlantic on a boat.
  
  History is simply filled with differing family shapes. You cannot find any
  clear unifying theme between them, except perhaps love, and even then, love
  can be expressed mighty clumsily sometimes. And what I say is true even when
  you go back thousands of years. For example, all the famous biblical stories
  which some of us learned as children reflect family structures about as far
  away from Ozzie and Harriet as you can get without travelling to another
  planet. Abraham, for example, had several wives and encouraged his chief
  wife to have an affair with the King of Egypt so as to better his financial
  status. He coldly sent an unmarried woman who bore his first child out into
  the desert to die. King David had his share of wives too, as well as male
  and female lovers on the side. The teacher Jesus rejected his single mother
  and his several brothers and sisters in favor of his students, whom he calls
  his "real" family. Lot did all the cooking in his family and, after his wife's
  untimely death, had children with his own daughters. Noah lived with all
  of his children and their families and a large number of barnyard animals
  in a houseboat and for a very long time. Isaiah was a single man who often
  walked about in the nude and had many critics. Ruth, once widowed, promised
  to live her life with her mother-in-law, but instead married a foreign man,
  and they all three made a family together, including the new grandbaby, Obed.
  
  Many of the folks who talk about "traditional family values" quote the Bible
  as their authority, but I am not sure why, since I cannot find therein any
  family that remotely resembles the families they proclaim as ideal in form.
  Like I said last week however, the Bible does often provide sober and unflinching
  descriptions of the way families actually can be.
  
  As Stephanie Coontz reminds us in the first reading, when political and religious
  conservatives talk about the word "family" they seem to have a very clear
  idea what that word means. It does not mean gay men or lesbians living together,
  that's for sure. Single mothers on welfare barely count, and single men are
  all up to no good and are somehow "anti-family" if they go around carousing.
  The two parent, never-divorced mother/father/child family is ideal, they
  say. And now we sinful Americans have fallen away from these traditional
  ideals. Worse, these damn liberals prate on about diversity shamelessly,
  when anyone knows that evangelical uniformity is the way of God in the world.
  
  But the liberals and progressives are no better than the conservatives, says
  Coontz. They have bought the fairy-story definition of proper family form
  lock, stock and barrel too, and they defensively try to proclaim "the diversity"
  of the modern family landscape as an improvement on the old model which they
  affirm was simply not just.
  
  Both liberals and conservatives have missed the point, she says, and I think
  I have to agree. There is not now, and never was there, a traditional family
  form. There has always been diversity. And thus, for me, a family is an
  arrangement of people related by blood or commitment or adoption who love
  each other, sometimes admittedly clumsily, and work together, for the common
  good. Family, I say, has no required shape. None at all.
  
  My old "family doctor" out in California, Alan Steinbach had a very clear
  understanding of what his "family practice" meant. His understanding illustrates
  how much I mean by affirming that family has "no required shape." He used
  to say that he treated lonely single women and men in their eighties, who
  had out lived everyone, as "family." But, because they had memories of family
  and love in the center of their heart, their health was affected by their
  family. The memories were enough for him to count an individual as part of
  a family. And it's enough for me.
  
  Most of the stuff I hear bandied about on the topic of families on TV, in
  books, in conversations, is simply baloney. I hear all the time that black
  families are different than white families in structure and form. Do you
  believe that? Most black fathers have flown the coop, whereas white fathers
  stay around forever. How do you know that, if you believe it? Do you really
  think that the color of our skin really determines the shape of our families?
  How? Show me the evidence, please. So are we really talking about black families
  and white (or Asian or Latino) families? Or are we really talking about poor
  families of any color in the city? Or in the countryside?
  
  What does the economic reality of local urban areas have to do with family
  structures and definitions? A lot, in some cases. But there are other factors
  that figure as well. For example, police officers and members of the military
  show substantially higher rates of divorce and family violence than others
  groups. Statistically, there is no doubt about that. So are they now to be
  considered some sort of dangerous underclass? Should we try and bulldoze
  law enforcement schools in order to preserve "the family?"
  
  And how does work availability figure in the shape of families? And public
  transportation? something we here in Central Ohio vote against often
  on our ballots? And what about day-care? And the quality of schools? Are
  there really no social factors that erode the optimism and energy of new
  young families, no matter what side of the tracks?or freeway? they
  live?
  
  I say there are. And I also say prejudice and ignorance inform our attitudes
  about what a family is, more than almost anything else, liberals included
  with conservatives in that number.
  
  For example, do you believe that Catholic families of origin are large? I
  hear that all the time around here. Ten kids per family, maybe? Do you believe
  that? Why? Fact is, some Catholic families are large, most are not. Most
  in this country are not. And Italy, a decidedly Catholic country culturally,
  has the smallest birth rate in Europe. And that has been true for a long
  time. My own Catholic family of origin was small. My parents grew up in small
  Catholic families of origin too. One child per pair of parents. I had Protestant
  friends with seven and eight children when I was growing up. Like all Protestant
  families? No, like some. And like some atheist families, too. And some Unitarian
  Universalist families?I know one with twelve. But not all UU families
  have twelve kids. Some have none. Some have two. Others, five. Is one
  configuration more a "real" family than another? I don't think so.
  
  And thus I, personally, have come to the conclusion that any statement about
  Catholics, Protestants, Jews, blacks, whites, Asians, Latinos, the elderly,
  any particular generation, the young, children, etc, which claims universality
  is simply prejudicial. And such prejudice is an entrenched form of ignorance.
  And ignorance is something my religious faith urges me to confront with questions
  and documented knowledge, wherever I can.
  
  Parents spend less time with their children now than they used to in the
  fifties? That is not supported by studies. But it's commonly believed. The
  fifties were economically better times than those evil sixties with all that
  sex, drugs and rock and roll? There was actually more poverty in United States
  during the fifties than in the much maligned sixties and seventies. But there
  has been a downward trend in recent years. These rises and falls in the economy
  extract their tolls on the formations of family much more than anything else
  does, including religious sensibilities among conservatives.
  
  What is a family? As I said, a family is an arrangement of people related
  by blood or commitment or adoption, who love each other, sometimes clumsily,
  and who work together for the common good.
  
  My colleague at that conference knew very well I have a family to come home
  to. That is why she apologized. For a minute, she had fallen for the old
  Ozzie and Harriet model, which she well knew was a mere blip in the history
  of the family. She knew, when she apologized, that, when I went home, my
  family would be there. She knew that a home is not necessarily a small roof.
  And she knew that family is not necessarily determined by geography.
  
  My family is beautiful. Among my family members, there are my beloved
  godchildren, like Ben who is singing Les Miz in his high-school production
  out in San Jose, or my dear Andrea who emails me daily from Chile with her
  17-year-old questions of what it means to fall in love. When I come home,
  I come home to my spiritual grandfathers like Harry Scholefield. My brothers
  like Richard and Doug and William and Chuck and Kevin speak often with me.
  I have breakfast or work out with my friends like Jim and James. I love difficult
  cousins like Daymond who rob me of my sleep because of their addictions.
  Then there are my sisters, like my blood sister Lynne and my sister Jane
  who tells me the truth and whom everyone knows as my wife at General Assembly
  because we spend so much time together. And my blood brother who is not much
  of a communicator. And my mother, both my birth mom and also Jacqui James,
  who helped me to give birth to a bright, brand new shining hymnbook eleven
  years ago. My beautiful family. And there's my blood father who visited his
  cousin, and several spiritual fathers who have blessed my life a thousand
  times over.
  
  I have a rich family life. A very rich family life. And like most anyone
  I can think of - liberal or conservative, American, Canadian, European, African,
  Asian, Latin - my family is more important than anything else in my life.
  More important than my career, my work; more important than my own dreams
  for myself, more important than anything I can think of. My parents taught
  me well after all. I wonder. What does your family look like?
  
  And I wonder, what would the world be like if you and I actually found a
  way to respond to that homeless man in the doorway as if he was, in some
  very real way, our brother?

  The opportunity to give is one with the opportunity to receive. As we receive
  the blessings of stars, of mountains, of waters and sunsets, of robins and
  horses, of friends and family, of service and solace, so may we feel free
  to offer of our own bounty to the common good of this, our religious community.
  Let the circle be unbroken, universe, world, community, family, friends,
  and self. The offering will now be given and received.

  Gonna keep on walking forward?etc.
