Mother™s Day: Do It For Me 
May 12, 2013 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 
 
Gathering Welcoming Centering Kindling Opening 

 
We are here, 

after a week both sultry and warm and rainy, 

to worship, to celebrate not just our lives, 

but the full, rich context of our lives, 

to lift up, not just our visions and hopes, 

but our every present breath and moment. 

 
Grounded in gratitude for the cosmos that is our ho
me, claiming deepening wisdom as our 
authority, and daring to engage joy, burden, loss a
nd insight in a deliberate community of 
many ways and ages, the flame summons us to 
awaken
: to listen with our whole lives, to 
open, 

to serve.
  
Singing #1002 Comfort Me 

 
Ingathering    
a version of Koala Loy by Mem Fox 
 
There once was a baby koala so soft and round that 
everyone loved her. Her name was Koala 
Lou. The emu loved her. The platypus loved her. The
 kookabura loved her. The echidna loved 
her. And even tough little Koala Klaws who lived ne
xt door loved her. 
 
But it was her mother who loved her the most. One h
undred times a day, she would shake her 
head and say "Koala Lou, I love you!" 

 
As the years past, other koalas were born...brother
s and sisters for Koala Lou. Soon her family 
was so busy that her mother didn't have time to sto
p several times a day to tell Koala Lou that 
she loved her. 

 
Although, of course, she did. 

 
She wanted her mother to say those words, "I love y
ou," but her mother was so busy. So when 
she heard about the Animal Olympics, she knew what 
she would do. She would enter the 
gumtree climbing contest, and she would win, and th
en her mother would notice her, and say, 
"Oh Koala Lou, I so love you."  

 
So Koala Lou trained for the Olympics. She jogged, 
she lifted weights, She did push ups till it 
hurt. And she practiced climbing the tallest trees.
  
 
At last the day arrived. Her main rival was Koala K
laws from next door. She could see her 
mother in the crowd, and knew that soon she would b
e hearing her say, "Oh Koala Lou, I love 
you." 

 
Koala Klaws went first. She made it up the tree in 
a record breaking twenty-two meters in 
seventy seconds flat. Everyone cheered and yelled. 
  
Then it was Koala Lou's turn. Kookabura said: "On y
our mark, get set, go! 
 
As Koala Lou climbed as fast as she could, the peop
le all roared and clapped. Higher and higher, 
she went, higher and higher.  

 
But she wasn't fast enough. In spite of all her tra
ining and practice and hoping, it was Koala 
Klaws who won the gum tree climbing contest. Koala 
Lou came in second.  Koala Lou was sad, 
and ran off to the forest nearby and hid. She cried
 her heart out. 
 
But when the first stars came out, and the moon ros
e, Koala Lou went home in the dark. Her 
mother was waiting for her. Before she could say a 
word, her mother hugged her for a long time, 
and kept on saying, "Koala Lou, I do love you! I al
ways have and I always will." 
 
Greeting  (and announcements) 

 
Affirming 
 Let us cultivate boundless good will, 

never looking down on another, or lying to them. 

Let none of us wish another harm,  

in rage or envy. 

Care for all beings,  

like a mother might care for her only child.   

 
Metta Sutta, from Pali Canon, c. 400 BCE    

  

 #184 Chant Be Ye Lamps Unto Yourselves
  
Communing 

 
 I wonder. What is it like, O Love, to step out und
er the star-pocked night sky and feel, not 
small and insignificant, but rather wonderful, part
 of a greatness larger than this moment? A 
vastness of stars and time? 

 I wonder. What is it like, O Love, to comprehend t
his day, not as a festival of particular 
human mothers whom we love, or miss, or wish we had
, or wish we could have been, but as a 
marking of motherhood everywhere...in the barking o
f seals and their pups in the Pacific Ocean 
near Monterey, the flight of eagles over their larg
e nests in the Rockies, and the Shenandoah 
Valley, and central Ohio, or the burrows of rabbits
 just outside this building? 
 I wonder. What is it like, O Love, to read the gre
at texts of the Pali Canon, or the Book of 

Ecclesiastes, or the Gospel of Luke, or the poetry 
of all the nations, and find there, not the stories
 
of 
other
 times and places, but mirrors in which I can see m
y own life, feel my own longings, and 
hear my own questions? 
I wonder. What is it like, O Love, to sit here, in 
the year 2013, under this warm wooden 
gable, in a post-modern building, built on land tha
t was once under water 240 million years ago; 
land that was once crossed by warriors who called t
he large river south of us Oheeyo, Great 
River, in their Tuscaroran dialect; land that was o
nce a family farm only a short walk from the 
zoo? Only the silence can tell us....              
        
 
silence
  I wonder. What is it like, O Love, to know that my 
life is one of many lives which are as 
important to them as my life is to me? What is it l
ike to name the bonds of love and loss and 
worry and boundary that weave me into the whole of 
human life on this planet? --    It™s like this: 
when I name those I love, miss, question, fret abou
t, haunt me...I acknowledge that their lives 
and my life are one. Now I begin that naming within
 my heart, or on my lips in gratitude that I 
can do so in community...                  

 
naming
  
I wonder. What is it like, O Love, to be blessed by
 beauty as great as stars and rivers and time 
itself? The music begins to answer.... 

 
The First Reading
 comes from Barbara Brown Taylor, an Episcopal pries
t and professor from 
Georgia who is generally considered one of the best
 preachers in the USA of any religious 
persuasion
. 
These passages come from her beautiful book, An Alt
ar in the World, 2009 
 
 According to the rabbis, those who observe Sabbath
 observe all the other commandments. 
Practicing it over and over again they become accom
plished at saying no, which is how they 
gradually become able to resist the culture™s killi
ng rhythms of drivenness and depletion, 
compulsion and collapse.  And yet those who practic
e Sabbath, a little or a lot, know that there is 
another kind of resistance at work.
  
One of my favorite prayers in 
Gates of Prayer
, the New Union Prayer Book, is called 
?Welcoming Sabbath? and it goes like this: 

 
Our noisy day has now descended with the sun beyond
 our sight. 
In the silence of our praying place we close the do
or upon hectic joys and fears, the 
accomplishments and anguish of the week we have lef
t behind. 
What was but moments ago the substance of our life 
has become memory; what we did must now 
be woven into what we are. 

On this day we shall not do, but be. 

We are to walk the path of our humanity, no longer 
ride unseeing through a world we do not 
touch and only vaguely sense. 

No longer can we tear the world apart to make our f
ire. 
On this day heat and warmth and light must come fro
m deep within ourselves. 

 
If you can hear the welcome in that prayer, then pe
rhaps you can hear the dis-ease in it as well. 
How is your own deep fire doing, by the way? Are yo
u pretty confident that you have enough 
heat and warmth and light within yourself to get yo
u through the night? Once you have turned 
off the computer and hung up the car keys, once you
 have decided to take one whole day off 
from earning your own salvation, are you ready to w
restle with the brawny angels who show up? 
 
The Second Reading
 is a recent poem by California poet Dan Gerber, cal
led 
Driving Home,
 which begins with the words "It™s perfect."  I dare
 say it is! 
 
?It™s perfect,? I said one day, 

the thought coming out of nothing I knew, 

to no one sitting beside me, 

while driving home from the market... 

 
said this without thinking, it seems... 

but could there be such a pure expression 

with no intention to express? 

 
The fields were incomparably green, 

the sky incomparably blue...lupine and poppies almo
st blared from the hillsides. 
At least that™s the way I thought it. 

 
?You were made for enjoyment,? Ruskin said, 

and the world is filled with things you will enjoy,
 but every day I stumble 

over cries I can™t still. 

 
?The world is suffering.? 

Say it twice, and it™s not the same 

suffering. 

?The world is suffering.? 

 
Disease, eviction, envy, grief, 

loneliness, rejection, dementia, 

judgment, self-judgment... 

when those I love may not love each other, 

or me... 

anger, suffocation, helplessness... 

this
 helplessness, 
my suffering of choice at the moment. 

 
My friend™s daughter, the pianist, 

whose index finger, lost to sarcoma, 

I can™t replace, 

my daughter whose breast I can™t replace, 

my dear friends whose murdered son 

 
I can™t replace, 

all, over which, I™m at this moment suffering, 

though they may be, at this moment, not. 

 
Closer to home, 

I pull off along the side of the road, 

staunched by the fleeting,  

incomparable beauty of the world  

in which everything happens
   
Preaching 

 
On this Mother's Day, I have to admit that neither 
my sister, my brother, nor I, were perfect 
children. We could leave our beds unmade, pile our 
dirty clothes high on the floor, instead of 
throwing them down the chute, or find ways to get o
ut of drying the dishes with great skill. My 
father was at work a lot, or helping his parents, a
nd so it was mostly up to my mother to deal 
with her rascally offspring. 

 
She wasn't one to yell...that territory was pretty 
soundly sewn up by my father, who had no 
problem exploding like a volcano when he was upset.
  
So my mother would 
try
 and be stern, but you could tell just by looking a
t her sometimes that she 
herself was embarrassed at having to be stern about
 anything. Now if she was really upset, really 
frustrated, she would sometimes just get teary, and
 then you can be sure we all felt terrible, and 
scurried around doing more chores than there were t
o do. But every once and a while, when she 
wanted us to do something we really didn't want to 
do, and we offered her the typical teenage 
protest called "reasons," she would just look at us
 in exasperation and say, "Oh, just do it for 
me." 

 
When we were very little, this tactic would make us
 uncomfortable, and we would do whatever it 
was she wanted us to do, but we would roll our eyes
 to make sure she knew it was a real 
imposition on us, and that ALL of our friends...yes
, every single one of them...were waiting 
impatiently outside for us to join them, since THEY
 didn't have to do such things. 
 
But when we grew older, and had turned into 
wiser-than-the world
 teenagers, and she would try 
that same tactic, we would each look at her and whi
ne "MAaaaa" as if to say, "You really don't 
think that's going to work, do you?"  And she would
 then smile, and act tough at the exact same 
moment, and say, "Just do it, then." 

 
You're right. We were all brats. Sorry, Ma. 

 
But over the years, I have thought about that phras
e.  "Oh, just do it for me." I have thought of 
how often that idea...with a slightly different mea
ning...has become a defining practice of our 
modern culture. Doing things for others, no matter 
what. 

 
Nothing wrong with that right?  Nothing wrong with 
cooking and serving food for homeless 
folks down at Faith Mission, like we do on alternat
e Fridays. Nothing wrong with helping 
someone move, or driving them to the doctor when th
ey can't do so themselves. Nothing wrong 
with showing up at a lobby day down at the Statehou
se, or working on our interfaith BREAD 
team, researching specific immigration issues here 
in Columbus. 
 
Of course not. But we are not doing 
any
 of these things for them without taking ourselves 
into 
consideration first. For instance, I cannot drive a
 friend to the airport so he can attend his 
grandmother's funeral in New York right now, becaus
e I am preaching. I am speaking in this 
quilted pulpit right now. My covenant, my agreement
, is with you first on Sundays, and not other 
people. I have to be clear with myself when I can d
o things and when I can't. Even absolute 
desperation on someone else's part would not make m
e leave this pulpit to do an undeniably very 
good act. As the book of Wayiqra or Leviticus famou
sly says: 

 
 
     
KaMOkha lere' akha veaHAVta   As you love yourself,
 so love your neighbor.  
 
You live inside your own skin, your own body. You m
ust begin there. You cannot live inside 
anyone else's body or skin. So you must start with 
yourself. Do you want food and health and 
love and happiness? Yes? Do you do what you can to 
make that true for yourself? Yes? Then 
work the same to make sure others can eat, can have
 access to health, the possibility of love and 
the journey toward happiness. You 
always
 have to begin with yourself first. This is not sel
fish-
ness, as some are afraid it sounds like, but rather
, self-compassion. You realize that you yourself 
are a person on earth no different than any other p
erson. Only a human person can love another 
human person. So you must always begin with yoursel
f. You must say yes to yourself in order to 
say yes to others. I think of the Greek Orthodox le
gend which holds that Jesus was born lame 
and limped all his life...his critics lambasted him
 by taunting him, "Healer, heal yourself." All 
my life I've noticed that the opposite is more ofte
n true myself....those who have suffered are 
almost always quicker to respond to the suffering o
f others, so I think their proverbial criticism is 
weak. 

 
But listen... 

 
So many times in my ministry I have dealt with folk
s who say 
yes
 to others, even when saying 
yes 
clearly doesn't really help the other. The famous w
ord "co-dependence" is the classic 
example.... friends and family give money to the ga
mbling addict, totally overlook alcohol 
misuse, or make excuses...sometimes silently...for 
the sexual predator inside the family or out. I 
certainly have had to wrestle with codependence iss
ues in my life...most ministers do, in fact, 
since our work is usually a form of saying ?Yes? to
 others. But if, say at a wedding, I pour a 
relative struggling with alcohol issues a glass of 
beer, my 
yes 
to him is actually a 
no 
to his life. 
This remains true even if he tries to make me feel 
bad, or worse, guilty, if I don't pour him a 
drink..."C'mon, it™s a wedding! Everyone's drinking
!" This is true even if he threatens to get 
loud, obnoxious and make a scene...even then. My 
yes 
to him will actually be a 
no
 to him...not 
love, but fear. 

 
It™s natural to want to help in a time of crisis...
the people who responded heroically against the 
Nazi regime, even though it cost them their actual 
lives; the women and men who went in to aid 
after 9/11, or Katrina...all of these were enacting
 their empathy and putting into practice their 
compassion in ways that were costly, but moving. Th
ey were not doing it to be liked, or loved, or 
even because being useful can provide some self-sat
isfaction. They had made a covenant...an 
agreement...with themselves...an agreement where th
ey promised themselves to work together 
with others, where possible, to alleviate suffering
 that can befall anyone. They felt compassion 
for themselves, they loved themselves    enough to 
know they themselves wouldn't be happy to 
suffer in either fire or water, so, as they loved t
hemselves, they loved their neighbors...yes, 
complete strangers mostly...and worked to help thes
e neighbors who were unfortunate enough to 
suffer because of fire or water or unjust laws. 

 
There are strangers, neighbors if you will, in larg
er Columbus, who come here from time to time 
looking for some sort of help, mostly financial. I 
understand. I have needed help in my days, 
including financial help, when I was out of work fo
r six months in my twenties. Now, when I 
was a younger minister, I felt the same amount of e
mpathy that I have now, I think, but I had a 
lot 
less experience. So yes, I confess, I have said 
Yes
 when 
No
 would have been a far greater 
form of love. I admit that I've fallen for a few of
 the long rambling stories offered me by 
strangers. I usually don't any more. I've learned m
y lessons the hard way, the way I learn most of 
my lessons.  

 
Like for example, a man comes in here recently. He'
s weeping... he clearly has real problems, 
shelter, health, family...but his breath is sour wi
th beer, and his emotions are flowing in a way 
that 
all
 of my experience associates with alcohol, so I sen
d him away. He was mad, and he's been 
back twice, telling the same story, still reeking o
f alcohol, and I've sent him away twice more.  
I'm sorry, I didn't feel mean. 

 
Another man came on a Sunday a few months ago, and 
this time many of you talked with him. 
He too had difficult problems. He spoke of them, bu
t never asked for any kind of help. I have to 
say, I was proud of so many members of this congreg
ation because you noticed him, and listened 
to him with compassion, and many of you consoled hi
m. When I heard his story after the service, 
I immediately felt compassion for him as well, and,
 after trusting my own instincts, I offered to 
help him out. We discussed what would make the most
 sense, and I paid off his school loan in 
the name of the church, and bought him a bus ticket
 back to Indiana. He still texts me every 
weekend, telling me he is restored to his family, h
as found a good job, one he likes even, and that 
he and his family are in the process of buying a ho
use. He is thankful. But I always tell him that I 
am thankful to him as well, for being honest, and f
or having enough compassion on himself to 
know he needed to be with people who could really s
ee and hear him...like us. He was right. 
 
I do appreciate those who actually ask for help...s
ince that's hard to do for many of us. For 
clearly, codependence culture in our nation exists 
right beside a culture of 
independence. 
 "No, I 
don't need your help. I can do it myself."  Sometim
es people act as if they are almost insulted 
that you offered your help. But it doesn't mean the
y don't need help. 
 
But back to codependence, which is saying Yes to ot
hers as a way of saying ?No? to yourself... 
and ultimately to them. This is something I have en
countered throughout my life, in story after 

story, conversation after conversation. I've begun 
to wonder if addictions to alcohol, drugs, and 
gambling are just the 
famous 
addictions.  Words like "workaholism" or "shopaholi
sm" seem cute 
(or even cruel when you have buried people who have
 actually died of disease that supplies the 
root word, 
alcoholism
), but I've always noted that folks make as convinc
ing excuses for people 
who work too long as they make excuses for people w
ho drink themselves numb. And people 
who brag about shopping all the time to make themse
lves feel better usually just get an 
appreciative and usually supportive laugh. 

 
I've recently been reading a series of essays based
 on the insights of neurobiology...brain 
science...on concepts like altruism, or empathy. Di
fficult reading for sure. Separating out co-
dependence from true compassion isn't easy all the 
time, but neurobiology grants us terrific 
insights. Interestingly, in this very polarized mod
ern United States culture, some researchers say 
that the exact same area of the brain lights up whe
n people are totally certain about things as 
lights up when standard addictive behaviors like al
coholism come into play. I've been thinking 
about that particular insight ever since. The artic
le had the mind-blowing title "Pathological 
Certainty." Kind of supports my intuition that addi
ctive behavior attaches itself to far more than 
beer bottles or a loose fist shaking dice. 

 
Addictive behaviors distort things certainly, but e
ven when I am as far from my addictive self as 
I can be, still I find it hard to love others as I 
love myself. There is only one of me to love, but 
millions of others. Men and women...strangers, neig
hbors...may come into the church to ask for 
help, but that doesn't happen more than once a week
. The requests for help that come my way Œ 
not as a parson, but as a person Œ are endless. I'd
 love to show up at the statehouse every day to 
lobby...and I could do that, since this week alone 
I've been invited to do that five times. I've 
received 30 requests for money since this month beg
an, not from men with alcohol on their 
breath, but from reputable organizations whose valu
es I share, or friends who are supporting a 
particular health issue which I would indeed like t
o support. I thought the BREAD meeting at the 
State Fair Grounds this last Monday went very well,
 personally, and that the progress made on 
certain issues was exhilarating. 3400 people bandin
g together to make their support known is 
powerful indeed. But if I just heard the list of al
l those urban issues 
without 
the supportive 
structure of our interfaith organization's well-str
uctured meeting, complete with children's choir, 
I think I might be overwhelmed to the point of roll
ing on the floor with my eyes popping out.  
 
To love myself, I need to have compassion for mysel
f as a mortal being with edges and limits. 
To love others, I need to have compassion for them 
as mortals with edges and limits...and I need 
to feel that compassion even more than I feel empat
hy for their plight. What people call 
compassion-fatigue is actually much better named em
pathy fatigue...I can be co-dependent, that 
is, I can identify too much with others, and lose m
yself in the process, which doesn't do anyone 
any good...either my self or other selves. 

 
Which is why I love the two readings I offered you 
today. The first, by the amazing Barbara 
Brown Taylor, urges us to love ourselves enough to 
resist 
"the culture™s killing rhythms of 
drivenness and depletion, compulsion and collapse."
 Powerful words...let me say them again...  
 
She offers the Jewish 
sabbath
 as a model, one I have come to appreciate since my
 best friend is 
an Orthodox Jew...but she is not telling us to foll
ow that practice, but any practice that allows us 

to resist losing ourselves to empathy fatigue...whe
ther it™s meditation, or just sitting there without
 
doing anything for a while. She peppers us with pow
erful questions...about ourselves... 
How is your own deep fire doing, by the way? Are yo
u pretty confident that you have enough 
heat and warmth and light within yourself to get yo
u through the night? Once you have 
turned off the computer and hung up the car keys, o
nce you have decided to take one whole 
day off from earning your own salvation, are you re
ady to wrestle with the brawny angels who 
show up? 

 
I wish I could write that well.  I may very well us
e that set of words as my evening meditation, 
my evening prayer tonight and every night for a whi
le, as soon as I turn off the computer and 
hang up the car keys. I need to ask myself those qu
estions frequently. You may need to ask 
yourself different questions...maybe it™s not the c
omputer that the best image of a demanding 
life, but working two jobs, or working and taking c
are of your children, or trying to juggle work, 
self and relationships in the eternal triangle wher
e only two out of the three get any sufficient 
attention at all.  

 
I also like her line about taking one day off from 
"earning your salvation." 
 
Poet Dan Gerber says much the same thing with a dif
ferent set of words: he is taken with the 
incomparable
 blue beauty of the sky, the 
incomparable
 colors the of wild flowers---lupine and 
poppies---but is not very sure, in Taylor's words, 
that he has enough 
heat, warmth and life to get 
him through the night.
  He is filled with empathy for the suffering, and 
then offers a pretty 
straightforward list of just the suffering he exper
iences in his own local life. He laments that 
there is so much he cannot do to help the people he
 most wants to help...not strangers, but family 
members. But he finds some rest, some sabbath, some
 inner warmth and life and light when he 
sets himself free to let the "fleeting, incomparabl
e beauty of the world" bring him back home to 
himself. Like the Buddha, he understands that all b
eauty is "fleeting" and that nothing is 
permanent. Like Koala Lou, he learns that the salva
tion of love is not something you 
earn
 from 
others, but that you offer to yourself first, and t
hen to others, even if sometimes the Yes of your 
love has to be a No...no to codependence, no to a c
ulture of "drivenness and depletion, 
compulsion (that is addiction) and collapse." No to
 the practice of desperately giving ourselves 
away before feeling compassion for ourselves as muc
h as we feel compassion for others. 
Sometimes people say to me, after a sermon, that I 
seemed to be speaking just to them. I want to 
be clear this morning that I am talking aloud to my
self,  for these are the issues I have been 
wrestling with a lot lately. Maybe you can hitch a 
ride on these ideas, maybe not. I have no way 
of knowing.  

 
But all of a sudden I realize what my mother used t
o say to me can still be said, "Just do it for 
me." I did, ma, I did. And I still love you with al
l my heart. 
  

Offering 

 
Returning:  A Sutta
 Thus I have heard:  One day, Siddatha Gotama was te
aching in the Deer Park at Isipitana. Many 
hundreds of men and women had gathered round. As he
 was teaching, the sun was setting, and as 
its light filtered through the branches of the bany
an trees, he looked up and stopped his teaching 

in mid-sentence. There, in the sun-lit branches of 
the trees, arranged just so against the orange 
sky, was the image of his mother Maya, who had died
 only a week after he was born. He loved 
the aunt who raised him, but he always wondered abo
ut his mother, and her life, and the wonder 
that life, and love and loss are just as they are. 
So he stopped speaking, and sat down under the 
banyan tree and kept quiet, meditating on these thi
ngs. The people sat down too, and gave up 
listening as their teacher gave up teaching for a w
hile. And as the moon and stars rose over them 
all, they were lifted up and restored to who they a
lways were. 

