 1 09-12-2007 Violence 

 
Opening Words 

We are here 

after a week of cold sun and first snow, 

to worship, to consider with our heart 

the flame of the mind,  

and to consider with our mind 

the bright lights kindled in the human heart.  

 
And so, before song, silence, and story, we say 

 
Mindful that a growing vision of a just world 

calls us together, that a community of  

commitment, courage and care sustains us,  

and that a life transformed by depth of spirit  

may illumine our way, we have kindled this  

light as the sign of our circle of life and love. 

 
The Sequence 

 
The cold comes now for us, sealing the sidewalks in
 slippery and even dangerous ice. But where the 
Bantu language is spoken, the sun is hot right now,
 the air dry. The branches of most trees outside 
these windows are bare now, even icicles melting. 

 
But where the Chilean accent is heard, the vineyard
s are green, and the first roses are budding in 
the climbing sunlight. Santa Claus, white as snow, 
hohoho™s in a thousand vast malls across the 
land. 

 
But where Dutch is spoken, Sinterklaas is soon to a
rrive in his sail ship, and where Italian is 
spoken, the children expect the Witch Befana to com
e with a sack of presents. 
 
And where Russian Sign is interpreted, the children
 will have to wait four whole weeks before 
Father Frost comes with gifts at the end of the fir
st week in January. 
 
In both hot Pretoria and in cold Columbus, Hanukkah
 candles are kindled these days, potato 
pancakes scenting the air here, and the creamy swee
tness of milk-tarts over there.   
 
O Love, the world is wide and round and full of peo
ple imagining joy in differing ways. Be with 
them all. And warm this, our silence, with a moment
™s breath in this busy season. 
 
silence 

 
No matter where we are on the globe, no matter whic
h language is spoken there, love and grief 
accompany us, worry and hope. Each of these shines 
in the face of someone known to us. 
These let us imagine, in our most tender hearts for
 a moment, naming them aloud if we wish. For 
those of us who worship here come with all of our l
ives and loves within us, first and last. 
 
naming 

 
 2 No matter the language or place, the festive season
s which cluster around the solstice set forth in 
ships of song, and carry us along with joy. 

 
The First Reading
 comes from an interview film director Julie Taymor 
gave at Columbia 
University on Feb 25, 2000 before a class of film S
tudents. It took a while, but I took her spoken 
words off the DVD of special commentaries which com
es with an actual film, which she directed, 
and which premiered here in Columbus. Her film, ?Ti
tus,? is brilliant, but it is not for all tastes. 
So see it, but be cautioned. To my mind, it™s the b
est production of one of Shakespeare™s plays 
ever done, either on stage or screen. But it is als
o the most violent play Shakespeare ever wrote, 
so be warned. All of these words are the words of J
ulie Taymor. They will sound choppy, 
because I lifted sentences from several different p
arts of a half hour interview, with the questions 
asked by the students. 

 
For me, Shakespeare™s Titus Andronicus
 is the greatest dissertation on violence ever writ
ten. 
Ever. 

 
At the beginning, Titus is a rigid man, all dressed
 up in armor.  He thinks he is invulnerable. He 
cannot see past order, ritual, government. His rigi
dity is both his vulnerability and his strength. 
He is not a bad man, mind you. He is doing his job.
  
The characters Titus and Aaron in the play are mirr
or images of each other. Titus commits 
violent acts without any malice, obedient to order.
 On the other hand, Aaron™s violence is his art. 
Still, Aaron becomes human as soon as he has a chil
d. Aaron gives up his life for his child. 
 
But then Titus does a very Aaron type of violence a
t the end of the play. Very violent. Vengeful. 
But you find yourself rooting for him.  

  

In Titus Andronicus
, Shakespeare explores human violence. He touches c
learly on every single 
kind. Starting with war, which we condone. We don™t
 say that war movies are violent movies; 
we call them war films. Now I am not saying war mus
t never happen. But it 
is
 terrible. Parents 
lose their children after all. 

 
Then Titus goes into ritual violence. Religious vio
lence. He sacrifices Tamora™s children to the 
Roman gods. It™s not much different now, with some 
Christians, Muslims and Jews in our age, 
killing and hurting each other. 

 
Next Shakespeare brings up father and son. The son 
disobeys the father. The father kills the son. 
This is the stuff of all domestic arguments. ?How d
are you not do what I tell you?? The gun 
comes out in a fit of passion. Boom. 

 
Then you have the lust of the boys, Tamora™s sons. 
Their violence against young Lavinia is 
constantly around us in the modern world. I think o
f the Menendez Brothers, or that recent 
violence in Central Park. It™s always with us. 

 
?Give me what I want or–? 

 
Finally there™s the violence of Nihilism. Aaron is 
a very contemporary character. You can 
completely understand this man in the present. All 
around us we hear of young guys so 
disaffected and disconnected they don™t give a damn
 about their future. Because for them there is 

 3 no future. Violent nihilistic Aaron is shocking to 
us when he says that last line:  ?My only regret 
is that I didn™t do more.? 

 
The Second Reading
 this morning is a well known poem by e. e. cummings
, the maverick, but 
beloved, American poet who grew up in a Unitarian p
arsonage, his father being a minister. The 
?el? in the poem refers to elevated trains once fou
nd in New York (and still found in Chicago, of 
course). Before the Second World War, many of these
 were torn down, the scrap sold to other 
nations, including Japan. Japan does not call itsel
f Japan, of course, which is not a Japanese 
word, but rather Nippon. So, some of these scrap me
tals were famously sold to Nippon, and 
supposedly forged into bullets used in the war
. 
Lao Tze in this poem is the name associated with 
the Daodejing, the famous Chinese collection of pac
ifist poems. His statue stands at the center of 
our Asian Garden. 

 
plato told 

 
him: he couldn't 

believe it (jesus 

 
told him; he 

wouldn't believe 

it) lao 

 
tze 

certainly told 

him, and general 

(yes 

 
ma™am) 

sherman; 

and even 

(believe it 

or 

 
not) you 

told him: i told 

him; we told him 

(he didn't believe it, no 

 
sir) it took 

a nipponized bit of 

the old sixth 

 
avenue 

el; in the top of his head: to tell 

 
him 

 
Sermon 

 
 4 Over in Franklin Park, off Broad, on the east side 
of Columbus, not far from downtown, there 
used to be a little lake. Next to that lake, on the
 25
th
 of February, in 1880, city officials put up a 
very large tent. In that tent, thousands of Civil W
ar veterans gathered to hear the famous Civil 
War general, William Tecumseh Sherman, hold forth. 
He gave a great speech, I hear. But only 
three words from that speech have survived into our
 time, and even now, they are all but 
forgotten. Those words, as a few of you might know,
 are these: 
?War is hell.? 
 
e. e. cummings refers to those famous words in his 
poem ?plato told.? What did Plato tell him? 
That war is hell. What did Jesus tell him? That war
 is hell. What did Lao tze tell him? What did 
you tell him? What am I telling him right now? That
 war is hell. Just like, ?yes sir, yes ma™am,? 
General Sherman proclaimed with such clarity right 
here in Columbus, Ohio. And not just with 
clarity. He was a general, after all, so he spoke w
ith the experience of war in his bones. 
 
But the young man ?didn™t believe it,? echoes the p
oet over and over. So then the violence that is 
war, the hell that is war, the death that is war, o
vertakes the disbelieving young man. And a 
bullet forged from old scrap metal from a demolishe
d New York City elevated train finally ?told 
him?–by striking him and ending his life. 

    ---------------- 

 
Now we really don™t know if the Japanese forged bul
lets from the old IRT railway in NYC. But 
it 
was 
commonly believed back in the 1940s by many. 
 
And frankly, I think the interconnection idea expre
ssed by this wartime belief is well reflected in 
our clever children™s story this morning. This stor
y outlines how our smallest actions are often 
connected to larger consequences, and that everythi
ng is interconnected in ways we often don™t 
see. As our principles put it plainly: everything i
s ?interdependent.?  We may think of this in vast 
ecological images, so that we imagine the death of 
a butterfly in Costa Rica eventually affects 
the price of coffee in North America. It probably d
oes, if you connect the dots. But the idea in 
the story is that the concept of interdependence ha
s an underbelly too. 
 
In other words, a little episode of violence in our
 own life, small as a drop of honey, might be 
fairly seen as inexorably leading to larger episode
s of violence in our lives. An obvious example: 
the computer game industry, which tops 7 billion do
llars this year, only two billion short of the 
film industry. Over half of all United States homes
 have at least one video game  station inside 
their walls. And by far most of the games played in
 this nation have to do with killing someone, 
or blowing up something. Look, I am not saying that
 videogames are responsible for the wars 
this nation fights or plans to fight. But I am sayi
ng that watching a rather realistic portrayal of a 
human person being blown up by you so that you migh
t understandably 
win
 a game, will so 
serve to numb any sensitivity to violence that the 
plight of ten-year-old children in Baghdad 
might not seem very urgent to you. And please belie
ve it. Whatever else war is about– 
economics, greed, entitlement, religious certainty,
 sacred land, competition, whatever– on the 
real playing field it™s all about killing people, m
any of whom are children. Please remember also 
what I have said before–over half of the population
 of Iraq is under the age of 15.        
 
No one makes a video game about Gandhi or Martin Lu
ther King, sensitizing people to non-
violent or reasonable approaches. No, our culture s
pecializes in visual clues that involve 
bloodshed and vengeance fantasies. And those fantas
ies are rife in 150 million homes.  
 
But I am talking about more than videogames. I am t
alking about every idea in the treatise on 
violence which Shakespeare wrote. As Julie Taymor a
sserts, it™s perhaps the greatest essay on 

 5 human violence ever written. Human violence. Not li
ons eating impalas, or moray eels chomping 
at monkfish. Not tidal waves wiping out villages, o
r earthquakes shaking down streets. But 
human violence. Violence to humans by humans. Of wh
ich there are, says Shake-speare through 
Taymor, many kinds.  

 
The play starts off with war. The history of war, a
nd the history of humanity are pretty much the 
same history. Guerilla wars. Revolutionary wars. Ci
vil wars. Wars of conquest, like Alexander™s 
wars. Wars born of insane visions, like Hitler™s wa
r or Pol Pot™s war. Even the Jewish half-
holiday of Hanukkah is rooted in a war. During this
 holiday, Jews the world over celebrate the 
wonder of light surviving for many days even though
 there was not enough oil in the lamps for 
even one day. But, it 
was
 a war which decimated the lamp oil in the first pl
ace. A just war, most 
would call it. A war of a colonized people against 
their oppressors. A guerilla war of people 
saying, ?I can be who I am, and you have no right t
o say otherwise.? A true statement, that, 
certainly. Yet it remains true that even the most j
ust of wars is still violent.  
 
Yet, I wonder why anyone in this country, or this c
ity, or this room, imagines that bloodshed is 
necessary before we call an action violent. If we u
se biting sarcasm against someone, because we 
believe we are right and they are wrong, does it be
nefit any of us to pretend that little drop of 
bitter honey is not violence too? Sarcasm, name cal
ling, innuendo–
 all of these can be forms of 
violence. Jesus said as much 1950 years ago. He pre
ached: ?You have heard that our forebears 
said: 
You shall not murder each other
. Right. But if you go around calling each other 
damn
 fool
, 
or ridiculing each other as 
soft-headed idiots
, might you not also be a worthy case for the 
Supreme Court?? In other words, the harsh verbal wa
rs of our era are not so far off from more 
bloody kinds of war. 

 
Next, there is religious violence. Or as the Goth q
ueen Tamora more properly calls it in the play 
?irreligious piety.?  Her own son is offered by Gen
eral Titus to the Roman gods as a sacrifice, 
using exactly the same form of execution as the Heb
rew martyrs, whom we call the Maccabees, 
suffered under their Greek oppressors, according to
 the Second Book of Maccabees in the 
western scriptures. And to be sure, rigid religious
 certainty has helped fuel the fires of millions of
 
other horrific deaths in human history. You and I b
oth know how many books have been written 
in the last three years lifting up just that assert
ion. 
 
But, if 
we, 
in this country, or this city, or this room, are ab
solutely sure of what we believe or 
disbelieve; if 
we
 have no doubts at all that we are correct, and tha
t those who disagree with us are 
simply and utterly wrong, or just plain stupid or i
gnorant through and through; or if we 
disbelieve simply because we are angry at the peopl
e who raised us, how are we 
any 
different 
from those who claim to be absolutely right about t
heir religion? How often I am aware of my 
own inner capacity for violence when I react to hea
ring people of religious certainty holding 
forth, like the famous picketing minister Fred Phel
ps! How often I wish he would just ?go 
away.? It doesn™t sound terribly violent, does it? 
But I assure you, it™s the soft, almost guilt-free 
form of wishing that a large meteorite would just l
and on him and leave a crater ten feet wide. 
Think of it as my inner videogame, if you would lik
e, a form of virtual violence. But according 
to Gandhi expert Joan Bondurant, for the earth to b
ecome civilized, it™s not just necessary to 
admit one™s violent tendencies, virtual or otherwis
e. No, we are each called to walk a spiritual 
path, she says. We are each called to be constantly
 aware of such things, that by awareness we 
might begin to actually conquer our violent tendenc
ies. 
 
Next, Titus kills his son for disobedience. Titus a
gain is rigid, having a clear idea of what 
families are supposed to be like. Father in charge,
 children obedient. Or like so many modern 

 6 families that end up in court, father in charge, wi
fe obedient. And children too. Kept in line by 
anger, threats and abuse which are all forms of vio
lence. Kept in line by innuendo, which is a 
form of violence. Kept in line by ridicule, which, 
as Jesus insisted correctly, is a form of 
violence.  

 
So I have to say that the small drop of honey which
 is wanting-things-to-go-our-way-no matter-
what leads inexorably to greater violence. Oh, I su
ppose we all want things to go our way, sure; 
but no one is 
entitled
 to that. That™s what I am saying. No one in the wh
ole world. Every person 
in every family is just that, a person. Focusing on
 that reality is a kind of spiritual practice, a 
form of prayer if you will, that might be a first s
tep in beginning to vanquish the power of 
violence. 

 
Next there is lust, or more broadly, greed and desi
re. The two sons of Tamora in the play do not 
like it when their amorous attentions are spurned, 
so they punish the young woman who refuses 
them– with monstrous torture. Again, entitlement is
 the issue, the rigid belief that certain people 
just deserve physical attention, and that those who
 don™t agree are merely fit objects for violence. 
Every war from Biblical times on has formed a theat
re for such forms of violence, from King 
David murdering Uriah the Hittite so he could have 
sex with Uriah™s wife Bathsheva, to a 
thousand modern reports from round the world, war b
y war, of that exact same story enacted 
over and over again to the last detail. The beginni
ng of violence is to claim that one 
deserves
 something or someone. I hear this kind of speech al
l the time. It™s a drop of honey, not a drop of 
blood, sure, I™ll admit that. But no one has yet ma
de a successful case to me why anyone 
deserves anything more than anyone else. So I™ll st
ick to my story. A good spiritual practice that 
might respond to this greed and desire is the Buddh
ist practice of mindfulness, where one notes, 
that is, is mindful of, all desires, expectations, 
wants and wishes, letting them flow through our 
hearts as if for a while we were just stream beds. 
They flow through, and move on–we simply 
note them and let them go. 

 
Finally, Shakespeare paints the character Aaron as 
utterly nihilistic. His social status, as both a 
racial minority and a person without sufficient wea
lth, weaves for him such a net of despair that 
he utterly loses his soul. Violence for him becomes
 his only way of achievement and self-esteem.  
 
Last week, at our interfaith BREAD meeting down at 
First Congregational, 50 Columbus 
congregations voted rather overwhelmingly to resear
ch issues of crime and drugs, a world of 
nihilism where the ordinary categories no longer ap
ply, because the source of the violence is so 
systemic, and socially interwoven, with race and cl
ass central and all of it, themselves deeply 
rooted in rage and despair. It™s going to be a diff
icult issue to face, all the violence out there. Bu
t 
because violence is so upsetting in our lives, so c
ommon a report in our ears, I knew in my heart 
that it would probably be the one we voted for. 

 
But we, in this nation, in this city, in this room,
 can only face and conquer violence ?out there? if 
we begin to face the potential for violence inside 
each of us, the little drops of honey that lead to 
greater transgression. 

 
Being aware of how we speak to each other is the be
ginning. Sarcasm or plain speech? 
Innuendo or direct words?  

 
Being aware of our own needs for certainty is the n
ext step. Is everyone in this room the sum 
total of human greatness? Are we the elites? Or are
 others of different beliefs also struggling 
beside us? Is it more important to be right or not 
to harm each other?  

 7  
Control issues are next. How much control do we thi
nk we have of those around us, in our blood 
families or families of choice? How angry are we wh
en things are beyond our control? Why? 
What is the purpose of that anger? Is it a cry of t
hwarted entitlement?  
 
Next, why is wanting what we desire so tied up with
 violence? Is there a problem with desire, or 
is it our sense of entitlement that we deserve to a
chieve our desire? Is there anything in us which 
feels entitled to anything? How did that get there?
  
 
And lastly, what mindfulness do we need, day by day
, to keep ourselves hopeful enough, strong 
enough to dismantle nihilistic systems of oppressio
n, of which many of us ourselves may be 
unwittingly apart.  How can our life choices help t
o establish a world where the nihilism of 
despair is more rare? 

 
Hanukkah begins with a war, just as Titus Andronicu
s
 does. But whereas Titus ends with 
nihilism and faint hope, Hanukkah does not lift up 
that war, but rather, kindles a whole range of 
bright hopeful lights, and proclaims that there rea
lly is fuel enough, spiritual oil enough, inside of
 
us. Enough to keep the light burning through the ni
ght. 
 
Violence has been part of human history throughout,
 and it hurts, it really hurts, to read the 
newspaper sometimes, or watch the news. But it™s th
at capacity to be hurt, that sensitivity, which 
kindles hope in me, personally.  And many are the o
ther candles lit by that hope. 
 
And by that hope, we Universalists in this room, wh
o do not ever proclaim hell after death, can 
begin to decry the hell 
before
 death that is war. For as Plato said, and Jesus, a
nd Lao Tze, and so 
many others, war 
is
 hell. So may our lives be lived in such a way as t
o abolish hell before death, 
as thoroughly as we have abolished it afterward.  

 
Offering  
  
 
Hanukkah Peace Prayer 

 
In ancient days, it is written, 

those who were colonized resisted the tyrants 

and demanded the right to be who they were. 

In our days, let those of us who have been 

colonized by violence, in all of its disguises, 

resist those disguises, that we might be who we mig
ht be. 
In ancient days, it is written, a false god of powe
r and culture was placed in the holy place, which 
never held images before. 

In our days, let those of us whose holy hearts have
 been profaned by images of violence 
rededicate (ha-nukkah) ourselves to living without 
such images, that peace might begin with us. 
May we cease to wait for peace from above, 

but practice peace ourselves in our own lives. 

That one day it might be said of this our era: 

Nes gadol Hayah Sham ?A Great Sign Was Accomplished
 in Their Age.? 

