 How Can I Believe In You? 
October 11, 2009 
Rev. Mark Belletini 
 
 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

as we are, neither pretending nor regretting, 

just present fully with our whole lives. 

Praise the gift of another morning! 

Praise the reliability of open hearts and minds! 

Our praise takes the shape of these words: 

 
Mindful that we share a common world, but approach 
that world in different ways, 
we begin our celebration together by kindling our p
romise of mutual honesty, 
attentiveness, and deep courtesy. May we become mor
e proficient at gratitude and 
awareness, that we might more deeply embody the kin
d of justice and peace which 
embraces everyone on earth. 

 
Sequence
  
I™m a trusting sort, 

at least for a skeptical kind of guy. 

You see, I trust that the leaves of the maple 

(now trying their hardest to resemble 

 jagged pieces of a terrific sunset) 

will eventually carpet the ground, and 

not fly high to compete with the geese. 

I trust that when I breathe in,  

I will breathe out 

within just a few seconds,  

and that my blood will flow  

through my veins and arteries with due speed,  

and that my vocal chords will continue 

to vibrate all the way through to the end of this 

sentence (at the very least). 

I trust that Caesar will remain in his grave, 

that Joan of Arc will lead no more troops, 

and that the whole population of Columbus, 

which rode horse-drawn streetcars   

to the Statehouse on the day when Lincoln™s body la
y in state there,  
will remain safe in the  

warm embrace of history books.  

And I trust that any bird that lights on my finger 

will fly away unharmed, and I trust in the love tha
t survives even the end of love; 

 but I, right now, I place my trust in the silence 

that brings me rest. 

 
silence 

 
I trust that my life has always been lived 

in the company of those who came before me 

and those who will survive me, and those 

who are at my side right now. 

I honor that great community of the ages 

by naming, now especially, those whom I have 

loved or been loved by, in a way that has transform
ed me for the better.  
Aloud, or in silence, I name them. 

 
naming 

 
I trust in the coming of the music, 

which brings with it the full beauty of the world: 

cooperation, skill, beauty, passion, discipline, 

attention, community and love. 

 
 
 
The First Reading
 is from psychologist David Richo, whom I much admir
e, in his book 
?When The Past is Present?  2008 

 
Our basic trust flows from an ongoing belief in the
 capacity of the world to grant us 
fulfillment of our needs. This basic trust is gaine
d early in life through a series of reliable 
fulfillments of our needs by our parents. Our paren
ts build our trust when they show they 
understand us. For example, a parent holds us when 
we are afraid, and gives us a sense of 
safety. 

 
In adult life, when someone shows trustworthiness, 
we receive it and feel appreciation. If 
we notice that someone is untrustworthy and has bet
rayed us, we withhold our trust. This 
is the adult style of trust as a basis of relations
hip: our trust is in ourselves rather than 
only in a partner. Indeed, unconditional trust is a
 disregard of the given of life, that 
people are not always reliable. As we say ?Yes? mor
e and more to that given, we 
reconcile ourselves to 
moments
 of trustworthiness. 
 
The Second Reading
 comes from Lillian Smith™s amazing book Killers of 
the Dream, 
written fifteen years ago. She writes of growing up
 in the south, and of the nursemaid 
who raised her. I learned about Lillian Smith from 
Sharon Welch, a professor at 
Meadville Lombard Seminary in Chicago, who did the 
program at our ministers™ retreat. 
 
I knew that my nurse, who had cared for me through 
long months of illness, who had 
given me refuge when a little sister took my place 
as the baby in the family, who soothed 

 me, fed me, delighted me with her stories and games
, let me fall asleep on her deep warm 
breast, was not worthy of the passionate love I fel
t for her, but must be given instead, a 
half-smile affection. I learned to use a soft voice
 to oil my words of superiority. I learned 
to cheapen, with tears and sentimental talk, my ?ol
d mammy,? one of the profound 
relationships of my life. I learned the bitterest t
hing a child can learn: that the 
relationships I valued the most were held cheap by 
the world I lived in. 
 
Sermon 

 
Sometime after President Kennedy was assassinated, 
a center for the performing arts  
in Washington D.C. was named in his honor, the Kenn
edy Center. On opening night, it 
premiered a commissioned theater piece by the then 
very famous and popular composer, 
Leonard Bernstein. With multicultural bravado, the 
Jewish composer, who had often 
written pieces based on Jewish themes, like 
Kaddish 
and the 
Chichester Psalms
, decided 
to compose a Mass, to rightly honor President Kenne
dy™s Catholic culture and practice. 
 
It wasn™t a traditional musical Mass, like the cele
brated pieces of Beethoven, Bach and 
Dave Brubeck. No, it was the whole ceremony, with a
ll the prayers, and the consecration 
of the holy bread and wine. What made it controvers
ial was that Bernstein portrays the 
Celebrant coming to a place of doubt and disbelief 
during the Mass, a crisis of faith if you 
will. That™s when he takes the sacred chalice and p
latter of bread and dashes them both to 
the floor, breaking them and stomping on them in sa
crilegious rage. You can imagine it 
didn™t make some people very happy.  

 
But Bernstein also disturbed some people by includi
ng a number of what he called 
Tropes,
 where jazz singers interrupted the ancient Creed a
s it was being chanted by the 
choir. After they sing in Latin ?Credo in Unum Deum
? ?I believe in one God,? a jazzy 
voice breaks into the text and starts to sing:  

 
?I believe in God,  

  but does God believe in me?  

  I™ll believe in twenty gods, 

  if they™ll believe in me.  

  That™s a fact. Shake on that.  

  No taking back.  

  I™ll believe in sugar and spice.  

  I™ll believe in everything nice.  

  I™ll believe in you and you and you–  

  and who™ll believe in me?? 

 
Bernstein here is playing sport with modern English
, which has a tendency to allow 
definitions to slip and slide. Normally, if ?I beli
eve? in someone, it means that I have 
confidence in them, I trust them, I have faith in t
hem. If I say ?I believe? in a 
religious
 context, however, it means something else. If I say
 the sentence ?I believe in God,? for 
example, it means that I am convinced 
that
 such a Being exists somewhere, and is not a 

 fiction. It does not imply, as it used to back in R
eformation days, that I have a trusting 
relationship with that Being. It doesn™t even defin
e God. It just says: ?There is one.?  
 
Five hundred years ago, ?I believe in God? used to 
imply relationship, a relationship of 
obedience, trust or grace, for example. But the phi
losophical critiques of the Age of 
Enlightenment changed all that, leaving us with onl
y a simple 
thumbs up
 or 
thumbs down
 in regards to God. 

 
But Mr. Bernstein is also playing with a new and su
rprisingly playful use of the word 
?belief? or the concept of trust. Politicians and F
ox News voices proclaim their faith in 
God with the regularity of a metronome–but for them
, it™s all a one-way street going 
toward God. They never assume faith can go the othe
r direction. But Bernstein does. He 
reverses the direction of belief: ?Does God believe
 
in me??
 Or even, ?Do 
you
 believe in 
me
??   
 
I confess. It feels good to have people believe in 
me. It feels wonderful when people trust 
me, and put confidence in my potential. And, conver
sely, it feels good to believe in you, 
to trust in your potential. It feels good when I ca
n trust you, rely on you, have confidence 
in you. ?In our adult life,? writes David Richo in 
the First Reading, ?when someone 
shows trustworthiness, we receive it and feel appre
ciation.?  He™s saying it™s downright 
exciting to be able to trust people, to know that w
hen they say they are going to do 
something, they do it, with care and skill and a ca
pacity to adapt and learn, with sincerity 
and honest commitment. 

 
But, on the other hand, it feels awful when I can™t
 trust someone. It™s discouraging when I 
have lost faith: in lover; in friend; in community,
 in certain spiritual language, or even in 
nation. 

 
Our historic religious organizational structure, in
 fact, is based 
on just this
: mutual faith 
and confidence. I know some in this room are still 
not very fond of the word, but really, 
that™s all the word ?covenant? means. Our ancestors
 formed their radical religious 
communities, not around a list of supernatural agre
ements, but rather, on faith in each 
other, reliance on each other. Trust. They agreed t
o walk together, talk together, figure 
things out together, be there for each other during
 the long haul, during sadness, crisis, 
and rejoicing. They promised to forge a community n
ot on final answers, but on the 
living practice of mutual trust. To modify Bernstei
n™s words:  
 
?I™ll believe in you, and you  

 and you and you–  

 and 
you™ll
 believe in me.? 
 
Why was this kind of faith so important to our ance
stors? Because they saw such faith as 
the true sign and basic condition of what it means 
to be human at all. And for me, a 
congregation is a place where we can shore up, prac
tice, rehearse, clarify, strengthen and 
even forgive the mishaps of our very real humanness
. Being human and learning to trust 
go together. Richo puts it this way: ?
Our basic trust flows from an ongoing belief in the
 

 capacity of the world to grant us fulfillment of ou
r needs. This basic trust is gained early 
in life through a series of reliable fulfillments o
f our needs by our parents. Our parents 
build our trust when they show they
 understand us. For example, a parent holds us when 
we are afraid and gives us a sense of safety.? 

 
Exactly. Of course, that doesn™t always work out qu
ite right. My mother, whom I loved, 
and whom I knew loved me, just didn™t trust me when
 I was nine years old to cross the 
street without her permission. She had to watch me,
 standing there on our little porch to 
make sure I would be safe.  I was embarrassed becau
se none of my friends had to ask 
their mother for permission, and hadn™t since they 
were seven or so. It felt creepy not to 
be trusted at the advanced age of 9, and it felt di
scouraging that I must seem less 
trustworthy than my friends. I was ten years old be
fore she let me cross the street by 
myself. 

 
Later, I found out why my mother did what she did. 
When I was about three, I had 
somehow found a way to open the gate in our back ya
rd fence. I waddled across the street 
while my mother was inside talking on the phone. Th
ey were building a new public 
school across the street, (by coincidence called ?C
olumbus School,?) and the equipment 
had dug a pretty impressive pit that would one day 
be finished as furnace rooms. I went 
to edge of the pit, apparently, and looked down. Su
ddenly my mother, very upset, came 
behind me and scooped me up in her arms, wailing th
at I had almost fallen into the hole 
and killed myself. 

 
Now, of course, I don™t remember being frightened o
f the hole. I really don™t remember 
anything, since I was three. I only heard this stor
y from my mother many years later. But 
I learned then that she never wanted to experience 
electric fear like that again, so she 
developed a sense of over-protectiveness when it ca
me to me crossing the street. It helped 
me to understand things a bit, though I still wince
 when I remember how ashamed I was 
to be alone. 

 
But listen. I never lost faith in my mother because
 of this. She was trying to do the best 
she could. I knew that, even then. My own sense of 
self-trust was not damaged, and so I 
grew up with a capacity to trust others, and to hav
e faith in them.  However, many people 
grew up in families where the actual sacred boundar
ies of body and spirit were crossed 
many times: by drunken parents, bullying sibs, or e
motionally impaired relatives, and 
thus they were hurt deeply, as the prophet Zecharia
h put it, ?wounded in the very place 
where people supposedly loved them.? And unfortunat
ely, the sense of necessary trust 
that had been building in them before the drinking 
binge or bullying ended, collapsed, 
and never emerged again, even when they were fully 
grown adults. It makes perverse, but 
real, sense that a person could believe that that n
o one else in the whole world can be 
trusted if members of 
your own family
 are not trustworthy. And so, even when these 
wounded children grow up and leave their family hom
e, their grown-up relationships 
often fail because of their necessary, but entirely
 self-defensive, inability to trust. It™s 
very sad, such brokenness. But very real. 

 
 Now Richo rightly reminds us that no trust is perfe
ct, in 
any 
relationship. In the covenant 
of marriage, the covenant of friendship, or the cov
enant of religious community, we are 
all bound to disappoint each other sometimes, bound
 to do things which might lessen the 
trust people want to place in us. Perfection is sim
ply not possible in this world. 
 
As mature adults, says Richo, we may have to get us
ed to the idea that trust comes in 
moments, not perpetuity. There are no perpetual mot
ion machines in the world of the 
heart, any more than there are perpetual motions ma
chines in physics.   
 
But more importantly, Richo points out that we have
 to 
trust ourselves
 first. We have to 
show faith in ourselves, or our faith in others wil
l be without any real grounding. ?This is 
the adult style of trust as a basis of relationship
: our trust is in ourselves rather than only 
in a partner.?  Simple. Easy to get. Yet entirely p
rofound.  
 
And just as sometimes, when trust has been broken w
ith others, it takes time to restore 
relational trust, so sometimes we have to take time
 to restore trust in ourselves.  When we 
make mistakes–and we all make them–they may leave u
s distrustful of our next move 
now and then. But it seems important to me, not onl
y to find a way to channel our anger 
into con-structive work, as I said last week, but t
o also take the time to deepen our sense 
of self trust which will allow us to live out our d
ays with greater courage and 
compassion.   

 
Now this is not as tough as it sounds. It doesn™t r
equire exotic spiritual disciplines. It just 
requires paying attention to our feelings. Even chi
ldren, who may have been taught that 
their own feelings are not trustworthy, that they n
eed to submit to the distorted views of 
their loving parents, know better that that. The rh
yming story this morning is a case in 
point. I knew better at age seven when I first hear
d the story of Noah™s Ark. My 
reasoning heart taught me there needed to be some w
ay for the animals not to eat each 
other in that cramped space. I didn™t know what it 
was, but I knew it had to be there. I 
was told to pipe down for asking such a question. B
ut my child™s mind was wise. It knew 
that the story lost its meaning unless that questio
n could be addressed openly, and 
without me being silenced. 

 
This understanding that we are wiser as children th
an we often are as adults is what 
moved me about the second reading, by Lillian Smith
. Not only does she love the 
nursemaid who raised her, she 
knows
 that she loves this woman. She trusts that 
her 
feelings of affection are real
. She was warned 
no
t to trust them, she writes, and she 
confesses that she ?learned the bitterest thing a c
hild can learn: that the relationships I 
valued the most were held cheap by the world I live
d in.? But because she 
did
 trust 
herself, she was able to 
un
learn that ?terrible and bitter thing? which cheape
ned her love. 
And since she trusted her own heart, her own partic
ipation in what Sharon Welch calls 
?fragmentary experiences of racial equality,? she g
rew up and made her life a model of 
social transformation. She didn™t live her life bas
ed on a creed proclaiming a vision of a 
utopia where love would flow freely between people 
of different colors and cultures–no, 
she experienced all she needed to know and feel on 
the warm breast of her beloved 
nursemaid. 

  
So, for 33 years until 1948, Lillian Smith was the 
director of the Laurel Falls Camp. As 
Margaret Gladney wrote in the introduction to Smith
™s book, at Laurel Fall Camp, Smith 
?provided for other young southern women the experi
ences that enabled them to see and 
challenge racism. There she began systematically to
 examine and then confront her 
society™s concepts of race and gender. There she al
so came close to creating the kind of 
world she wanted to live in, where every child coul
d experience esteem, where old ideas 
were questioned and new ones explored, and where di
fference could be appreciated.? 
 
Lillian Smith™s amazing camp could serve as a model
 of a great Unitarian Universalist 
congregation where members covenant in mutual trust
 to pay attention to the positive 
experiences of real love in their hearts, as well a
s gently encouraging each other to 
question the commonplaces in their socialized minds
.  And then to find ways to detach 
themselves from 
systems of hurt and wounding
 which they learned unconsciously in their 
own, and quite often loving, homes, but which unfor
tunately have kept other people 
down and out. 

 
So this is what I conclude about the need for trust
 and faith in our religious lives. I say 
having faith in a utopia coming down from heaven li
ke a New Jerusalem to make 
everything right is an idea without issue, a fantas
y without heart. I say believing that 
some righteous, bloody revolution will produce a bl
oodless peace and human equality is 
like planting a tomato and expecting a golden egg. 
No, the real revolution, the deeper 
transformation, is when we turn to trust our own ex
periences of love, momentary as they 
are, and then turn in trust to each other, reaching
 out in faith to join hearts in communities 
of people who sing to each other: ?I believe in you
 and you and you, and you™ll believe in 
me!? 

 
That™s when it really begins–
  
Offering 

 
Prayer adapted from words of Sharon Welch 

 
Come, Wellspring. 

Flow through us,  

and deepen our ethical commitments. 

You are not a vision of utopia,  

nor an angry declaration that the world 

could and should be otherwise. 

You are only Love. 

You invite us to love this life in which people die
,  
in which people suffer, where there are limits and 
where we make mistakes. 
You, Love, are this:  

the deep affirmation of the joy,  

richness, and blessing that the world is. 

Yet You are also the ground from which we rise to c
hallenge all injustice and oppression.  

 You are not a vision of what the world could be whe
n the ?Realm of God? arrives,  
or come the Revolution.  

No. You are gratitude itself,  

the beginning of our journey as well as our end,  

our heartfelt desire to honor the wonder of that wh
ich is. 
Come, Wellspring.  

Flow in us as we cherish,  

celebrate, and delight  

in the gifts and joys of life.  

 
 
