
  If government action, then, provides a model for citizens to follow, what
  model does the death penalty provide? When the government executes capital
  offenders, it is sending two contradictory messages to 280 million people.
  It is sending the message that it presumably wants to send - that is, if
  you commit a crime of like order, this is what will happen to you - but it
  is also sending the message that violence is the province of the powerful;
  that violence signifies victory, success, triumph, retribution, and toughness.
  An adviser to Governor Jeb Bush of Florida caught this spirit perfectly when
  he was quoted in state papers as saying, of a speeded-up death penalty process,
  "Bring in the witnesses, put [the prisoner] on a gurney and let's rock and
  roll." How could any would-be capital criminals possibly ignore the message
  that violence may very well be a simple solution to their problems too? Inasmuch
  as most of those convicted of capital crimes have been subjected personally,
  usually at a young age, to volumes of physical abuse at the hands of parents
  and guardians, and are, as a result, already prone to see violence as a customary
  means of asserting power and authority, the use of the death penalty is a
  perfect vehicle through which to perpetuate that myth. I submit that one
  of the reasons criminals continue committing capital crimes even when they
  know they may face the death penalty is because when it comes to the execution
  drama, they identify not with the "victim" who receives the jolt of electricity
  or lethal dose of drugs, but with the powerful figures who administer them.
  
  Criminologist Joan McCord of Temple University cites multiple studies that
  show that exposure to violence desensitizes those who view it to future violence.
  Many across the political spectrum certainly believe this is true when it
  comes to entertainment. Why, then, do we not think the same dynamic is at
  work when it comes to state-sponsored violence? Or consider that some studies
  have even shown that the more severe the threat of punishment for any particular
  behavior, the more attractive the act being punished becomes. If that is
  true, the death penalty may well invite that which it seeks to discourage.
  Several studies have indeed shown that homicide rates increase when the death
  penalty is used. The average annual increase in homicides in California was
  twice as high during years in which the death penalty was carried out than
  in years in which no one was executed.

Sunrise

  You can die for it -
  an idea, or the world.
  
  People have done so,
  brilliantly,
  letting their small bodies be bound
  to the stake, creating 
  an unforgettable
  fury of light.
  
  But this morning,
  climbing the familiar hills
  in the familiar
  fabric of dawn,
  I thought of China, and India
  and Europe, and I thought
  how the sun blazes
  for everyone just
  so joyfully as it rises
  under the lashes
  of my own eyes, 
  and I thought I am so many!
  
  What is my name?
  
  What is the name
  of the deep breath I would take
  over and over
  for all of us? Call it
  whatever you want, 
  it is happiness, 
  it is another one of the ways 
  to enter fire.

  Burn, fire of the spirit, 
  in my mind, that the shadowy corners of
  my very real ignorance 
  might be slowly illumined.
  Burn, fire of the spirit,
  in my heart, that my own small flames
  not grow and rampage across the earth,
  but be contained by your own.
  Burn, fire of the spirit,
  in my soul, not in my hand, 
  that my mortal search for mortal good 
  will bring me garlands instead of ashes.
  Burn, fire of the spirit, in my voice,
  that my singing be one with the light you give.
