Christmas Eve Service December 24, 2014
Lane Campbell, Director of Religious Education and
Rev. Eric Meter First Unitarian Universalist Church of Columbus, OH based on Even Unto Bethlehem by Henry van Dyke
Eric: Good evening and welcome to our family Christmas Eve service at the First Unitarian Universalist Church of Columbus.
Tonight, as we welcome newcomers and longtime friends alike, we will join once more in the power story and song have to move us into even greater appreciation of what is possible when we open our eyes to the miraculous around us and respond in kind.
But, rather than get too far ahead of ourselves, let's begin with singing the magnificent Christmas carol, Joy to the World.
HYMN #245 Joy to the World
Lane: And what is it we have to be joyful about this evening? What do you have to be joyful about this evening? (Invite responses!) Each year, we take time to celebrate our delight at the birth of a significant child. A birth that has quite a story behind it ­ a story we will be sharing with you tonight. It is an ancient story, a story told all over the world and in many different ways. It is a story of a miraculous birth, yes, but also a story of a far journey, a story of hope and hospitality after being turned away again and again. Tonight, we tell it again. This story began with a dream, a dream Mary had of an angel Gabriel who came to tell her she would soon become pregnant with a child, a boy to be exact, a boy named Jesus, who would become one of the greatest and most well-known teachers on earth. This was surprising news to Mary as she had not yet married and this birth was certainly unexpected, some would say impossible. At first, Mary was afraid. I mean, how many of us are visited by angels in our sleep? Soon, she did become pregnant. And that is where our story begins. Mary had met a man named Joseph whom she loved dearly. Our story starts on top of a hill outside of Nazareth with a conversation between Mary and Joseph during their evening's rest.
Joseph: I heard a Psalter say in synagogue the other day, "I will lift up mine eyes to the hills, from whence cometh my help." He was quoting the Psalms.
Mary: Help? God knows I shall need help if the words the angel spoke to me in my dream are true. I am only a country woman. Why should I be chosen to bear the hope of the world and the son of the Most High in my belly? And the times come on so fast! Here it is, long past the second harvest; and by the turn of winter my baby must be born. How can I wait for it? How can I face it, husband?
Joseph: Be not afraid, dear Mary. Everything will be all right. See, see down there. See the flow of life on the trade roads below us. And look, look over that way. Look to Galilee, not too far from here. There is life in these places. It has movement, it continues. See, all will be well. Everything will be all right.
Mary: I know in my heart of hearts it will all be well, I just can't help but feel like something is coming. Something strange, something difficult for us both. I know childbirth will be a challenge and I know the people we have grown up loving in Galilee may not understand what is going on.

Joseph: Come, the air grows colder. Let us go back inside so you won't catch chill.
Mary: Yes, it's time to go home. I will light a fire on the hearth. I hope we can live there quietly until my son is born. May we support each other in the days to come.
Eric: The couple walked home. Mary lit a fire and they sat together by its warmth, continuing to share their dreams and fears for their unborn child. This hope of living quietly was Mary's deepest hope of them all. And it was her deepest fear ­ to bring this child into the world, into this world amidst conflict and uncertainty. This child, that held all of Mary and Joseph's hopes and fears. For anyone who has had a child here, you know where these two are sitting.
Days passed, and life returned to somewhat normal. Joseph continued woodworking, as he was a carpenter. And Mary continued caring for the home, which was just as much work. She prepared space for this new little baby in their home, cooked meals, washed clothes, and made sure the house was clean. Let us join with her in tending to the house by singing hymn #235 "Deck The Halls With Boughs of Holly."
HYMN #235 Deck The Halls With Boughs of Holly
Mary: Joseph, I'm headed to the village fountain to fill our water jug. There are curious rumors going around the neighborhood. All the other women will be at the fountain. I hope they'll tell me the news.
Joseph: I'm sure they will. They always know all that is happening ­ and sometimes more! But go carefully, dear. Don't strain yourself in carrying that heavy jug.
Lane: Mary walked to the well, and the women greeted her with all the gossip of the day. The conversation ended strangely though ­ with the women looking at her in a funny way, with a sort of question in their eyes. It seemed Mary was right ­ some of the women in Galilee just didn't understand. Some wondered about how she could have become pregnant, and others just ignored her. It was just as Mary had feared. But Mary said nothing more and carried her jug back home.
Mary: Oh goodness! (Cries and covers her eyes.)
Joseph: What is it my dear?
Mary: It's bad news, Joseph. A decree has gone out from that heathen in Rome, Caesar, that all the world must pay a new tax. All people must be recorded in each family. Oh, Joseph, don't you see what this means for us? It means they will be looking for our little baby. There will be questions about him. We must leave the house now, we must go to Bethlehem, the city of David. But I am so very afraid of this journey now, when the baby is due so soon. What if we run into danger? What if I have an accident on the way that hurts our baby?
Eric: I wonder if you have ever been there ­ at a crossroads, where the decision to stay or to go has been a difficult one. I wonder if you too have experienced fear, experienced a time in your life where you could have done something, but your fears held you back. The road less traveled is one we all know somewhere in our lives. Or I wonder if you have been in Joseph's shoes ­ receiving bad news and not knowing where to turn. Perhaps in the midst of difficult news, you turn inward- taking time to think or taking a step back before acting. Being at the crossroads is a difficult place to be- decisions are

heavy, our choices carry more weight. And perhaps you are someone who just needs to sleep on it, to see a situation with fresh eyes in the morning. As the night passes in Galilee, let us join in singing hymn #244, It Came Upon a Midnight Clear.
HYMN #244 It Came Upon a Midnight Clear
Eric: We return to our story: On the next day, Mary went to her synagogue and the rabbi read a prophecy about a woman traveling there ­ one who would bring a very important man into the world. Mary heard this message and came back home convinced that she and Joseph needed to travel to Bethlehem. So when Joseph came back from his woodworking, Mary was packed and ready to go.
Joseph: But I'm not yet ready to leave. How will we make this journey?
Mary: I bought us a donkey.
Joseph: A donkey?! That's no way to get around. We will look like fools. And how will we stay dry?
Mary: Not to worry, I got us some tent cloth. We can wear it to keep us warm as we travel. And use it at night to set-up a camp of sorts, if there are not places close by to stop in.
Joseph: And how will we care for this baby when we get to Bethlehem? We will need supplies for this child.
Mary: One of the village ladies came by this afternoon and brought some swaddling clothes for us. She apologized for the awkward moment by the village fountain, and she brought us some warm, soft cloth for this little baby about to be born.
Lane: With that, Joseph could no longer argue. Mary and Joseph set out for the long journey to Bethlehem. They rode day in and day out, stopping for rest in their tent. The rains began and were falling heavily. The rivers grew, making their journey more treacherous. But Mary continued to move forward, often needing to cheer Joseph on, to assure him. My, how the tables had turned since they began on the top of that hill! Finally, they reached Bethlehem, where Mary's cousin Rebecca was there to greet them.
Rebecca: Welcome to Bethlehem! We had no idea we would be seeing you.
Mary: Rebecca, beloved cousin, we have traveled so far from Galilee to be here with you all. We knew you owned an inn. Is there any room inside? I am great with child and the time for his birth is coming soon.
Rebecca: Oh dear. Oh dear, oh dear.
Joseph: What is wrong, Rebecca?
Rebecca: Well, it seems we are all full here at our inn.
(Mary groans.)
Joseph: I'm afraid her time is fast approaching. Don't you have anywhere we can stay?

Rebecca: Oh, I know just the place! I hadn't thought of it before because it's not much of a place to stay. It's a dry barn just behind our inn. We have many animals in there, but they should give you no trouble. In fact, one of the stables is empty and freshly cleaned out. There's straw for your bedding and a manger for your little babe. Come, let me show you.
Joseph: Oh, thank you, Rebecca. We must hurry. I think the time is near for our child to be born.
Lane: And there they were, all in the barn. Animals and shepherds came from all around to see this amazing sight. And we will need your help to bring this barn to life. Right here, in this Worship Center, tonight, we are going to create the manger in which Mary and Joseph spent this long night. We will need some of you to step forward to be some of the barn animals and wise people. And we will need everyone's help in making the noises of the animals. Characters we need are:
2 sheep 2 donkeys 2 cows 3 doves 2 mice 1 star 3 wise people 2 shepherds
Christmas in the Barn by Margaret Wise Brown adapted
Lane: In a big warm barn. In an ancient field. Eric: The sheep baaed. Lane: The donkeys squealed. Eric: The cows mooed. Lane: The doves cooed. Eric: And quietly the daylight died in the sunset of the west. Lane: And a star rose brighter than all the stars in the sky. The mice scampered in the hay. Eric: And two people who had lost their way walked into the barn at the end of the day. Lane: And they were allowed to sleep in the hay because there was no room at the inn. Eric: The little mice rustled in the sweet dry grass. Lane: The cows mooed. The sheep baaed. Eric: The little donkey's brayed "hee-haw." Lane: The doves cooed. Eric: And there they were. All safe and warm. All together in that ancient barn. When hail! Lane: The first wail of a newborn babe reached the night where one great star was burning bright. Eric: And the wise men arrived. And the shepherds with their sheep. Lane: And angels from on high are come to watch him sleep. Eric: What child is this who is born here? Away in a manger. No crib for his bed. Lane: The little child sleeps. Eric: The donkeys squeal. The cows "moo." The sheep "baa." The doves "coo." And the field mice scamper in the hay. Lane: The star goes down. Yet the wise ones stay to see the dawning day. Eric: The child was sleeping in the hay. And there they were. All safe and warm. Lane and Eric: All together in the ancient barn.

Offering ­ Eric
The child was sleeping, safe and warm. Tonight I hope you'll join me in making that possible for other people as well, regardless of their age. Our offering tonight goes to the congregation's discretionary fund that Mark and I use to help out, in usually small ways, people in need.
Recently we were approached by a single mother of three who had gotten behind on her rent. We were able to leverage a contribution from the fund, with the generosity of others in and beyond our community to help her keep her apartment this winter.
Your generosity will help others sleep safe and warm in months to come, giving life to the call of Christmas, as spelled out so eloquently in the words of the Reverend Howard Thurman:
When the song of angels is stilled, When the star in the sky is gone, When the kings and princes are home, When the shepherds are back with their flock, The work of Christmas begins: To find the lost, To heal the broken, To feed the hungry, To release the prisoner, To rebuild the nations, To bring peace among the brothers (and sisters and cousins). To make music in the heart.
Our ushers will now come forward to receive your offering. Thank you.
HYMN #246 O Little Town of Bethlehem
Song of the Universe by Manish K. Mishra-Marzetti
For each child that's born, A morning star rises And sings to the universe Who we are.
Listen carefully... Can you still hear the song? The one sung for you When you were born. The song sung by a cosmos In motion Rejoicing at your life.
You, the result. You, the outcome. You, the celebration.
Listen carefully... Can you still hear it? A song of possibility. A reminder that We still have time To be who and what We need to be.

Listen carefully... The vast expanse Echoes a recognition That's not always easy. Possibilities Can be hard to pursue.
[Roads not taken, Wrong turns, Destinations that disappoint. Through this, The song persists. The universe sings no less Because time and space Wear us thin.]
The music calls us To recognize our limitations, To recognize that The song is best Sung with others.
Here in community, Bringing alive That most primordial impulse, The desire to sing To the universe who we are To celebrate and share Our lives with others.
Introduce the candles
HYMN # 251 Silent Night
Benediction (from the rear of the worship center)
Tonight, bathed in this candlelight, our promise is visible for all to see. Go with joy in your hearts, and spring in your step, and with care streaming from your fingertips. Go with love, dear friends. Go with love.

