 Hospitality as a Mission 
September 18, 2011 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 Kindling 

Opening Words 
 
We are here,
 as the equinox approaches, 

to worship, to contemplate our life 

with story, imagination and gratitude, 

as we praise the sublime, 

and open our hearts to greater loving. 

 And so, without guarantees, we lean into joy, and b
end toward a just way of life, both for our 
own sakes, and for the sake of our children and eve
ryone with whom we share the earth. We 
would engage our mission wholeheartedly, with coura
ge, self-questioning, compassion, 
vulnerability and honesty. 

Transition Ritual 

Adapted from a ritual by Thomas Mikelson & Jory Aga
te of First Parish in Cambridge 
DRE:
 Once again we celebrate the ritual of transition f
or our children and youth and it requires 
your participation. You only have a few words to sa
y. Only a few words Œ but they are very 
important, as you'll see. They are: 

We love you and we're proud of you. Let's just try 
it out Œ say it with me: 
We love you and we're proud of you. 

So when I say "Remember" and point to you, be sure 
to remember your lines and say them nice and 
loud. 
Things change. We change. Our lives never stand sti
ll. 
We are always changing, from one age to another, on
e experience to another, one stage of life to 
another, one place to another. Today we will welcom
e two new staff members and install our new 
board. Things are always changing here in our congr
egation. 
We call these changes transitions. Some transitions
 are small, but some are big, and some are very, 
very big.  

We have children here who are beginning kindergarte
n this year. Now, that is very, very big. Who 
here today is starting Kindergarten? Come join me u
p here, please. 

 Kindergarten is a big step, a very important transi
tion.  Congratulations.  We wish you well. 
You will learn a lot of new things. You will explor
e, discover, count, categorize, and color. And 
sometimes - you might even make a 
few mistakes
. That's all right. We 
all
 make mistakes. Everyone 
here has made some mistakes. How many here have mad
e mistakes? Hold up your hands. See, we 
all make mistakes. 

Mistakes are very special. When you make a mistake 
you always learn something new, and you can 
try again with your new information. If you're not 
making mistakes, then you're not learning 
anything. 

So, to remind you how good and important mistakes a
re, we want to give you a special gift to take 
with you to kindergarten. Erasers. They will let yo
u erase your mistakes and try again. You won't 
need to worry about mistakes. In fact, make lots of
 them. Just keep your eraser handy. Good luck in 
Kindergarten. 

And remember–
 CONGREGATION: 
We love you and we're proud of you. 
JOLINDA
:  
Do we have anyone here who started middle school th
is year?  
Middle school is a huge change. Do we have any who 
are starting middle school? Please come 
down and join us. 

In middle school you  have lots of questions. Who a
m I and how do I fit in?  What group do I 
belong to?  

The most important thing to remember when you ask t
hese questions is to be true to your inner self, 
to get acquainted with who you are, what 
you 
value. And don't lose that.  
And to remind you, we have a gift for you, too. It'
s a mirror to help you hold onto who you are and 
what is important to you. When you take a look you'
ll see a person who is special and wonderful. 
And, Remember–  

CONGREGATION: 
We love you and we're proud of you. 
JOLINDA: After middle school comes high school. Do 
we have anyone here beginning high 
school? Come down front and join us here. 

High school is a very big step, a very big transiti
on. In high school we move toward maturity. More 
and more we have to find our own way in the world, 
not necessarily the ways chosen by our family, 
teachers or friends. And that's not easy. Finding o
ur own way can be a challenge. 

 We have a gift for you - a tool so you will always 
know how to find your way home, to your family 
who loves you, to your faith community that cherish
es you, and to your own true self. 
We give you the gift of a compass. Keep it close to
 you. Pull it out when you need to be grounded 
in the community that will always embrace you. 

And remember–. 

Congregation: We love you and we're proud of you. 
Will all the children and youth come forward now. E
ach year is a transition with its own challenges. 
And, every one of our children and youth need of th
is faith community. 
We all go through transitions. Some are big, some a
re small, some are easy, some are hard. Some 
seem almost 
impossible
. Let's all give thanks for a place where our trans
itions make a difference. 
Spiritual life is always transition. Beloved commun
ity is community in transition. 
So, don't forget: 

Keep your erasers handy, we all make mistakes. 

Keep your mirrors handy, we all need to remember wh
o we are and what is important. 
And, keep your compasses handy, we all need help fi
nding our way from time to time 
And, most of all, don't 
ever
 forget, First UU is a place where–. 
Congregation: We love you and we're proud of you. 

 
Sequence:   

 
Soon the sun will be lower in the south, 

and the purple shadows we cast will be longer. 

Soon the leaves will dry up despite the rain, 

and colors will grow brighter first, then duller. 

Soon the air will be cooler all around, 

and the jackets will come out of our closets. 

Soon the nights will be crisper, 

and the blankets will stack on our beds. 

Soon the worries we carry will have different names
, 
but the heart will stay concerned. 

Soon our feelings, the joys and sadness, will pass,
 but new feelings will rise within us. 

Soon the words of this prayer will fade away, 

but the silence will offer a greater blessing–. 
silence 
 
 Soon other days will come, yes, but for now 

the hours of our present concerns and love 

fold into this moment precisely. 

And so the time is upon us to remember the particul
ars of our personal lives: the faces we associate 
with our worries, our sorrows, our loves, our joys 
and the mysteries of being alive under the sun. 
Into the breath of silence that comes now, we place
 names to faces, and either whispered, or 
privately in our hearts, declare our lives by the a
ct of naming: 
 
naming 

 
Soon, music, like love itself, having risen from a 
human heart, will return to a human heart; our 
hearts, the very center of our being; our heart, th
e home of our love, the shelter for our hopes, the 
temple where we either tear down, or build up, the 
images of God we™ve inherited. 
                         

Music: 
9:15 Flute Sonata 11 Ubi Caritas/Durufle 
 
The First Reading 
is a poem by Mohja Kahf, 
a Syrian American born in Damascus, who teaches at 
the University of Arkansas at Fayetteville. 
The title is just perfect, I think: My Grandmother 
Washes Her Feet in the Bathroom Sink at Sears
   
My grandmother puts her feet in the sink of the bat
hroom at Sears to wash them in the ritual 
washing for prayer, 
wudu,
 because she has to pray in the store or miss the m
andatory prayer time 
for Muslims. 

She does it with great poise, balancing herself wit
h one plump matronly arm against the automated 
hot-air hand dryer, after having removed her suppor
t knee-highs and laid them aside, folded in 
thirds, and given me her purse and her packages to 
hold so she can accomplish this august ritual and 
get back to the ritual of shopping for house-wares.
 Respectable Sears matrons shake their heads and fro
wn as they notice what my grandmother is 
doing, an affront to American porcelain, a contamin
ation of American Standards by something 
foreign and unhygienic requiring civic action and p
ossible use of disinfectant spray. 
They fluster about and flutter their hands and I ca
n see a clash of civilizations brewing in the Sears
 
bathroom. 

My grandmother, though she speaks no English, catch
es their meaning and her look in the mirror 
says, 
I have washed my feet over Iznik tile in Istanbul
 with water from the world™s ancient irrigation 
systems
 I have washed my feet in the bathhouses of Damascus
 over painted bowls imported from China
 among the best families of Aleppo
. 
And if you Americans knew anything
 about civilizations and 
cleanliness,
 you™d make wider washbasins, anyway
 My grandmother knows one culture--the right one, as
 do these matrons of the Middle West. For 
them, my grandmother might as well have been squatt
ing in the mud over a rusty tin in vaguely 

 tropical squalor, Mexican or Middle Eastern, it doe
sn™t matter which, when she lifts her well-
groomed foot and puts it over the edge. 

?You can™t do that,? one of the women protests, tur
ning to me, ?Tell her she can™t do that.?  ?We 
wash our feet fives times a day,? my grandmother de
clares hotly in Arabic. ?My feet are cleaner 
than their sink. Worried about their sink, are they
?  I should worry about my feet!? 
My grandmother nudges me, ?Go on, tell them.? Stand
ing between the door and the mirror, I can 
see at multiple angles, my grandmother and the othe
r shoppers, all of them decent and goodhearted 
women, diligent in cleanliness, grooming, and decor
um. Even now my grandmother, not to be 
rushed, is delicately drying her pumps with tissues
 from her purse. 
For my grandmother always wears well-turned pumps t
hat match her purse, I think in case someone 
from one of the best families of Aleppo should run 
into her-here, in front of the Kenmore display. I 
smile at the mid-western women as if my grandmother
 has just said something lovely about them 
and shrug at my grandmother as if they had just apo
logized through me. No one is fooled, but I hold 
the door open for everyone and we all emerge on the
 sales floor and lose ourselves in the great 
common ground of house-wares on markdown. 

The Second Reading 
is my translation of the Greek from the Gospel of M
ark, 7:24-30. The 
anonymous author we call Mark wrote this book just 
after the temple in Jerusalem was razed to the 
ground by the Romans in the year 70. This is an unu
sually troubling story about Jesus.  
 
And so he stood up, and left the place where he had
 been preaching, and eventually came to the 
border crossing near the cities of Tyre and Sidon. 
There he was able to find a room where he 
wanted to retreat privately, but unfortunately he w
as not able to hide.  For a woman whose daughter 
was very sick heard that he was there, and sought h
im out, falling at his feet to beg his help. 
 
Now this was a Greek-speaking woman, a Syrian of go
od Phoenician stock by nationality. There 
she was, begging him to heal her daughter. 

 
But Jesus said to her, ?Let the children get their 
fill first. I don™t think it™s best to take the goo
d 
bread baked for the family and offer it to the litt
le household dogs instead.?  
 
?Yes, indeed, sir,? she said, ?yet you know very we
ll that the children are busy tossing small pieces 
of their bread under the table for their puppies to
 eat.? 
 
Jesus said: ?Since you put it that way, you can go 
home now, confident that your daughter is no 
longer afflicted.? 

 
And when the woman returned home, she found her dau
ghter quiet on her bed, without any sign of 
her fever. 

 
Sermon 

 
 Over the years I™ve received what can only be calle
d remarkable hospitality. On my first trip 
abroad, for example, a friend asked the friend of a
 friend of a friend who happened to live in Paris i
f 
I could stay at his place for a week. I was upset w
hen my friend told me he had done that, because it 
all seemed so far removed from me–
the friend of a friend of a friend! 
He assured me it was 
perfectly OK. 

 
And it was. I ended up staying with this man, a tot
al stranger, for almost ten days by the time I left
 
Europe. He insisted I stay in his bed at his ridicu
lously tiny apartment in the Bastille area of Paris
, 
while he slept on a cramped couch.  

 
Being received by a total stranger like that was tr
ansformative, and since then, I have found true joy
 
many times in offering hospitality to complete stra
ngers. I met a young German man from 
Westphalia twenty years ago on his way to New Zeala
nd with a stopover in San Francisco. I put 
him up in my place, and over the years, he and his 
girlfriend used to stay at my place for weeks 
when they vacationed in the States. They had the be
d, I had the couch.   
 
Since then, I™ve put up a couple of Japanese studen
ts in the States for a conference we were all 
attending, students who didn™t speak a word of Engl
ish– for four full days. I™ve given full-day 
tours to lost Chinese tourists I met accidentally o
n the street, and otherwise opened my heart and 
home to complete strangers. I never think twice abo
ut it. Here in Columbus, I™ve given the key to 
my place to seven friends who live far enough out o
f town that sometimes it™s better for them to 
stay closer. They are always welcome to stay at my 
place, and they often do. This practice of mine 
seems central to my way of living in the world, and
 very simple. The way I see it, I have received 
lavish hospitality all of my life–I intend to offer
 it to continue the circle. 
 
I™m not bragging, any more than I would brag about 
telling the truth, or showering every day. It™s 
simply one with my breathing in and breathing out. 

 
I remember that when I attended my first Unitarian 
Universalist church, however, at age 22, the 
practice of hospitality presented a more complex fa
ce. No one welcomed me, or said hello to me 
that first visit. No one offered to show me where e
veryone was getting the coffee and shortbread, 
and the layout of the building was hard to figure o
ut. But I was glad to be left alone–whether you 
believe it or not, I actually am rather shy when th
e community structures are not clear to me, and I 
just wanted to look around and figure things out sl
owly. After a few months, however, I slowly 
warmed up to the place, and formally joined the con
gregation. But I found that, by then, I mostly 
talked to people I already knew, not strangers like
 I once was, who had just come for the first time. 
 
I think hospitality in a congregation like ours is 
important, certainly. But I do respect the complexi
ty 
of the issue. Some benefit from a warm handshake. O
thers avoid it, afraid to be engulfed as perhaps 
they once were earlier in life, by another institut
ion. There is no way to know how anyone will 
respond to the ordinary courtesies of congregationa
l hospitality, so when you greet anyone, all we 
can do is to be sensitive to this complexity, and g
raciously accept that the complexity will never go 
away. 

  

But I don™t think a true hospitality can be sensibl
y defined as simply shaking hands or saying hello, 
or providing pulpit welcomes, or explaining how thi
ngs work around here without using baffling 

 local acronyms like AEP, RE, or OMD. I think it™s m
ore demanding than that, as I hope to make 
clear this week and next.  

 
We say in our congregational mission statement that
 we are here to learn and practice true 
hospitality. I like the wording. To admit that we h
ave to learn how to do it seems like a pretty 
vulnerable admission to me–and almost every spiritu
al and religious teacher I revere touts the 
central idea of practice, practice, practice, carry
ing our erasers around with us, as Jolinda suggeste
d 
earlier, because no one practices without making mi
stakes. 
 
But the word mission is itself interesting to me. C
ompanies and corporations all have mission 
statements these days–it™s a business thing. But th
e word itself, some of you know, has religious 
associations–and not all of them are happy. I think
 of the California Missions built by Junipero 
Serra, which brought no little misery to the native
s of that populous state. Or I think of certain 
Pentacostal missionaries being sent to the nation o
f Chile–.this is something I heard from my 
friends while I was on Sabbatical down there– to co
nvert the poor Catholics to the ?real? 
Christianity. My agnostic friends in Chile were ups
et by such missions. 
 
But when I remove all the connotations and cultural
 burrs sticking to the word ?mission,? I find a 
word that is one of the richest in our language.  N
ot only does it help form hundreds of other words, 
like admission, commission, emission, intermission 
and permission, promise and even Christmas, 
its powerful meaning centers around the concepts of
 ?going forth, being sent, being released, letting 
go.?  Derivative words like ?missile,? ?emissary? a
nd ?missive? (meaning letter) make that very 
clear. 

 
So when we tie the word hospitality to the word, mi
ssion something very interesting occurs. 
Hospitality becomes not just something we do when w
e are here, welcoming newcomers and guests 
as best we can, it™s something we do in the act of 
letting go, or going forth from this place. 
 
And of course, that brings us to this morning™s rea
dings. The first reading, about grandma washing 
her feet in the sink, does not happen in a worship 
room like this, or at coffee hour. It happens in a 
bathroom at Sears, surely one of the most banal pla
ces I can think of. And yet something very 
extraordinary happens there. Strangers meet and dis
cover they understand the world from different 
perspectives. A woman who speaks no English washes 
her feet in a small bathroom sink. Other 
women who probably ONLY know English are all upset 
and offended by her act. ?A clash of 
civilizations? is how the poet puts it with dramati
c clarity. But the most important lines of this 
extraordinary poem for me are these two:  

 
 First:  My grandmother knows one culture--the righ
t one, as do these matrons of the Middle West.
  
And second: Standing between the door and the mirro
r, I can see at multiple angles, my 
grandmother and the other shoppers, all of them dec
ent and goodhearted women, diligent in 
cleanliness, grooming, and decorum. 

 
This poem suggests to me that true hospitality asks
 us to refuse to make assumptions about the 
perfection of our own way of doing things, our own 
way of seeing the world. This poem suggests to 
me that true hospitality is going to ask us to see 
the world from, in the poet™s phrase–multiple 

 angles–.not just from within our own cultural blind
ers. Any discomfort you may have felt hearing 
that story poem is a sign, I think, like it was for
 me, of how difficult that work of true hospitality
 is.  
Both the grandma and the Midwestern matrons were ca
ught up knowing the one 
right
 culture–their 
own
.  True hospitality invites us to respond to that c
onflict of cultures with compassion and wit, not 
righteousness and belligerence.  It seems to me tha
t™s some astonishing mission we™ve set for 
ourselves. 

 
But listen, the poet goes further: she affirms that
 both the Midwestern woman and the Syrian 
grandmother are decent and goodhearted. She does no
t assume at any time that one culture is evil, 
the other good, one right, the other wrong. She doe
s not play into the prevalent theology and 
philosophy in the world, the theology and philosoph
y which have made a shambles of it all–
 namely, that everything is light vs dark (and guess
 who™s in charge of the light!), absolute righteous
 
good vs absolute depraved evil, my absolute right t
o have anything I want vs your absolute right to 
have nothing.   

 
Of course, to be fair, that was true in ancient tim
es too. Since the beginning of recorded history and
 
legend, I find evidence that we human beings in eve
ry culture have fallen into the habit of making 
the parochial, universal; the local, cosmic; and I 
get to define ?the other? before even meeting the 
?other.? defining the faraway. Take the story found
 in the middle of the gospel of Mark.  
 
When I was growing up, and the clergy talked about 
the human Jesus within the context of the creed 
that said he was also God, all they meant was that 
he sweat when he was hot, his stomach growled 
when he was hungry, and maybe he got sleepy now and
 then. Big deal! As far as I™m concerned, 
that could describe any mammal, like a bear or a sq
uirrel, as much as it describes a human being. 
No, to be human–and Jesus was entirely and only hum
an–is a lot more than being a mammal 
among mammals. It™s to be part of a culture, to bot
h love and question that culture, and to transcend 
the limitations and brokenness from that culture wh
ich have become part of us. 
 
So in this surprisingly frank, disturbing and not v
ery flattering story, Jesus is visiting a foreign 
country, Syria, near the island city of Tyre. He™s 
trying to rest apparently, take a vacation, we woul
d 
say now. There he meets a local woman of Phoenician
 ancestry. He was raised in the Jewish culture 
of the Galilee, a culture which had warned him abou
t people of such an ethnicity. The citizens of 
Tyre reportedly harrassed the Jews who lived there,
 and reports came in that they refused to pay full 
price at the farmer™s market when Jews were selling
 their vegetables there. In ancient times, the 
word was, the Phoenicians even sacrificed children 
on the altar of their god. Dreadful people, the 
rumors had it. Now one of these very people disturb
s his peace while he is trying to rest a 
bit–disturbs him with her urgent need–a need for he
r own child, her sick daughter. Jesus speaks 
impulsively out of his own upbringing and refuses, 
saying his gift of free healthcare outside the 
medical system is just for his fellow Jews, not dog
s like her–dog being the ordinary nasty term for 
a Gentile at the time.  The woman, however, refused
 to be offended or insulted. She wants what she 
wants. So she retorts with her clever quip of point
ing out how the children at the table feed scraps t
o 
their puppies wiggling at their feet. And indeed th
ey often do, don™t they? 
 
What I like is that the story portrays Jesus being 
changed
 by this conversation. He begins to 
question the cultural assumptions that have shaped 
him, and treats her as a guest in his house, 
offering her what he would offer anyone else in his
 own neighborhood– compassion, sympathy 

 and aid. Her status as a pagan woman and ethnic for
eigner does not make her less human, but 
just 
as human
 as he is, just as worthy of compassion and access 
to health as his closest kin. The true 
healing in the Markan story is not in the fevered b
ody of the woman™s daughter, but in the human 
heart of the ancient teacher Jesus, who began on th
at difficult day to learn to practice what he had 
always preached by welcoming someone he had assumed
 was not worthy of being welcomed. 
Something similar happened in the bathroom at Sears
; there was a moment when a culture clash 
could have gotten ugly, but where the poet was able
 to name the beauty instead: 
they were 
all 
goodhearted. 
Which is another way of saying they were 
all
 capable of love, of compassion for both 
self and stranger. The women in the bathroom at Sea
rs could all learn how to practice hospitality, 
just as Jesus was able to learn how to do that.
  
And the truest form of hospitality for me is the st
ruggle–the very real struggle–
to get past pre-
judgments and assumptions, so we might be hospitabl
e to people not just within these doors, but 
outside
 these doors, in our day-to-day lives. It™s our 
mission
 to learn and practice hospitality, we 
say, which means, as I parse the word ?mission,? th
at we are called to show hospitality, not just 
when we gather for celebration in this lovely room,
 but when we are 
sent forth, let go, released
 from this center at the end of the service. 

 
I was lavishly welcomed by complete strangers earli
er in my life, as I said, and it made all the 
difference in why I want to practice hospitality my
self. It™s been an important part of my life for a 
long time.  Pretty basic.  That the congregation  c
hose to make this practice their own moves me 
very much. What stories of hospitality, received or
 given, live inside you, and are helping you to 
transform your life in this regard? What helps you 
to bend toward greater loving and welcoming in 
the world? 

 
Offering  

We offer this time of general support for the congr
egation to enact our mission of not only 
supporting our ways of showing hospitality, but als
o to enact our mission to revere the generous 
heart.
  
Installation of Church Leadership 

(in order of celebration) 

 
