 12008-5-24 Dreams
 Mark Belletini 

Opening Words
  
We are here 

after a week of cool, bright sun 

to worship, to welcome the fullness of our lives 

and to strengthen our compassion, 

and our community. Here, let the dream 

of a just world be as life-giving to us 

as the beat of our own hearts. So we say: 

 


??
?ˆ

?

Sequence
  
Maybe, one day, yellow roses will lose their power 
to prompt my deepest thanks that I am alive to enjo
y 
them. But not yet. Not yet. 

 
Maybe, one day, the power of the wind to suddenly c
hange, completely independent of me, will cease to 
remind me of how small I am in the scheme of things
.  But not yet. Not yet. 
 
Maybe, one day, the hurts of the world will not aff
ect me so, the inequities, the sadness. Maybe one d
ay 
my heart will beat without the syncopation of sorro
w. But not yet. Not yet. 
 
Maybe one day, the silence which heals and restores
 will dwell with me at my center, day in, day out, 
without me having to set time apart for it. But not
 yet. Not yet. 
 
silence 

 
Maybe one day I will think of myself as independent
 of every community. But not yet. Not yet. Family 
and friends, loved ones and lost ones crowd around 
my heart, and breathe on it to keep it beating stea
dy. 
Those that call to me now most clearly I name withi
n or without, to bring them into this circle where 
my 
independence is always upheld by the interdependenc
e of community.  
 
naming 

 
Maybe, one day, the miracle of music growing like a
 rose in a composer™s mind, which then becomes 
music printed on paper with ink, which then becomes
 music coaxed from instruments by both breath and 
hand, and which at last turns into music which puls
es and glows in my own heart, will cease to amaze 
me.  But not yet. Not yet. 

 
Readings
  
 2The First Reading
 is from Toni Cade Bambara, from her essay found in 
Sturdy Black Bridges, 1979 
 
When you dream, you dialogue with aspects of yourse
lf that normally are not with you in the daytime, 
and you discover you know a great deal more than yo
u thought you did. 
 
The Second Reading
 comes from the Torah, put into final edited form ab
out 2500 years ago. This 
story, much older than that, is one of the great no
vellas of the ancient world. As I like to do, I use
 the 
Hebrew forms of the names. 

 
Yosef dreamed another dream. He came to his gathere
d family and said: ?Here is what I dreamed. The 
sun, the moon and the stars were all bowing down to
 me.? His father cried: ?What?? and began to berate
 
him. ?What kind of dream is this? Do you really thi
nk your mother and I, and your brothers here, are 
going to bow to the ground before you as if you rul
ed over us??   His brothers too expressed their rag
e 
about this dream, and his father remained deeply tr
oubled in his heart. 
 
One day, when his brothers were pasturing their flo
ck at Sechem for a few days, his father sent Yosef 
to 
find out how they were doing.  His brothers saw him
 when he was still far off.  ?Here comes the 
dreamer!? they said. And they conspired to kill him
. When he came close, they tore the ornamental 
cloak off his back, and threw him down the shaft of
 a dry well.  Then they sat down and ate as if noth
ing 
had happened. 

 
But his brother Reuven, seeing that his brothers in
tended to actually kill Yosef, wanted to save him. 
?Do 
not shed his blood!? he begged.  

 
Just then, in the distance, they saw a caravan of A
rab traders going down to Egypt.  So Yehudah said 
?Reuven™s right, you know. Let™s not kill him. Let™
s sell him as a chattel slave for the slave-markets
 of 
Egypt. After all, what would we gain by killing him
? We just want him out of our hair. And, he 
is
 our 
brother, flesh of our flesh.?  His brothers were co
nvinced by Yehudah™s argument. So they lifted Yusef
 
out of the well, and sold him to the traders for tw
enty silver pieces. 
 
 
Sermon
  
I don™t know about your family of origin, but mine 
is soaked in enough legendary stories to rival the 
American myths of Paul Bunyan and Babe the Blue Ox.
  
There was that story of my grandfather Umberto and 
the octopus in North Africa. And there was the 
Paul Bunyan strength tale of my grandfather Nazzare
no lifting a 500 lb barrel with his bare arms and 
hoisting it to the level of the bar where he was ha
ving a beer. There was the strange tale my father t
old 
about the day when his platoon buried a whole tank 
because they had one too many on their supply list 
and they had to get rid of it before inspection. An
d there was the story of my grandmother™s dreams. 
 
When my father went into the armed services in the 
early 1940s, my grandmother quite understandably 
was worried. He was her only child, after all, and 
he was in training to serve in the air in a B 52 bo
mber. 
 
 3She dealt with this worry by reciting many rosaries
 and by busying herself with crocheting day after d
ay. 
Some of the products of her crocheting, lace tablec
loths, are so gigantic and complex that the sheer 
intensity of her fretting is still plainly visible 
to the eye. 
 
One night, she told me, she had a dream. She dreame
d of her own father, who had died some time before 
that, but back in Italy. Her father spoke to her, s
aying, ?Fear not, Carmelina, for your son Louis wil
l not 
be harmed in the war, for the war will end in May o
f next year, before he is finished training.?   
 
Sure enough, the war in Europe ended in May of 1945
, and my father never went overseas, his training 
only finishing that month. 

 
My grandmother was completely convinced that her de
ad father had come to tell her this to alleviate he
r 
worry. For her, these were visitations, visions you
 might say. I can see how someone could feel that 
way. My dreams often leave me with the same feeling
 of reality that reality itself bestows me.  
 
But I don™t see it that way.  

 
I see dreaming as coming from our own selves, our o
wn minds, and not from somewhere beyond the 
ocean or beyond the edge of life. 

 
I see dreams as emblematic of who we are as 
whole
 persons, not fragmented persons. 
 
In other words, I see my grandmother expressing her
 whole self in that dream. I see her living with th
e 
fact of my father™s training; which would have ende
d in late April, the fact of her own father™s death
 and 
her sadness that when she left Italy, she never saw
 him again; the fact of her understandable motherly
 
worry; and the fact that her worry consumed her and
 drove her to distraction 24 hours a day. All of th
ese 
fragments of her self were bound together in her be
autiful dream, which lessened her worry, helped her
 
grieve her father, and released the strangling grip
 that her concern for her son had on her. Her dream
 
pulled her away from the edge, and helped her get b
ack to her center. 
 
That™s a pretty good achievement, it seems to me, f
or just a few hours of sleep. 
 
In the words of our First Reading by Tony Cade Bamb
ara, my grandmother was ?dialoguing with parts 
of her self? as she slept. All those aspects were a
lready in her in the daytime, but they were not 
connected to each other. But at night, they had a c
onversation, and my grandmother™s worries were 
lessened by the power of that conversation. 

  

In other words, I think dreams are part of our whol
eness as human beings. I think this is true whether
 or 
not we remember them, which I don™t always do by an
y means. Sleep scientists used to say that we were 
dreaming only when there was this fidgety motion un
der the closed eyelids of the sleeper: the famous 
Rapid Eye Movements, or REM™s. Now, through further
 study, we know otherwise. We dream more 
often than that. But, there does seem to be some ev
idence that dreams which occur during REM™s are 
more easily remembered the next morning. 

 
 4We also know now that we 
learn
 how to dream as we grow older in the same way we l
earn anything in 
school. We practice. And the older the person, supp
osedly, the better and clearer the dreams. And, the
 
fewer nightmares, apparently. 

 
Jeremy Taylor, the Unitarian Universalist minister 
whose writings on dreams have traveled around the 
world, used to teach at my seminary. The course was
 
Dreams and Dreaming
 and pretty much everyone 
took the course, one semester or another.  What thi
s meant for me was that every morning at the school
 I 
would find my classmates gathering before class to 
discuss their dreams from the night before. Over 
coffee or tea, the clatter of this conversation fil
led the school until classes began. But when I firs
t moved 
to Berkeley in 1975 to start school, I felt complet
ely out of it, since, at the time, I really didn™t 
much 
remember my dreams. And, I hadn™t taken the class. 
And, I hadn™t even known that anyone ever studied 
things like dreams. 

 
But when I finally screwed up the courage to mentio
n that I felt like was out on the periphery of thin
gs, 
several folks immediately suggested to me that I co
uld remember my dreams anytime I wanted to 
remember them. All I had to do was, before I went t
o sleep at night, tell myself four or five times th
at I 
was GOING to remember my dreams the next morning no
 matter what.  
 
Now to me, that seemed 
way
 too simple. But I tried it, and it worked. I was a
lso counseled to have a 
little notebook next to my bed so I could write the
 dream images down right away, since they did tend 
to 
evaporate pretty quickly. 

 
Pretty soon, I found I was able to gather useful wi
sdom from my dream life, insight that did not seem 
to 
come to me in the daytime. Since all of my dreams c
ome from my brain, it seemed fair to assume that al
l 
of the images in my dreams were mine to work with. 
There was no universal cipher, like Sigmund 
Freud™s famous, and not terribly useful, suggestion
 that if you dream of a train in a tunnel you are 
dreaming about sex in some way. None of that nonsen
se. 
 
But in conversation with others who also remembered
 their dreams, I learned a lot about myself through
 
my dreams, gleanings that were validated over and o
ver in my waking life. 
I was still myself in my dreams, mind you–everyone 
is, I think. Shy people don™t become chatterbox 
extroverts when they sleep. Talkative sorts don™t s
uddenly sit in silent meditation when they dream. Y
ou 
are who you are in your dreams. But you can be your
self 
developing insights about yourself
 in dreams. 
 
But here I need to say more: dreams have played 
an amazing part in human history
, and not just in the 
more private area of personal spiritual growth and 
psychological integration. Dreaming, after all, is 
a 
form of thinking. I remember being very impressed w
hen, in college, I made a study of the great 
Michelangelo, painter, sculptor, architect. He was 
having a difficult time coming up with a blueprint 
for 
a library he was commissioned to design. The site s
et apart for this library was completely odd, and n
o 
ordinary structure would work. One night he had a d
ream about hat-boxes. When he awoke, at first he 
was perplexed by the strange dream, until he notice
d that the roundish hat-boxes could be taken for an
 
unusual staircase design, one that might, in fact, 
fit an odd site. If you are lucky enough to get to 
Florence one day, and find the Laurentian Library, 
you will actually be able to climb the solid steps 
of 
Michelangelo™s dream come true. 

 
 5The tune to 
Yesterday
, (sung: Yesterday, All My Troubles Seemed So Far A
way–), one of the most 
famous tunes by Paul McCartney, and a jewel of twen
tieth century music, came to him in a dream, every 
note of it. Elias Howe™s invention of the sewing ma
chine developed in his dream life. The central idea
 in 
Mary Shelley™s famous Frankenstein came to her in a
 dream. C.J. Walker, the first African American 
woman to become a millionaire (back in the days whe
n being a millionaire actually meant something), 
made her fortune by producing the formula for a hai
r product that came to her through her dreams. The 
Indian math genius, Ramanujan, actually dreamed ent
ire mathematical formulae with Greek letters, 
which he claimed were handed to him by the Hindu go
ddess Namikkal. When he awoke, he wrote them 
down, and they earned him his deserved internationa
l reputation.  And, it™s timely to point out during
 
this weekend of the Memorial Golf Tournament that t
he deservedly famous Jack Nicklaus claims that 
when he dreamed of swinging the club in a totally n
ew way, he put it into practice the next morning. I
t 
was the success of that dream-generated swing that 
MADE Jack Nicklaus famous, in fact. 
 
And of course, the second reading this morning, fro
m the Torah, reminds us of the oft-told tale of Yos
ef, 
or Joseph, of Egypt, one of the finest novellas to 
come down to us from ancient times from any culture
. 
The handsome young Bedouin teenager reports some ra
ther narcissistic dreams that really irritate his 
family, so much so, some of them actually are brist
ly enough to want to kill him, a drastic response t
o be 
sure. Still, sold as a slave to an Egyptian family,
 the young man clings to his capacity to dream 
astonishing dreams. And, using his knowledge of dre
am interpretation as a social tool, Yosef eventuall
y 
becomes the viceroy of Egypt, second only to the Ki
ng in authority and power. And he uses this politic
al 
power to save his own furious family from death dur
ing a famine.  
 
Dreams fill all the religious stories of the world,
 both written and oral from Yosef of Egypt, to Jose
ph of 
Galilee, to Muhammed, dreaming of leaping to heaven
 on a horse.  
 
The Senoi people of Malaysia reportedly made a whol
e culture out of dreaming. Like the girl in the 
young story you heard this morning, they supposedly
 were able to control their dream life, something 
called lucid dreaming. They chose what to dream, in
 other words, and could change their dream plots at
 
will. 

 
Modern anthropologists dispute the findings of the 
man who first reported the Senoi dream culture, 
Kilton Stewart. This Mormon Elder made great claims
 for them, you see, saying that they discussed 
their dreams every morning just like we did at semi
nary. And they supposedly had no crime in their 
community, no mental aberrations or psychoses, and 
he assumed that this was true because their dream 
culture was so central. 

 
As far as I can tell, most of this is, sadly, a fab
ricated story, made up by a man famous as a tale be
arer, 
and unfortunately, a man with little or no anthropo
logical knowledge, someone who didn™t even speak 
the Senoi language, and who only lived among them f
or two weeks. 
 
It is true that the Senoi people have a dream life,
 just as we do. All human beings do, as I said earl
ier, 
and it makes no difference if they are hunter/gathe
rer types like the Senoi, or post-Industrial Inform
ation 
Addicts like we are. And it is true that some of th
e Senoi people enjoy lucid dreaming. But some of us
 
do too. I have several friends who routinely change
 the plots of their dreams, or fly off when they wa
nt 
to while in their nighttime dream world.  And it is
 true that the Senoi people live in a relatively pe
aceful 
non-neurotic way. But apparently they don™t spend t
heir mornings talking about their dreams, nor do 

 6they use such dream work in any way as an organizin
g principle of their society as far as modern 
anthropologists can tell, so their peaceful mental 
health must stem from some other source or 
worldview. 

 
But here I need to say that rooting a reverence for
 the power and gift of dreams in the social life of
 a 
remote pre-industrial society doesn™t make much sen
se to me in the first place. You don™t have to 
practice peace in the world on the authority of Jes
us™ famous beatitude, ?Blessed are the peacemakers,
? 
but, rather, because it™s simply self-evident, rati
onal, and experientially true that peace is better 
than 
bombing babies and burning cities to the ground. Th
e social, creative, spiritual and psychological gif
ts 
which careful attention to our dreams can provide u
s–that™s enough for me.   In order to develop and 
grow as whole persons, no part of our life can be l
opped off as unimportant. We do, after all, spend o
n 
average approximately six years of our lives dreami
ng. To work with individual dreams, as so many 
dream groups associated with this congregation do s
o successfully, has to do with our wholeness, our 
fullness, as human beings. 

 
Paying attention to our dreams is humane, human, an
d even holy.   
 
Some of my poems and sermons have risen from my dre
ams. At one time I used to preach almost 
entirely from themes organized by my useful dreams.
 Novels and formulae have arisen from dreams. 
Part of Einstein™s influential theory rose from a d
ream he had, a dream he discussed with the famous 
dream-psychologist, Karl Jung himself. And you and 
I both know that Martin Luther King Jr. even used 
the word ?dream? to imagine a world of justice and 
honesty. He didn™t say, after all, ?I have a bluepr
int. 
I have a plan. I have a scheme. I have an outline.?
 He used the most appropriate, accurate and strong 
and 
yes, 
useful
 metaphor he had:  ?I have a dream!? 
 
But beyond such grand and more social uses, I™ve kn
own many people whose lives have been deepened, 
turned, comforted, challenged and taught by their d
reams, ranging from my beloved grandmother 
Carmelina, to at least two dozen people in this con
gregation who have shared their dreams with me over
 
the years, and who have benefited from that sharing
. For Tony Cade Bambara is right, I think. If we ta
ke 
dreams seriously, personally and socially, creative
ly and fearlessly, in the end we™ll discover that ?
we 
know a great deal more than we thought we did.?   

  

Offering
  
The trees give off oxygen by which we live. 

The sun gives off sunshine by which we live. 

The land gives of its fruits, by which we live. 

The sea gives of its bounty, by which we live. 

The heart gives us our dreams, and dreams  

give us a chance to know ourselves. 

All of the universe gives and gives and gives. 

May we, who are part and parcel of that universe, j
oin in that unending process. The  
morning offering of pledges and gifts will now 

be given and received. 

 
Memorial Day Prayer
 
 7 
Does anyone look up at the noon sky, 

and say: ?I hate you, because you belong 

to another nation now?? 

Does anyone look at any child and say: 

?Let this one perish for being in the wrong 

place at the wrong time?? 

Does anyone look at the full moon 

silvering the needles of a distant pine at midnight
 and say: ?You are hideous, because you are  growin
g 
on the other side of the border?? 

Can anyone look into the eyes  

of a bereaved parent, a parent of anyone, young or 
old; and say: 
?Your tears are not as good as mine. 

  Your sorrow is an affront to me?? 

No. Amen. No. Amen. No. Amen. No. Amen. 

Let us therefore on this day of remembrance, rememb
er them all. 
Let us therefore remember them all. 

Let us therefore remember  

and not forget. Amen. 

