 1 2007 Water Ceremony
  
Opening Words
  
We are here  

with the whole of our community, 

every one, every age, 

to worship, to flow with our singular lives 

into the great common stream of history and time 

shaped by currents of ceremony and song.
  
 
With hearts come home to this place, we pray: 

? East, south, west and north, encircle us as we sa
y
  
Mindful that a growing vision of a just world calls
 us together, that a community of  
commitment, courage and care sustains us, and that 
a life transformed by depth of spirit 
may illumine our way, we kindle this light as the s
ign of our circle of life and love. 
 
Sequence for the Water Ceremony 

 
Water falling off a cliff, white as clouds. 

Water looking green as a leaf in still pond. 

Water in a rolling river, grey and tan. 

Water in a lagoon, turquoise and powder blue. 

Water in the deep ocean, black as night. 

Water in a lake, blue and silver, sunlit. 

Water from a faucet, clear as fine crystal. 

Water in human bodies unseen, but sometimes flashin
g like ancient seas on the surface of the 
wondering eye. 

Water in the eyes of New Orleans children, flowing 
two years later, salty. 
Water deep in the earth, hidden, yet used. 

Water at the poles, melting into rising seas. 

Water in pitchers, water from north, south, east an
d west, water from round the world, flowing 
with dreams and memories, transitions and hopes, be
auty and tears, a staggering awe, and a deep, 
deep silence. 

 
silence 

 
Water in tears flowing both from laughter and sorro
w. The ancient water that connects us all no 
matter how different we are. The water of remembran
ce and hope. Speaking the names, or 
quietly imagining the faces of those whom we love, 
or who love us; those whom we miss, those 
who know hard times or fear, let us join in a commu
nion of heart and hope which binds each of 
us into the embrace of the water-sheathed circle of
 our common world. 
 
naming 

 
Water of story and ancient tales, water of ceremony
 and poetry, water of history flowing past the 
shore of this moment–come, and sing in our hearts. 

 
Readings 

 2  
The First Reading
 is an amazing poem by the great San Antonio poet, N
aomi Shihab Nye, 
written 9 years ago.
  
OUR SON SWEARS HE HAS 102 GALLONS OF WATER IN HIS B
ODY  
 
Somewhere a mistaken word distorts the sum:  

divide 
becomes 
multiply 
so he™d wrestle his parents who defy what he insist
s. 
I did the problem 
and my teacher said I was right!  

Light strokes the dashboard.  

We are years away from its source.  

Remember that jug of 
milk?  
No way you™re carrying one hundred of those!  

But he knows. He always knows. We™re idiots without
 worksheets to back us up. His mother 
never remembers what a megabyte means and his dad f
ainted on an airplane once and smashed 
his head on the drinks cart. We™re nice but we™re n
ot always smart. It™s the fact you live with, 
having parents.  

 
Later in a calmer moment his dad recalculates the s
um and it comes out true. Instead of carrying 
giant waterfalls inside, we™re streams, sweet pools
, something to dip into with an old metal cup, 
like the one we took camping, that nobody could bre
ak.  
 
The Second Reading
 comes from Seattle poet David Whyte, who in 1984 wr
ote the poem 
All My Body Calls:
  
All my body calls  

for something in this sleeping earth  

we call the spirit.  

But how  

from lifted arms  

where stars run through fingers  

and the night is like sand  

do I breathe a fragrance of its wisdom  

do I call its name  

or listen to the drops  

that trickle down to earth  

and hear  

life being given  

not only through the moving hands of the forest but
 through the hand that reaches in  
the dark unmoving regions of the chest  

and uncovers slowly  

the enormous  

indistinct shape of the ocean.  

 
Homily
  
Last Spring, the Unitarian Universalists who live i
n Europe invited me to the second of their two 
annual weekend retreats. It was, as many of you wil
l remember, held in Berlin, and it turned out 
to be the single most satisfying and wonderful trip
 overseas I have ever been lucky enough to 
enjoy.  

 3  
I was asked to do several things: to lead worship o
n Sunday, and visit with the children in their 
Religious Education sessions, and be available for 
counseling. But on Saturday, I was to offer a 
substantial lecture to the end of prompting satisfy
ing discussion. This I did. 
 
They wanted me to imagine the future history of our
 movement, say, seventy-five years from 
now, toward the end of the present century. I accep
ted this theme with a sense of both its fun and 
its futility. After all imagining tomorrow is delig
htful, but most such imaginings miss the mark. 
Some of you will remember that, in the 60s, many of
 our brightest minds imagined a world of 
space travel, gleaming, safe cities, and growing pe
ace on earth in the glowing year 2001. 
 
Instead, we got falling towers, horrific wars, and 
hurricanes for which no one was prepared. 
 
Nifty vision back in the sixties. But all wrong. 

 
In any case, I really had a ball writing the lectur
e. As I began, I realized that there is no way of 
actually imagining the future unless you have a goo
d grasp of the past and present, for time is a 
single flowing stream, not separate ponds strung ou
t across a desert. And so, in order to imagine 
how, for example, our worship life might change in 
75 years,  I decided to look at how it has 
changed in the last 75 years. 

 
I used the example of the flaming chalice. 

  

Back before World War II there wasn™t a single Unit
arian or Universalist congregation which 
began its services by lighting a flaming chalice li
ke this one. The symbol, although very old, and 
known in northern Europe, was not known to us in No
rth America. But slowly, and though it 
faced lots of resistance, the symbol took hold, fir
st as a drawing, then as a three dimensional 
symbol with real fire.  

 
I am convinced it was first used at the ceremony of
 consolidation in the early sixties, when the 
Universalist Church in America fused with the Ameri
can Unitarian Association in order to make 
our present Unitarian Universalist Association. Nex
t, it was used in a single California 
congregation in 1963. Now, only 44 years later, few
 can imagine Unitarian Universalist worship, 
or even small group meetings, without its comfortin
g presence. 
 
But not one visionary ever predicted the arrival of
 such a ritual 75 years ago, so I thought it best 
for me not to try and predict any new rituals 75 ye
ars hence.  But I did think it wise to muse 
about the water ceremony we already do here.  

What might that look like 75 years hence? 

 
The water ceremony too is not a very old ritual.  

Emerson didn™t know anything about, nor did the fou
nders of this congregation back in 1940. 
Musician Carolyn McDade, who composed Spirit of Lif
e, and the articulate Lucile Longview 
invented the original form of this ceremony in 1980
 for a women™s convocation. Since then, it 
has slowly developed into a ritual that is common i
n many of our congregations, with a variety of 
forms and interpretations.  

 
But I wonder, how might such a ceremony gain spirit
ual significance in the next 75 years? With 
global warming, polar bears moving toward extinctio
n while ice shelves melt, and the aquifers 

 4 which supply our drinking water running dry from ov
eruse, how sacred and precious might water 
be for our children™s children in 75 years? 

 
Might not such a ceremony take on a whole new meani
ng by the year 2082? Might not water 
become, not something common, but a sacred and prec
ious element, something as valuable as all 
that we treasure most? Might the ritual take on a p
owerful note of spiritual urgency, so that the 
water is not just a symbol of our unity around the 
world, and our connection to far away places, 
but the true sign of our own lives? After all, we a
re largely made of water, and with all other life 
on earth, evolved in ancient waters.  

 
I think of Naomi Shihab Nye™s poem, where her son k
nows something of this inner water: 
?we™re streams, sweet pools,? the poet writes, admi
tting that her son is smarter than she is. 
?We™re nice, but we™re not always smart,? the poet 
admits candidly. Might such a ceremony 
invite us to take ourselves as only part of the env
ironment called planet earth, rather than its 
masters? 

 
Might it help us to understand that, instead of rem
embering our own stories and travels, we 
might imagine the lives of our children and their c
hildren to whom we owe everything? 
Where will they be able to travel? Where will they 
go on a changed earth with dried up lands 
on one hand, and cities under water on the other? 

 
Maybe, just maybe, our present bodies, here in this
 place and this time, can, like the body of 
the poet David Whyte, use this ceremony to ?call fo
r something in this sleeping earth we call 
spirit.? 

 
Maybe our present understandings of this ritual are
 like, in the poet™s words, ?drops that trickle.? 
Maybe the spirit can grow from that trickle, in sev
enty-five years, into creek, and then a mighty 
stream, the one described 2700 years ago by the pro
phet Micah: ?Let justice roll down like a 
mighty stream!?  A powerful stream.  Moreover, a st
ream, not embarrassed to be powerful, not 
ashamed to be strong. 

 
A stream that can begin to wash away what our prese
nt trickle is not able to do: the stagnant sour 
ponds of religious people who are no longer moved b
y compassion, but by corporate interests 
and manipulative amassed fortunes. I™m talking abou
t a stream that can refill the living lake dried 
up by the cruel hot winds of war, where the life th
at once thrived in deep waters thrashes to death 
in the dry bed of greed, bullying and deception.  I
 am talking about a stream that can grow wider 
and wider, stronger and stronger, flowing toward wh
at the poet calls ?the enormous indistinct 
shape of the ocean? the ocean of peace, the shape o
f which is admittedly indistinct. But a stream 
that knows that all rivers must flow finally into t
he sea, into the deep enormity of hope and 
vision and accountability and responsibility and ye
s, a love that is not necessarily nice, but very, 
very smart. 

 
Those who claim to imagine the future are often wro
ng. But sometimes, oh yes, sometimes, they 
are right. I pray that the vision I have offered th
is morning moves forward, that our children™s 
children might know a world redeemed by our choices
, our worship, and our commitment. 
 
Offering 

 
This is the time in our flow of morning celebration
 when members and friends offer their pledges 
and gifts to the circle of our mutual benefit, for 
the church is the congregation of the people who 

 5 agree to make it, not some abstraction far away. If
 you are a guest this morning, a visitor, let the 
basket pass you by in peace. You are welcome here, 
and do not have to pay to be here. Those 
who have made a commitment to this circle of life a
nd love sometimes use this moment to 
present an expression of their commitment to the li
fe of this, their spiritual home. 
 
The Water Ceremony 

 
  

 
