What's the Difference Between Freedom Won and Freedom as the Norm
April 6, 2014 Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini

Reflections before the Celebration begins:

"Let me be...free; free to travel, free to stop, free to work, free to trade where I choose, free to choose my own teachers, free to follow the religion of my forebears, free to talk, think and act for myself -- and I will obey every law or submit to the penalty."
Hinmaton Yalatkik (Chief Joseph/Nez Perce) 1879

"Freeing yourself was one thing; claiming ownership of that freed self was another." Toni Morrison 1987

Gathering

until the temple bell calls us to mindfulness

Welcoming

Phyllis Byard

Centering

Nathan Hamm, piano

Kindling

the grail which signs our living tradition 9:15 Lisa Hanlon, 11:00 Eliza Fish

Opening

please rise in body or spirit Gina Phillips

We are here, as spring finally begins to green and flower, to worship, that is, to revere truth and freedom, as both grounding and goal for our lives, and to let our little and separate days be embraced by the divine grandeur of Love.

And so, bearing witness both to our world as it is, and as Love can imagine it, we would claim that vision of a just world in our own lives. And because of a growing sense of kinship with all beings, inviting our compassion, we begin in this celebration to engage our mission with our whole lives: body, mind, and heart.

Praising

#188 Come, Come, Whoever You Are

Ingathering Priscilla Draws Her Picture of Freedom

This is a true story. In the very first congregation where I served they didn't light a flaming chalice like we do here, but I was about to introduce the idea. That's when I met a woman named Priscilla who had heard about what I was going to do. She told me that she was born in an area of Europe called the Czech nation, and that she was Jewish. I noticed she had a long number tattooed onto her wrist. I asked her about it. She told me about a sad and awful thing that happened to her ­ counting from today ­ 75 years ago.
75 years ago, there was a nation near to the Czech nation that was taken over by a group of men called the Nazis. You'll read about them in school one day. The Nazis believed that they would one day rule the world, and so they marched into country after country around them and took over the country. The Nazis believed that people like the Jewish Priscilla, or people like me, or people who needed wheelchairs, or people with dark hair like the Roma people, or dark skin like people with African ancestry, should not be allowed their freedom.
So the Nazi soldiers came into her town, and took away her family. Sadly, she never saw them again. She was placed in a terrible fenced-in area called a camp, where they tattooed the number on her wrist. She was treated terribly ­ forced to work hard, on little food. Many people around her didn't make it, and some were deliberately killed. They tattooed a number on her arm (which she showed me).
"But you survived!" I said to her. "Tell me about that."
She asked me "Do you know about the symbol of Jan Hus, who lived in my land five hundred years ago?"
"Yes, the chalice, right?"
"Yes, a symbol of freedom. A symbol of truth. And even though he was a Christian and I am a Jew, in my country we all used the chalice as a symbol of hope, a symbol that said NO NO NO to the terrible idea that some people belong, and some don't. So this is what I did to survive. Every morning, I used to go outside when the dew made the dirt damp, and I would use my finger and draw the chalice, with the flame of truth rising from it. And I would say these words from my language that always go with the chalice symbol: 'Pravda vitezi' Do you know what that means?"
"Well, 'pravda' must mean 'truth,' since it means that in Russian and Ukrainian. Am I right? But what does 'vitezi' mean?"
"Yes, Rev. Mark, you are right. Pravda means 'truth' in my language as well. And 'vitezi' means 'prevails' which I guess you could say means in English, 'overcomes.' Or even, truth 'wins.' Truth will overcome, which is a way of saying truth will win over lies. Truth cannot be destroyed. Only telling the truth will set you free. So everyday I drew a picture of the chalice with my finger on the sand, and the flame of truth, and then wrote the Czech words Pravda vitezi over it. I had had faith in my heart that there was a truth greater than the Nazis. A truth greater than their belief that some people belonged, and some do not. Then, before I got myself into trouble with the guards, I wiped out the drawing. But the picture of the chalice came into my heart, and gave me strength and wisdom, and that is why I was able to survive. That and some luck perhaps," she added at the end, with a little smile.

I have never forgotten that story. I have told that story many times. Here and other places. And every time one of you comes up here in your green stole to light our chalice, I think of it too, and I take the idea of freedom and truth into my heart. I hope you can do that too.
after which children and teachers leave for their activities, while Nathan plays one of his own compositions.

Greeting

Gina Phillips

Affirming (Anne Lamont) Lies cannot nourish or protect you. Only freedom from fear, freedom from lies, can make us beautiful, and keep us safe. Because this business of becoming conscious is ultimately about asking yourself, "How alive am I willing to be?"

Singing

Hymn of Frederick Douglass, who used to attend the All Souls Unitarian

Church in Washington D.C. faithfully toward the end of his life, although he didn't officially join.

Douglass's life was remarkable, his thought brilliant by every modern standard. He was quoted in the

19th century almost as much as Martin Luther King is quoted in our own era. I took his words and put

them into meter today partially for what he says about freedom, but also partially to lift up the BREAD

Rally, tomorrow night a 7 PM at Tifereth Israel on Broad Street. BREAD's philosophy of engagement

reflects the ideas of the great African American activist exactly. The tune is Finlandia, which is largely

known. But if you don't know it, the melody is at #159.

Those who profess to favor sacred freedom Yet turn away from agitation's call Must think that crops will grow without the plowing, Or, lacking storms, the rain will neatly fall. There is no sea, without the waves own thunder. Without demands, all tyrants always stall.

Find out what people placidly submit to, And there you'll find the sad exact amount Of what injustice can be pressed upon them, For tyrants know no limits when the count grows great of those who show a meek endurance. There is no freedom 'til demands surmount.
Communing

Oh Love, I need to be clear this morning. I talk about freedom a lot. I love the word, but, please don't think I want to be totally free, or achieve perfect freedom. I don't want to be free of a tidal wave of immediate concern and worry when I find out about the 8.2 earthquake in Chile, centered not far from where my goddaughter Andrea lives. I don't want to be free of my sense of relief that she is OK, or my sense of sorrow that many died. I don't want to be free of my desire to worship the first purple crocuses out in the garden in the southwest corner of our parking lot, or the single daffodil greeting me at my office door. I don't want to

be free from the privilege and hardship of wanting to struggle for more freedom in society, so that our forebears' declared dream of equal rights for all, and freedom for all, can finally begin to thrive in our own era.
I don't want to be free from nurturing my friendships with Finkbone, or Doug, Kaaren, or Richard or Christian. I don't want to be free of long weekly conversations with my laughing sister Lynne, or set free from the love I feel tangibly, every single moment of every day, for my son, Tony.
And I don't want to be free from this silence either ­ in all the week, there is no other time when I can be with my fellow human beings to share a redemptive silence amidst the noise and demands of life. This is the steady hub that centers the wheel of life.
The Great Silence
I don't want to be free of my own life. What it has been, it has been, and nothing can change that. Loss and hardship, sure, unhappy decisions now and then, but plenty of love and blessings as well, all of which, all of which, leads up to this moment. I am really exactly who I am because of all of it. And you are who you are because of your unique lives. Thus do we set aside a brief moment on Sunday when each of us can remember, commemorate, or simply note, the people who hold our lives in their embrace: those we love, those who have loved us, those who have struggled with us, those who are far away and whom we miss, those whom we mourn. Saying their names aloud if we wish, or quietly within, we situate ourselves, not just in the conversation about freedom, but within the sacred center of our own lives.
The Naming
Let the beauty and power of music now come to us, a harbinger of deep truth, creative freedom, and joyful love. Let our spirits revive and run free!
Anthems
The First Reading comes from Ignazio Silone's 1938 novel, Bread and Wine (Pane e Vino). Silone's novels were very important to me in the first part of my ministry.
"Freedom is not something you get as a present," said Pietro. "You can live in a dictatorship and be free ­ on one condition: that you fight the dictatorship. If you think with your own mind and keep it uncorrupted, you are free. If you fight for what is just, you are free. But you can live in the most democratic country on earth, and if you're lazy, are annoyingly insensitive, or fawning and deferential within yourself, you're not free. Even without any violent coercion, you're a slave. You can't beg your freedom from someone. You have to seize it for yourself, as much as you can. Not just you ­ everyone."
The Second Reading comes from Bird by Bird written by the remarkable Anne Lamott back in 1994
Toni Morrison said, "The function of freedom is to free someone else," and if you are no longer wracked, or in bondage to a person, or a way of life, tell your story. Risk freeing someone else.

Not everyone will be glad that you did. Members of your family and other critics may wish you had kept your secrets. Oh, well, what are you going to do?"
Preaching
Yesterday I went down to King Avenue United Methodist Church to attend a planning meeting of Why Marriage Matters, one of several Ohio organizations working to make it so that I, if I one day fell in love and so desired, could get married in my own state without having to fly to Chicago or New York to do the deed.
A Cincinnati judge, just this last Friday, as many of you must know by now, opened a crack in the armor of our DOMA (Defense of Marriage Act), to insist that Ohio, at the very least, has to recognize the marriages legally entered into the records of other states, no matter what the gender.
The planning meeting I attended was organized well before that astonishing legal decision in Cincinnati however. And even though the judge said what he said, no one canceled the meeting, imagining that we will now careen down a greased slide all the way to marriage equality.
The meeting was well organized. It outlined the history of marriage equality during recent years, both in our own state, and in other states. And people told stories: Lesbian couples, gay men of many colors, a straight Methodist minister. There were tears. There was laughter. There was every color, age, ability, faith and unbelief represented.
The leaders spoke of what they have learned from the history they outlined, and the analysis of that history. After the discouraging Prop 8 decision in California, many leaders in the movement to establish marriage equality felt defeated and depressed. Understandably so. I was depressed too, as were my California friends especially.
The anti-"Black-Church" sentiment espoused by many whites depressed me even more, since it was based on scanty evidence, all of it hyped up by the amazingly enduring racialized lens our nation in particular has polished.
But after the shock of it wore off, and the hand-wringing stopped, the school of the spirit opened its doors. In the school of the spirit, you can ask truthful questions: "What can we learn from all this? What did we do wrong? What can we do next?"
What they learned is that talk of civil rights ­ like, your partner being officially carried by one of the great insurance companies, or having access to housing where you can't be thrown out just because the ones you rent from don't like your kind ­ didn't make much of an impression on the California people. (Nor, for that matter, did it impress the Utah people, the leaders on Temple Square, who helped richly fund the anti-gay marriage campaign.)
But what they discovered, which really did make a difference everywhere else where marriage equality passed, was the specific language used to describe marriage. Lists of complaints don't work: "Why have you taken away our privileges?" "Why have you people stolen our rights?" "Why don't we have this freedom?" But instead, they found that what really connected with folks was passionate open talk about these three positive words: "Love," "Commitment" and "Freedom." They began to explain why

marriage equality is important using just those three words.
I'll get to the word freedom in a moment. But the love and commitment were obvious to me. I have been officiating at gay and lesbian ceremonies since 1979; I've officiated at well over a hundred, I think. None of them legal by any state standards so far. They were beautiful ceremonies nonetheless.
But this is what happens every single time I do a ceremony. Listen. Folks come up to me after the service ­ parents, grandparents, friends, business partners, brothers and sisters, whoever... with their faces clearly all aglow. They begin their conversations with the following words ­ the same words, mostly, each and every time, to wit: "I get it now. This is not about rights, it's about love and commitment. These two actually love each other so deeply, and are so committed, that they are doing this despite the fact that the state will give them no benefits, and that, at least here in Ohio, their landlord or landlady can kick them out of their apartment if he or she doesn't happen to think people like them belong in society. I get it now. I get it now. Thank you."
Every time!
Who would have guessed that a marriage ceremony would be an opportunity for effecting a complete turn around like that? For doing justice work? You see, justice work is not only hard-ball politics, letters to the editor, marches and organized interfaith meetings like BREAD, or the Why Marriage Matters folks. It's also speaking words of love and commitment in the flower-scented, candle-lit meeting house of a religious congregation.
Justice work. Chris Geggie, one of the leaders yesterday, made a play on that word justice which was easy to remember. He said: "Justice isn't just us." In other words, he echoed Toni Morrison as quoted by Anne Lamott in the second reading "The function of freedom is to free someone else."
But Not everyone will be glad that you did, cautions Lamott. Indeed. I have a friend whose brother is an alcoholic, like mine was before he died because of its ravages. My friend's whole family had confronted my friend's brother, and intervened some years ago. Deeply affected by his family's concern, he took measures to stop drinking, and didn't drink a drop for three years.
But he's drinking again. Plenty. Except now, he takes pains not to drink when he visits his parents. And he has pressured his siblings not to tell the folks, and my friend and his sister and brother have agreed no to. I told my friend that more and more have come to understand how the secrets in my own family contributed to my brother's early demise. I encouraged him to reconsider, even though it would, of course, be agitating to all concerned. Anne Lamott agrees: "Members of your family and other critics may wish you had kept your secrets."
Secrets. One of the shame practices that supports enslavement to addictions yes, but many other realities as well. As you know, the last few years have been zig-zagging with outrage about certain whistle-blowers who decided to tell everyone all the secrets the "powers that be" have been keeping. So I have to imagine that if Anne Lamott was writing her words now, instead of back in the 90s, she might write like this instead: "Members of your family and your government critics may wish you had kept your secrets to yourself, so much that they'll want to kill you dead if they ever get your hands on you."

So now here is where the third word that people are now using to describe marriage equality comes in: First love, then commitment. And the last one is freedom. I say that there can be no freedom ­ from addictions, or great deceptions, or the various systems of oppression ­ without taking the freedom to tell the truth, to name what is going on, to pull back the veil (the Latin word for that is REVELATIO, revelation) off tightly guarded secrets. This is true in family systems, in organizations, both secular and religious, in governments, and in cultural centers.
Freedom after all, as Silone puts it so succinctly, "is not something you get as a present. You can't beg your freedom from someone. You have to seize it, take it, for yourself."
Some of the privileged among us who have lived here in the "land of the free" all our lives may counter, "But my freedom is a gift! It's written in the Constitution and Declaration of Independence and everything. People went to war to defend that freedom!" Tell that to the African Americans who were denied voting privileges in the last election due to deceptive legislation passed in many states. Tell that to the man on the street shouting to himself because he is severely mentally ill, and has no support from either family or society that he can figure out ­ because he can't figure out anything sometimes ­ he is ill, after all. The only "gift" of freedom "given" to him is this: "You are free to barely survive."
Or explain that freedom is a present to the people in prison serving decades for marijuana possession even in states where marijuana is now legal.
And yes, tell that story about the "freest country in the world" even to all the white supremacist groups in this country ­ yes, even here in Ohio ­ who join churches that tell them their freedom is being eaten away by all the immigration. And that their religion is being persecuted by progressives who hate both God and Christ, and who therefore want to pass laws which will undermine the faith traditions of conservative believers (although they might just simply call themselves believers). People in such groups are not free either, any more than the man shouting to himself on the street. No one is getting any presents here.
Or, let's get historical for a moment ­ and more in-house. Tell that business about the land of the free to all the women and gay men like me who were looking to serve Unitarian Universalist congregations back in the late seventies, and were told ­ by liberal Unitarian Universalists ­ first, to the women: "We can't deal with women ­ their voices are too soft; they will distract the men; they will have babies and then what? Second, to me: we can't deal with a man who lives with a man. That's all you will talk about, we just know it. You won't fit in to the community. You won't in any way be one of us."
Yet here I am. Up here in the pulpit of a rather large congregation. Why? Did something "inevitable" happen? I hear people using that word "inevitable" all the time about the freedom to marry, because so many states now have laws in place, and in rather a short time.
Sorry. Freedom is simply not something you get as a present. Not now, any more than in the days of Mussolini when Silone was writing. I am here because thousands of us, gay, lesbian, straight women and men, didn't say "YOU ALL need to have been ordaining us a hundred years ago." That would have been idiotic. No, we accepted that we were Unitarian Universalists too, and

agitated to change the system. To educate. To set more honest policies. To question the hidden, unspoken cultural norms. To hold us all ­ and I mean all ­ to the principles we even then espoused.
And now, 30 years later, the Unitarian Universalist Association is strikingly different. And far more in line with our stated principles in social areas. And all of us who worked hard to change things did it out of love for our movement. We didn't ask, "Why are YOU PEOPLE setting up barriers?" No, respecting the love, commitment and freedom at the very center of our living tradition, we asked, "What can WE do together to help all of us belong? We need to all grow and deepen our lives."
Or, let's look at marriage equality. The women and men in Minnesota, to take one example, according to my friend and colleague Meg Riley who lives there, feared the worst during the last election. The polls were not good. The Money was all on the other side. But they didn't let fear take away their determination to seize their freedom, to demand it, albeit kindly. They formed phone banks, even staffed by people who do not like to talk on phones, to nevertheless make tens of thousands of cold calls ­ to talk to strangers, one at a time, about love, and commitment ­ and that third word: freedom, a cardinal value claimed by both liberals and conservatives. All of this organized but non-violent agitation is what began to turn the tide. But remember, they also had to raise money, create the phone banks, write op-ed pieces, organize conferences, talk to city officials. That is all hard, organized struggle by real people. It's not some invisible force of inevitability rolling over everyone and everything. Silone puts it this way: If you think with your own mind and keep it uncorrupted, you are free. If you fight for what is just, you are free. But you can live in the most democratic country on earth, and if you're lazy, are annoyingly insensitive, or fawning and deferential within yourself, you're not free.
Or as Frederick Douglass put it so poetically, yet forcefully in his agricultural metaphor, Those who profess to favor freedom yet turn away from agitation's call, must think that crops will grow without the plowing...
Of course, I have lived long enough to know that human beings can really be truly awful, extravagantly and violently and shockingly awful. I have lived long enough to know that there are times when phone banks don't work, or op-ed pieces. I have talked with more survivors of the Shoah (the Holocaust) than just Pricilla, the woman I mentioned in the story this morning. I learned that sometimes, all you have available to you is your finger, the dirt, and a motto: Pravda Vitezi, Truth Prevails. Truth overcomes. There is a truth greater than oppression, yes, I have faith that this is so, but I might only be able to rekindle that hope, not achieve it today and tomorrow, which is what Priscilla did. And with luck, and the chalice of hope burning inside her, she survived.
Still, for the most part, freedom after all, begins when secrets are no longer guarded. It begins with the shedding of illusions, as I said last week. It begins with telling the truth.
BREAD tries to do this, our congregation tries to do this, the Unitarian Universalist Association tries to do this, the various groups working for marriage equality in Ohio are trying to do this, and, I assure you, we are not a small number.
But freedom is not a gift. It doesn't plow the fields for us. We have to do that.

Offering For all the stories told, the laughter and the tears, the opportunities to commit, and the challenges that free us to grow; for all the small groups, the cleanup days, the call to deeper freedom and responsibility, the ceremonies of marriage for folks regardless of gender, we offer this gift of the offering, a way, besides what we give electronically, to say "Yes" to all we do together.
Returning: Spring's Own Little Homily on Freedom (I found a little parchment rolled up in the daffodil outside my office. I picked it out of the blossom, unrolled it, and now I will read you what it says:
I am Spring, and I greet you. You creatures who walk upon the earth, so dark and wet with the week's rain, note that my daffodils bloom now, and that they will not be blooming in two weeks. Your freedom to take delight in crocuses which exist only now. Be free now, not yesterday or tomorrow. Rejoice in your freedom to take delight... clouds and storms cannot take away your liberty, your liberty to respond to what is flowing through the world now, and which will not last. The days are fast reviving here in North America, you are fast reviving too, perhaps, as you begin to shed Winter like a snake sheds its skin. Be gentle as you walk across the earth I am blessing with myself. Be gentle as you take in the vision of new green grass. Be gentle with yourselves too. Open like the flowers do ­ gently. Rejoice in me, for I am Spring. but do it now ­ not tomorrow.
Singing #63 Spring has now Unwrapped the Flowers
Blessing Erin Voithofer sent me this wonder quote yesterday, and as soon as I read it, I knew it was perfect to end the celebration today. It's by David Orr, who teaches here in Ohio at Oberlin. The plain fact is that the world does not need more successful people, but it does desperately need more peacemakers, healers, restorers, storytellers, and lovers of every kind. It needs people who live well in their places. It needs people of moral courage willing to join the fight to make the world habitable and humane. And these qualities have little to do with success as our culture has defined it.
Having heard these words, I bless you with the blessing used in the influential Liturgy of St. Mark in the Bowery, the poet's church, in Manhattan. They are very simple. "Go. You are free."
Choral Ending

