  Thanksgiving.doc  MLB 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

as the gold of high autumn gives way  

to the cold and grey of winter 

to worship, to remember that we share a world 

and do not have to face our troubles alone; 

to rejoice that even though both joy and sorrow 

claim our hearts, gratitude can strengthen us. 

 
And so, though our ways of thinking and feeling abo
ut the meaning of our days may 
differ, we agree to journey together, side by side,
 face to face. Within this circle of 
strong spirit, mutual care, and ethical vision, may
 we ourselves remain open to 
being transformed by a welcoming heart and emerging
 justice. 
Affirming
At this time, we have more for which to be grateful
 than we will ever 
know. So let us set aside our shopping list of grie
vances, and instead, want 
what we have. And if our lives hurt, may we remembe
r to want nothing 
more than the affection of those whose hearts are b
roken by our pain. Let 
us do what we can, dreaming one possible dream, cli
mbing one 
splendid mountain, that our lives may be blessed wi
th attainable 
meaning. And let us be who we are, answering the ca
ll that is ours, not 
anotherôs.         
             
Rev. Forrest Church (edited for this service), 2008
  
Sequence   
Images before the silence 
 
Kernals of grain in the ground.  Ant cities near by
, their freeways tunneling through the 
soil. Mold, pebbles, white roots from a nearby weed
. The sound of Flight 187 from 
Cleveland to Memphis 38,000 feet overhead, sending 
down slight echoes of the broken 
air that are felt by few, except a few sensitive ea
rthwormsñ.. 
 
Green shoots in late spring. An almost-famous poet 
drives past, notices the blue sky 
against the green field and jots down a few notes f
or a future verse about her relationship 
with her mother, a notable farm-house cook. A lone 
falcon hovers over an invisible 
mouse amid all those stalksñ.. 

 
Bronze grain waving in the breeze.  The great red m
achines rumbling, one driver 
reflecting on the economic downturn, another compos
ing a letter to his nephew attending 
school in Cuernevacañ
  A yellow glass bowl of grain grown from that kern
al, in that 
field, ground into soft flour, mixed with yeast and
 water and salt, rising into air already 
breathed in and out a thousand times, over a thousa
nd years, by a thousand human beings 
all around the world. Bread. Filled with memories a
nd poems, sounds and cities, stories 
and salt, tangled with the whole abundant cornucopi
a of the earth, including, I suppose, 
this very silence. 

   
silence 

Memories in the heart. The men and women and childr
en in our lives, here or far, alive or 
not, rising within us, a harvest of love. Let us th
ank them for how their lives, joined to 
ours, brought us to this day. We name them, quietly
 inside, or spoken in air, but we do 
not move through the rest of the service without jo
ining hands with them and 
acknowledging their part in all thisñ. 

 
naming 

Thanksgiving rising into the air, gratitude binding
 everything to everything elseñsong 
and voice, piano and hand, composer and ear, silenc
e and sound, memory and hope, 
sorrow and joy. 

 
The First Reading
 this morning is the poem Wonderbread by Alfred Corn
, 1997. 
 
Loaf after loaf, in several sizes, 

and never does it not look fresh, 

as though its insides werenôt moist 

or warm crust not the kind that spices 

a room with the plump aroma of toast. 

 
Found on the table; among shadows 

next to the kitchen phone; dispatched 

FedEx (without return address, though). 

Someone, possibly more than one 

person, loves me. Well then, who? 

 
Amazing that bread should be so weightless, 

down-light when handled, as a me 

dying to taste it takes a slice. 

Which lasts just long enough to reach 

my mouth, but then, at the first bite, 

 
Nothing! Nothing but air, thin air ....    

Oh. One more loaf of wonderbread, 

only a pun for bread, seductive 

visually, but you could starve. 

Get rid of it, throw it in the riverä 

 
Beyond which, grain fields.  

Future food  

for the just and the unjust,  

those who love, and do not love. 

 
The Second Reading
 this morning are a few thoughts offered by my frien
d and colleague 
Janne Eller Isaacs, who with her husband Robbie ser
ves our terrific congregation in St. 

  Paul, MN. These sentences were in a sermon she offe
red two weeks ago, which I asked 
her if I could use in my edition of her amazing wor
ds. Jonah, in the reading, is their first 
born, a man in his mid-twenties who is, from his pl
ace in Brooklyn, NY,  fighting a 
diagnosis of cancer, tooth and nail. He had just ha
d some surgery the week before 
Janneôs sermon on gratitude to remove some growths.
  Gratefulness, ?great fullness? as David Steindl-Ras
t reminds us, ?is the full response of 
the human heart to the gratuitousness of all that i
s.?        
 
Cultivating gratitude begins with the act of acknow
ledgement å yes, there 
are
 blessings 
in our lives. There 
is
 a feast set before us. When we recognize and ackno
wledge the feast, 
take a moment to let the feast fill our spirits, we
 are expanding our gratitude. 
 
This is true even in the midst of the trials and tr
ibulations of troubling times.  
 
The Psalmist says: 
Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of d
eath, I will fear no 
evil. Thou settest a table before me in the presenc
e of mine enemies. My cup runneth 
over. 
No matter what, I will testify to the feast set bef
ore me.  This is the gift of 
cultivating gratitude. This is the gift of naming w
hat I am grateful for every day, even the 
days that contain disappointment and despair.   Eac
h day I must describe and 
acknowledge the feast.  What is this feast?  This w
eek (for example) it was days full of 
particular and spectacular blessingsäwe watched as 
our country moved toward a new 
kind of hope-fulness   It is the staff here at Unit
y with whom I have the great privilege to 
work.  It is the bag of popcorn left at our doorste
p by Brian and Angela. It is my dear 
friend and colleague Meg, saying she would be with 
me during Jonahôs latest surgery, 
and we could do anything.  She provided a list.  I 
was especially captivated by her 
suggestion of throwing dishes against the garage wa
ll.   
 
            Having to cultivate a discipline of gra
titude has saved my life these past few 
weeks since Jonahôs recurrence. It has kept me focu
sed in the present.  It has provided the 
structure to take me beyond my fears about his futu
re.  It has helped me focus on those 
things that are so much more important and signific
ant than our economic downturn.  It 
has forced me to hold the joy 
and
 the sorrow.  It has challenged the life of my spir
it to be 
large enough to contain it all
ä  
 
Sermon 

 
Over the almost 30 years of my ministry, I have com
e to respect, and even love many of 
my colleagues. They donôt live close, most of them,
 but I work with them long distance 
on projects, laugh and cry with them at meetings an
d conferences, stop at their house for 
breakfast while traveling, call them up to ask advi
ce or read their many books; this, since 
so many of them seem to be authors. 

 
Forrest Church, minister for 30 years at All Souls 
church in Manhattan, is one of those I 
have worked with many times, whose books Iôve read,
 whose house I have visited for 
breakfast, who has laughed and cried with me, advis
ed me, cajoled me and supported me. 

  Though we are the same age, I have always regarded 
him as a kind of mentor. I love him 
very much. 

 
When, a few years ago, he was diagnosed with esopha
geal cancer, I was disheartened and 
depressed to hear it. When it was treated successfu
lly, I was overjoyed. And it when it 
came back all the more voraciously, promising him a
n early death, it knocked me down 
to the ground.   

 
At General Assembly this year, one of our annual me
etings of congregations in our 
Association, Forrest was given a life-time achievem
ent award. He was feted and praised. 
At the gracious invitation of Kay Montgomery, our A
ssociational vice-president, I too 
offered a few words of thanks at a luncheon in his 
honor.  
 
Forrest also gave a talk at General Assembly.  My o
ccupancy estimation told me around 
1000 people came, almost a third of the whole Assem
bly. 
 
I was one of those people of course. As usual, Forr
est, a bit on the thin side, his beard 
unusually scraggy, delivered one of his amazing, an
d quite typical, self-effacing talks, 
with a smile never far from his face. But he was no
t talking about cheerful things, or at 
least, things that fit neatly into that category. H
e was talking about his diagnosis, his 
manner of dying and his theology of living. ?Hereôs
 how I see it,? he said in conclusion. 
?Love what you have. Do what you can. Be who you ar
e.?  
 
Many of us, however, never got past the first phras
e. ?Love what you have?!! Love what 
you HAVE? Man, you have terminal cancer! Are you te
lling me you love that cancer, are 
thankful
, to have been given such a diagnosis??   
 
Sure enough, when he was done, he had enough energy
 left to field a few questions, and 
the inner question that I just expressed was asked,
 worded almost as I worded it. 
 
?Look,? answered Forrest, (and here I am offering m
y version of what he saidñthere 
may be others who heard him differently), ?I donôt 
want to die of cancer. I donôt want to 
die of anything. But the world doesnôt spin on my a
xis. Nor yours. Death, unevenly 
distributed by age, is the truth about all of our l
ives. To be thankful only for the good 
things of this life, the good luck, grace, abundanc
e and joy, without paying attention that 
they are, all of them, yes, all of them, tangled up
 completely with the tragic things of life, 
is to miss the point of loving what you have, about
 being grateful for your particular life. 
I canôt single out my cancer and say that it is som
ething completely separated out from 
my need to love and be loved, my decisions about ca
reer and family, my every other 
sorrow and joy. It all runs together, if I am ruthl
essly honest, and what good is theology if 
itôs not ruthlessly honest? My cancer is not outsid
e my life. Itôs part and parcel with rest 
of my lifeñitôs all part of who I am. And I am part
 of your life, and you are part of mine. 
I love what I have, because there is no way to sepa
rate it all out from what I do not have, 
in this case, health. Besides,? he added by way of 
ironic humor, ?if I scrunched up my 
face and sent all of my hatred toward my cancer, an
d told it that I didnôt think it was fair 
that I was dying so young, do you think I would liv
e any longer?? 

   
I too struggled against his point. But over the day
s since then, I have to admit he does 
have one. In some ways, the first line of his mantr
a, ?love what you have,? is another way 
of saying: ?Well, life isnôt fair, you know.? 

 
Almost everyone I know says that.  From people writ
ing newspaper advice columns, to 
ministers, to teachers, to your average woman or ma
n on the street.  
 
People seem to differ drastically, however, as to w
hy that is true. Some say the reason 
thatôs true is that whatever happens, good or bad, 
is just Godôs will. Their God, they 
mean. The one they say is the only one. Well, I don
ôt know about you, but when I hear 
things like that, I suddenly feel that their God mu
st be a pretty arbitrary character, 
irascible, not loving in any way that makes sense t
o me, and someone who, in the clear 
words of theologian Ricky Ricardo, has ?a lot of Çs
plaining to do.? 
 
Others say that people bring things like cancer on 
themselves somehowñthey either 
want to suffer because of some unresolved conflict 
or some unforgiven sin; or they did 
something awful in their last life. Again, I am not
 sure how ?blaming the victim? in either 
of these ways makes things easier to face. It just 
adds layers of guilt and shame to the 
suffering, which doesnôt strike me as helpful. 

 
Others are quick to deny arbitrary gods and vast sc
hemes of blame, but as soon as 
something awful happens, their heart is packed to t
he edge with the question ?Why me? 
Why NOW?? which implies that life is somehow 
supposed
 to be fair, and that maybe 
someone was sleeping at the switch. In any case, th
ey sound very resentful and, 
somewhere inside, EXPECT life to be fairñalmost, it
 seems to me, automatically. They 
think life should be fair without having to go to B
READ meetings to try and make things 
fair by increment and intention, without having to 
do Empty Bowls events on Saturdays 
to make sure some people have at least a little som
ething to eat, or without cooking for 
the homeless on Fridays. The mashed potatoes should
 just be there. 
 
And still others will be quick to come at Forrestôs
 proverb combatively, like our 
questioner in the audienceñlike many of us there, i
f the truth was made plain. He was 
just the only guy with the guts to pose the questio
n. He just didnôt press far enough. The 
obvious conclusion to his questions was: ?You donôt
 think a woman in an abusive 
relationship should love the abuse, do you? You don
ôt think the Jews or Roma people 
thrown into Bergen-Belsen should have patted their 
tormentors on the head, thanked 
them, and blown them kisses, do you??  

 
No, and no and no and no and no and no and no. 

 
Look, I know what he says is hard to get. I know th
at not everyone will be able to get it 
right off the bat. I know that my powers of explana
tion are limited, and my own wrestling 
with his great idea is not done yet. 

  

  But I AM convinced my friend and colleague Janne, h
owever, understands what Forrest 
is saying in her very bones. She does not love her 
son Jonahôs cancer, or praise his pain. 
She simply does not separate out his diagnosis from
 his brilliance, his beauty, his sense of 
humor, his deep capacity for love, or his profound 
struggles with his own diagnosis. She 
does not separate out his cancer from her relations
hip to him, his to her, or his 
relationship to his father or friends. She gives th
anks for the whole of her life with him. 
She loves all that she has in him because the cance
r cannot be split off and put on a shelf 
somehow. And listen, it sounded to me that when her
 friend Meg suggested throwing 
plates against the wall of the garage, she was alre
ady clutching a nice porcelain gravy 
boat in her hand ready to smash it to pieces, ready
 to admit that, as Jonahôs mother, she is 
filled with feelings that admit no finer or more au
thentic expression. But instead of 
smashing plates, she writes these wonderful words a
s she begins to conclude her sermon. 
 
Having to cultivate a discipline of gratitude has s
aved my life these past few weeks since 
Jonahôs recurrence. It has kept me focused in the p
resent.  It has provided the structure 
to take me beyond my fears about his future.  It ha
s helped me focus on those things that 
are so much more important and significant than our
 economic downturn.  It has forced 
me to hold the joy 
and
 the sorrow.  It has challenged the life of my spir
it to be large 
enough to contain it all
ä  
 
Large enough, spacious enough, inclusive enoughñto 
contain all.  
 
When I was in seminary, I took a course called Roma
ntic American Religion. It was 
taught at the Jesuit School by a very competent pro
fessor named Dr. Gelpi. In the class, 
he addressed American religion of the 19
th
 century, our Unitarian and Univesalist 
ancestors here in the states, the Transcendentalist
sñEmerson, Theodore Parker, Margaret 
Fuller, Orestes Brownson, Bronson Alcott etc. He ca
lled them ?romantic? because they 
seemed to live their lives with a kind of rose-colo
red-glasses type of optimism that 
couldnôt find a healthy way to respond to suffering
, tragedy and misery in this life. He 
pointed out that Emerson, who lost both beloved wif
e and son to death, could find 
nothing else but life-long depression to offer in r
esponse. 
 
I think Professor Gelpi overstated his case by seve
ral furlongs, and I did offer him a few 
good arguments against his thesis, which he graciou
sly accepted; but his observation is 
not entirely without foundation. 

 
To use the images of our poet, Alfred Corn, itôs no
t enough to argue whether bread 
should be light and moist, like Wonderbread, or thi
ck and crusty, like a peasant loaf made 
by my grandmother from whole grain. In the same man
ner, Forrest would say that itôs not 
enough to argue whether theology should be light an
d optimistic, like Transcendentalism, 
or thick and crusty, like some forms of humanism, o
r modern forms of Unitarian theism. 
For beyond all those arguments about bread, says th
e poet, ?grain fields. Future food for 
the just and the unjust, those who love, and do not
 love.? In the same way, beyond all 
arguments about theology, behold the fields of our 
common life, which we share with the 
just and unjust, those who love and those who do no
t love. 
 
  There is no way to live in a world that does not ha
ve joy and sorrow mixed together, the 
just and unjust living side by side (sometimes insi
de a single person), the sick and the 
healthy sitting in each otherôs lap. Itôs the way i
t is. No one is to blame, no one is at fault, 
itôs not a mistake, itôs not the result of someoneô
s ancient sin in a garden, as our religious 
ancestor Pelagius said with clarity over 1600 years
 ago. Itôs simply the way things are. To 
acknowledge 
that 
is to ?love what you have.? And that, I think, is w
hat Forrest means by 
his wise, simple, yet always surprising statement. 

 
Personally, I hope Forrest will be around a lot lon
ger. His treatment has already defied 
the odds presented him, heôs gained 20 lbs, and ins
tead of this being a eulogy, as I feared 
it might be when I scheduled it last August, this i
s very much a living testament of love, 
admiration and friendship. Maybe, if I am very luck
y, I will one day get to throw plates, 
with him, right against the hard walls of the groun
d floor of his New York condo 
building. 

 
Forrest always ends his sermons with the following 
words to his congregation: 
God bless 
you. I love you.
 I wonôt presume to steal his traditional words, bu
t I think I will use one of 
my own traditional phrases and aim it toward him: ?
Forrest, thanks for being exactly who 
you are, and no one else. And, yes, I love you.? 

 
Offering 

        

 Table Prayer for Thanksgiving
  
(Jolinda) Bread of the world, we come to your table
. 
 
First Reader:  
 
May this bread be for us our 
joy.
 Joy before the good gifts of sun and soil, seed an
d 
water, sowing and harvest, kneading and baking. Wit
hout such gifts, we would not be 
alive. Thanks for life.   
here, break bread 
 
    
Second Reader:   
 
May this bread be for us a 
blessing
. May it speak 
to us of the sacred meals of our ancestors when the
 bread they ate was more than bread, 
and when they knew they were more than their separa
te selves. 
  
here, break bread 
 
    
Third Reader: 
 
May this bread be for us a 
promise.
 May it speak to us of a day to come when we have 
worked to see that there is ample food for every hu
man being on earth. 
 here, break bread 
 
Fourth Reader: 

   
May this bread be for us a 
vision
. A vision of a time men and women and children sha
ll 
come from north and south and east and west and sit
 down to eat in peace, together with 
sufficient fool for all.  
  
here, breaks bread 
 
(Eric) May this broken bread be for us all 
a call.
  A call to remember that sharing the 
bread is just as important as feasting on it. For s
uch bread does not disappear when it has 
been eaten, but remains present whenever we welcome
 each other in love and respect, 
whenever we stand by each other in broken times, wh
enever we remain thankful that we 
can serve, and give. 

 
(Jolinda)  And so blest are you, Love, our joy, our
 blessing, our promise, our vision and 
our call. In you we are transformed and made whole,
 despite our brokenness. For all that 
is our lives, we give our thanks and praise. 

  (here, already prepared baskets are passed, beginni
ng with the one in the center of the 
table. the rest will be under the table) 

 
Blessing: 
 Love what you have. 
           Do what you can. 

     Be who you are. 

 
                  
or
, in the worlds of our childrenôs story 
We donôt give thanks because weôre happy.  

We are happy because we give thanks. 

  

