   2009-4-12 Easter   

Mark L. Belletini  

  

Opening Words
  
We are here, 

after a wild week of bright skies one day, 

and gray, cold rain the next, 

to celebrate Life with joy and flowers, 

to sing, reach out and stretch our hearts 

and see a world transformed by freedom. 
  
And so, though our ways of thinking and feeling abo
ut the meaning of our days may 
differ, we agree to journey together, side by side,
 face to face. Within this circle of 
strong spirit, mutual care, and ethical vision, may
 we ourselves remain open to 
being transformed by a welcoming heart and emerging
 justice. 
 
Exultet: The Proclamation of Easter
  
April 4 1968 From 5:59 To 6:02 p.m. written by Davi
d Maywhoor 
Spoken in unison, first two verses 

 
Su Ann leads in unison: 

A single soul leads a movement 

Many hearts shine within one 

Hope floods into action and 

Action flows into the streets 

 
Dark rooms inside many minds are 

Re-lit and furnished with places to 

Sit and plan and rejuvenate and 

Dance and clap and sing new life 

 
Eric:
  A single knowing soul is betrayed 
Cut down while anticipating an end 

Light is extinguished in fiery rage 

Movement is wrecked on the devil™s road 

 
Su Ann:
 Be so many that one killed is no end 
Be so many places flowing like air  

Be so many thoughts kindling new ideas 

Be so many fibers in an impenetrable web 

 
Eric:
 A single soul leads a movement 
A single knowing soul is betrayed 

  Always and say never again 

Be so many that one killed is no end 

 
Sequence for Easter 

 
Life is today. Not yesterday. Not tomorrow. 

These flowers bloom today, 
not
 yesterday, 
not
 tomorrow. 
 
But the silence here today is the same as yesterday
™s silence. It™s the same as tomorrow™s 
silence. It™s the silence that was here before the 
universe spun into being, and it™s the 
silence that will shelter its unimaginable end. And
 yet despite all that, it is always, 
always, always, and only, just now. Now is all ther
e is–.Alleluia. 
 
silence 

 
Calling to mind those whose lives have touched our 
own, we remember that we 
blossomed in their sun and rain, and that without t
hem we would not be who we are. In 
silence we give thanks for them, or 
into
 the silence we name them, so as to celebrate this 
day with them as well. 

 
naming 

 
Alleluia for sun and rain, for moments, for music, 
for life, for life, for life. Alleluia. 
  

The First Reading
 is called Resurrection. It™s a brief story from 
With Roots and Wings
 by Jay B. McDaniel, 1995.  The word ?tantric? refer
s to a form of Hindu and Buddhist 
literature about powerful symbols. Thomas Merton wa
s an influential Trappist monk, a 
writer and interfaith wisdom teacher. 

 
Thomas Merton died while at a conference for monks 
in Thailand.  On his way to the 
conference he was able to visit many Tibetan Buddhi
sts, including the Dalai Lama.    
 
At one point, Merton met a somewhat ?wild? Tibetan 
lama who impressed him deeply, 
but who had serious reservations concerning Easter.
  He called Merton ?a Jesus Lama.?  
The lama then confessed: 

 You know, I have never been able for the life of me
 to get a handle on this, so I™m 
glad you™re here this morning–.The center of your r
eligion concerns a man who 
comes back to life after death; and yet, in Tibetan
 Buddhism, when you have one 
of these people, a walking corpse, we call our lama
 to put him down.  So I want to 
know what kind of a religion has at its center a de
ad man coming back to life?  
 The lama did not question the literal reality of Je
sus rising from the dead.  From a Tibetan 
perspective, such rising did not seem that extraord
inary. What troubled him was the fact 
that the early followers of Jesus did not ?call in 
a lama? to send him on his way.  

   
Merton did not respond defensively.  Instead, Merto
n explained the Resurrection in 
tantric terms about the overcoming of fear and the 
utter and complete power of liberation  
–freedom from 
all
 constraints and restraints, from fear of death to 
fear of life.  That™s 
freedom!  

 
The Tibetan lama was satisfied by Merton™s response
.    
 
The Second Reading
 is from my beloved Szymborska. Impressions of the T
heater, 1972. 
 
For me, a tragic play™s  

most important act  

is the last:  

when everyone rises up  

from the stage™s battlegrounds,  

adjusting their wigs, their robes,  

wrenching out the fake knife from their chest,  

removing the noose from their neck, 

and then lining up  

in front of the living audience 

to face them. 

 
They bow, alone and together; 

their pale hands on their wounded hearts; 

the lady who had killed herself curtseys; 

the beheaded guy nods to one and all. 

 
They bow in pairs:  

anger extends an arm to shyness;  

a victim looks blissfully  

into the hangman™s eyes;  

the revolutionary bears no grudge  

as he walks right next to the tyrant. 

 
They trample eternity with a golden slipper. 

They sweep morals away with the brim of a hat. 

They show incorrigible readiness  

to start afresh tomorrow. 

 
Single file, those who died a lot earlier, 

say, in the second or third acts,  

enter– alive. 

It™s the miraculous resurrection  

of those lost without a trace.  

The thought that they have been waiting backstage, 
patiently,  
not taking off their costumes  

  or wiping off makeup moves me, strangely,  

more than all the play™s tragic tirades. 

 
But truly inspiring is the lowering of the curtain.
 And that brief glimpse of what lies beneath it. 

Here, one hand  

hastily grasps at a bouquet of flowers,  

there, another hand  

picks up a dropped sword.  

Only then does a third, invisible hand 

perform its task:  it clutches at my throat. 

 
Sermon: 

 
So why, I wonder, does the poet Szymborska feel a h
and clutch at her throat when the 
tragic play ends? Why does she feel such deep feeli
ngs when, after all the Shakespearean 
massacres and poisonings are over, all the dead ris
e up from the floor, and pick up fallen 
swords and catch bouquets of flowers from the appla
uding, deeply affected audience? 
 
Because in real life, that just doesn™t happen.  Sz
ymborska knows that the folks on the 
stage haven™t really died. They are 
pretending
 to die.  They have been trained to fall the 
right way, and without hurting themselves in the le
ast.  They have learned to appear to be 
run through by daggers, or to fall limp from poison
. 
 
But in real life, they don™t get up. The daggers wo
rk very well indeed. The poison is 
deadly. Our latter-day Romeos and Juliets do not st
art breathing again after the drive-by 
shooting or over-dose, after the explosion in the b
arracks, or after the mortal illness, 
which the insurance simply refused to cover, claims
 a young life. The curtain comes 
down, and does not go up again. Szymborska feels a 
hand at her throat because the 
theater of the world does not have that last act, t
he one when everyone stands up again.  
She is moved because, although the play tells the t
ruth about life as we know it, its last 
act, the curtain call if you will, seems to erase t
hat truth, or at least, hold it at bay. 
 
Yet the Easter stories claim to tell the same hard 
truths as any Shakespearian tragedy–
 betrayal, fear, injustice and unfair death–but then
 
surprises
 us by providing us with what 
it claims is a REAL honest-to-god curtain call. The
 story insists that its main character, 
killed in a most awful way, actually does stand up 
again on the stage of the world
.  
Anastasis
, the Greek word so clumsily translated as 
resurrection
, means just that–to 
stand up again. 

 
Like all those actors on the stage. 

 
However, there is a story in Matthew™s gospel which
 clearly suggests to me that Jesus™ 
?standing up? was not one of the visions of the dea
d that grieving people often see. Right 
at the moment Jesus dies, Matthew tells us, ?there 
was a great earthquake, and rocks were 
split apart,? he says, ?and tombs were opened, and 
many good people came out of their 

  tombs after Jesus™ resurrection, and went into the 
holy city where they appeared to 
many.? 

 
But please note that the very fact that these peopl
e were seen in the city is not put on a 
par with the first Easter experience. Matthew never
 asks us to see in this strange event 
more proof of some literal Easter story. Here™s why
, I think. 
 
I have been a minister for 30 years, and I tell you
 now that there are many people who 
have had visions, dreams, or other unusual experien
ces of the recently dead. I have heard 
this story in my office, or on walks, or on the pho
ne countless times. Beacon Press, our 
Association™s magnificent publishing house, just pu
t out a terrific book on the subject, 
Dreaming Beyond Death: A Guide to Pre-Death Dreams 
and Visions
, written by a 
mother-and-son team, the Bulkleys.  Ladosha Wright,
 the totally remarkable mother of 
my dear friend Devere whose Memorial was just a few
 weeks ago, had a dream, a vision, 
an out-of-the-body experience, call it what you wil
l–of Devere, along with her long 
passed father and a good friend. She saw them again
st a field of dark green with a deep 
blue sky-color behind them. It was comforting. And 
Devere said amazing things to her in 
this dream, holding a real conversation. But she wr
ites, ?I know science rules over my 
dream/out-of-the-body experience, but I must admit,
 I am pretty damned awestruck.?   
 
Exactly. This is why I don™t struggle against the v
isions of ordinary healthy men and 
women who come to me with these experiences. Arguin
g about neurons, endorphins, 
psychological grief, projection and all that stuff 
is completely beyond the point, as far as I 
am concerned. Experiences which bring out the griev
er™s awe and wonder, dreams which 
comfort with a deep green heaven, are gifts to leav
e us awestruck. 
 
Remain faithful to science, by all means. I am.  Bu
t remain faithful to your love and your 
grief too. You don™t have to file any experience yo
u have into some specific theological 
drawer in your head. You can just rejoice in the wo
nder of it. You don™t have to come to 
some particular ?ism? or some time-honored interpre
tation either. Being awestruck is its 
own reward, it seems to me. Experience can remain e
xperience.  You can reflect on it, 
sure, but you don™t have to come up with some theol
ogical notion to finalize an 
interpretation. I don™t think you have that power. 
As a Unitarian Universalist, I don™t 
think anything has that power. Ever. 

 
But the gospel of Matthew tells me that this kind o
f vision is NOT what it means when it 
speaks of the 
anastasis
, the resurrection, of Jesus. 
 
Let me make clear that 
anastasis
 doesn™t mean resuscitation either. There are two 
perfectly fine Greek words for reviving someone who
 is dead to literal life, namely
, zontanevo, anazoogono.
 But the gospels, all written in Greek, insist on u
sing a theatrical 
word that sounds like it belongs in a Szymborska po
em about ?slain? actors standing up 
on stage after the play is over. 

 
And long before Matthew, some 45 years before Matth
ew™s gospel in fact, you will find 
that no one was buying this resuscitation business.
 You can read about it in the First 

  Letter to the Corinthians, written by the much-misu
nderstood Paul of Tarsus. Paul claims 
he too had an Easter experience; and yet he didn™t 
even know the historic Jesus, nor had 
he even seen him. But he claims he saw a light whic
h knocked him off his high horse. 
But Paul is clearly horrified, and even a bit peeve
d, when anyone suggests he has 
witnessed some 
literal 
return of the dead to life. He insists that when we
 die, our natural 
body returns to nature (physis in Greek.) But the 
resurrection
, he says, is about what he 
calls a ?breath body,? (soma pneumatika) namely, a 
recognition that everyone alive, all 
who breathe, together make up a living, breathing, 
universal or 
spiritual
 body. Paul even 
went so far as to make it perfectly clear:  ?flesh 
and blood simply cannot inherit– 
imperishable life.?  

 
Yet so many simply ignore these clear texts.  The B
uddhist lama who spoke to Thomas 
Merton had himself heard this strange idea of  resu
scitation; and to him, this meant the 
Jesus was only some sort of zombie, a frightening c
reature that had to be ?sent away? by 
a powerful lama. I admit I was blown away that he h
ad no problem with the idea of a 
corpse coming to life; he just thought the fool thi
ng needed to be chased away.  
 
But instead of being defensive about this vast cult
ural difference and clear 
misunderstanding, Merton explained the Easter story
 in a way the other monk could 
understand, as the experience of complete freedom a
mong those who were committed to 
live with the kind of freedom Jesus brought to the 
living of 
his
 life. Namely: freedom 
from any law that doesn™t serve the common good; fr
eedom from trying to earn approval 
from any authority; freedom from the unquestioned b
ut rigid cultural and religious taboos 
that keep people apart and afraid of each other; fr
eedom from needing to have people 
agree with him and praise him; freedom from wanting
 to control how other people think; 
and freedom to make up his own mind. 

 
What this means to me is that anyone in this room c
an have, and, more significantly, can 
have had
, Easter experiences for themselves. Not something 
to be believed, passed down 
from an ancient book. Not something necessarily Chr
istian even. You certainly don™t 
have to believe that ancient stories are true in an
y particular or doctrinal way. As I say 
every year during the Seder, ?stories are true in t
he way stories are true.? (cf. E. Chartier/ 
Alain) You don™t have to believe that the crucified
 Jesus turned into something else any 
more that you are expected to believe that the unse
lfish mouse in our story this morning 
literally turned into an eagle and flew off. Storie
s are true in the way that they are true. 
You don™t have to be a Jesus lama like Merton; you 
could even be Buddhist or a Jew who 
rarely mentions Jesus; and, as I reported one year 
on this day, even a strong non-religious 
agnostic like Bertrand Russell once had a luminous 
experience that he claims tipped his 
life totally toward that kind of freedom, an experi
ence that in no way seems emotionally 
or effectively different than Paul of Tarsus being 
knocked off his horse by a bright 
insight, or Mary the Magdalene having a conversatio
n with a gardener in a cemetery that 
turned her life completely upside-down. 

 
Easter is 
not
 about what happened or didn™t happen to Jesus. Eas
ter is about what 
happens to us, to you and to me, when we are open t
o being restored to the deepest life 
within us. What Easter is about is not awe-inspirin
g visions of the recently dead, or some 

  wild resuscitation, but rather, it™s about somethin
g possible for everyone in this room. 
Over the years, many of you have told me, sometimes
 while trembling or even weeping, 
stories about facing great odds; and about how you 
faced them even though you were 
afraid; or you™ve told me about finding relationshi
ps that have transformed you; or 
getting 
out 
of relationships that were hurting you; or risking 
new and untested endeavors; 
or refusing to be defined by failures and grief–all
 of these are Easter stories, at least as 
far as I am concerned. They are 
one
 with the stories of Jesus or Martin Luther King Jr
., or 
Susan B. Anthony or Sojourner Truth. Each of them i
ndividuals who were trembling, and 
fallible, yet remarkably free. None of them got up 
from the stage of history after they fell 
and walked around again. Life may be a stage, as Sh
akespeare told us, but it is not 
literally a theater– the slain do not get up, catch
 bouquets and bow. 
 
But those of us, the living, who are lucky enough t
o hear the transformative Easter stories 
of the remarkably free: Jesus, or King, or Susan B.
 or Sojourner, along with so many 
others, 
are 
blest. If we allow ourselves to be moved by these s
tories beyond the safe 
edges of our own lives, and whenever we cross those
 edges, I say we can experience 
Easter first hand, not second hand by focusing on s
omeone else™s story instead of our 
own.  

 
And what if all of us who have experienced our own 
kind of Easter combined our efforts? 
I can only answer with the last line of David Maywh
oor™s beautiful poem: 
 
Be so many that one killed is no end
. 
 
Offering: 

Remembering that transformation is a constant deman
d, that growth of spirit and joy ask 
of us a certain generosity of heart, we set aside a
 time during each Sunday Celebration 
when the blessings which have sustained us become t
he blessings we share with our 
community. 

 
Flower Ceremony 
(adapted from Capek™s 1923 prayer) 
 
Minister: 
In the name of that Mystery which implants in the s
eed the future of the 
flower, and in our hearts, the longing for harmony 
and peace; 
 
East Voice 
In the name of the Most High and Most Deep, in whom
 we move and have 
our being, and who makes father and mother, brother
 and sister, lover and loner what 
they are; 

 
South Voice 
In the name of the sages and prophets who lived out
 their lives to hasten the 
coming of the age of mutual respect--- 

 
West Voice 
Let us renew our passion to find ways to be real br
others and sisters to each 
other, regardless of the kinds of barriers which tr
y to separate us, one from the other. 
 
North Voice 
In this holy resolve may we be strengthened, knowin
g that we are as one 

  family, the human family; that one spirit, the spir
it of life and love, unites us, and in that 
spirit, may we move toward a more just and joyful l
ife each and every day. 
 
Blessing
  
Be so many that one killed is no end 

Be so many places flowing like air  

Be so many thoughts kindling new ideas 

Be so many fibers in an impenetrable web 

 
 
A single soul leads a movement 

A single knowing soul is betrayed 

Always and say never again 

Be so many that one killed is no end 

 
