
  Let us seek each other in the villages of the earth,
  In the root, dark, where we live in the dust,
  Find us singing in the underground vein, 
  the germinal seed, in the returning sun;
  And bring our goodness to enormous, 
  fertile and perpetual harvest, toward zeniths of noon,
  toward total expansions in crops 
  of brotherhood and sisterhood.
  
  Let us await each other in the village field
  in the new year; 
  risen in ancestral dust, from the furrow,
  from the loom of the people where, amid lamentations
  we have loomed our life in pollen;
  where the leaves forgive the root
  and our children rise in perpetual sunrise, 
  in immense globular light.
  We await each other!
  
  The light returns on no enemy faces,
  but upon the communal chorus,
  roused in villages of the earth, 
  to cry salute and sing,
  Shout in choruses of millions,
  Rising toward communications, 
  toward extremities, nadirs?
  the entire solar light on all flesh,
  on all fields and all villages.
  Roused from sleep, rouse us,
  let us seek each other and move from the violent, 
  the broken, the predatory, to the enormous 
  and myriad fertile and impregnated harvest,
  the global village
  We sing with you in choruses of millions.

A RITUAL TO READ TO EACH OTHER

  If you don't know the kind of person I am
  and I don't know the kind of person you are
  a pattern that others made 
  may prevail in the world,
  and following the wrong god home,
  we may miss our star.
  
  For there is many a small betrayal in the mind,
  a shrug that lets the fragile sequence break
  sending with shouts 
  the horrible errors of childhood storming out 
  to play through the broken dike.
  
  And, as elephants parade 
  holding each elephant's tail, 
  (but if one wanders the circus won't find the park),
  I call it cruel and maybe the root of all cruelty
  to know what occurs but not recognize the fact.
  
  And so I appeal to a voice, 
  to something shadowy,
  a remote important region in all who talk:
  though we could fool each other, we should
  consider -lest the parade of our mutual life
  gets lost in the dark.
  
  For it is important that awake people be awake,
  or a breaking line may discourage them back to sleep;
  the signals we give - yes or no, or maybe -
  should be clear: the darkness around us is deep.
  

O Reality that no lie or deception
  may finally hide,
  blow in the wind that fills our sails
  rise in the sea that holds our barque afloat,
  move in the hands that interpret a service
  like water interprets a sunrise,
  or move in hands that join in
  a confluence of justice and peace.
  Roots of our heritage, quench our thirst;
  wings of our dreams, hold us safely
  high above the cataracts of our cynicism.
  But you, Love, be more than nourishment
  or image or metaphor; be our fidelity to
  honesty, our willingness to embrace
  conflict as an invitation to growth;
  be the comfort in our discomfort,
  the strength in our footing,
  the joy in our journey,
  the resolving chord in our song of life,
  the humility in our silence,
  the courage in our caring.Love, unite us in setting us free.

