   We Are Here Œ Van Jones 
August 26, 2012 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 Gathering, Welcoming, Centering, Kindling Opening: 

 
We are here 

in late August, in the city of Columbus, 

to celebrate this day and its possibilities, 

to feel what we sometimes push away 

to greet the unexpected with gladness, 

and to be together, not believe together. And so, 

 
Grounded in gratitude for the cosmos that is our ho
me, claiming deepening wisdom 
as our authority, and daring to engage joy, burden,
 loss and insight in a deliberate 
community of many ways and ages, the flame summons 
us to 
awaken
: to listen with 
our whole lives, to open, to serve. 

 
  

Ingathering:  
Goin' Someplace Special by Patricia McKinnick (abbr
eviated) 
  

Tricia Ann was about to burst with excitement!  Clo
sing her eyes and crossing her 
fingers, she blurted out, "Grandma, can I go to Som
ewhere Special by myself today? I 
know where to get off the bus and what streets to t
ake and all." 
 
Although it had another name, Tricia Ann always cal
led it Someplace Special because it 
was her favorite spot in the world. 

 
"Please! Pretty please with marshmallows on top?" 

 
Grandma laughed. "Ok, I trust you'll remember every
thing I told you." 
 
"I will, I will," Tricia Ann said. Then she grinned
.  "Oh you mean I can go?" 
 
"I reckon, but hurry up before I change my mind!" T
ricia Ann blew her grandmother a 
thank you kiss, then rushed out the door and down t
he sidewalk.  "And no matter what," 
her grandmother called after her, "hold your head u
p and act like you belong to 
somebody!" 

 
At the corner, the green and white bus came to a st
op and hissed. When the doors folded 
back, Tricia Ann bounded up the stairs and put in h
er coins. The she walked to the back, 
and took a seat behind the Jim Crow sign that said 
"Colored Section" Tricia Ann had seen 
such signs all of her life. Grandma used to say, "T
hose signs can tell us where to sit, but 
they can't tell us what to think!" 

   Pretty soon the whole back of the bus filled up, an
d there was no more room. Tricia Ann 
saw Mrs. Grinell with her shopping bag full, and go
t up and let her have a seat. There 
were lots of empty seats in front of the sign. 

 
"It™s not fair," she said to Mrs. Grinell.  "No, bu
t that's the way it is honey. Still, you carry 
yourself proud, OK?" Soon Tricia Ann got off the bu
s, right downtown. 
 
As she walked through the park on the way that led 
to Someplace Special, she saw a park 
bench with a sign on it. For Whites Only. Her face 
fell, and she suddenly wished her 
grandmother was with her. "Silly signs!" she though
t to herself. 
 
But all of this made Tricia Ann cry. The tears came
. She walked into a church garden so 
no one would see her cry. But Mary, the gardener, w
as there and said when she saw her, 
"My flowers have been watered already. Are you lost
, child?" 
 
Tricia Ann told her that she was going to Someplace
 Special, but that it was too hard. 
"I need my grandmother." 

 
Mary thought about this for a moment, and then said
: "Well I want you to listen carefully. 
I believe your grandmother IS here if you only list
en hard. My granny is here, I know. 
What do you hear, child?" 

 
She heard a bumblebee in the garden. But as she lis
tened, she began to hear her 
grandmother's steady voice inside her heart. "You a
re somebody, child. A human being 
no better or worse than anybody else in this world.
 Getting Someplace Special is not an 
easy route. But don't quit! Just keep on walking fo
rward and you'll make it." 
 
"My grandmother is here!" said Tricia to Mary, the 
gardener.  
 
"So you are not lost!" "No ma'am, I not." And with 
that, she left the garden, real 
determined-like, on her way. 

 
At the corner, Tricia Ann saw the building rising a
bove her. It was beautiful in the late 
summer sun. It was more than bricks and stone. It w
as an idea. Grandmother called it 
"The doorway to freedom."  When she looked at it sh
e didn't feel angry or embarrassed. 
"At last," she said aloud, "I've made it to Somepla
ce Special. Before bounding up the 
stairs she stopped to look up at the message carved
 in stone above the front door: 
PUBLIC LIBRARY ALL ARE WELCOME 

 
Sequence 

 
So, for now at least, 

let™s open our fists and reveal our palms 

to the world, to the air, to ourselves. 

Breathe out, breathe in. 

So, for now at least, let's breathe out the 

   painful words of both this political season and thi
s past week. 
Let us breathe out the paralyzing resentment 

that may be clogging our spiritual arteries 

when men in power dismiss the lives of women, 

and just breathe in the molecules of the air 

in this room, molecules that may have once flowed t
hrough the bodies of Marie Curie, 
Margaret Fuller, Emma Goldman, Helen Keller, and El
eanor Roosevelt. 
So, for now at least,  

let our breathing be steady, our whole lives 

be present in this moment and this moment only. 

Let's put aside our worries and personal stories fo
r a moment, and let the world spin 
without us in the infinite awesome silence of the c
osmos as it has been spinning without 
us for four and a half billion years. Let us releas
e ourselves for a time into the emblem of 
that silence, here, now, in this room. 

 
silence 

 
Returning to our personal stories, may we release o
ur individual details into this precious 
common moment of our lives in community, naming or 
envisioning in our hearts all 
those we love, who love us, all those who worry us,
 or for whom we feel sympathy, all 
those we find hard to love, and those whom we remem
ber in grief and with gratitude. 
 
naming 

 
Having kept silence with all that is, having named 
the meanings of personal lives, we 
now proceed through the gates of beauty and harmony
 that open onto the mindful 
morning. 

  

Bulgarian Song 

  

The First Reading 
is from Julia Vinograd, of Berkeley CA.  I've quote
d her many times 
and always get good comments about her wry words. I
t™s called American Dream.  Hear 
these words: 

 
I™ve been trying to remember America 

when Walter Cronkite of the handsome white hair was
 president 
and there weren™t any politicians. 

When fireworks and immigration were both legal; 

we 
wanted
 everyone to want us, 
it proved we were the best. 

I held a sparkler, the Statue of Liberty held a tor
ch, 
I expected my light to grow into hers. 

I remember when boys who wore baseball caps 

played baseball. 

There were maps full of geography 

but they were the past. 

   We had fast food, fast cars and movies 

of the slowest kiss in the world, 

the one that™s still going on  

but I can™t see it anymore.  

America.  I grew up believing it worked 

even though it didn™t work for me. 

Like all the sad housewives  

sure their neighbors™ marriages were happy, 

watching afternoon soaps in empty houses 

with the blinds pulled down. 

It might even be better now 

in the dark where nothing works. 

We™re all scared and the birthday cards 

painted on the sky peeled off long ago. 

No more pretending. 

Everything™s broken from promises to plumbing, 

it™s not just us anymore. 

 
The Second Reading
 is from the Summer Common Read of our congregation
, by Van 
Jones, called Rebuild the Dream. Many of us read th
e book and were deeply impressed 
by its practical wisdom. Hear these words: 

 
In essence, we are standing up for ?liberty and jus
tice for all.?  And many of us take that 
?for all? part pretty seriously.  We don™t mean ?li
berty and justice for all,? 
except
 for 
those lesbians, gays, bisexuals, and transgender pe
ople.  We don™t mean ?for all,? 
except
 for those immigrants or those Muslims.  We don™t me
an ?for all,? 
except
 for those Asian 
Americans, African Americans, Native Americans, or 
Latinos.  We don™t mean ?for all,? 
except
 for those women.  We don™t mean ?for all,? 
except
 for those Appalachians and 
rural poor.  We don™t mean ?for all,? 
except
 for the elderly or the disabled.  We don™t 
mean ?for all,? 
except
 for the afflicted, addicted or convicted.  When we
 say ?liberty and 
justice for all,? we really mean it. 

 
We have a long way to go.  In this age of polarizat
ion, one political extreme pretends that 
we already have obliterated every vestige of bigotr
y and bias.  The opposite extreme, 
meanwhile, insists that we have not made an inch of
 progress in one hundred years. 
Neither camp is being honest.  There was much to ov
ercome, and much work remains to 
be done.  But our ancestors™ sacrifices and struggl
es were not in vain.  We are a better, 
more inclusive nation today than we were in 1900 or
 1950 or even 1980.  And we will be 
still more so, thirty years hence. 

 
In America, we honor the past Œ good, bad, and othe
rwise.  And yet we place our faith in 
the future.  We should never deny the pain of yeste
rday.  But we should never let that 
pain have the last word, either. 

 
The future is worth fighting for. The time has come
 for the next generation to step 
forward. 

   Sermon
  
When I was a child, the world, depicted with astoni
shing nostalgia by Julia Vinograd, 
was what I remember. 
We wanted people to want us
, she writes in her poem 
American 
Dream
.  We were the best country on Earth, and people fl
ocked here to live out great 
lives on our nation's shores. Trusted Walter Cronki
te delivered the news while actually 
being moved by what he was saying. I love it when V
inograd writes 
I remember when 
boys who wore baseball caps played baseball.  We ha
d fast food, fast cars and movies 
of the slowest kiss in the world.  

 
When I was a child, I remember writhing through tho
se kisses myself when I was her 
age. And, although I wasn't as much into baseball a
s my brother was, I do think Vinograd 
is right. Back in those days, guys who wore those c
aps weren't making a popular fashion 
statement, they actually played baseball! 

 
And, when I was a child, like most of you in this p
lace, the teacher would have us stand 
up in home-room every morning, place our hands on o
ur hearts, and say the Pledge of 
Allegiance, surely one of the very first things I e
ver memorized. Wanna say it with me? 
 
"I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United Stat
es of America. And to the republic for 
which it stands, one nation, under God, indivisible
, with liberty and justice for all." 
 
The pledge was first composed in1892 by a fellow na
med Robert Bellamy, who 
published it in a youth magazine. It very quickly b
ecame the thing to say whenever a flag 
was present for adults as well as for youth. Here i
s exactly what he wrote Œ note, not 
exactly what we just said:  

 
"I pledge allegiance to my Flag and the Republic fo
r which it stands, one nation, 
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all." 

 
Two phrases were added later. The simple phrase "to
 my flag" was replaced by the longer 
"the flag of the United States of America." And dur
ing the heyday of the McCarthy anti-
communist scare in 1954, when I was but 5 years old
, Dwight Eisenhower had congress 
add "under God," to which, I must add, Robert Bella
my's daughter greatly objected.  
 
Originally, there was a kind of choreography requir
ed when you said the pledge. You put 
your hand over your heart first, and then, when you
 got to the word "flag," you put out 
your right hand, palm down and raised high to salut
e the flag. This gesture was removed 
when folks in our country began to realize it was t
oo close to the Nazi salute made 
popular by Adolph Hitler. 

 
This morning I am going to reflect on the book Rebu
ilding the Dream
, by Anthony Kapel 
Jones, who now always goes by his nickname Van. Van
 Jones. It™s a book we here at first 
UU asked people to read if they had a chance this s
ummer. Don't worry, if you didn't read 
it, everything is OK. You'll find the essence of wh
at Dr. Jones wrote tucked away in my 
sermon. 

    
Now, earlier this year, I had the great privilege o
f meeting Van Jones. He had given a 
speech at a two-day conference I attended, sponsore
d by Ohio State's most remarkable 
Kirwin Institute. I was mesmerized by his talk, as 
was everyone else present. After lunch, 
I waited to talk with him so I could thank him. Dr.
 Jones had mentioned Theodore Parker 
in his speech, the 19th century Unitarian minister 
from whom Abraham Lincoln 
borrowed and adapted the phrase "of the people, by 
the people, for the people" in his 
Gettysburg address. 

 
I thanked him. I said to him, "As a present day Uni
tarian Universalist minister in the 
tradition of Theodore Parker, I want to thank you f
or mentioning the Unitarian source of 
Lincoln's great phrase. Not many people bring that 
up, for fear of even suggesting that 
Lincoln cribbed something he did not write."  "Yes,
" he said, "but Lincoln didn't quote it 
exactly. He edited it. What Parker wrote is that ou
rs is a government "of 
all
 the people, 
by 
all
 the people, for 
all
 the people." For some reason, Lincoln removed the 
"all."  
 
"Yes," I said, "I thought of that too when you spok
e of the Pledge of Allegiance. It struck 
me forcibly when you mentioned that modern Tea Part
y pundits only quote the word 
liberty
 from the pledge. They say they want liberty from t
axes, liberty from federal 
government influence, and especially in these last 
few months, liberty from President 
Obama. But then, with a one-two punch during your s
peech, you simply pointed out that 
the word 
liberty
 in the pledge does not stand alone, but is bound u
p completely with five 
other words: 
with liberty and justice for all.
"  
 
"Yes," he responded, "six words that cannot be prie
d apart. Without liberty there is no 
justice, without justice there is no liberty...and 
if it™s not for all of us, then what of it?" 
 
"Right!" I concluded. 

 
We both went our separate ways then, but the conver
sation has stuck with me. 
 
Liberty and justice for 
all.
 Of 
all
 the people, by 
all
 the people, for 
all
 the people
.  
 
When I was reading his remarkable book this summer,
 I was deeply affected by his 
practicality, his concrete programs rooted in value
s that are central to my vision for my 
own country. I was touched by his reclaiming of the
 word patriotism, a most difficult 
thing to do when folks on the right these days blas
t everything they don't approve of as 
Un-American, and think that settles it once and for
 all. 
 
But, even though he is referring to the pledge of a
llegiance obliquely, it's Dr. Jones' 
remarkable litany toward the end of his book that r
eally lifted up the conversation we had 
at the Kirwin conference.  

 
In essence, we are standing up for ?liberty and jus
tice for all.?  And many of us take that 
?for all? part pretty seriously.  We don™t mean ?li
berty and justice for all,? except for 
those lesbians, gays, bisexuals, and transgender pe
ople.  We don™t mean ?for all,? except 

   for those immigrants or those Muslims.  We don™t me
an ?for all,? except for those Asian 
Americans, African Americans, Native Americans, or 
Latinos.  We don™t mean ?for all,? 
except for those women.  We don™t mean ?for all,? e
xcept for those Appalachians and 
rural poor.  We don™t mean ?for all,? except for th
e elderly or the disabled.  We don™t 
mean ?for all,? except for the afflicted, addicted 
or convicted.  When we say ?liberty and 
justice for all,? we really mean it. 

 
Like Tricia Ann in this morning story, Jones is tal
king about finding a way to get to 
Someplace Special, where all are welcome no matter 
who they are. 
 
But how do we get there? What vehicle will get us t
here? Do we have walk all the way? 
Crawl? 

 
In the story this morning, Tricia Ann takes a bus, 
because the library is too far to walk. In 
the bus 

there is a sign telling her to sit in the crowded b
ack because of her skin color. 
 
Was the bus something bad? No. The vehicle worked j
ust fine. It got her to where she 
needed to get off to walk the rest of the way. And 
got her there efficiently. 
 
But the journey in the vehicle was tainted by the c
ruelty of the sign. It was 1955, when 
Tricia Ann took that bus. Back when boys who wore b
aseball caps actually played 
baseball, when the fast food was taking over, and t
he kisses were long; back when the 
white picket fences around charming houses supplied
 the nostalgia images that still 
seduce many a modern American,  progressive and Tea
 Partier alike, things were not all 
good. The busses and park benches and drinking foun
tains had awful signs back then, and 
people of color were kept away from the ballot box.
 Vehicles, like busses in the South, 
that went from place to place, actually went nowher
e ethically and morally speaking. 
This is why the psychiatrist who supplied the words
 for our affirmation this morning 
wrote the words we spoke earlier:  

Nostalgia is the enemy of hope. A more realistic vi
ew envisions the past as the theater of 
experience, some good, some bad, and opens up the p
ossibility of growth and change. 
 
But it was not all bad. Tricia Ann did indeed exper
ience good things in 1955:  her 
grandmother's wise words telling her she was someon
e important, the people in the back 
of the bus who invited her not to 
be
 put down when she was put down, Mary in the 
garden who offered a shoulder for her tears, and an
ger, and of course, that Someplace 
Special, the library where 
all were welcome
...these were the good things, worthy of a 
healthy nostalgia, worthy of rebuilding. 

 
But Tricia Ann also experienced bad things: exclusi
on, categorization, rejection, hurt and 
self righteousness from those around her. The bad e
xperiences of 1955 invite the twisted 
nostalgia of many modern Tea Party folks, and no on
e needs to rebuild those experiences, 
or take a bus with nasty signs and scowls from the 
front. 
 
   Dr. Martin Luther King had those experiences too...
remember, he was a child once. And 
from his experience and the experience of those lik
e him the "possibility of growth and 
change" opened up. The sit ins. The marches. The le
tters.  The speeches. Ballots in the 
box. Girls in the school. The whole world beginning
 to change into Someplace Special 
for ALL people. 

 
Even Julia Vinograd's poem admits this truth about 
nostalgia (back in 1955):  
America. I 
grew up believing that it worked, but it did not wo
rk for me.
 She too witnessed the drama 
being played out in the theater of experience, the 
good and the bad. And clearly her poem 
suggests that the good things from her nostalgia dr
eam might be rebuilt, but this time, it 
had better include her, a disabled poet in her sixt
ies who was Tricia Ann's age in 1955.  
 
This is why Van Jones talks about looking for a veh
icle to take us to a place, Someplace 
Special, where we can start to rebuild the good par
ts of the American Dream:  the sense 
of liberty and justice for all, the anger, the enco
uragement. He wants us to find a vehicle 
to take us to our common future, but a vehicle with
out signs. A bus without a place in 
back and a place in front that are different. He wa
nts everyone on the bus in all parts of 
the bus, as we rebuild the good dreams of Tricia An
n's loving grandmother and friends:  
"You ARE somebody!" 

 
In his book he describes the vehicles we have to ta
ke to get to the Special Place where 
dreams really can be rebuilt. He offers us clear co
ncrete ways to get big money out of our 
election process, as we bring reforms in. He invite
s us to overturn the ?Citizens United? 
Ruling and offers us practical steps to do so. He i
nvites us to put lobbyists on a leash, to 
reform campaign finances step by concrete step. He 
invites us to fix the filibuster and 
increase transparency and accountability in this go
vernment that is "of all the people, by 
all the people and for all the people." Jones calls
 us as a nation to create 21st century 
energy jobs, as well as a Green economy. He calls u
s to invest in our crumbling infra-
structure, secure Social Security, offer Medicare f
or all, invest in Public Education, tax 
Wall Street speculation and strengthen our democrac
y with clean, fair elections. All of 
these are efficient vehicles for rebuilding a dream
 for all, not some, everyone not a few. 
 
All of these vehicles can take us to Someplace Spec
ial, our great future, where we shall 
live for the rest of our lives, and not the past fo
r which we sometimes feel nostalgia.  
 
The phrase "liberty and justice for all" is not jus
t a memorized phrase to begin a grammar 
school home room period. It™s the very summary of w
hat Julia Vinograd, Van Jones, Dr. 
Gordon Livingston, and you and I can rightly call t
he American Dream without 
embarrassment. 

 
And, as Dr. Livingston wrote, and as I believe, "ou
r best days 
are 
ahead, not behind!" 
 
Offering 

 
To give of our livelihoods during the morning offer
ing is to form a circle with the world 
that gave us our lives, and this religious communit
y which nurtures our spirit and our 

   vision, and calls us to our mission. We therefore n
ow make that circle and give and 
receive the morning offering. 

 
Affirmation of Life 

 
These word were written by my good friend Andrzej B
aranski, who grew up in Costa 
Rica, with a Polish father and Costa Rican mother. 
 He has been thinking about his own 
theology and life recently, and he shared with me t
hese beautiful words, which he wrote 
in Spanish and then translated for me in English. H
e gave his permission for me to use 
these words today with you.  

 
A New Way 
    Un Nueva Camino 
1.
 Voy a enfrentar el presente con mi corazón. Voy a d
ejar que mis emociones y 
sentimientos florezcan con sinceridad y así podré e
xperimentar la plenitud de 
vivir. 
2.
 Buscaré lo mejor en los demás, y seré un instrument
o que entone notas de 
esperanza y amor. 
3.
 Mis acciones y palabras serán medidas con la regla 
de oro. 
4.
 El pasado será fuente de inspiración y meditación, 
habrá gratitud y cambios 
positivos en el presente,  
5.
 con los cuales construiré un mejor futuro viviendo 
cada día a la vez. 
 1.
 I will engage the present with all of my heart.  
 
2.
 I will let my emotions and feelings burgeon sincere
ly in order the experience the 
fullness of life. 
 3.
 I will see the best in other people and will be an 
instrument that plays a tune of 
hope and love. 
 
4.
 My words and actions will be measured by the Golden
 Rule. 
 5.
 The past will be a source of inspiration and medita
tion; gratitude will induce 
positive decisions in the present with which I will
 build a better future one day at 
a time. 

