 1 2004-2-1  Blues Without Music   Mark Belletini and Wendy Fish  Opening Words  We are here as human persons, winter blossoms rising up on this vast and mysterious earth, our home, to worship, to search, celebrate, long and leap that we might strengthen ourselves for service to our lovely, yet unraveling,  planet.   And so, united in the Spirit of Life, we say:   May we live fully, love deeply, learn daily and speak truly that we might together leave the  sacred legacy of a better world  Sequence  There are red rocks in the Gobi desert  I will never see,  and blue waves near the Seychelles Islands  I will never gaze upon. Songs are now being sung in a café in Singapore  which will never dance in my heart.  Rice cakes eaten yesterday by Ainu grandmothers on the northernmost island of Japan will never cross my lips. The earthy scent of the dark mushrooms  growing in some of the forests of the Andes will never melt on my tongue. The texture of Van Gogh™s painting the Potato Eaters, in Amsterdam, will never be rough under my roving fingertips. My feet will never walk over Superbowl fields. My sigh will never be heard at the North Pole. 
 2 The world is mostly outside me. It™s bigger than me, greater than I am. It™s unaware of me speaking here, and I will never know more than a million millionth part of it.  I know I am not the highest power in the cosmos, the most knowing, or the best. I am simply me. And others are who they are.And together, each of us, small fragments of a great whole, make the world. No one is really alone, even if they feel lonely. All of us are together, different, yet woven intricately into the whole. Each one doing our part and no more. Each, one facet of reality, no more. Each one important and no less.  Come, silence, and bless us with a sense of our intrinsic worth.   silence  We can bless the hearts that are joined to our own in this great weaving called reality. We name them aloud or quietly, the hearts we love, the hearts who make us whole, the hearts whose brokenness reminds us of our own.  
We bless them with our remembrance.  naming  Sometimes we are lonesome. Sometimes we are not. But always the music opens our hearts.  Readings  The First Reading comes from Martha Manning™s book Undercurrents: A Therapist™s Reckoning with Her Own Depression, 1994. The book is a diary of sorts, and I found it an excellent and humane treatment of the subject.  My husband Brian has been much more honest with me since we™ve been back. He doesn™t bite his lip anymore and swallow what he feels. He says he misses the fun, the spontaneity. He says I don™t initiate anything any more. I wish I could say, ?He™s insensitive and wrong.? But I can™t. It™s enough just to speak when spoken to, to give up some minimal reaction to a stimulus. But to actually be the stimulus doesn™t occur to me. 
 3  I look at other people and think, ?He lives without meds. She does. What is wrong with me? Am I so bio-chemically screwed up, so neurotic, so narcissistically self-absorbed that every hour is an obstacle course for me?? I don™t know, but this can™t continue. I feel like I am dying. And the worst thing is that I am taking other people along for the ride. But I swear, I don™t know how to do it differently.   The Second Reading is one of the greatest poetic descriptions of depression ever written. Shakespeare puts these words in the mouth of Hamlet himself, while talking to Rosencrantz and Guildenstern They are so well written one wonders if the Bard himself had first hand experience with depression.  Although the play ?Hamlet? is difficult to date, the commonly asserted date is 1600. Some of you my age may remember that these words were turned into a beautiful song in the famous musical HAIR.   I have of late-- but wherefore I know not-- lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercises, and indeed, it goes so heavily with my disposition, that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most excellent canopy, the air, look you! This brave o™er-hanging firmament  fretted with golden fire, why, it appeareth nothing to me but a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours.   Sermon  When I attended that conference in Germany last fall, a kind woman there invited me to stay in her guestroom in Wiesbaden the night before my early morning flight back to the States, because she conveniently lived a mere 25 minute train ride to the Frankfort Airport.  As she offered me a tour of her most futuristic house, we walked through her home office, where she works. In it was a huge Light Box, one of those new inventions that radiates the pure spectrum of sunlight into a dark room.   
 4 I commented on the large fixture and its soothing light. She said to me ?Oh, they are required here in Germany for all indoor work during the winter. They really cut down on the effects of winter depression, and the government knows that happier people improve production. I really like them. You have no idea how gloomy Germany can get in the winter.?  ?Believe me,? I said to her. ?I™m from Ohio, and we can compete with Germany anytime in the gray and bleak winter department.?  I told her then of a former ministerial intern who now lives in Stockholm. She and her husband tried to get through their first dark winter there American-style, that is, braving the three PM sunsets and 9 AM sunrises with that ?lift yourself up by your own bootstraps? mentality. The next year, she told me, they came to their senses and started taking the same temporary anti-depressant medication that most everyone else in Sweden takes now in the winter, as a matter of course. It really cuts down on their high alcoholism rate, she tells me.  These two anecdotes are a small sample, to be sure, but it seems to me that the Europeans have a more practical attitude toward depression than you find here in the States. This practical attitude may be based on something as simple as the fact that few Europeans are as conventionally religious as the average American. And thus, instead of separating the human person into two distinct pieces–mind and body, flesh and spirit– most Europeans that I know tend to see human persons as whole, united, spirit and flesh being simply two of many metaphors to describe the unique mystery of the human person. They respond to winter depression, a difficulty linked to the diminished sunlight of the season, with practical means–a gentle mood lifter and a light box.  This practical attitude is more difficult to find in the United States. So very often I hear people speaking of the mind as if it were a ghost taking up residence in the brain, body and environment. They speak as if the mind was in control of everything in the body. They speak as if it should be able to be agreeable at all times, no matter what juices are flowing through it. No matter what experiences are bludgeoning the person™s spirit. I hear folks 
 5 speaking as if any experience of depression is something of a deep embarrassment, a weakness, a brokenness, even a failure of nerve.  I™d like to speak against such an attitude. I™d like to suggest that my European friends are correct to see the human person as a unity of body and psyche, environment and heritage. I™d like to suggest that some forms of depression are ordinary and sensible responses to realities physical and spiritual and environmental. Yes, some make it through the dark winter without being depressed, but some do not. The lack of light affects them bodily, and thus mentally. It seems senseless to say it shouldn™t be so. It is so. So I say, treat it the way the Swedes treat it–with sensible help to the body and brain.   But winter depression is not the only kind of depression, and rarely is it as serious as other kinds. Over my 25 years in the ministry, people have come to me to talk about their deeper depressions.   Now again, sometimes it™s clear to me right off that their depression is a direct result of some brain area functioning out of synch. It™s immediately apparent that only medication or other physical means have any real chance of alleviating the depression, and that I need to send them to a qualified medical professional.  But at other times, the depression clearly is a response to difficult situations which impact them. A person comes to me and says, ?I lost my job last week, my best friend died two weeks ago, and my spouse filed for divorce three weeks ago. I™m depressed.?   I find myself wanting to say, ?Well, I would hope so.? What other response can a sane person expect? To be hit so hard by so many crises in so short of time is BIG. Really BIG.  I often eventually do say to people in such a situation,  ?Look, if a boxer carved out of three hundred pounds of muscle hauls back and punches you in the face without his glove on, please, please have the sense to fall over.   Don™t pretend you weren™t hit. Don™t deny that it was devastating. And for Heaven™s sake, pay no attention to the well-
 6 meaning but foolish folks around you who want you just to buck up, pull yourself up by your own bootstraps and get over it all in two days or less.?  I really don™t see any easy outs or simple answers to swiftly rescue someone from such a tidal wave of difficulties. I see no reason not to be overwhelmed by such events. I lost my best friend to death, my partner in life to separation and my second best friend to an alcohol binge,  all within three months. Believe me, depression was the only response that made any sense to me. All I could do was to slowly, but slowly, shudder back into consciousness, finger my broken jaw, find my shaky balance and oh-so-carefully stand up again to face life anew as best as I could. I did it at my own pace, not anyone else™s pace. I didn™t feel I owed anyone speediness in my recovery from the dismal state of my depression.  In fact, such transformations out of depression are usually slow and painstaking. Recovery comes one step at a time. I think of the girl in the children™s story this morning whose precious blanket unraveled itself. The loss of her blanket upset her, made her cry even, but nonetheless she retraced her path, step by step, to pick up the pieces of her blanket, or her unraveled self, if you will. Note she did not let the cynical taunts of ?cry-baby? keep her from her task. Nor did her frayed blanket look like a blanket by the time she had gathered up the length of the yarn that made it. It was now a ball, a sphere, the symbol of wholeness–her life looked different afterward.  So did mine, frankly, so did mine.  As far as I am concerned, there is no way to get through life without depression, sometime or another. Difficulties do bunch up sometimes. It™s the way the world seems to work. Nothing orderly, neat, fair. Difficulties, troubles, sorrow, and pain are simply part and parcel with life.  This is hardly news. Buddha said that 2500 years ago. And Jesus told disturbing fables about this reality 2000 years ago.   
 7 But look, I know. There is depression and there is depression. Deep or clinical depression is not when blankets unravel, it™s when lives unravel. It is not based on your situation, it™s based on your physiology. It™s when you don™t want to sing at all, even the blues. Clinical depression is the blues without any music at all.  In Shakespeare™s observation–deep, non-situational depression is a state without joy (?I lost all my mirth,? says Hamlet), a time where even our ?custom of exercises? falls by the wayside– our ordinary daily habits of grooming and self-care is what he means. It™s a state where the earth and sky around us are no longer our comfortable home, but ?foul and pestilent.? Everything is negative, without invitation. We feel like we are, in classic biblical language, ?aliens in an alien land.? We often just want to be left alone.  This is the kind of depression that is most often treated with medication, or even stronger means.  Dr. Martha Manning, for example, in her autobiography of her depression, admits that the only thing that actually set her free from years of depression was electro-convulsive therapy. Yet even though this technique set her free, her friends lined up to criticize her decision. They told her that such therapy was medieval and cruel. (In fairness, fifty years ago, it probably was more medieval than it is now.) But she had to defend her own new health at such a cost by saying to her critics, ?So, when electric paddles revive a stopped heart, it™s a miracle to be celebrated, but when electrical means are used to revive a stopped brain, I™ve done something terrible??  (Did you hear that? There™s that old ?bootstrap? philosophy surfacing again. Her friends were basically saying to her, ?Don™t use whatever means necessary to return to joy–just toughen up and pick yourself up with your ghost of a mind. This is not about wholeness, after all, it™s about character. You should be able to overcome this without electric help. Just will it.?)  Dr. Manning had tried medication, and, ultimately, it didn™t work. That™s true for some people, sadly. We are, after all, only at the very beginning of such medical exploration. But Manning also well expresses the quandary 
 8 many depressed folks feel when they are given meds. She writes: ?I look at other people and think, ‚He lives without meds. She does.™ What is wrong with me? Am I so bio-chemically screwed up, so neurotic, so narcissistically self-absorbed that every hour is an obstacle course for me? I don™t know, but this can™t continue. But I swear, I don™t know how to do it differently.?  These powerful words show the theological confusion that is so prevalent in America, the theological confusion I alluded to at the beginning of this sermon. People feel like they are ?screwed up,? or self-absorbed if they can™t pull themselves up by their own bootstraps, and simply will their depression away, or scare it away with some manly, or womanly scowl. This is simply the ?sin and redemption? model of American Protestant religion translated into psychological terms, and I stand against it. A seriously depressed person is not best described as ?screwed up,? or narcissistic. A seriously depressed person is just that, a person, a whole person like everyone else. To use a rather obvious metaphor (takes off his glasses), I am not less worthy than a person who has no need for glasses. My eyes are shaped the way they are, but that shape does not diminish me. I say, thank Heaven I can wear glasses to make my vision clear. Please don™t describe me as a person with ?bad? eyes. Describe me as a person.   And a deeply depressed person is not ?at fault? for his or her depression. No one has ?sinned? against the world, or failed at character. They are simply persons whose brains are functioning in a way that prevents them from experiencing the fullness of life.  We moderns are not as good at medications as we are at glasses–I freely admit that. But we have made tremendous progress in the last ten years. And yes, I know some doctors are too quick to medicate, or over medicate. I have heard those stories. But such realities do not translate that all medication needs to be thrown out the window into the nearest snow bank.  And certainly, no system of recovery works for everyone the same way–that™s just foolish thinking. We are all different in the bio-chemistry department. 
 9   So what I am saying is that there are two basic kinds of depression. Situational, including winter depression, and organic. Both can be alleviated by a combination of factors, medical, spiritual, situational, and social.   However, sometimes depression is not really depression per se. Sometimes, in world that welcomes expressions of grief even less that it welcomes the gloom of depression, depression sometimes functions primarily as a code word for grief.  Wendy:  On a hot day in mid-September, 1996, I stood at my mother Selma™s grave and delivered her eulogy.  Writing a eulogy is both a privilege and a challenge under ordinary circumstances. But it™s exceedingly hard when you yourself are grieving.  I hadn™t slept much in the last days of her life, and sleep didn™t come easily right after her death, either.  I had little appetite.  These things didn™t help my concentration, but the truth of the matter was that I was really absorbed with my thoughts of my mother, our family, what was lost, and I had little space in my brain to think of much else. Writing about my mother™s life gave me some focus.  What gave me comfort was the presence of close friends and loved ones who listened, reassured me, and tenderly touched me, hugged me, stayed nearby.  I remember that graveside ritual with vividness, the blueness of the sky, the silver gray wisps of clouds that offered relief from the noon-day sun, the ashen look of my father who had just celebrated the anniversary of fifty years of marriage with the woman we were burying.  Three generations huddled close to face this particular ending in our lives, and loved ones with no blood ties were there, too.  We remade our sense of family in that day ripe with intense loss.  When prayers were said, tributes paid, death™s finality acknowledged, and ample memories shared, the rabbi who was officiating lined up family members by intimacy of connection, in two rows facing one another.  One by one we walked through this honor guard of love.  It was then that my tears flowed in earnest.  
 10 Grief resulting from the loss of a beloved person often makes itself known through tears.  But sometimes grief resulting from life™s losses gets expressed as guilt or anger. That™s harder to recognize as grief.  Maybe someone you know well is unusually disorganized, starting one task only to leave it to start another, completing nothing. Maybe you, or someone you love, can™t focus on anything for any length of time.  That, too, may be a sign of grief work, of a mind being preoccupied, acknowledging change.  It™s not always apparent when someone™s heart is heavy from sadness and loss.  It was easy as my mother was lowered in her grave to name this as a loss, to know up close my intense grief.  But other losses are not as specific, not as straightforward. We mourn for the loss not only of people we love, and the endings of relationships, but also other losses: loss of health, loss of employment, loss of social roles or status, loss of opportunities, and loss of valued objects. And this is a very short list, as you may imagine.    People who are bearing the burden of sorrow, the challenge of loss, appreciate others who can make it safe to grieve whether that expression is 
loud or quiet, demonstrative or not.  People who are grieving often need to share memories, talk about the implications of the loss, the future.  That™s what I needed after my mother died.  And I needed time to collapse, do nothing and sleep, to admit to my utter exhaustion.  I needed quiet time to process the feelings of connection I had to what I felt was inexpressibly holy, to what I named then, and name now, as God. To make sense of my mother™s life and her death, I needed to feel my deep connected-ness.  Supporting someone who is grieving, or someone who is depressed is easier for some than for others.  And when the grieving or depression is sustained over a long period, it™s challenging, indeed. But it™s important to remember that grief only disguises itself as depression, and depression is sometimes only a code word for grief, as Mark said. The two are different, even though, on the surface, they appear to overlap a lot.. In my family of origin, we learned ways to be with my mother who was clinically depressed for more than three decades.  It wasn™t easy.  Much of her focus was on herself; a lot of her thinking was negative thinking, about herself, about the world around her, and the future.  Despair permeated her words, her ways.  She slowed down from the mother who took me into Filene™s Basement to hunt 
 11 for bargains and who moved from one display to another so fast I could barely keep her in sight. Her whole being slowed down, emotionally, intellectually, and physically.  As a young mother, I turned to Selma, my mother, as a resource for the thousands of questions that are so common for first-time mothers.  What I remember most is her saying, ?I don™t know–ask someone else.?  I could understand ?I don™t remember.? But her frequent response was, ?Don™t ask me? that was different, a sign of her diminished self-esteem, her self-doubt.  My mother™s clinical depression, her complex mood disorder, didn™t respond well to the medications available in her day. All of us who loved her were disappointed that that was true for her.  Today, with the wonders of new clinical advances, many people find real relief from clinical depression. But not everyone. And often not for all time, so that, commonly, medications need updating over time.    However, relief from grief-generated situational depression sometimes results from actually facing and naming what we™ve lost. Relief comes from reaching out to community or connecting with friends.  This naming and these connections can be significant turning points. They do not work as often for those that are clinically depressed, however. That™s where talk of medication begins.  I™ve talked about my grief, and my mother™s depression, and tried to show how they looked similar in some ways, but were fundamentally different. And my story or Mark™s story are just two among the countless stories we could share from just those gathered here, today. In fact, all of human history itself is filled with evidence of human depression.     Mark:   Depression does not hit any particular class of people, any particular gender or skin color or age. It is universal. It™s found in every culture, class and character.  
 12 And please note that depressed people are often able, nevertheless, to function at a high level. Winston Churchill, whose famous and brooding portrait is on the cover of your Order of Celebration, is a case in point. He was often deeply depressed. And yet he powerfully led a nation in an horrific age of war. Or think of Florence Nightingale, who tended the sick and yet remained depressed much of her life. Or remember Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States, who used to hide out in his office and bolt the door for days at a time. Remember his wife, Mary Todd Lincoln, for that matter, who suffered more from depression than even her husband.   Because depressed people can often function so well, their suffering is often overlooked. Even, sometimes, by themselves. People will tell me ?Oh, I™m not depressed? when a thousand of the  signals of depression, many of which Wendy and I have tried to describe, are waving like pennants over their heads. They have somehow learned to cover it all up. My guess is that it™s to spare themselves the shame offered them by our unsophisticated, often judgmental, and most uncompassionate society   But I say it™s better to face one™s depression, of any and every kind, and admit it and work on alleviating its pains, than to simply live a competent but gray life without any real joy. Medically, socially, spiritually–in any way possible. I used therapy to help me cope with my situational depression. Others use medication for their clinical depression, or Light Boxes for their winter depression. But I assure you that most often, something can be done to restore a fuller sense of self and the joy that comes from that.  Not long after the service, at 12:45 our fine Caring Committee is offering a panel discussion on the topic, Living beyond Depression. Snacks will be provided. All of you are not only welcome, but I encourage you to come as you can. For I assure you, this is a reality that touches, has touched or will touch every single person in this room.   Offering 
 13  This house is a place where all human realities may be explored and faced, and where we may learn how to love ourselves and each other with greater insight each and every week. To support the work of such a house, we offer this time for members and friends of the church to bring their offerings and pledges, as a sign of their commitment support and care for this place.   Blue Prayer  I feel blue sometimes, O Love,  but the sky that delights my eye is also blue.  I feel blue sometimes, O Love,  but the water that quenches my thirst  when I am parched  also has a crystalline blue look about it.  I feel blue sometimes, O Love,  but flowers that bloom can be blue, too,  and so thus I pray:  When I find myself blue,  may I dream of ways to blossom,  may I imagine my capacity to slake a thirst,  and may I find some small bright delight  in the midst of the indigo world that I might steer by, like a star in heaven.  Blest are you, O Love, my means and my end, my comfort and my goad.  Amen. 
