

??ˆ??????
˜? !?"#$%?&'
We are here, 

not to list and proclaim our diverse beliefs, 

but to decide how best to live out strong lives 

in service with, and for, others and ourselves 

to promote justice that unites instead of divides. 

 
(And so) 
˜%%?%( " ? 
"???
%)%?? *?%%??
+*%??%
 %??"*)?)??? "
?????+%?%
"????"?


,? 


˜'?"

-(('
. +* )?%?,%
???"???
??)?*?*?



#/
School supplies passed around at local classrooms, 
in this building and around the 
Columbus area–
   
September memories of teachers  
 writing on a green board with chalk. 

Two high towers of light on the south end of Manhat
tan; videos of the jolt of that day  
   
September memories of a balmy day 
   when fear and horror rose to the sky 

   on a pillar of cloud and smoke. 

Cooler nights, rain and the sweetness of late summe
r corn. 
 September memories of sun slanting through 
 our bodies at the exact angle it™s slanted 
every 16
th
 of this month for all our lives, 
grounding us to our days. 
Revelations of tragic deaths in faraway Libya, prom
pted by viral foolery and long 
embedded conflicts of decade after decade–
 September revelations that sincere 

compassion and understanding can still 

exist in a season soured by impolitic politics.   

Love, this moment is what we have,  
not an hour, not a day, not a month,  
neither a memory, nor an anticipation, 
but this blink of an eye,  

this pause between our breaths,  

this full-blown eternity well disguised as 

a single heartbeat. 
Let us share this gift in silence. 

 
silence 

 
Bringing our lives to the presence of this moment, 
hearts spill over in the spaciousness 
with love, with forgiveness, with resistance, with 
gratitude. Embracing the people who 
knock at our heart™s door right now, we imagine the
ir faces before us in our mind™s eye, 
or simply name them in the shared silence which mak
es us one. 
 
naming 

 
The horn of the September equinox will sound this c
oming Saturday, as the season begins 
its yearly shift. Arise, arise; let the new beginni
ng of the next moment move forward 
borne on the exaltation of music. 

 
The First Reading 
is from Richard Dawkins™ 2011 book the 
Magic of Reality
, which in 
many ways strikes me as his best book. 

 
People sometimes say, ?Everything happens for a rea
son.?  In one sense, this is true. 
Everything 
does
 happen for a reason Œ which is to say that events 
have causes, and the 
cause always comes before the event.  Tsunamis happ
en because of undersea 
earthquakes, and earthquakes happen because of shif
ts in the earth™s tectonic plates.  That 
is the true sense in which ?everything happens for 
a reason,? the sense in which ?reason? 
means ?past cause.?  But people sometimes use reaso
n in a very different sense, to mean 
something like ?purpose.?  They will say something 
like ?The tsunami was a punishment 
for our sins? or ?The reason for the tsunami was to
 destroy the strip clubs and other sinful 
places.?  It is amazing how often people resort to 
this kind of nonsense. 
 
Maybe it is a hangover from childhood.  Child psych
ologists have shown that very young 
children, when asked why certain rocks are pointy, 
reject scientific causes as an 
explanation and prefer the answer:  ?So that animal
s can scratch themselves when they 
get itchy.?  Most children grow out of that kind of
 explanation for the pointy rocks.  But 
quite a lot of adults seem unable to shake off the 
same kind of explanation when it comes 
to major misfortunes like earthquakes, or good fort
une such as lucky escapes from 
earthquakes. 

 
It is true that if you toss a penny 1,000 times you
™d expect approximately 500 heads and 
500 tails.  But suppose you™ve tossed the penny 999
 times and it™s so far come up with 
heads every time.  What would you bet for the last 
toss?  According to the widespread 

misunderstanding of the ?Law of Averages,? you shou
ld bet on tails, because it is tails™ 
turn
, and it would be so 
unfair
 if it came up heads yet again.  But I would place 
my bet 
on heads, and so would you if you were wise.  A seq
uence of 999 heads in a row suggests 
that someone has tinkered with the penny, or with t
he method. 
 
The Second Reading
 consists of excerpts from Julia Vinograd™s funny bu
t very serious 
poem Playing the Lottery from 2002. 

 
I™m playing the lottery. 

When I win I™ll be so rich 

that ?war? will be only a short, obscure word 

still in the dictionary but mainly useful 

for morning crossword puzzles. 

I™ll be so rich 

that panels of experts on tv 

will cut The New York Times 

into strings of paper dolls 

because nothing happened today. 

I™ll be so rich 

I™ll buy hangovers from street drunks, 

collage them into a modern symphony 

and everyone will go once a month 

in their best clothes 

because they™ve gotten bored with feeling good. 

I™ll be so rich I™ll make grade schools teach a spe
cial course called: no, you 
won™t
 understand when you grow up. I™ll be so rich 

I™ll give a hundred comfortable rocking chairs 

to every welfare office so no single mother 

ever has to stand in line again. 

I™m playing the lottery. 

When I win I™ll be so rich 

everything will be all right 

the way they always promised me 

when I was a child 

and scared of the dark. 

 
Preaching 

  

Two summers ago, while flying to California to visi
t my friends in the Bay Area, my 
Southwest flight took me through Phoenix. The first
 leg of my flight was jam-packed, not 
a single empty seat. The second, from Phoenix to Oa
kland, was also, as the attendant 
warned us, "a totally full flight." I was sitting b
y the window, and a man came and sat on 
the aisle. We didn™t say anything Œ I usually am pr
etty introverted on planes Œ and 
anyway, both of us were waiting for someone else to
 plop down between us. Suddenly, 
the attendant shut the door of the plane. And the o
ne empty seat on the whole plane was 
between me and the man on the aisle. We both looked
 at each other, and accepted the gift 

of extra room by high fiving each other. "Excellent
!" We introduced ourselves. He was 
Marco Antonio. I told him my name was Mark, but tha
t my closest friends, (the men 
whom I call my brothers) and my grandparents had al
ways called me Marco, never Mark. 
Marco Antonio was going up north to visit friends. 
I was going out west to visit friends. 
We discovered we both like sushi a lot. We talked a
ll the way through the flight which 
flashed by like lightning because we were so engage
d in the conversation. As I exited in 
Oakland, we promised to keep in touch. 

 
And despite the odds Œ after all, it was a single t
wo hour conversation Œ we did. 
 
So this last year, at the Phoenix General Assembly,
 we naturally decided to get together 
for another face-to-face conversation and a drink a
fter he left work. We had a wonderful 
time.   As we talked more about our lives, one of t
he things I told him was that I felt like 
a very 
lucky 
person Œ so many good things had befallen me in my 
life Œ I™ve come to love 
the most amazing people I can imagine, starting and
 finishing with my son Tony; I™ve 
enjoyed good, engaging work that has both taken me 
deep into the human condition, and 
helped me to travel around the world. Marco Antonio
 then said to me: 
 
?I understand what you are saying when you use the 
word 
lucky
, but I don™t use the word 
‚lucky™ any more, or the word 
luck
. I prefer to say 
fortune
 and 
fortunate
 instead. 
 
?Hmm," I hummed. "I think of them as meaning pretty
 much the same thing,? I 
suggested.  

 
He answered: ?I understand that they are often used
 interchangeably with each other, and 
with the word 
chance
 too, but the words 
luck 
and 
chance 
sound mechanistic and cold to 
me. I associate them with the addictive life of cas
inos and the magical thinking associated 
with lotteries. However, the word 
fortune
 is surrounded by other meanings, like 
abundance
, for example, and 
rich
. And by 
rich, 
I™m not talking just about bank accounts, 
of course, but also the rich world we live in, a wo
rld of rich culture and abundant natural 
beauty and remarkable resources. 
Fortunate
 suggests the richness of life in friendship, 
love and joy, in food and delight, health and heali
ng, and even in grief.? 
 
After our conversation, I decided to think about th
e subtle difference between the words 
luck, chance
 and 
fortune
.  And to do so, I took up as a spiritual experimen
t not saying the 
words 
luck
 or 
lucky
 anymore, but substituting the word 
?fortune?
 instead (as well as its 
opposite word ?misfortune?). 

 
And this simple experiment during the summer set a 
lot of my wheels turning in fresh 
ways.  

 
I began remembering my resistance when I was told a
s a child Œ as I indeed was Œ that I 
should feel "lucky" because I lived in the best cou
ntry in the world, and unlike the folks 
in other countries, I had food and was not starving
 to death with one of those bloated 
bellies.  I had an allowance (to save or spend) and
 was not begging with a bowl on the 
street like other children. I had good schools inst
ead of having to work in fields in order 

to barely survive. And I was in a country with a fa
ir justice system, instead of a place 
where you could be jailed for not telling the polic
e your parents were still stubbornly 
attending an underground church. 

 
Even as a child, I kept on thinking and feeling tha
t this was not fair. "Who are those kids 
with the begging bowls and bloated bellies and sore
 feet from working in the fields? Did 
they do something wrong to deserve such a different
 life? Are they like me? Why was I 
so lucky...or, as I was told, blest by God to live 
in the best country in the world? What 
kind of a God, I wondered, said "Starve to death" t
o some children, and "Eat pizza" to 
others? Consider it the first significant theologic
al question I ever asked.  
 
But I am not exaggerating one bit.  

 
It used to keep my up at night, me imagining holdin
g a bowl out at the end of my own 
arm on some dusty street in a country with an alpha
bet on all the signs I never learned to 
read. I wanted to try to imagine what it was like, 
as the proverb puts it, 
to walk in 
someone else's shoes
, or in this case, to go barefoot in someone else's
 feet. The poverty I 
witnessed in my own city of Detroit near my grandma
's house verified the things I was 
told about other countries. The vast gulf between p
overty and wealth we talk about today 
is not something new. I could experience it as a ki
d. The fact that one of our Justice 
Action Ministry concentrations these next two years
 is 
poverty alleviation
 fits with my 
natural childhood instinct seamlessly. 

 
As I grew older, I learned more about statistics.  
The kind of thing that Richard Dawkins 
talks about when he tells us that if a penny is tos
sed 999 times and shows up tails, it 
would be foolish to bet that it will not fall that 
way the thousandth time. Some one has 
clearly rigged the penny. It is not and never has b
een the penny's "turn" to fall heads. 
There is no natural fairness in reality.  There is 
no such thing as an invisible ectoplasm of 
luck that you can influence by thinking it™s due yo
u, or squishing up your face intently at 
the gambling table.  

 
Unfortunately, the new and ridiculously huge casino
 they are building way on the west 
side will last a thousand years only because people
 really do believe that luck is due 
them, that their time has come, that "it™s bound to
 happen this time." Dawkins makes this 
very clear: not only is it a waste of time to say "
It™s bound to happen this time," there is 
also no good sense in saying "Everything happens fo
r a reason," unless you are talking 
about cause and effect alone. If you push a car dow
nhill and the brakes are off, the car 
will roll downhill. Cause and effect. If the brakes
 are on, it won't. If you think it™s your 
turn to suffer misfortune, or your turn to be fortu
nate, you have missed the whole wisdom 
offered by what my late pen pal Arthur Clarke calle
d "Statistical theology." Neither 
wishing or begging or fervent traditional prayer wi
ll make nature change its course just 
because it™s inconvenient or painful to you. You ar
e not being singled out. You never 
have been. There is no "singling out." To think tha
t the world is out to get you because 
you have suffered a great deal of calamity, or, con
versely, that you are a good person 
because your "luck" happens to be remarkable, is si
mply false theology. My friend 
Andrzej teaches similar things at OSU in his econom
ics class.  He teaches, and I quote: 

"whatever we cannot predict accurately in a mechani
cal way gets tagged as ?chance."  
Ah, see, once again, it™s all about what we pretend
 to control when in fact we don't.    
 
What they are all saying is that nothing is stacked
 up 
against
 us by fate, nature, God, the 
universe...pick your name for ultimate reality.  No
thing is stacked 
for 
you either. God, 
Fate, Chance or Whatever did not put me in the Unit
ed States and say "Live!" and say to 
a young girl washed away in a Bangladesh tsunami, "
Die!"  
 
And, as you and I have undoubtedly both observed, y
ou can be rotten to the core and still 
have "good luck." You can be a saint and suffer cal
amities without ceasing. This is not 
some new idea, either, since the Scroll of Job in t
he Hebrew testament, which wrestles 
richly and profoundly with this reality, was writte
n over 2500 years ago.  
 
When I fly in a plane ten times in a row without tu
rbulence, it doesn't mean that 
turbulence is due me. Each flight I take is a new b
eginning. Each flight I take shares an 
equal capacity for turbulence. No One Somewhere owe
s me turbulence, or is keeping 
track to make sure I have been shaken up fairly. Ch
ances for turbulence do not build up. 
 
What 
does
 build up however is my concern for the poor, the s
ame concern rooted in my 
childhood sense that starving children in some othe
r country was intolerable and unfair. 
In this election season, when the popular conversat
ion is contrasting the beleaguered 
middle-class with the multi-billionaires, the poor 
and destitute do not get quite as much 
airtime. The terrific poem by Julia Vinograd, altho
ugh written well before this election 
season, cleverly mocks this kind of omission from t
he conversation. After announcing 
that she is going to win so much money from the lot
tery because of her undoubted good 
luck, she then tells us that she will thereby use h
er gajillions of dollars to eradicate all 
war, whisk all world calamities away from the New Y
ork Times™ headlines...no more 
troubles in Tripoli once she is fabulously wealthy.
 She's going to deal with the drunks on 
the street, and the children in our schools...but n
ote, she is not going do anything for the 
poor welfare mothers but get them rocking chairs, s
o they don't have such an 
uncomfortable wait standing in line. She eradicates
 war and shootings, but the poor she 
only comforts with a cushion on a soothing seat. 

 
Vinograd, I think, is brilliantly playing with the 
whole thoughtful insight lifted up by my 
Phoenix friend Marco Antonio. The chance or luck th
at leads to billions, whether via the 
market, venture capital successes, inheritance, or 
the lottery itself, is just an empty, 
cynical and mechanistic lens for regarding our comm
on world. The word 
fortune
, with its 
echo-words of 
rich
 and 
abundance
, make me think of the riches of the world as 
proclaimed by the Eskimo or Inuit people who speak 
of the "riches of the world as 
intelligence, fearlessness, and love."  Such fortun
es don't just drop on our head with the 
spin of a blackjack wheel or jazzy Wall Street spec
ulation; they can be cultivated. 
Fortunes like that can deepen, change for the bette
r, and focus not just on personal 
benefit, but also on those women in line in difficu
lt financial straits, whether or not they 
have rocking chairs to sit in. The fortune Marco An
tonio helped me to focus on was not 
the kind that enables me to fly to Paris just for s
upper at LaTour, but the fortune that 
helps me to notice the riches of the world that bel
ong to each of us, no matter what 

country we live in, no matter what physique or colo
r we were born with, no matter what 
kind of house we live in, street we beg on, songs w
e sing, food we eat, prayers we chant, 
silence we keep. The riches of the common sky above
 us all, with and without its storms, 
the riches of a world that is capable of supplying 
so many needs of water, food, beauty, 
and even the possibility of social unity and cohesi
on. The 
riches of life
, as the Innuit say. 
 
No matter who we are, the joy we have is not beginn
er's luck, but beginner™s fortune...the 
capacity of knowing that the next minute is new, th
at the whole parade of minutes and 
days before us cannot safely or finally predict wha
t will happen next. Each coin toss, 
each plane flight, each moment is fresh and new, an
d this is remarkable spiritual beauty 
as far as I'm concerned. At least, I find it more c
omforting than the idea of luck. We are 
all, each of us, fortunate to be alive, fortunate t
o be able to grow our capacities to love 
others, and fortunate to be able to support others 
as they strive to thrive and live out their 
best lives, no matter their circumstances.  

 
So yes, it™s true, what I often hear: the fact that
 we exist at all, and that each of us is 
mortal and that each of us breathes, and that each 
of us enjoys pleasure and suffers grief 
certainly proclaims our unity, our oneness in our l
ife here on earth. But equal to all of this 
is the 
statistical fortune
 that embraces us all, never blessing us or cursing
 us because of 
what we do or do not do, but also not standing in o
ur way as we nurture our capacity to 
improve the fortunes of others, to dismantle the ef
fects of systems and circumstances, to 
join together to say "the world belongs to us all, 
to each of us, and no one can be written 
out of that vision by mere mechanical luck, or hear
tless chance."  
 
Thanks, Marco Antonio, and Richard, and Julia, and 
Arthur, and Andrzej and you Innuit 
for helping me with my comforting theological medit
ation this morning, which has 
helped me to realize not how lucky I am, but rather
, the blessing of my fortune. 
 
Offering 

 
Fortunate to be alive. Fortunate to live now, not s
ome other time. Fortunate to be here 
with friends or family or strangers. Fortunate to b
e able to give and receive that the life of 
this our common house of life and love might deepen
, 
be well sheltered, be open to all, be a place of so
lace, be an institution well cared for, kept 
clean, kept open, with a growing vision and a rich 
life of the spirit for all. Though some 
give electronically, many prefer this more communal
 way of supporting something we 
love. 

 
Returning 

 
This fall, the BREAD team, part of our Interfaith n
etwork for local justice work in the 
metropolitan Columbus area, will be inviting people
 for a series of One on Ones, that is 
brief conversations, one person to one person, to l
ift up the local concerns that may keep 
you up at night, that may suddenly grab you during 
the day as you are driving. These are 
not long conversations, but important. When someone
 from the BREAD team calls you 
or emails you to schedule such a conversation, plea
se say yes. Or even sign up today to 

arrange a few calls yourself. Would those that are 
here who are part of the BREAD team 
please rise in your seats.  May we give them a roun
d of applause as a blessing on their Œ 
and our Œ commitment to help make a better world wh
ere fortune has more say than 
misfortune. 

 
 
Prayer:   

Love, I belong to the world. You are of the world, 
known in our struggles and in our 
intimacy here. We belong to the world, every single
 story we tell. The world belongs to 
me. And to all of us. It™s on loan. It™s a passing 
gift. It™s a wonder and a marvel and more 
than we'll ever understand. We are of the world, ou
r understanding of the world therefore 
also rises from the world, from which we are insepa
rable. Grateful for the riches and 
fortune of being alive in this world, I therefore s
ing in praise and thanks. 
 
Singing  # 19         Blessing 

 
