Sunday, January 6, 2007 page 1  Sermon Outline  "Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen." Rev. 18:2&21. Rev. 18:2 & 21, and Jer. 51:64. To wit: "And a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all." (Rev. 18:21)  "Thus shall Babylon sink, and shall not rise from the evil that I will bring upon her." (Jer. 51:64) These words come from a speech ­ or rather a reading ­ that a gentle little man named Seraiah made to a sad gathering of Jewish captives in Babylon, that circulated among all the disheartened Jewish captives ­ and that circulated throughout Babylon, and that circulated throughout the world ­ from then to now! And, Beloved, all mankind ­ (i.e., every individual of mankind) ­ is charged with having a knowledge of every word of that speech ­ because we have it readily available in virtually every language ­ and we know that speech ­ word for word ­ as Jeremiah, chapters 50 and 51. And this is true notwithstanding the fact that as soon as gentle Seraiah finished reading the speech, he threw it in the Euphrates river. He was, strangely, ordered to do so ­ which enhances the mystery of the Gospel ­ I say, he was ordered to do so ­ by the Lord God! Yes! I say, Seraiah was ordered by the Almighty to take that speech ­ after reading it to the crowd ­ and tie a big rock around it so it would sink ­ in the deepest part of the river ­ To wit: "And it shall be, when thou hast made an end of reading this book, that thou shalt bind a stone to it, and cast it into the midst of Euphrates." Jer. 5l:63. But in Rev. 18:21, the mighty angel took up a "great millstone" to cast into the sea, dramatizing the same event; to wit: the sudden and complete and final doom of Babylon. Why couldn't Seraiah use a millstone with the same dramatic effect? Why did he have to throw the speech away? Did he have another copy? It's interesting to speculate on why. Maybe it was because Seraiah's mission was fraught with danger, from the time he hitch-hiked onto King Zedekiah's camel train to get to Babylon in the first place. Apparently, Seraiah was some kind of official, high up in Zedekiah's administration, chosen by the king to accompany him on a delicate mission to reconcile himself with Nebuchadnezzar. Scripture says, "And this Seraiah was a quiet prince." Jer. 51:59. Gill says Seraiah "was of a peaceable disposition, who did not like war, nor the persecution of good men." Just the kind of man King Zedekiah would need to help him placate the angry Babylonian King. And now this quiet, peaceable man was out there in Babylon itself reading 110 verses of the strongest language ever penned," ­ (language like, "As God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbor cities thereof, saith the Lord; so shall no man abide there, neither shall any son of man dwell therein." Jer. 50:40) ­ I say, 110 verses like that  Sunday, January 6, 2007 page 2  Sermon Outline  one just quoted ­ I say the strongest language ever penned ­ to this effect: "Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great, and shall rise no more again forever." Beloved. That kind of language is not calculated to win friends and influence people, ­ not in Babylon. Especially not in the ears of the king of Babylon, whom you have come with a humble delegation to help you win over that king ­ so he won't cut your head off ­ like he did your brother Jehoiakim! I say, that was downright dangerous ­ what the quiet little prince was doing out there that day ­ reading that speech to a crowd in Babylon ­ declaring the final, complete doom of Babylon. Why did he do it? Have you ever read those 110 verses at one sitting? Please do it some time. Why did Seraiah read the speech to the crowd, and then ­ real quick like, ­ tie a rock to it, and throw it in the river? The short answer is that Jeremiah told him to, and he feared the Lord and loved the Lord, and was willing to hazard his life for the Lord (Acts 15:26), and he was willing to jeopardize his life in the high places of the field. Judges 5:18. This is all we know of this quiet little Prince, but it's enough to place him right up there with Phinehas for courage when the chips are down, as they say in Las Vegas. Babylon at this time was at the zenith of her power and majesty. Think what courage it took to say to such a great and prosperous empire that her doom was coming soon. Think what courage it takes for us, in our day, in our own dispensation ­ to deliver substantially the same message to mighty America. Here's another example, taken from the speech of Seraiah; to wit: "Thus saith the Lord of hosts; The broad walls of Babylon shall be utterly broken, and her high gates shall be burned with fire; and the people shall labor in vain, and the FOLK IN THE FIRE, and they shall be weary." Jer. 51:58. Like the Great Fire of London in 1666 ­ (only worse) ­ that blazed for days and days ­ that burned all of London to the ground. The walls of Babylon looked to be and were considered to be utterly impregnable. Those outer walls and inner walls were 311 feet high and 87 feet thick, and they completely surrounded the city of Babylon, with a circumference of some 60 miles (some 15 miles on each side of the square city), and pierced with 100 huge, thick gateways with gates of bronze. Babylon's magnificence, beauty, splendor, prosperity and power just before her final and total destruction ­ was simply indescribable ­ such that King Nebuchadnezzar could well boast, in the language of Scripture; to wit: "The king spake, and said, Is not this great Babylon, that I have built for the house of the kingdom by the might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty?" Dan. 4:30. Ancient Babylon was, indeed, a breathtaking sight to behold. And it was to THAT Babylon ­ while standing in the midst of THAT Babylon, bustling and alive and vibrant with her great throngs ­ that Seraiah, the "quiet prince," delivered a blistering speech, in powerful words chosen and written by the fiery prophet Jeremiah himself. Think of it. Standing in the very shadow of those massive walls ­ thought to endure for the ages ­ and proclaiming in the Name of God; to wit:  Sunday, January 6, 2007 page 3  Sermon Outline  "Thus saith the Lord of hosts; The broad walls of Babylon shall be utterly broken, and her high (bronze) gates ­ all 100 of them ­ shall be burned with fire." (Jer. 51:58) And, Beloved, here we are ­ this little church ­ despised and rejected ­ standing in the big middle of this great nation, in our own dispensation of time ­ declaring the same message to this evil nation which is modern Babylon; to wit: America is Doomed! "Though thou exalt thyself as the Eagle, and though thou set thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring thee down, saith the Lord." Obadiah 1:4. There were nine different men throughout the Bible who were named "Seraiah" ­ but our hero of this remarkable story is mentioned only in this one place, the last six verses of Jeremiah, chapter 51; to wit: Jer. 51:59-64. "The word which Jeremiah the prophet COMMANDED SERAIAH, the son of Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, when he went with Zedekiah the king of Judah into Babylon in the fourth year of his reign. And this Seraiah was a quiet prince." Jer. 51:59. Seraiah was obviously a "prince" in the administration of king Zedekiah, with a marvelous talent for placating offended dignitaries, and hence was ordered to accompany king Zedekiah as a part of his delegation to placate the great Babylonian king who was greatly offended by the rebellious Zedekiah. You now see how it was a delicate and very dangerous mission from the outset. But how could Jeremiah COMMAND prince Seraiah to do anything? Answer: Moral suasion. The only power Gospel preachers have. Moral suasion. "So Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that should come upon Babylon, even all these words that are written against Babylon ­ (i.e., Jer., chapters 50 and 51). And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When thou comest to Babylon, and shalt see (i.e., scope out the lay of the land), and shalt read all these words; Then shalt thou say, O Lord, thou hast spoken against this place, to cut it off, that none shall remain in it, neither man nor beast, but that it shall be desolate forever." Jer. 51:60-62. Included among the fearsome words that Seraiah read to Babylon are these; to wit: "The word that the Lord spake against Babylon and against the land of the Chaldeans by Jeremiah the prophet. Declare ye among the nations, and publish, and set up a standard; publish, and conceal not: say, Babylon is taken, Bel is confounded, Merodach is broken in pieces; her idols are confounded, her images are broken in pieces." Jer. 50:1,2. Babylon's great god Bel ­ the god of war and destruction ­ was Babylon's most important god ­ just as Bel, the god of war and destruction ­ is America's most important god. Sure. That's where the big money is. The late Pres. Eisenhower warned America to beware of the Military/Industrial complex. America is the world's largest supplier of arms and weapons of mass destruction. We make hundreds of billions of dollars a year in profits in the manufacture and sale of weaponry. We spend billions for weapons, and billions more on manpower for the  Sunday, January 6, 2007 page 4  Sermon Outline  Military ­ all managed out of the massive Pentagon Building in Washington, DC. We maintain 700 military bases in 134 countries around the world. Yes, Beloved, America worships the great war god Bel. "Bel boweth down. Nebo stoopeth...They stoop, they bow down together." Isa. 46:1,2. "Bel is confounded." Jer. 50:2. "Because of the wrath of the Lord it shall not be inhabited, but it shall be wholly desolate: every one that goeth by Babylon shall be astonished, and hiss at all her plagues." Jer. 50:13. "Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will punish the king of Babylon and his land, as I have punished the king of Assyria." Jer. 50:18. There happen to be seven (7) letters in the name of Babylon, ­ B-a-b-y-l-o-n ­ ; and there happen to be seven (7) letters in America's name; to wit: A-m-e-r-i-c-a. "Babylon" appears dozens of times in the 110 verses of Jeremiah, chapters 50 and 51. "America" should be substituted for "Babylon" ­ each time ­ and that would be the message of Westboro Baptist Church to fag America in this hour. Just as ancient Babylon did, America has turned the country over to fags. On account of which, America will meet Babylon's destruction; to wit: "As God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbor cities thereof." Jer. 50:40. And ask yourself, Beloved, does this language fit America or not? To wit: "A sound of battle is in the land, and of great destruction. How is the hammer of the whole earth" ­ (i.e., America: think, 700 military bases in 134 countries throughout the world, the hammer of the whole earth) ­ "How is the hammer of the whole earth cut asunder and broken! how is Babylon ­ (prophesy, "America") ­ become a desolation among the nations! I have laid a snare for thee, and thou art also taken, O Babylon, and thou wast not aware: thou art found, and also caught, because THOU HAST STRIVEN AGAINST THE LORD. The Lord hath opened his armory, and hath brought forth the weapons of his indignation: for this is the work of the Lord God of hosts in the land of the Chaldeans." (Jer. 50:22-25)  It might have taken prince Seraiah an hour or so to read his speech: chapters 50 & 51. Afterward he was to bind a stone to it, and cast it into the river ­ thus hiding the evidence? One more thing. Why not Baruch? who read Jeremiah's earlier letter to king Jehoiakim, who angrily burned it and ordered the arrest of Jeremiah AND BARUCH? Jer. 36:26. Chapter 45 suggests two things went wrong with Baruch; to wit: Fear & Pride. "Woe is me!" (Jer. 45:3); and, "Seekest thou great things for thyself? seek them not." (Jer. 45:5). "When ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do." Lk. 17:10. Amen.  
