



A DREAM*


    I was dream ing. I wa s lost in some wild mountains in a strange country. Mysterious, silent and terrifying rocks fantastically shaped surrounded m e from everywhere. I clim bed and laboured from rock to rock, slipping and falling and getting up again, jumping and crawling higher and higher. I ignored m y destination. To move further and further seem ed to be the only object. At last I came to a stop. I was on a narrow sort of ledge, and a tremendous high wall of a solid rock was facing m e, and behind m e was a drop of many hundred feet...There was nowhere to go...But suddenly I saw that on the face of that rock there was a small iron door...I was stretching my hand to open it, but bef ore I could do so, it swung open, and a blazing light poured out of it. A m an was standing there and smiling at me. I could not see the features of the m an, because they were drowned in light. But I saw a pair of eyes sparkling like black diamonds. 

His hands were sm all and th in with long fingers. He held a short stick in one of his hands, while the other was slightly raised with lon g fingers apart. He was so calm that it was terrifying.

    "Who are you?" I asked. 

"I am Shri Meher Baba," he ans≠wered. "You can 't go through that doorónot yet." 

   "Why not?" 

"Because you have to clim b a little longer." "But I tried; I want to rest," I exclaimed. 

    "Donít worry. You will rest when the time comes. You remember, when you left Sais in a hurry, I prom ised you would rest for 1000 years; and then, do you remember what you did in Rom?" 

"No, I do not. But tell me where does that door lead to?" 

"It leads to a place from where people do not com e out but are sent out." 

    You seem to know a lot. If so, will you tell me, Shri Meher Baba, what is a man and 


where does he come from?"  "It was not madeóit was given,"  

   "Man is one of the results of the  came the answer.  

Universal Mind. He com es from the     "And where does evil come from?" 

same source of all that exists. "     "There is no place for ev il in the  

   "You mean that Ióa human beingó  circleóit comes from freedom of  

I come from the sam e source as my  action. There is a clash in the evolution  

dog?"  of mind, as air, fire, water and earth  

"Yes. When in primitive state of  clash in the evolution of matter."  

larva in its origin al form, you not only  "Yes. I understand. But now tell m e  

come from the same source, but you are  one more thingóis there anything I  

alike."  ought to do?"  

"And then?"      "Yes. Though since I saw you last,  

    "Then the evolution is operated, each  you have progressed and you have  

in its destined cir cle. You rem ember  mastered your m ind by capacity of  

that design of Amon," and here the man  concentration, and you have awakened  

of light tra ced with his little stic k a  your spiritual self; however you are  

design on the rock. He drew a circle,  standing now in front of a blank wall.  

and wrote within it "U niversal Mind",  From that spiritual consciousness  

round it drew another circle in which he  which you have attained you have still  

inserted three words, "Consciousness",  to go further. To climb this wall higher  

"Love" and "Creative Power". Then  up to the Ultimate Reality is the highest  

from that circle he drew lines going out  consciousness. You have m astered  

like sun rays. He wr ote at the end of  many of the sanskaras, but not allónot  

each a word, but as he was writing very  all..."  

quickly, the words were obliterated. I      The door closed, the light vanished;  

could hardly follow. I rem ember "Air",  but it seemed to me that high, high up  

"Matter", "Minerals", "Animals",  above my head and above the rock, a  

"Man"...  gleaming hand was waiving to m e  

"And who made the soul?" I asked.  pointing upwards!  

ï  