  Let's begin by stating the central truth of HenryScougal's book, THE LIFE OF GOD IN THE SOUL OF MAN (Sprinkle Publications,1986, originally, 1677), first in the old 17th century languagehe uses and then in contemporary language.  The central truthof the book in his words is that true religion is essentiallyan inward, free, self-moving principle of divine life, not merelya system of thought or behavior constrained by external considerations. It is the life of God within the human soul enlivening and motivating;it is not driven merely by threatenings, nor bribed by promises,nor constrained by laws (p. 36).  How would you put that in more contemporary language? I would say:  Becoming a Christian is more like a larva becominga butterfly than like a republican becoming a democrat (or ifyou prefer: a democrat becoming a republican).  There is something wonderful and true about thiscomparison and there is something terrible and misleading aboutit.  The wonderful and true thing is that being a Christian doesindeed compare to being a non-Christian like flying in a gardencompares to lying in a cocoon.    When the divine command comes to a butterfly, Fly!it feels no burden, no fear, no guilt.  It just does what it hasbeen made to do: it flies -- and sings to the grace of God withevery flap of the wing.  It has the new nature of a flier thatit didn't have when it was a larva in the cocoon.  That is whatScougal means by the vital principle of true religionin the soul.    But when the divine command comes to the larva inthe cocoon, Fly! it does not fly.  Instead it hasthree options for how it can respond.  1) It can sink in despairand say, I can't fly!  There is no hope for me!  Or2) it can soar in self-deceit and say, I am flying!  See,there is the ground way down there.  Or 3) it can do whatSt. Augustine did and cry out, Command what you will, andgrant what you command -- Make me a butterfly, O my God!  The true and wonderful thing about the comparisonis that it points to the necessity and the miracle of the newbirth.  To be a Christian is to have a new, vital principle oflife in the soul so that the commands of God are not oppressive,but are the beckoning of a beautiful spring day and the aromaof a flower-filled garden.  By the grace of God we have been transformedinto butterflies.  The life of God has come to dwell in our souland it is now our nature to be up and flying for the Savior.  But there is also something terrible and misleadingabout the comparison between a larva becoming a butterfly anda republican becoming a democrat.  It could give impression thatthe study and reflection and choice that goes into changing yourpolitical affiliation is not part of what goes into becoming abutterfly.  But that would be terrible and misleading.  The miracle of spiritual metamorphosis from a non-Christianlarva to a Christian butterfly does not happen through the  unconsciouschemical processes inside a cocoon, but through the consciousconsideration of truth.  Everywhere in the Bible men and women,who are larva-like in their capacities for spiritual flight, arespoken to as responsible persons.   The messengers of God speakto them with persuasions and evidences and entreaties and exhortationsand commands and warnings and promises and reasonings and argumentsand incentives -- that they should be up and flying!  Why?  Because the beauties and the aromas of thegarden where butterflies fly are the glorious perfections of God. And the perfections of God are glorified most if the conversionof non-Christian larvae into Christian butterflies is owing tothe compelling power of the beauty of the garden of his perfections. But how do these perfections come to be known and loved?  Theanswer is that the perfections of God are known by the mind andrelished by the will.  And therefore, if God is to get glory,all metamorphoses -- all conversions -- must come about by addressingthe mind and the will of non-Christians with the compelling truthand beauty of the garden of God.  So, on the one hand, it is wonderful and true tosay that becoming a Christian is more like a larva becoming abutterfly than like a democrat becoming a republican, becauseconversion does involve the giving of a new nature with new powersof spiritual flight.  But, on the other hand, if you press the comparisontoo far, it is terrible and misleading because in fact Christianconversion is more like changing political parties than becominga butterfly, because it always involves the presentation of truthto the mind and a reasonable appeal to the will of the unbeliever.  How then does the new butterfly-life of the Christiancome into being?  Henry Scougal says that the root of the new,divine life in the soul of man is faith.  And he defines faithbeautifully and profoundly and so differently than most contemporaryChristianity.  He says that faith is a feeling persuasionof spiritual things.  Faith is not just a feeling.  Andit is not just a persuasion.  It is a feeling persuasion. And this new feeling persuasion of divine things is the rootthat taps into the divine life of God in the soul.  And how does that root of faith come to be plantedin the soul?  The Bible says, Faith comes by hearing andhearing by the word of Christ (Romans 10:17).  The feelingpersuasion of divine things happens when the truth and beautyof those things are exhibited to the mind in the word of God.  And this is what I want to do in the rest of ourtime this morning.  I want to exhibit to your mind from the wordof God in Romans 8 three effects or results of having the lifeof God in your soul.  And my prayer as I do this is that the truthof these things would commend itself to your mind and that theirspiritual beauty would be compelling to your will and that youwould be gripped by a feeling persuasion of thesegreat spiritual realities, and so come to enjoy them in your ownlife for ever.  In Romans 8:9 Paul identifies Christians like this:But you are not in the flesh, you are in the Spirit, ifthe Spirit of God really dwells in you.  Christians arethose in whom the Spirit of God dwells.  This is what Scougalmeans by the life of God in the soul of man.  God lives in thesoul of man by the indwelling of his Spirit.  Let us look thenat three effects of this awesome reality of the indwelling ofthe life of God in our souls.   1. The life of God in the soul of man brings abouta new relationship to God and his Son.   In the last part of verse 9 Paul says, Anyonewho does not have the Spirit of Christ does not belong to him. In other words the fundamental effect of having the Spirit isthat he makes you belong to Christ.  You are not your own.  Youwere bought with a price.  And the Spirit of God and of Christ(which are one) have sealed this new relationship for ever.  Youare Christ's this morning because you are indwelt by the Spiritand life of God.  But not only does the indwelling of the life of Godbring about a new relationship with God the Son, but also withGod the Father.  Verses 15 and 16:   For you did not receive the Spirit of slavery tofall back into fear, but you have received the Spirit of sonship. When we cry, Abba! Father! it is the Spirit himselfbearing witness with our spirit that we are children of God.  The Spirit of God is the Spirit of adoption.  Orto put it another way, the life of God in the soul of man createsa living union between Father and child.  The nature of the Fatheris imparted to the child, and the old relationship of slave toslaveholder is utterly changed.  A new, free, overpowering impulsenow governs our lives: not cowering slavery, but glad-heartedsonship.   2. The second thing that the life of God in the soulbrings about is a new leadership.   Verse 14: All who are led by the Spirit ofGod are sons of God.  When the Spirit of God invades the soul of man anew leader emerges, namely, God.  But the leadership is not thedominating external constraint of a slaveholder.  It is the leadershipof a new inner principle of life, as Henry Scougal would say. The Spirit loves the things of God and so he leads by impartingthat love of divine and holy things to us.  And so the commandmentsof God are not burdensome because we have the nature of God withinus.    The Spirit leads by implanting a kind of homing instinctfor heaven.  Or, to change the image, the leadership of the Spiritis so powerful and yet our response is so free that Paul callsit fruit -- the fruit of the Spirit -- and not works, in Galatians5:22.  The Spirit leads forth the fruit of righteousness by makingthe tree good.   3.  That brings us already to the third thing thatthe life of God in the soul brings about, namely, a new freedom.   Verse 2:  The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hasset me free from the law of sin and death.    Christians are not lawless.  There is a law in ChristJesus.  But it is something very different than the mere writtencode engraved in stone.  This law is written on the heart.  Itdoesn't just tell us not to sin; it comes with its own power tobreak our bondage to sin.  And therefore it frees us from deathwhich is the penalty of sin.  And is called in this verse thelaw of the Spirit of life, because it is nothing lessthan the Spirit of God himself writing the will of God on ourheart so that, as verse 4 says, the just requirement fothe law might be fulfilled in us who walk. . . according to theSpirit.  So the life of God in the soul of man frees us fromthe dominion of sin not by stamping our toes when we take a wrongstep, but by stamping itself, with its own nature, on our heartand making its own will the thing we love to do.  The greatestfreedom in the world is becoming the kind of person who lovesto do those things against which there is no law (Gal. 5:23!!!).  But here Paul has to face up to the problem of schizophreniain God.  On the one hand, he has taught us very clearly in thisbook that all of us have sinned and fallen short of God's glory(3:23), that the wages of sin is death (6:23), and that the holywrath of God is revealed against all ungodliness (1:18).    But here in Romans 8:2 God, the just and holy Judgeof all the earth, sends his Holy Spirit not to punish sinnersbut to free them from the power of sin and the sentence of death. So how is God not a schizophrenic?  Does he hate sin and pourout his wrath on sinners or does he send his Spirit to free condemnedsinners from the control of sin and the curse of death?    Verse 3 is the solution that Paul sees.  For God has done what the law, weakened by the flesh,could not do: sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful fleshand for sin, he condemned sin in the flesh.  Before God made an agreement with his Spirit thatthe Spirit should go and free sinners from the power of sin andfrom the sentence of death, he first made an agreement with hisSon that the Son should go and bear the condemnation for sin.  So when the Spirit of God goes forth to free hispeople from the dominion of sin and the sentence of death it isnot because God has ceased to hate sin, or that he has ceasedto be a just judge.  It's because the the just and awesome Judgeof the world who hates sin with infinite hatred is so rich inlove that he put his Son in our stead and secured for us an eternalacquittal.    So there is not the slightest whiff of schizophreniain the Godhead.  There is complete harmony and unity as the trinityconspires to redeem a people for the praise of God's glory.      Out of the riches of his love, God the Father plotsthe salvation of his sinful people.  He covenants with his Son to stand in their steadunder his holy wrath on the cross.  And then he turns, as it were, to his Spirit andsays, Fear not that we are working at cross purposes.  Bythe death of my Son I have acquitted my people of all their sinand taken away their guilt.  And now I commission you with allmy heart and with all my soul: apply this great purchase to theirhearts and strip the chains off their souls.   O, how I hope you see, and love, and praise the interweavingof the work of the Trinity in your salvation!  The Father plannedit, the Son purchased it, and now the Spirit -- the very lifeof God in your soul -- is applying it, freeing you from the chainsof sin that have no place on the souls of the redeemed!  O, do not resist him!  Do not quench his fire orgrieve his heart!  His work on your behalf is very glorious andvery precious.  Do you know why the Holy Spirit is grieved whenwe resist him?  It's because he loves the Son of God.  For everytime we resist the work of the Spirit in our lives we belittlethe blood of Christ, because Christ shed his blood to purchasefor us the gift of the Holy Spirit.    If we neglect the new relationship he provides withGod as Father, if we oppose the new leadership he brings, if wegrab the chains of our sin and resist his deliverance, then wetreat the blood of Christ as a cheap thing, because the very aimof shedding his blood was to secure for us the presence and powerand cleansing of the Spirit of God -- life of God -- in our souls.   Yield to the ongoing work of God's Spirit in yourlife today!  Trust in the finished of God's Son today!  And praisethe greatness of God's love and the glory of his grace that plannedit all. 
