


Manzil-E-Meem 

BY ABDUL KAREEM ABDULLA 

Amidst more than a million citizens of Bombay, there existed, in the thick of the City, in the year 1922, a microscopic group of about two scores of peculiar people who were, at the same time, more than a million miles away from it. 

Like the rest of the popu≠lation, they worked and played, ate and slept, lived and prayed; but they did all that in their own particular way, in their own isolated world which was all the same comprehensive enough to embrace the rest of the world. 

They included amongst themselves men grey in years and boys gay in teens, both well-educated and equally illiterate, good artists and not bad artisans, shrewd profess≠sionals and simple students belonging to almost every caste and creed and having rich and influential backgrounds as well as poor and unknown antecedents. In short, the group compared well with the rest of the cosmopolitan inhabitants of this westernised City in the East. 

They lived in a spacious bungalow, with a nice big compound as good as any other on the Main Road in the grow≠ing suburb of Dadar. But for a chair or two in the verandah, every living room in the bungalow was devoid of any furniture. All the creature com≠fort that was there in each room consisted of a couple of trunks or boxes and the beddings out of which all quilts and mattresses had been scrupulously removed with the thoroughness of an excise or customs department.

    In line with the other resi≠dential quarters in the line, this bungalow No. 167 had an usual name-plate at the entrance with an unusual legend painted thereon in English, viz., ManzilóeóMeem (The Abode of M) visible to all those who passed by it as well as to those who saw it in dreams and visions without ever before having seen or heard about it. 

The inmates of the Manzil believed in all Masters, and be≠longed to all religions. They revered all saviours and res≠pected all saints. They appre≠ciated all viewpoints, but had only one point of view ever before them in everything they did, and that was to follow faithfully and implicitly the one Master amongst them whom they all called Meher Baba. 



They were, therefore, as free as all the other free citizens of Bombay without any lock or chain and watch or ward, yet for all practical purposes, they were hardly free to do anything more than breathe as they liked. In almost all other res≠pects everything had to be done at a particular time and on a particular line.

    These harmless ascetics not only slept under well-tucked mosquito curtains carefully fixed on the flooring with tapes and tacks to available walls and windows, but were under the spiritual obligation to kill daily with their hands a fixed number of mosquitoes, and no nook or corner was safe enough in the premises for these tiny engines of malarial terror amidst the forty and odd formidable   pairs of  clapping hands. 

On the stroke of nine, all used to retire for the night to be up and about punctually at four every morning, when the bath-rooms buzzed with the splutter and screams of those not used to cold baths that all had to take daily between the fixed period of 4 and 4-45, irrespective of the season, whether it was wet or cold. The one amongst them suffering with chronic asthma was also no exception to this rule that strangely made him feel all the better for it. 

The Manzil dwellers were no doubt mystics, but none of them ever dressed as faqirs and sadhus, nor went through the studies of any sadhana or chilla-kashees. There was no flirting with the sensations or tinkering up of the senses, no acrobatics in breathing nor manipulations of the body. For forty-five minutes each morning they sat in perfect silence and in one fixed posi≠tion, mentally repeating a name of the Almighty, but the name and the seating posture were left to the choice and selection of the individuals concerned in accordance with the religion that each professed. 



 

After seven o'clock every morning, they went out in the City, but moved about only according to clear-cut instruc≠tions, and had had to be indoors before seven in the evening under equally definite orders. Neither any cause nor any force was good enough to be late even by a single minute. Hours did not matter, if required to be wasted in preparing to save that one scheduled minute. While passing through the streets they had to avoid reading sign≠boards and advertisements as all reading and writing without permission was forbidden. It was strictly restricted to absolutely necessary require≠ments when out on duty, and rightly censored when allowed to be indulged in indoors. 

All of them used to be equally poor in possessing not more than eight pice as their own everyday, and yet some≠times they set out in search of the select from amongst the destitute and disabled to bring them to the Manzil, and bathe, feed and clothe them. If the search led to an unexpectedly long distance, they did not mind making an exhibition of themselves in borrowing the passage-money from the very beggars to carry the poor people comfortably by tram-cars. 

Except when occasionally fasting completely for twenty-four hours, specially when feasting the poor, all in the group were not only in duty bound to eat to full satisfaction thrice every day, but some≠times had to go to the other extreme in over-eating as well as at times partaking of food when least inclined or desirous to eat anything. Most of them were born non-vegetarians, and many amongst them had no religious or personal objection to drink, but one and all had to keep strictly away from all meat, fish, eggs and intoxi≠cants. This restriction was respected as much in the premises as outside it. But for this restriction they enjoyed rich meals. In order to ensure fresh and crisp bread for breakfast from one of the best bakeries in the City, it had fallen to the lot of a quad≠rangular cricketer amongst them to tumble out of bed at three every morning and arrive with a sack full of hot bread slung on his shoulder in time for the tea. 


A big black board and a little brass bell played no small part in heralding and re≠cording the spiritual history there in the making. Except when the bell rang at certain fixed hours at regular intervals for prayers, meals and such other daily routine, it was a signal for them to rush to the board with the promptitude of a city fire-engine, and read the instructions and directions as well as messages of hope and cheer that often used to be chalked out thereon at all odd hours of the day and night. In fact one of their foremost duties was to be alert and ready to follow the ominous ring of the bell that generally spelt big news for them.

    In spite of all the iron disci≠pline and absolute despotism enjoined upon them collec≠tively and all the rules and regulations imposed upon them individually in the interests of their physical as well as moral and spiritual well-being, they, nonetheless, enjoyed a definite freedom in the field of expres≠sion and a distinct freedom in the world of action. They were severely tested, but at the same time they were serenely trusted 

Not only opinions were invited from them but the majority view was generally upheld and acted upon. They had their own little parliament which was called the gutta (a retail wine shop). It assembled occasionally in the evening after dinner, and everyone of them was equally entitled to speak, vote and give expres≠sion to his views on the subject under discussion. To avoid the gutta getting as noisy as a gutta is in its literal sense, they could speak only one at a time after obtaining permission of the "chair" squatting amongst them on the same carpet. The permission had to be sought by lifting up a hand silently without speaking a word by mouth. If more than one hand shot up at one and the same time, it was left to the presiding authority to decide the precedence. 

Just as they did not live merely for the sake of living, or eat purely for the sake of eating, they often went to cinemas and theatres, but not always for the sake of amuse≠ment alone. Although they occupied the best of seats in the best of shows, they often had to be 



 

satisfied in suddenly leaving the programmes unfinished and enjoy an incomplete enjoy≠ment. 

They played different games and enjoyed different sports every morning and evening, but all inside the premises on their own limited playground at the back of the bunglaow which was just sufficient for the necessary recreation.

    But for all that they worked with a will to their utmost abilities and capabilities in not only running the premises practically without the help of any paid labour, but they also put in regular service for fixed long hours during the rest of the day in different business and public concerns belonging to themselves as well as to others, and whatever was earned and realized did not be≠long to the individual. 

They were sound in their intentions and sincere in their activities, they were straight in their dealings and simple in their undertakings. Yet they were sometimes misunder≠stood, often misjudged and generally ridiculed by people because of the popular miscon≠ception under which life is wrongly divided in two different watertight compart≠ments of matter and spirit. Addressing them once Baba said: "Living with me, as you are, you are considered to have discarded the whole world in spite of living in it." This is in short a gist of the collective life lead by them. It would make another story to report the individual life experienced by the different individuals in the Manzil-e-Meem. 



(To be continued) 

ï 
