 2008-8-24Knoxville  

Mark Belletini 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

on a late summerôs morn  

to worship in the spirit of wisdom
, 
to celebrate life freely and honestly, 

to rejoice in the transforming power of  love,  

and respond to compassionôs deep call. 

 
And so, though our ways of thinking and feeling abo
ut the meaning of our 
days may differ, we agree to journey together, side
 by side, face to face. 
Within this circle of strong spirit, mutual care, a
nd ethical vision, may we 
ourselves remain open to being transformed by a wel
coming heart and 
emerging justice.
  
Affirmation 
from Galway Kinnellôs Flying Home 1980 
 
And I have slowly learned that while a good many th
ings are easy, 
love is not. 

Because love is first of all a powerñits own powerñ
 which continuously must make its way forward 

from transcending union always forward into difficu
lt day. 
Love is very much like courage; 

perhaps it is courage,  

and even perhaps, only courage. 

 
Sequence 

 
Let it be. The sweep of storms over the land. 

The straw-like grass. The shooting stars of night. 

 
Let it perish. 

the sad conflicts of nations,  

the cruel division of everything into pro and con, 
the selfish laziness of 
prejudice and scorn. 

  
Let it be. The blue flower of the chicory and 

gold disc of the sunflower. The roar of the 

ocean. The altitude of hills. The gift of tears. 

 
Let it perish. 

The habit of denial. The false safety of entitlemen
t. Endless excuses for why 
nothing can really change for the better.  Self-pit
y. 
 
Let it be. Acceptance. The honest naming of 

what is. The honest facing of it. Hopeful 

organization. And the solace of sweet silence. 

 
bell and silence 

 
Let it be. The Love which sustains us and 

strengthens us. Each relationship which helps 

us to be more who we are than we could be 

all by ourselves 

 
In the continuing silence, may we welcome their fac
es into our hearts, or their 
names onto our whispering lips. Those we miss, thos
e we engage, those who 
invite our tenderness and sympathy, even those with
 whom we struggle. 
 
naming 

 
In times of trouble, in times of joy; in times of 

joy and trouble and beauty all mixed together, 

wisdom comes on the wings of silence and music, on 
the serene breeze of 
summer mornings. Let it be. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Readings 

  
The First Reading
 comes from Robert Solomonôs 2002 book, Spirituality
 for 
the Skeptic. I recommend the book for those who are
 interested in this often 
misunderstood subject. 

A few years ago, the mother of a boy who had lost h
is two best friends in a 
tragic accident tried to help her son discern some 
meaning in it all. She wrote 
up her agony in a popular news magazine, and conclu
ded, ?I donôt think that 
tragedies happen on purpose, but, and I echo my own
 sonôs words, if people 
learn to value one another more and to appreciate h
ow precious life is, then 
perhaps some good can come from something so awful.
? Wise and modest 
words, and she finished by adding, ?In the end, the
 musings of a nine-year-old 
boy, struggling to find a reason, are the musings o
f us all.? Those who would 
give an ?answer? to tragedy, or reduce it to blame,
 lack this wisdom.  
We too often opt for victimization or cynicism, the
 products of our overactive 
faculty for blame and our extravagant sense of enti
tlement. Or we take refuge 
in pessimism. (If we expect the worst, what worse c
an happen?) But there are 
better ways to think about life.  

Gratitude is one of them. Spirituality at its best 
is a combination of 
gratitudeñ.and a passionate engagement with the det
ails and the people in our 
lives. The important thing is not to deny tragedy, 
but to embrace it as an 
essential part of the life we love, and for which w
e should be so grateful. 
The Second Reading
 comes from Nance Guilmartinôs most helpful book, 
Healing Conversations. If you feel clumsy at a memo
rial service, or in a 
difficult conflict, you might want to check out her
 sensitive and wise 
approaches to such things. 

  

Many ordinary people have undertaken extraordinary 
efforts to make a 
difference after something in their lives went terr
ibly wrong.  Judy Shepard is 
dedicating her life to educating people about the h
igh cost of hate.  Her son, 
Matthew, was beaten to death for being gay. When Na
ncy Bostley died of 
cancer, her family collaborated with their YMCA to 
start Nancamp, a local, 
subsidized outreach program for children and famili
es affected by cancer.  

 The Forget-Me-Not Foundation was created to help fa
milies of brain-injured 
patients. It was founded after the family of Nan Zo
bel couldnôt get the help
 they needed to cope with the after-effects of a ser
ious brain injury.  
When friends and families set out to create a livin
g legacy in the wake of a 
tragedy, few of us know how much work it will take.
 Our success is made 
possible because families, officials, banks, lawmak
ers, the media, and 
strangers pitch in to help. We take risks. We learn
 how to communicate new, 
and sometimes unpopular, messages to the public. We
 hang in there for the 
long haul. We take comfort in doing something. We l
earn that we never know 
what we are capable of doing until something very p
ainful touches the core of 
our beingäinspiring us to action. 
 Sermon 

 
My godson Toby Rzepka joined himself in marriage to
 a wonderful woman 
named Rosalie this late July. His mother Jane and I
 helped officiate at the 
lovely Unitarian Universalist Jewish ceremony, at a
 beautiful park graced with 
a noble lighthouse and misted pines on the rough Pa
cific. It was called Cape 
Disappointment. The sailor who named it was simply 
disappointed that he had 
not found the useful passage he was looking for, on
ly a shallow inlet. The 
great Columbia Gorge was still some ways away. 

 
The ceremony took place under a huppah, or canopy, 
made of pieces of cloth 
folk chose to send beforehand. A rose-window of my 
grandmotherôs own 60 
year old lace radiated at the center of the huppah.
 It was beautiful in every 
way. Words. Ceremonial. Setting. A perfect day.  

 
For us that is. It was the preface to a terrible da
y for some other folks. For the 
next morning, when I was returning through the moun
tains of southern 
Washington State, Michael Brennan, our Church Admin
istrator, called me to 
tell me that there had been mayhem in one of our co
ngregations. His call was 
interrupted several times by high cliffs cutting of
f the signal, but by the time I 
got back to Portland, I had at least a small idea w
hat happened, although there 
were still no names and faces attached. 

 
 By the next day the most basic facts were clear. As
 most of you know, a 
certain man had entered the building of the Tenness
ee Valley Unitarian 
Universalist Church in Knoxville during their Sunda
y Worship time. 
 
A group of their children were singing when this ma
n raised a gun and shot 
and killed a man and a woman. He also wounded sever
al others quite 
seriously, until two people lunged and dragged him 
down, and took his 
shotgun away from him.   

 
In a single day, a tragedy that affected many lives
 in that single congregation 
rippled far and wide through millions of human hear
ts round the nation. Some 
folks in this congregation, for example, had either
 been part of that Knoxville 
congregation once in their life, or had at least at
tended while visiting relatives 
down there. One person in this congregation has an 
aunt who is a member 
there, a woman who knew the man who was shot quite 
well. 
 
But even without such direct connection, I donôt kn
ow of a person who wasnôt 
affected by it. Members of our local interfaith cle
rgy group associated with 
BREAD called me in sympathy and solidarity. Friends
 who were Jews and 
Muslims and Christians and unreligious called me to
o, for the same reasons. 
This was a tragedy for our larger human family, not
 just for Unitarian 
Universalists near and far. 

 
This sermon, coming a few weeks after the initial e
vents, hopes to touch on at 
least one or two of the larger issues raised by thi
s tragedy. I am speaking of 
issues which, I assure you, are being raised in ALL
 of our congregations in 
these weeks following, not the least of which is th
e Knoxville congregation 
itself. Even as I speak, their minister is offering
 a sermon called God, Gays, 
Guns, and the Gospel, addressing one small factor i
n the shooting. His sermon 
last week, on Liberalism, made me weep. I commend h
is podcasts to those of 
you who are computer literate. I am convinced they 
will help you thinkñand 
feelñ through this event. 

 
But even his sermons cannot cover all the issues ra
ised by this attack. Issues 
of safety. Issues of courage. Issues of forgiveness
. Issues of practical 
response, readiness and risk. Issues of trauma. Iss
ues addressing the lives of 
children. Issues of mental illness. Even issues of 
 language, since innuendo 

 and vile language are now commonly considered perfe
ctly acceptable in the 
public square. And all of these issues are permeate
d by the language of 
theology and philosophy, the two chief vocabularies
 of 
why
 and 
meaning
 and 
hope 
in the midst of it all. 
 
On the Large Church Ministersô chat line, the quest
ion of practical safety in 
our congregations has been bouncing back and forth.
 Some of our 
congregations have held fire drills, or trauma rehe
arsals. Others have been 
posting plainclothes off-duty police officers on Su
ndays just in case. 
 
But listen. This trauma in Tennessee did not spark 
these preparations. The 
plain-clothes officer, for example, dates back deca
des, after there was a loud 
disruption of a service by an angry man ranting abo
ut occupation politics. 
 
And I myself am not unacquainted with such unexpect
ed disruptions to 
ministry and my personhood. 

 
Early in my ministry, some 30 years ago, I was the 
personal focus of an 
emotionally impaired human being who openly claimed
 to want to kill me. 
Well, not me per se, but what I stood for, as far a
s she was concerned. My 
looks reminded her of someone, and my sexual identi
ty upset her. After a 
bizarre incident she caused which scared me sensele
ss, she proceeded to write 
me every day, both at home and at the office, to te
ll me she intended to take 
my life. A different letter every day. With no marg
ins, tight text, and vile 
language aimed at my family. This went on for a who
le year.  
 
Was I scared? You betcha. I watched my step every d
ay. I looked both ways. I 
slept with one eye open. She called me every night 
and left horrific messages 
on my answering machine. I would take the tapes of 
these horrible threats 
down to the police, who said at the time that mere 
harassments and threats 
were not crimes. (It actually wasnôt a crime back t
hen, although it is now.) 
?You mean you can only do something if she succeeds
?? I asked in terror. 
They said, ?Yep.? Now believe me, I was genuinely f
rightened for my life. 
But of course, when you are a minister, and you com
e to preach your sermon 
on Sunday, you are in the presence of many, many ot
her people beside 
yourself. Her threats made them vulnerable too, mak
ing everything much, 
much worse. Youôre right. I gave thought to just qu
itting. My whole career. 

  
But instead I chose I have to have a conversation w
ith my Board, inviting 
their feedback. Together we crafted a plan. We agre
ed that if I saw this 
woman approaching the door of the Meeting House, th
rough the window I 
could see from the pulpit, I would say a certain wo
rd, and I would leave by the 
back way, and let her know I was outside the buildi
ng, since her focus was 
only me, not the congregation. Then I would disappe
ar down the well-wooded 
ravine for my own safety, and they would call the p
olice.  
 
The story is a lot longer that what I am telling yo
u, but, in short, with the help 
of a brilliant psychologist I consulted, I was able
 to find a way to give this 
poor disturbed woman some verbal images that actual
ly stopped her scary 
assaults on my life.  At the time, the idea that a 
few choice images could do 
such work after such a long time of frustration fel
t more like a miracle than 
anything else. I assure you I would never have been
 able to come up with the 
solution without leaning on the therapist for help.
  
But all of a sudden, the phone silent, the mailbox 
empty, I felt pretty safe for a 
change. And I realized what a wonderful feeling tha
t is. Safety. 
 
The man who killed and hurt the people of the Tenne
ssee Valley congregation 
assaulted their sense of safety deeply. Far more th
an my own safety was 
assaulted. Some of the kids in the congregation sti
ll wonôt come into certain 
parts of the building. Trauma teams and psychologis
ts have been working 
every day with the survivors, who are defusing thei
r rage and fear, both 
expressed and suppressed. And those who were hurt b
y the gunshots have 
suffered such injury that several will not be able 
to return to work for months, 
including primary breadwinners. So itôs clear that 
the dismantling of a sense 
of safety caused by the act of a deranged man will 
be in effect for a rather 
long time. 

 
I know that folks have pointed out that this man wh
o killed other human 
beings offered as his excuse that he thought that l
iberals were destroying 
America and should be shot. Certainly the books he 
had read by Michael 
Savage and Ann Coulter, which refer to all self-def
ined liberals as being 
mentally ill, or both stupid and not worth spitting
 upon, provide a chilling 
atmosphere in which the murders were perpetrated. N
othing kind or 

 praiseworthy can be said about such cruel and hurtf
ul language, entirely 
comparable to the bullying bureaucrats of every tot
alitarian nation in human 
history, who refer to any group or culture they hat
e and blame as mere vermin, 
i.e. bugs. And as you know, few rush to confess to 
the sin of murder when 
they swat a mosquito. No, there is no doubt the vil
e language of over-
confident right wing pundits ricocheted through the
 sick mind of the killer. 
 
But did these awful books force this man to shoot p
eople?  Many millions of 
others have read these books and have not gone on k
illing sprees, and so there 
is every evidence that this poor man was suffering 
from a kind of emotional 
impairment that can neither be fairly called politi
cal nor philosophical. Just 
tragic and sad.  

 
But such people have always existed. From Jack the 
Ripper to the twisted 
minds that shoot up schools or tie fragile young ga
y men to barbed wire, they 
have always existed. Is there a social atmosphere f
or such crimesñfrom nasty 
books like the aforementioned titles, to distorting
 sermons from religious 
deceivers like Dr. Dobson, to the systemic and soci
al calamities of quicksand 
poverty, unemployment, and racial tension? You betc
ha. Absolutely. But even 
so, if such things had the power people claim for t
hem, murder such as befell 
Knoxville would be common, not rare, and thank good
ness, it is indeed most 
rare. The woman who wanted to kill me was deranged,
 in a day before 
medication was invented which could have reigned he
r in. Her upside-down 
mind was unlucky biology, not evidence of political
 or homophobic animus 
against me.   

 
I was lucky and escaped physical harm. Folks in Kno
xville were not so lucky, 
and will suffer for a good long time. 

 
Is there meaning in such misfortune? No.  As the mo
ther of the nine year old 
in our first reading said, ?I donôt think that trag
edies happen on purpose.? I 
agree. Tragedies are just sad.  

 
Is there something special about me that I am still
 living, despite the bizarre 
assault on my life?  No. I was just lucky. Thatôs a
ll. Was there something 
lacking in Knoxville? Could they have prevented wha
t happened? Of course 

 not. You canôt wrap everyone up in cotton forever t
o keep them from hurting 
themselves, as our story makes clear this morning. 

 
There can be no final guarantees about safety if sa
fety is merely understood as 
freedom from harm. No such guarantees can be made w
hile any of us are still 
alive. Sorry. Even with fire-drills and safety plan
sñwhich I am for, by the 
way. After all, multiplying harbors doesnôt reduce 
the sea, said Ms. Dickinson 
with poetic efficiency. 

 
But gladly, we can find other ways of understanding
 safety. We can find ways 
of responding to tragic events. Emerson said it suc
cinctly: There is safety in 
valor. In courage. And courage is, according to the
 poet Kinnell, one of the 
chief expressions of love. Maybe even the best and 
only, he dares to declare. 
 
Thus, I was 
not
 surprised when I heard about that dear man in Knox
ville 
turning, seeing the gunman, and moving in front of 
the children so as to block 
with his body the shots aimed at the children. 

 
I was 
not 
surprised when I heard of the people tackling the g
unman, wresting 
the gun from him to prevent more hurt at risk of th
eir own lives. 
 
As I was driving through the mountains of Washingto
n State, I was 
not
 surprised when I heard that Rev. Bill Sinkford, the
 President of our Unitarian 
Universalist Association, showed up in Knoxville so
 fast that peopleôs heads 
were still spinning. For love, you see, is courage.
 And solidarity. And 
compassion. And itôs courage, solidarity, and compa
ssion, I think, which 
chiefly reveal and outline the basic character of r
eligious liberals. 
 
I also was not surprised that a service of solidari
ty, valor and compassion 
would be offered here on the Monday evening after t
he shooting, even though 
I was stuck in the Portland Airport and could not l
ead it. For love, 
compassionate courage and valorñand thus safetyñ
thrive and breathe in 
this
 congregation too. I could say I was proud of the re
sponse here, I suppose, but 
that would suggest that I might have imagined some 
other response, and 
frankly, I couldnôt imagine anything else from a co
ngregation of liberal 
character. 

 
 To continue to proclaim how we live our religious l
ife, to continue to be open 
and welcoming, to continue to choose what we have c
hosen, is a great 
expression of love, which Kinnell insists is courag
e. I think of all the 
examples of courage following tragedy offered in ou
r second readingñthe 
Forget-Me-Not Foundation, the YMCA Nancamp, and esp
ecially, Judy 
Shepherdôs breathtaking love and courage following 
the death of her beloved 
son.   

 
So, after a few weeks of giving it some reflection,
 I have to say that I think 
there is safety in this place. Not safety hidden in
 the walls wired with alarms, 
or tucked away in hefty locks, but in the valor of 
day-to-day living as 
Unitarian Universalists. Each of us is a part of th
at valor. Each of us is a part 
of that love in our own way. 

 
The times are tough, they say, the times are tough.
 Wars and rumors of wars. 
Downturns and inflation. Political fisticuffs and p
iles of books with vile titles 
insulting as many people as possible.  

 
But you know what? With the courage, the love, the 
valor Iôve seen recently, 
none of this bends me anymore. I am only encouraged
, buoyed, and grateful to 
be a part of this movement, grateful to claim this 
religious way of moving 
through a hard world, grateful for the details of y
our lives and mine, grateful 
to be engaged. So now, under the lacy huppah of the
 sky, the canopy of 
creation itself, I join hands with all who risk lov
e, who understand that love is 
mostly courage, who smile, knowing that our safety 
is smack dab at the center 
of our courage, and join my life to theirs. In toke
n of this joining, I offer the 
ring called beloved community, the circle that has 
no beginning, and no 
ending. Weôre not at Cape Disappointment today. Cal
l it, if you want a 
geographic image, the Cape of Good Hope instead. 

 
For my hope is undimmed. My love is only growing. M
y fear is fading, 
actually. And you and I are alive, I think, to work
 for a more hopeful, loving 
and safe world for both myself and everyone else al
ive on earth right now. 
 
Blest is the day and task set before us! 

 
 
  
 
 
Offering 

 
They say times are tough,  

and the economy is slow.  

I say the spirit still moves 

among those who care and 

and are committed as fast 

as it ever moved, and as freely. 

We give and receive the morning 

offering in a circle of support 

for the real needs of this house of 

light and love and learning. 

 
Prayer 

 
What wondrous love is this, which is strong 

even when everything has fallen to pieces? 

What wondrous truthfulness is this, 

which shines relentlessly even when the clouds  

fool themselves that they have put out the light? 

What wondrous wisdom is this, 

which resists the distortions of human brokenness b
y simply breathing steady 
without panic or paranoia? 

What wondrous day is this, which opens 

up before us, filled with love, truthfulness and wi
sdom and wonder? 
 
 
