  December 7, 1986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchMorningPastor John Piper, preachingCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper    PREPARING TO RECEIVE CHRIST  WILLING TO DO THE WILL OF GOD John 7:14-18 About the middle of the feast Jesus went up into the temple and taught. TheJews marveled at it, saying, "How is it that this man has learning, whenhe has never studied?" So Jesus answered them, "My teaching is not mine,but his who sent me; if any man's will is to do his will, he shall know whetherthe teaching is from God or whether I am speaking on my own authority. Hewho speaks on his own authority seeks his own glory; but he who seeks theglory of him who set him is true, and in him there is no falsehood. The question we are asking in these advent messages is: How is the heartprepared to receive Christ? What must happen to our heart so that we willreceive Christ for who he really is? Last week our text was Matthew 16:17. When Peter had recognized Jesus forwho he really was, Jesus said, "Blessed are you Simon bar Jonah, for fleshand blood has not revealed this to you, but my Father who is in heaven."So we learned that in order to recognize and receive Christ for who he reallyis we need something more than flesh and blood, something more than our ordinary,natural human powers. We need a revelation from God the Father. "Flesh andblood has not revealed this to you, but my Father in heaven." But we stressed that this personal revelation from God concerning the Sonis not a message telling us things about the Son that we can't see in himthrough his word. Jesus is not honored if he is "received" because of externalconstraints that do not come from his own irresistible glory. So the revelationthat the Father gives is not of that kind. It is the opening of the eyesof the heart to see Jesus for who he really is so that we freely and trulyreceive him for who he really is. It is the God who said, "Let light shine out of darkness," who has shonein our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in theface of Christ. (2 Corinthians 4:6) Today we add another piece in answer to the question, How is the heart preparedto receive Christ? The text is taken from the Gospel of John. Before we getinto the text itself it may be helpful to show that this talk of "receivingChrist" is in fact a Biblical way of talking about conversion, especiallyin the Gospel of John, and that it is something quite radical. Let's lookat just two examples: John 1:11-13 He came to his own home, and his own people received him not. But to allwho received him, who believed in his name, he gave power to become childrenof God; who were born, not of blood nor of the will of the flesh nor of thewill of man, but of God. Here it seems that receiving Jesus is essentially the same as believing onhis name. His name is his whole identity. So receiving him is to believein all that he is. Tozer put it like this: "To 'accept Christ' . . . we accept his friends asour friends, His enemies as our enemies, His ways as our ways, His rejectionas our rejection, His cross as our cross, His life as our life and His futureas our future." (Gems from Tozer, p. 51) It is very harmful to people to create and atmosphere in which people thinkthat they are saved by "receiving Jesus as Savior" when they reject him inmany other ways. "Receiving Jesus" means receiving Jesus for who he reallyis -- Savior, Lord, Marriage Counselor, Vocational Counselor, Therapist,Financial Planner, Nutritional Specialist, Wardrobe Consultant, etc. To tryto pick and choose the things about Jesus you find convenient to receive,rejecting the rest, is not to receive Jesus as he really is. John 12:48 He who rejects me and does not receive my sayings has a judge; the word thatI have spoken will be his judge on the last day. Here receiving or rejecting Jesus is directly connected with receiving orrejecting his sayings. From the Biblical standpoint it is simply unthinkablethat a person could claim to have "received Jesus" and yet have no desireto learn and obey his sayings. If the option were open to receive Jesus as Savior and not receive his teachingsas our daily norm, then Satan would be the first person in line to receiveJesus as Savior, so that he could stay evil but escape suffering. These two examples will suffice I think simply to make the point that whenwe speak of "receiving Jesus" we are using good Biblical language aboutconversion and we are talking about something radical, something thatrevolutionizes a person's life and never lets him go back. Now what must happen to a person's heart to prepare it to receive Christlike that? Jesus gives another part of the answer in John 7. Let's get thecontext in view first. According to verse 2 it is time for the feast of Tabernacles. This wouldbe a great opportunity for Jesus to demonstrate his miraculous powers andwin a big following -- so his brothers thought. Verse 3: So his brothers said to him, "Leave here and go to Judea, that your disciplesmay see the works you are doing. For no man works in secret if he seeks tobe know openly. If you do these things, show yourself to the world." This sounds at first like the sentiment of a true believer. But John saysin verse 5 that the reason Jesus' brothers said this, was that they did NOTbelieve in him. "For even his brothers did not believe in him." Evidentlyyou can be confident in Jesus as a great miracle worker and be full of desirethat many people see his greatness, and yet not have saving faith in Jesus.What was wrong with their enthusiasm? We will see in a moment. Jesus answers their suggestion to go up to the feast in verse 6, "My timehas not yet come, but your time is always here. The world cannot hate you,but it hates me because I testify of it that its works are evil." So Jesushas no intention to use his miraculous power to make himself popular. Hehas no intention to fill churches with enthusiastic unchanged people likehis brothers. He tells people that their works are evil and and so he doesnot get popular he gets crucified. What his brothers appear to be missing is the moral basis of genuine savingfaith. They don't see that to receive Jesus for who he really is requiresa change of heart about popularity. When John says in verse 5 that even hisbrothers did not believe on Jesus, he alerts us to a deep work that needsto happen in our hearts to prepare us to receive Christ for who he reallyis. When Jesus finally goes up to Jerusalem in the middle of the feast (v. 10)he goes privately, not ostentatiously as his brothers had hoped. And insteadof doing dazzling miracles he goes into the temple and begins to teach. Andin his teaching he reveals to his own brothers and to us what preparationhas to precede the receiving of Christ for who he really is. In verse 15 the Jews are amazed at his teaching, and they say, "How is itthat this man has learning, when he has never studied?" We know from verse19 that these are Jews who are seeking to kill Jesus. So their amazementin verse 15 is not an appreciative amazement at Jesus' insight. It is a scoffingamazement at Jesus' presumption: How can he dare to assume the role of anauthoritative rabbi when he has not received the ordinary training! So the question is on the table: How can Jesus teach like this and standin the place of a rabbi? His answer in verse 16 is this: "My teaching is not mine, but his who sentme." So Jesus denies that his taking the role of a teacher in the templeis presumption because he is not speaking words that merely originate withhim. He is a mouthpiece of the One who sent him, namely God. Rabbis get theirauthority by being faithful to the teachers of the law who have gone before.Jesus gets his authority by being faithful to the Lawgiver himself who speaksdirectly through him -- more directly than they ever dreamed. "My teachingis not mine but his who sent me." Now a new question is on the table: How can the Jews know that this claimto speak for God is true? How can they -- and how can we -- know whetherJesus' teaching is from God or merely from himself? If we are going to receiveJesus for who he really is we must know whether he is God's true spokesman.How can we know? Jesus goes on in verse 17 to give the answer: If any man's will is to do his will, he shall know whether the teaching isfrom God or whether I am speaking on my own authority (literally: from myself). Let's look at this very carefully. How shall someone know if Jesus' teachingis of God? A person shall know (according to a literal rendering) "if oneis willing to do his (that is, God's) will." The condition of knowing iswilling. Now if we must know whether the teaching of Jesus is of God before we canreceive him as he is -- and surely we must -- then the way the heart is preparedto receive Jesus is by getting a certain kind of will, namely, a will thatwills what God wills. This is very crucial for understanding how we come to receive Christ. Toreceive Christ you must recognize him for who he really is, namely, One whoseteaching is God's teaching and not merely man's. But, Jesus says in John7:17, you will never know this about him (and thus never receive him forwho he is) unless you have a will that inclines to do the will of God. He is not merely saying that a certain kind of willing (or wanting or desiringor inclining or preferring) must precede our receiving Christ. He is sayingthat a certain kind of willing must precede our knowing, our recognizing,that Christ is worthy of being received. He is not merely saying you haveto want Jesus in order to receive Jesus. He is saying you have to want yourwhole life to be shaped by the will of God in order to even recognize Jesus.To paraphrase the verse: "If anyone wills (wants, prefers, desires) to dothe will of God, then and only then will that person be able to know thedivine authority of Jesus -- that his teaching is God's." So Jesus is saying that the basic reason why people do not own up to thetruth of what he teaches is not that they lack sufficient evidence, but thattheir wills -- or we could say their hearts -- are against God. The fundamentalproblem is not intellectual but moral. The great obstacle to recognizingthe truth of Christ is not deficient resources but deep rebellion againstGod. People cannot see and recognize the truth of Christ's teaching becausethe prevailing tendency of their will is insubordination against the authorityof God. There is only one close parallel to John 7:17 in this gospel. It is a textthat says exactly the reverse of what 7:17 says, but it sheds much lighton the meaning of our text. John 7:17 speaks of one whose will is to do thewill of God. John 8:44 speaks of those whose will is to do the will of thedevil. In John 8:43 Jesus asks the question, "Why do you not understand what I say?"He answers in the next sentence, "It is because you cannot bear to hear myword." (Literally: Because you cannot hear my word.) But why can't they hearhis word? They are hearing him with their physical ears. What does he meanthat they cannot hear? And if they can't hear why are they responsible tohear? Why are they guilty for not hearing? Jesus answers those questions in verse 44. The reason they can't hear hisword is that they are of their father the devil, and their will is to dotheir father's desires. "You are of your father the devil, and your willis to do your father's desires." This is the closest parallel in the Gospel of John to John 7:17. There Jesussays that if our will is to do the will of God, we will recognize that histeaching is divine. Here he says that if our will is to do the will of thedevil, we will not be able to hear or know his teaching. The same truth lies behind both texts: before we can hear the word of Christand recognize it as sent from God and worthy of being received, our willmust be brought into alignment with the will of God. Something has to happendeep down in the root of our will to remove the rebellion against God thatwe all have by nature. Something has to happen to take away our antagonismagainst the authority of God. Last week we compared 1 Corinthians 2:14 ("the natural man does not receivethe things of the Spirit") with Matthew 16:17 ("flesh and blood did not revealthis to you but my Father in heaven"). Today I want us to compare Romans8:7-8 with John 7:17. Paul says, The mind of the flesh is hostile toward God, for it does not submit to God'slaw, indeed it cannot; and those who are in the flesh cannot please God. In other words, apart from the work of the Holy Spirit (v. 9), our willsare deeply, often unknowingly, antagonistic toward God and resistant to hisauthority, insubordinate to his law, and so unable to please him. Now Jesus adds in John 7:17 that unless this rebellious bent of our willsis changed we will never be able to even recognize the divine beauty of histeaching and know that it is from God. When he says, "If anyone's will isto do God's will, he shall know whether the teaching is from God or whetherI am speaking on my own authority," he means that our hard, fallen, rebelliouswill must become soft and docile and compliant to the will of God if we areever going to be able to assess the teaching of Jesus accurately. A rebelliouswill toward God produces a blind eye toward Jesus. But will the text let us be any more specific? What is it about the teachingof Jesus that makes it so hard for a rebellious will to see? Or, reversingthe question, what is it about a rebellious will that makes it so blind tothe teaching of Jesus? This is the question I think John 7:18 was intendedto answer. Jesus goes on to say, He who speaks on his own authority (Or: from himself) seeks his own glory;but he who seeks the glory of him who sent him is true, and in him thereis no falsehood. Here Jesus gives an objective criterion for assessing his truth. If his lifeis devoted to enjoying and magnifying the glory of God, and not his own privateglory, then he is true. But now put verses 17 and 18 together and see what you come up with. Verse17 says that in order to recognize the divine truth of Jesus' teaching therebellion of your will must be overcome so that it wills what God wills.Verse 18 says that in order to recognize the truth of Jesus you need to seethat his life is devoted to the glory of God. When I look at these two verses together I see two facts and I draw twoconclusions: Fact # 1: the truth of Jesus is shown by his commitment to enjoy and magnifythe glory of God rather than seeking his own private glory (v. 18). Fact # 2: the rebellion of our fallen will makes us blind to the truth ofJesus. (If we willed what God willed we would see the truth. v.17) Conclusion # 1: therefore the specific thing that our wills rebel againstin the will of God is that his glory not ours should be the quest and passionof our lives. Conclusion # 2: therefore the reason we can't see the truth of Jesus is becausehe embodies the will of God which we hate, namely, that God's glory and notours should be the quest and passion of our lives. I close with by directing your attention to John 5:41-44 where thisinterpretation is confirmed. Jesus says to those who are rejecting him, I do not receive glory from men. But I know that you have not the love ofGod within you. I have come in my Father's name, and you do not receive me;if another comes in his own name, him you will receive. How can you believe,who receive glory from one another and do not seek the glory that comes fromthe only God? In other words you can't believe if your will is bent on relishing the glorythat comes from men and not the glory that comes from God. Which is justanother way of saying, We will never recognize the truth of Jesus until ourwill is to do God's will, namely, to love the glory of God above our own. When we come to will what God wills, namely, the enjoyment and magnificationof his glory, then we shall know concerning the teaching of Jesus, whetherit is of God. And we will receive him for who he really is -- the way thetruth and the life. Prepare your hearts this advent season to receive the Lord for who he reallyis. Cultivate a love for the glory of God. If you wanted to develop a love for the glory of classical music, you wouldstudy it and spend time talking with people who love it, and you would listenand listen and listen. If you wanted to develop a love for the glory of visual art, you would studyit and go to museums and spend time with those who love it and you wouldlook and look and look. If you wanted to develop a love for the glory of the sky you would get atelescope and you would read astronomy and you would spend time with peoplewho love the stars and night by night you would gaze and gaze and gaze. And if you want to love the glory of God above all other glories, then youwill study God and spend time with lovers of God and listen to God and lookat God and gaze and gaze and gaze at the revelation of the glory of God.   Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
