Westboro Baptist Church February 16, 2014  This sermon is in two parts and it builds upon the wonderful sermon Brother Charles preached on repentance. When it comes to this serious topic our generation(s) has a number of faulty assumptions.  Faulty Assumption 1: Most of the Things People Do Are Not a Sin to Begin With  Mt. 4:17 From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. I agree with Brother Charles when he said this was the central theme of Christ's ministry on earth and the backdrop to everything He said and did. This is a particularly callous time we live in, but our generation(s) is not all that different than those of the past.  Mt. 11:20, 23 Then began He (Jesus) to upbraid (reproach, revile, throw in your teeth) the cities wherein most of His mighty works were done, because they repented not... And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell: for if the mighty works, which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day.  Christ and His disciples had done  Chorazin  SYRIA  particularly mighty works in Capernaum, Chorazin and Bethsaida and they repented  not. More miracles were done in  Capernaum (according to the New  Testament) than almost anywhere else. It  sits on the north shore of the Sea of Galilee.  It was a hot bed of activity for the apostles  because Peter, Andrew (fishermen ­ I will  Samaria  make you fishers of men), James, John and  Matthew all lived there. In Mt. 4:13 it says  And (Christ) leaving Nazareth... came and  dwelt in Capernaum. Christ did amazing  things there including: 1) cured the centurion's servant, 2) recovered Peter's  wife's mother from a fever, 3) healed the man sick of a palsy, 4) raised a man's  daughter from the dead, 5) made whole the woman that had a bloody issue, 6/7)  1|Page  opened the eyes of two blind men, and 8) cast out a devil from a dumb man. Even with that great light dwelling in their city they said all manner of evil about Christ, persecuted him and his disciples, and they repented not, because they did not believe there was a reason to. This is a common theme in the Bible. Rev. 9:20 And the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues yet repented not (I.) of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood: which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk: 21 Neither repented they of their (II.) murders, nor of their (III.) sorceries, nor of their (IV.) fornication, nor of their (V.) thefts. In Revelation 9 crazy things are happening in the world. The de-creation of the world is well under way and the locusts like unto horses are killing and creating mayhem, and yet men repented not. In our day everyone sees these supernatural events that are happening (2004 Tsunami in Indonesia, 2005 Hurricane Katrina, 2010 Haiti Earthquake, 2011 Japanese Earthquake, 2012 Super Storm Sandy, etc.) and yet no one is repenting, in fact it is just the opposite, it is getting worse. (I) - In Revelation 9:20 of the sins men repented not of, God leads with the sin of idol worship. Beloved there is madness in the land that dominates the religious worship of our day. It holds that you can actually take your hands and make, buy, distribute, and worship idols and graven images of any and all kinds and it is okay with God. Beloved, God forbid. We are seemingly the only ones sensitive to this practice which Satan knows men naturally run to. When the verse says "and idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood: which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk," of course it is not limited to just those materials beloved. They were meant as representative of anything you can make an idol out of... concrete, plastic, ceramic, paper, electronic and all the rest. We stood at a monstrous catholic church in Newark, New Jersey a few weeks ago where there were concrete crosses and statues of Mary, Jesus and others built into the structure of the building. The church had concrete gargoyles that protruded out of the structure 3 feet, I kid you not. There 2|Page  were probably 20-30 of them at the top of the mammoth spires all around the structure. They use gargoyles you know to scare off evil spirits. These churches are monstrously superstitious and full of idols. Why do you need a dead concrete gargoyle when He who neither slumbers nor sleeps is watching? (Ps. 121:4). God is a Spirit: and they that worship Him must worship Him in spirit and in truth (John 4:24). God does not want people worshipping some tacky worldly, fleshly representation of Him. Ex.20:4 Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image. He wants his people to keep His commandments, to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts and live soberly, righteously and godly (Titus 2:12). You keep your ubiquitous crucifixes (St. David's), your church art including the Sistine Chapel, your Jesus fish car emblems, your St. Christopher necklaces, your rosary beads, your WWJD charm bracelets, your lying fake Jesus portraits, your Lord's Supper souvenir plates, and your plastic Jesus dashboard bobble heads. Beloved, if you do these things you are worshipping devils in God's eyes ­ you are worshipping Satan. The verse says "that they should not worship devils." All of verse 20 is talking about the subject of idols. This generation, like prior generations has come together with few exceptions and said we love idol worship and we are going to have them and to hell with you God if you do not like it. They repent not. This issue runs deep with God in that he reserved 7,000 men that had not bowed the knee to the image of Baal (1 Kings 19:17, Rom. 11:4). Even though idols are everywhere in our day, they are still hated by Christ and if you partake of that sin, you are fighting for Satan and headed to hell. (II) - What's number two on the list that this world stubbornly refuses to repent of? ... it's murders. There is a lot of murder going on in this world beloved including in Syria where the government has besieged the City of Homs for 18 months and where they are eating grass, weeds and roots. We told everyone you will be eating your babies soon. Last summer the government used chemical weapons to murder hundreds of women and children by asphyxiation and then they immediately followed it up by the worse shelling of the war, because it was easy to finish them off. Thou shalt not kill (Ex. 20:13). Gill: thou shalt not do anything hurtful or injurious (rape, assault, battery, torture, etc.) to the health, ease, and life, of thy own body (no suicide ­ self/murder), or any other person's unjustly. It does not forbid killing in "lawful war" or self-defense. 3|Page  Quit killing the saints and prophets of God, babies (U.S. Total 53,000,000+ that they admit to) and other people. Luke 3:14 - And the soldiers likewise demanded of him (John the Baptist), saying, and what shall we do [to be saved]? And he said unto them, do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely; and be content with your wages. Mt. 5:21-22 Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment. But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council: but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. Beloved, the murder or hurt of another human being should be avoided at all cost and the desire to do such things should be avoided. This American Life is a radio program that is a part of National Public Radio (NPR) and it is the most popular podcast in the United States with more than 2 million weekly listeners. You can check it out on your mobile phone using the "Podcast" icon. This American Life did a recent story on a soldier who served three tours in Afghanistan. While he was in Afghanistan they asked him to make regular recordings of himself during his deployment (Good Guys, Act 4). Here is part of the story:  The soldier said: In infantry school I would be shocked the reasons that people were there. People, well, I wouldn't say people, men want to kill other young men. That's why they were there.  The producers said: He (the soldier) said deep down the men didn't just want to kill the enemy they wanted the opportunity to kill another human being period. Not everyone was like this, but most of them. At first this disturbed him, but then after a while it didn't. The army and the training changed him.  The soldier said: o So I have really realized that building up to my deployment that I am not any different than most of these people. Regardless of the noble aspirations that I have for joining the army I am pretty sure I just want the opportunity to kill someone too. If I am being honest with myself, it is there. 4|Page  o You do learn too... they do teach you to want that (to kill), you yearn for that and in basic training and at least in infantry basic training over and over again the only success you get is hitting a target, or winning a fight. Everything else you are criticized for, but if you do those things you are doing good. The interaction you have with your drill sergeant is based on killing somebody. o Half of the people we rolled up on (in Afghanistan) were probably innocent, but we would have killed them if we could have gotten away with it. It is homicidal. It is simply the repercussions that stopped us from murdering those people. This is the norm, it is not abnormal there. I have been there. I have been around hundreds of men with the same mindset. It is not me, I am simply a representation of the community I was working in. o People can say it's because they are the enemy but that's not it. You are on the verge of having the power to do it (kill people), and the permission to do it, so you want to do it. Every day I wondered if this was the day I would kill someone. Every mission I was hoping I get to kill someone. [On] every mission this was actively talked about (in his unit). o Everyone wanted to get their first kill and if you didn't have it, everyone (in the unit) knew that and talked about it... of course everyone knew this. If you had a kill, people trusted you and knew you were dependable. o My threshold for violence is much less now. I would kill people more readily and quickly than the normal person and I actively hope to have those situations (he is no longer actively deployed). If I have a good excuse to kill somebody I would definitely do it. o Once you take the training it's your job to kill people and you want that experience.  A military psychiatrist was quoted in the story as follows: o This is a normal part of war. Society's most basic prohibition is to not kill so a basic part of military training is to get people to the point that they can cross that line. Beloved, it is impossible to repent of something you are not only proud of, but you get satisfaction and recognition from others for. The sentiment these soldiers 5|Page  pray and yearn for is "I will be looked upon as a hero by the military, my family and my country if I kill." That is murder wrapped around pride. This is a carefully crafted cultish psychological marketing strategy produced by the U.S. Department of Defense and gobbled up by the media, the evangelical Christians and the average man on the street. When I was a boy, there was a strong anti-war movement with protests in the street and riots of college campuses over the Vietnam War. Yes, they were opposed to the draft, but they were opposed to the war in general as well. That is gone. We do not have that sentiment anymore. The U.S. Department of Defense was not happy over the backlash of Vietnam so they went back to the drawing boards and manufactured a marketing strategy they could sell. Here is it is: "God bless our troops." Beloved, the U.S. military has a multi-billion dollar budget and sophisticated marketing and propaganda strategy with research to back it up. It is like any Fortune 500 company, except their marketing budget is larger. The Army for example has the Army Marketing and Research Group (AMRG) that reports to an assistant of the Secretary of the Army." Listen to what they say: The Army brand is really the ongoing dialogue we have with the American people... [the Army] Brand is what is believed and what is believable about an organization. And, what is most believable is what you are able to see and experience without the filters of the media, entertainment, etc. The AMRG's mission is to make the Army more transparent to the American people; explained in a way that is accessible and shows how truly extraordinary the U.S. Army and American solider are... It is important that Army story is synchronized through all communications channels ­ marketing, advertising, recruitment, public affairs and legislative affairs." Beloved they repented not of their murders. The Army brand is fundamentally the teaching and training of young people to kill their fellow man and not feel remorse for it. The way to heaven is not through killing and murdering people. (III) - Number three on the list of the things they did not repent of is sorceries. That word "sorceries" is 5331 in Strong's, the Greek word is "pharmakeia" from which we get our word pharmacology. Number 1 on the list in Strong's is "the use 6|Page  of administering of drugs." This is interesting given the widespread abuse of pharmaceuticals generally (Justin Bieber) and the passage of recreational Marijuana in Colorado and Washington. My step father owned a liquor store and he would often refer to himself as a drug dealer. Number 3 on Strong's list for sorceries is "magical arts." Deut. 18:10 - There shall not be found among you ...[anyone] that useth divination, or an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch, or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer. For all that do these things are an abomination unto the LORD. Such conduct is alive and well and practiced on a large scale. Topeka has their own coven, and the witch at the top has withstood us from our earliest days on the picket line. (IV) - Number four on the list is fornication. Beloved, do not be confused by that word. Webster defines "fornication" as consensual sexual intercourse between two persons not married to each other. The word "fornication" is 4202 in Strong's is the Greek word "porneia" and it is much broader than Webster's definition: 1) illicit sexual intercourse 1a) adultery, fornication, homosexuality, lesbianism, intercourse with animals etc. 1b) sexual intercourse with close relatives; #Le 18:6-23 1c) sexual intercourse with a divorced man or woman; #Mr 10:11,12 2) metaph. the worship of idols 2a) of the defilement of idolatry, as incurred by eating the sacrifices Beloved, this generation refuses to repent of their adultery, fornication, homosexuality, lesbianism, bestiality, incest and idolatry. Gill: All sorts of uncleanness; not only simple fornication [sex between unmarried persons], but adultery, incest, sodomy, and all unnatural lusts; brothel houses have been set up and licensed by authority, which have yielded to the popes a yearly revenue of forty thousand ducats; the Romish clergy, popes, cardinals, priests, monks, and friars, have been dreadfully guilty of all manner of uncleanness, and still are... 7|Page  This nation is a long lover of "simple" (garden variety) fornication. I found a statistic once that said that 70% of all young people in the United States between the ages of 17-21 have committed fornication. Fornication is widely and openly found in all this country's Churches. The religious leaders of these churches either openly condone it or look the other way and ignore it, because if they were to look too far down that hole, they know there is no end to it. If any Church enforces this prohibition, they will not have a Church; all of the members will leave. And as if simple fornication was a light thing we now move on to more complex forms of it including adultery and the ancient sin of sodomy. This nation is not repenting of its simple fornication it is compounding the error by lusting after sodomy and same-sex marriage; it is getting worse, not better. And do not forget that fornication applies to the religious worship of idols. Rev. 2:20-21 Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee (the Church at Thyatira), because thou sufferest that woman Jezebel, which calleth herself a prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto idols. And I gave her space to repent of her fornication; and she repented not. God is enormously long suffering and incredibly patient. It's hard to paint a worse picture of a human being than Queen Jezebel, but God even gave her space for repentance, and when she did not, he fed her to the dogs. (V.) Thefts ­ Strong's says this word means: 1) thing stolen; 2) the act of theft. This is not just talking about someone robbing you in the middle of the night. That is child's play. This is broader than that. There is a lot of stealing in this world, I would say the majority of it is not that type.  National Stealing ­ This country stole tens of millions of acres from the Indians and swindled them in treatises there were never fulfilled and moved them from rich lands of abundance to desert land. This country stole the lives of millions of people by enslaving them. What reparations have they received? 8|Page   Corporate Stealing ­ I think on a dollar basis this has to be one of the highest. Corporate stealing is rampant. This includes corporations gouging customers and clients and misleading investors and the like. It goes on all the time in every industry. You cannot go but a few weeks and the Department of Justice is talking about record fines in this or that industry.  Stealing of One's Identity ­ That is one of the fastest growing crimes in the world and one we are very familiar with. These are ordinary thieves that do this. They steal billions of dollars from people annually. Just look at the recent Target security breach.  Stealing from Employers ­ You cannot hardly go but a few months and you read about local stealing by secretaries, controllers, managers and the like. Remember the lawyer that hated us, that lives in my old house a few blocks away that stole from Crime Stoppers. In Mayeta a few weeks back a treasurer for the local fire district was convicted of stealing $425,000 by issuing checks with forged signature to fictitious companies over four years so the fire district couldn't pay its bills.  Stealing From God ­ Mal 3:7-9 Even from the days of your fathers ye are gone away from mine ordinances, and have not kept them. Return unto me, and I will return unto you, saith the LORD of hosts. But ye said, Wherein shall we return? Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole nation.  Churches ­ Gill: nor of their thefts; who under pretense of granting indulgences and pardons, and praying souls out of purgatory, with other tricks, cheat men of their money, pillage and plunder their estates, and devour widows' houses; rob men of their substance, and make merchandise of their souls.  Stealing/Robbing o A woman in Wichita recently had an aneurysm at a fast-food restaurant and eventually died. While she was unconscious, someone stole a ring she had on (presumably a wedding ring). 9|Page  o In Salina recently a man broken into the drive-thru window of a Dairy Queen and he stole $200...worth of ice cream. He stole buster bars, Dilly Bars and DQ sandwiches. While he was stealing the frozen goods he dropped a few pieces of mail in the parking lot next door. It was the burglar's mail with his name and address on it. They got a search warrant for his freezer. I believe stealing is a national past time in this country. These people do not repent for these crimes or show any remorse. Such is the way of an adulterous woman; she eateth, and wipeth her mouth, and saith, I have done no wickedness. Pr. 30:20 I love you all. Amen. 10 | P a g e  
