Fully psychotic
On the next day I was sitting there in lunch time and began to tremble with weakness. From the opposite Spree river bank it thundered from a building site over here. Yes, it is Thursday (German: es donnerte am Donnerstag), I began to understand, and this was my test to stand. My work on the computer was urgent. But I wasn't capable of anymore work. A certain Heinrich called, they needed the lists immediately. Heinrich, the carriage breaks! This Frog Prince utterance came only into my mind. I asked a colleague to help me. At 14 o'clock I made end of workday. I told my colleagues, I would have to recover firstonce. (actually they wanted to go afterwards with me to the physician. So I forestalled them.) Before leaving the factory I got still the evening newspaper to read and my overtaxed brain played the next trick on me.
All articles were exactly adapted to me and my situation. Only I could read the secret messages between the lines. They wanted thereby to say to me somewhat. It was suddenly clear for me that I was kept under secret surveillance. And it was an East-West problem, which was it about. Because I was from East-Berlin, the eastern side was the good one. The West should be tricked somehow. (this process of reference finding on yourself when reading newspapers or experiencing situations, takes place also at mental healthy humans, but these would not consider seriously that they are personally addressed thereby. Only an extremely overtaxed brain cannot differentiate no more between information, for one is intended and other general environmental information.)
When I left the building, a young boy trilled with a trill whistle. Now it begans, I thought. Am I beeing filmed? A woman went ahead to the rapid-transit railway. Under her skirt she had bloody legs. They wanted to make me feeling unwell! That was certainly a hint that I was not allowed to go to the rapid-transit railway. There were certainly the bad western guys, who wanted to kill me. I changed the roadside. Now an unpleasant older man with black leather jacket went slowly ahead. That was the Death! Or at least an allegory for it. I frightened and went in into a house, waited until the chap was away. What now? How should it continue now? I followed my instinct and went on winding ways through Treptower park and Plaenter-Forest toward my apartment. Everything which I saw on the way, had its meaning and a reference to me. The people, which I met or saw, were there only because of me. This was a test!
I made rest in the "Little Egg-House" at the Spree river, drank coffee and ate a piece of cakes. I was observed, clearly. A man who smoked a pipe, was looking at me ever and ever. On the bar a sign hung: "only for V.I.P." - very important person - only for quite special people. I thought, therefore is the thing quite large with you, into which only few people are let in on. Well dressed older ladies came in. They were from the west side! They found me! I paid and went into home direction, but not the direct way the rapid-transit railway station, but in a spiral form up to the dwelling. Traffic signs, the colours of the cars and their stop lights seemed to show me the way. I asked myself, what expects me at home? About what did it actually go in this test? At home everything was the old.
In the evening I drove off again - this time I dared to drive with the rapid-transit railway - with the idée fixe to have to drive to a certain address. Perhaps did I experience more there? The people, which met me, were specially because of me there, said to me my feeling. They were the good ones, watched out for me. There I could go, where I wanted, always was they and observed me. But they made it quite inconspicuous and professional. Certainly specially trained, I thought. When I was then at the address, talking with that people, it was clear to me that it could not be that. On the way back I met passerbies, who said: "One monkey fewer!". That was quite clearly a hint to me and means unsuccessful attempt of getting contact. Or perhaps a reference to my company and the bad boss. Had they arrested him?
In the middle at the night at 2 o'clock I woke up. What the matter only was with my heart? Such pulling and pressing! Opposite in the backyard was an office building. There often in the evening was light in the highest floor. Someone had to indicate these pain from the outside, was suddenly clear to me. There they musted have a new ray cannon to me aligned. In the apartment I could not stay, I thought, otherwise I would die. I wanted to drive anyway in the morning to parents. Then I now drive off, with the bicycle, I said to me. I left everything untouched and to be situated, however put something to eat with me, because I had a long tour before me. It was a mild night at 21rst October 1988. The large city was sleeping.
I had never before driven the route, which I drove, large part. I avoided the large roads. There the western guys could be! The psychotic experiencing continued at the whole tour. The red neon signs at the houses did to me well and said : "You are on the correct way!" Passage prohibitions and one-way streets did not disturb me. In the opposite: Red means: Well so! Also the street names inspired me and gave me courage. A road had wet-squirted. That they made, I realized specially for me. They knew already that I come along here. I seemed to pass the test well. Thus over the puddles! Outside I met a few road-sweepers, sweeping leaves. That was a signal! I descended and pushed my bicycle past. Take a breather, something eat! You are good in the time, wanted to say they to me.
I almost lost my way, but fortunately I saw the lights of the next city lighting up then into the night sky and knew again the direction. In the new building quarters of this city was festive lighting on the roads. The reddish light of the sodium-vapor lamps made courage for me. And everywhere was flown with GDR flags. Because of me, I thought. How dear! (in reality they hung still there of the 7th October - the national holiday.) I felt, how the power left me. My food run out and I had still another whole distance to drive. At the end of the town I discovered suddenly an apple on the road. It was a great red apple. They must have put that down for me, I thought. They knew exactly, how far my energy reserves would last. The apple was eating and drinking in one. This was perhaps a discreet, but permitted assistance from the background. The test had to be absolutely passed!
On the highway a dead black cat was at the roadside. This is a test, I said myself and that has somewhat symbolful. I am certainly to worry about the cat. She was stiff. I pushed her in the ditches. There she should have her peace! Many cars already were oncoming. Their lights dazzled me. And the Russian trucks thundered and hummed and made to me courage in the heart. It grew slowly bright. Now I could use a short cut through the forest. Here I knew my way around. I got a quite pleasant, lucky feeling in the body. In a minute I had done it! It was autumn. Everywhere golden leaves at the trees and quite little nebulas. Marvelously! That was my forest! On secret paths I drove to the apartment of my parents. It was 7:30 a.m.. My mother wanted just to go to the work.
I had done it! I was free on Friday (Freeday). Free of the work and free of Berlin. Was it that? A test whether I can do it without other assistance, driving at night to here? Had East and West bet on me? By the eastern radio newscaster I felt my opinion reinforced, the western speakers were annoyed and spiteful. Outside cars drove past with red labels. They hummed loudly. That gave me strength and courage, however there crawled along also western cars - the opposite side. Had they found me or did look after me? I got from my mother a calming pill and afterwards I slept all day long. (my mother was already very concerned because of my strange behavior.) When I believed then on the next day to have to drive still before the breakfast to my granny into the old people's home, it was too much for her. She ordered the ambulance. There was a "good" and a "bad" patient driver. I saw it at their eyes. That had to be probably belong to the test, I thought and made no rebellion. I still wasn't crazy! But it was humiliating.
