
Shavuot – Yizkor 
It makes sense that of the 613 commandments, we would be inclined to pay special attention to the first one and the last one. The great twelfth-century sage Moses Maimonides, in his sefer ha-mitzvot, tallied up all the commandments derived from the five books of the Torah. The first mitzvah – first according to its placement in the narrative and I suppose because without it, none of the other mitzvot really matter – emerges from the Garden of Eden: the command “To be fruitful and multiply.” The last mitzvah, derived from Deuteronomy 31:19, is that it is incumbent on each Israelite to write a sefer Torah for him- or herself. Even though, according to tradition, we have all received the Torah, and even if you live in a community with one, two, three, or more Torah scrolls, Maimonides and later commentators make clear the paramount importance of each and every Jew personally helping to bring a Torah into this world. 
In a sense, it makes perfect sense. Both the first mitzvah and the last mitzvah are about propagation – first of the human species and finally of God’s Torah. On every day of the year, but especially on this festival of Shavuot, we celebrate the giving of the Torah not as a one-time event, but as a reminder to ourselves of our own responsibility to spread the word of God. There is a famous debate recorded in the Talmud between Rabbi Hanina and Rabbi Hiyya (Bava Metzia 85b) discussing if – Heaven forbid – the Torah should be forgotten among the Jewish people, how best to restore what was lost. R. Hanina argued that should such a situation arise, that with his erudition, his incisive analytic abilities, his pilpul, and by force of his charisma and personality, he would singlehandedly restore Torah to the people. While every pulpit rabbi somehow identifies with Hanina’s instincts, it is not he, but Hiyya who carries the day. Hiyya claims that he would not need to restore Torah, because his method would prevent Torah from ever being lost. He would trap deer, feeding their meat to orphans and writing out Torah scrolls on the deerskins. He would then take the Torah scrolls to five children and have each of them learn to teach Torah to five other children who would do the same to five more and five more –over and over – and in this manner, the Torah will never be forgotten. Hiyya’s message is the same as the final commandment. Already in ancient times, the rabbis knew that the only way to sustain a message, to make it go viral, was to create the vehicle, in this case a Torah scroll, by which it could spread. The obligation of each of us to write a Torah scroll reflects the underlying ethic of the entire Torah, that we should imitate God’s ways in everything we do. Healing the sick, caring for the poor, extending hospitality – all these acts that God performed are incumbent upon us. On this festival of Shavuot, just as God gave us Torah, so should we, like God, make for ourselves and ultimately for others – Torah.
All this may be true, but I believe that there is another, more subtle message of the 613th commandment, especially in these moments prior to Yizkor. I am struck by Maimonides’ choice of language. It is incumbent upon each individual to write a sefer Torah l’atzmo, for him- or herself. As if to say, that just as God wrote a sefer Torah reflecting the Divine will and personality, so each person has within him- or herself their own Torah, their own narrative, their own code that reflects the essence of that individual. Each of us is a Torah that may be written, each of us is a Torah that may be given. Not the Torah of Moses, but of each of us – books that will ensure that the Torah of our lives is never forgotten. The Baal Shem Tov, the great eighteenth-century Hasidic master, characterized the Jewish people as a living sefer Torah. As sure as I am that the first of the 613 mitzvot is about beginnings, it strikes me that the final mitzvah charges us to consider endings, namely, the spiritual legacies that extend beyond the length of a human life – the legacies of those we love most – those we remember today.
When we arrive at Yizkor, our emotions necessarily turn somber, as we experience the loss of our loved ones. We remember a parent, a spouse, a sibling, a child, who – whether blessed with the gift of years or cut down prematurely – is now separated from us. We the living, are reminded at this time of how painful it is to live in the absence of those who gave our lives meaning. But Yizkor is about far more than loss, Yizkor is about learning. It is a Torah service within a Torah service, a process by which we take out the narratives of our loved ones, from beginning to end, and we study their lives, and recall, here and now, their teaching. 
The lives of our loved ones, like the Torah itself, are combinations of law and narrative. We remember, of course, the lists of do’s and don’ts; the advice, solicited and unsolicited; the counsel and the wisdom that our loved ones gave us. But I suspect that as with the Torah itself, what truly leaves an impression on us, what we recall most profoundly, is not what was legislated, but what was modeled – the Torah that was lived day in and day out – that taught us so much. We learned and can learn so much from the decisions our loved ones made. The midrash explains that when the children of Israel were wandering through the wilderness, they traveled with not one, but two arks. In the first were the tablets containing the commandments, the laws of the covenant. The second ark, containing the remains of Joseph, was of equal importance, for it was that ark that enabled the Israelites to reflect on a life of righteousness in a way that could never be prompted by a law code. So too with our loved ones as we recall them during Yizkor. As important as what they said, it is what our loved ones did that is the Torah that guides us right now. As Martin Buber taught, “just to live is holy.” 
As anyone who has studied Torah knows, we do not seek only to mimic the lives of those who came before. Just as we struggle with the decisions of Abraham, Isaac, Sarah, Rebecca and other biblical characters, so too we reflect and often wrestle with the lives of those we remember at this time. Each of us is a reflection of, but also a reaction to, the people who shaped us. To consider our loved ones’ lives and acknowledge the distinct paths that we have chosen for ourselves does not diminish our love for them. Today’s act of remembering is not a one-time event. As we do to the Torah itself, we will return again and again to the stories of our loved ones’ lives. And each time, those narratives, though the same stories, will appear to us a little different, for we will be arriving at the text of our loved ones from a different vantage point, a different chapter in our own lives.
Finally, the sifrei Torah that we consider today are not only the books of Moses and the scrolls of our loved ones’ lives, but the sifrei Torah still being written – the ones bearing our own names. Our own stories are still in the midst of being composed. Ultimately, our stories will one day, please God, be remembered by the generations to come. Yizkor is a time to acknowledge that the sacred canon continues to be written, and that we, in this room, are not merely recipients but also creators in that process.
In his short story “The Tale of the Scribe,” Shai Agnon bequeathed to us the image of a Torah scribe who is about to complete a scroll, and who, in keeping with ancient tradition, leaves several verses at the end unfinished, outlining the letters, but not filling them in, so that someone else may fulfill the biblical commandment of writing a Torah scroll. At this moment of Yizkor, each of us has arrived to pick up the quill left for us by prior generations, by loved ones who, though separated from us by death, remain forever in our hearts. We dip the tip of the quill in the inkwell of our tears and we fill in the hollow, outlined letters left open by the generations before. We take that same quill and we outline letters of our own, leaving them open for others to fill as they will see fit. This is the story of our people, the Torah handed down from God to Moses, from generation to generation, the story to this day, the story for generations to come. This is the act of Yizkor.
