Arangaon Dispute 

BY ELIZABETH C. PATTERSON 

Staying at "Meherabad" I feel that I live everywhere and nowhere. Yet through Baba this speck on the map of India which is unknown to the world seems like the pin of the hub that fastens the giant wheel, with its spoke radiating out to the throbbing cities, the arteries of civilization, and to the furthermost ends of the earth. 

Colourful local events assume importance which could have their counterpart in other communities of the world, only against different back≠grounds. 

The little village of Arangaon about a quarter mile from "Meherabad", the temple bells of which we can hear from our hill top, has four hundred in≠habitants. It had its importance, together with Ahmednagar in the time of the brave Mahomedan Queen, Chandbibi, who lived several hundred years ago in the Mogul period and led her armies to victory, although she, riding on her white horse, was killed in the battle. At present in Arangaon there are interesting architectural facades, doorways, windows and other relics of past grandeur including parts of the old wall, but the place is crumbling and poor. The great picturesque fort in Ahmednagar which is large enough to house whole barracks of British troops today, was constructed by Chandbibi. 

There is an ancient feud existing, in Arangaon, the true details of which are lost, but it is kept alive in the village through the inhabitants taking sides, and two 'parties' have long been formed. The village has always been divided against itself, despite the fact that the inhabitants are practically of one caste. 

On Baba's birthday, or other oc≠casions when the villagers come to see him, or they invite Baba to their village for a fete, are the rare occasions when they come together (both parties) peaceably. Recently Baba was invited by the headman of Arangaon, as spokesman, to come to their great 

fete day and give the villagers Darshan or blessings. Knowing that his Western disciples had never seen anything of the kind, Baba invited us to accompany him on what turned out to be a touching miniature "triumphant tour ", for every villager was there lining the cobble≠stoned streets and throwing flowers before the car in which Baba rode. He smiled upon them as the divine parent, which he is in truth, and we could feel their hearts respond. The headman of the village together with musicians and native dancers who were escorting, slowly walked or danced the half a mile distance from 'Meherabad' to Arangaon with its winding streets. At a place especially prepared for Baba near the ancient gateway on the far side of Arangaon, the villagers each in turn passed in front of him and, in the manner which is as old as the East itself, prostrated themselves before his feet, and he touched their heads in blessing. Baba always lets happen that which is prompted by the human heart. 

It occurred a few days later that some minor crime was committed in Arangaon and the ancient feud flared up, the village party was on the point of killing the other when they remem≠bered Baba. They sent a delegation to him saying that only Baba could settle their differences. He returned word that he would meet a contingent from either side, both at the same time, at the Ashram in "Meherabad" that evening. As we rode up the two 'parties' were seated, divided on either side of the building, and Baba arranged that they were kept waiting for a few moments and then suddenly called into the Ashram. In this way they came inside all mixed as one 'party', and Baba requested them at once to be seated on the floor. One villager with murderous thought against the other, found him≠self seated next to another of the opposite partyóbut they were so intent upon putting their side of the question before Baba believing him to be the True Judgeóthat they did what on other occasions would have been impossible without bloodshed. Baba had several of his able, staunch men disciples conduct the gathering and, if more than one villager spoke at a time, they were quietly 





 

but strongly kept in order. Baba showed extreme patience and listened to about forty anguished souls, with all they had to say. Finally one old woman came forward and swayed back and forth, almost as if she were reciting an incantation of all the woes of the race. One of the village men stepped forward and pushed her aside, as even they could not stand so many woes! At another point, when evidently the particular offender was speaking, about ten men arose and commenced yelling at one another. Baba smiled benignly and then clapped his hands for silence. The effect was instantaneous and amazing, for the men so rough and loud, with Baba so gentle in compa≠rison and not speaking, but with only a hand clap of command abated their storm of passion. On his board, inter≠preted by one of his disciples, he in≠formed the gathering that as evidently they had made up their minds not to be peaceable, there was nothing to do but to leave the matter to take its course, and when it reaches the authorities, they would deal with it in their own way. Baba arose to leave. Upon this the villagers who were enjoying their ill feelings towards one another and wished to talk all night, were taken aback and their faces visibly fell, for suddenly the arguers were left without an argument, as fire without fuel ! 

Baba paused at the doorway, and seeing them crestfallen, stated that he would remain only if they would abide by his decisionóto which they agreed. First he took the headman to task for not having kept better order in the village. Some began to feel rather sorry because they felt in their hearts that they were really to blame in the matter. Then he told the dissenters that they must "Forgive and forget and become one." As long as they had two 'parties' they could never accomplish this. There was much discussion amongst them≠selves, and I thought, of course, they were objecting to giving up the two 'parties', but instead there was objection to eating together, as it had been pro≠posed that a village feast be held. The question at issue appeared that one side would not accept food from the other. In Indian custom if both parties accep≠ted to eat 



together it becomes a bond; the same as in our Christian Bible if refers to "breaking bread together " as something sacred, but we in the West have lost the significance that the East still has for this rite. 

It was agreed finally that if Baba himself would give the food, they would both accept from him and thereby become one family. In this concrete manner, a few days after Baba thus blessed this flock of black and white sheep, by uniting them from ancient hatred into fellowship. 

On twenty-sixth of November last, as the Arangaon villagers wished to ex≠press their appreciation to Baba and to cement their union by coming to him, a gathering was arranged which com≠menced at sunset time. A long line con≠sisting of the four hundred inhabitants, together with their children. came up the hill where we are residing, led by their musicians who kept time in a slow rhythm of dance. Baba was seated on the ground in front of the place where once he had retired in seclusion for a year and where now there is erected, 

over his cave, a white domed structure. 

The evening ceremony consisted of a bhajan, or sacred recital, sung before Baba. Until now the former 'parties' had kept back one thing, which Baba knew, and that was sitting next to each other in the temple. Instead they held the weekly bhajans separately. This sacred song recital in Baba's presence com≠menced by one of the former 'parties' singing accompanied by bell-like in≠struments and then, that which had not happened for years occurred, the other party joined in unison. At this point Baba, who knows so well the child-like need of the people for a material symbol, gave to the villagers a long-shaped drum, which is an ancient sign of 'peace of unity '. Hereafter at the bhajan in the temple they will sing together accompanied by its rhythmatic beat, which in their orchestration is played as recurrently as the beat of the human heart.

    All the assembly of men, women and children came forward to receive Baba's Darshana and Prasad before returning to their homes and took leave with song and blessings in their hearts. 