 January 3, 2006 An Open Letter to Environment Minister Ian Campbell Commentary by Paul Watson Sea Shepherd Conservation Society Dear Mr. Campbell, Please stop me from saving another whale. I confess I am a deranged whale saver. Last week you accused me of being deranged for wanting to stop illegal Japanese whaling activities. I'm sorry, Mr. Campbell. I can't control myself. I try, I really do, but I have to admit that I am serial whale saver since 1975. After thirty years, it is difficult to get this monkey off my back. I'm addicted, obsessed, and unable to stop. I would like to stop but the whalers keep killing, and the laws to stop them are being ignored. You are doing nothing but talking. You act like their illegal slaughter is normal and my actions to uphold the law and save whales is, how did you say, oh yes, deranged as in psychotic, criminal, anti-social. Now I've saved lots of whales in three decades, Mr. Campbell. And yes, I've sunk a few illegal whaling ships, and damaged a few harpoons. But I've never hurt anyone, no not even a given a whaler a splinter, although I have hurt their pocketbooks. Which is really what this is all about isn't it, Mr. Campbell? What I really want to know is how is it that you can have me investigated for possible charges for writing about saving whales in the so called Australian Antarctic Territory yet you can't stop the Japanese from breaking the law? What authority do you have over me, a Canadian on a Canadian-flagged vessel down here that you don't have over a Japanese whaler on a Japanese ship or an illegal Panamanian tanker transferring fuel unlawfully in the Antarctic Treaty zone? Do you intend to arrest me and seize my ship when we return to Australia? Or do you simply wish to arrest my Australian crewmembers for trying to save whales? We would like to know just what your agenda is, Mr. Campbell. Is a free trade agreement with Japan really worth selling your soul and pride for? Stand up for the whales. Stand up for the Australian Sovereignty of the Antarctic Territory. Your job title states Minister of the Environment. Why don't you try standing up for the environment and for the whales. Sincerely, Captain Paul Watson Master of the Farley Mowat Founder and President of the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society www.Seashepherd.org 