Electroconvulsive therapy
On the next day I had to sign something. How could the lady doctor only require that I write my name? I was still monitored in the head! That was a revealing to the west! I came again into the watching hall and I should dress the pyjamas. With the bed I was driven into the physician corridor. I tried to look at nobody. I should make a fist with the right hand - a prick - I melted away and became unconscious.
In the evening I woke up in bed. I did not know at all, what had happened to me. The fancies had me in the grasp right again. I looked up to the window. The light brown blanket on the window board was the Sahara. And the green curtains, that was Libya. And over the sea the American F-16 has shot the Libyan aircrafts! Such strange allusions were in my mind. What did I have to do with it? In the next morning I was driven again into the corridor. From the RIAS ward loudspeaker sounded: "... he is fallen into a hole." What meant this? The RIAS brought only references to me. Was I fallen into a black hole? I melted away again.

It was already night. In the watching hall were lying the patients and slept. Only the green night lamp gleamed. I had slept long enough and asked myself, what had happened to me. I had still the "taste" of the anaesthetic in the lung and in the breath. It was so shallow in my chest! As if it was completely dissolved. Hereby the thought spiral started. I was really fallen into a black hole! Therefore I became unconscious! If one falls into a black hole, still everything is past, I considered. Why do I still live? The whole earth must have disappeared! Via any coincidence, which must have to do with my head, it had not been done. Our universe had not disappeared, but had inverted itself along a DNA in my head! The chance 1: 1 billion to get over a black hole. This was my consideration. The taste in my breath - that had to be the DNA.
The scientists of the earth had foreseen that! Therefore this test with me. They knew that I had this magnetic anomaly in my head and had me prepared to this day, when the earth falls in the black hole. With me the chance would have been there to survive. And it had worked. East and West were only apparently rivals! They both had meant it good with me. The test had to be secret! Nobody was allowed to know something from the black hole, otherwise general panic would have broken out and the enterprise would have been endangered. I went around with these considerations in the dark watching hall. It was a bizarre situation. The green night lamp was on. That was the earth! We had gotten over it.
It was Saturday morning. Beside me in the watching hall was again Rainer. The Rainer, who had welcomed me on the first day in the hospital - pure seriosness (reiner Ernst)! "Why?" I asked myself. The earth was still saved! Or was there just another large danger? Rainer was impulsive. He went around with long steps ecstatically in the ward. He had been the whole time above in the locked ward. I should watch out and make no stupidities, he said. That had to mean something! His trousers were designed at the side with stars. He went around again impulsively. He welcomed me again and I should watch out. I tried to get out the sense and read its utterances from the rear around, but only quite superficially, but the result was language salad. In the course of the day I got the realization that a dangerous instability was in my head, which was forced by clear thoughts. I should watch out that I form internally no normal sentences, otherwise the whole universe would be over - an enormous supernova! Rainer helped me thereby. I read his spontaneous expressions always from the rear around and always came out the warning: Watch out! Do not formulate sentences in your mind! My internal language motor functions flew from a thing on the other. I wanted to protect all. On me depended the continuing of the world. I was not allowed to get weak!
On ward was an older man, looked in his wine-red bathrobe like Santa Claus. Why was he here? Christmas was already past. I explained myself with the fact that the time had stopped. By inverting the universe along the DNA the time was removed! Which meant this, I asked myself. There was no more aging process. Everything remained in such a way, as it was. Everything was immortal! That was the terrible price for the chance of surviving the black hole. Despite the handicap by my ordered internal language confusion I continued with my Science fiction considerations: We all thought and felt like organisms, but there was no more life! Even the trees outside were immortal, dead subject, which functioned by the internal perfect structure of nature. Before the black hole it was nature. But now no more. There was no more the factor error any longer and thus no aging! And the second price for it was that I was on always and eternally condemned to confuse my thoughts i.e. to formulate no clear sentences. (It is just quite strange that such fantastic thoughts were released only by the fact that I saw someone in a red bathrobe. But in the delusion a fancy comes after the next. And for one itself everything seems logically. It would have been terrible, if the physicians had aborted the electroconvulsive treatment in this stage. It was not a pleasant status and indeed not harmless for me, which the next statements are to describe.)
Another man on ward was already older, had white hair. That was the dear God! We all here are now gods, I thought. Because we were immortal. The thing had still a catch, I detected. Obviously could nobody move away from his current place of beeing. We were condemned on eternal to stay at our place, even the nurses and physicians.

In the television on ward the news of the day ran. Beside the speaker was the symbol of the earth and under it was a laurel ring. They acknowledged it to me: The earth and all creatures on it became immortal. The fact that it was only the UN symbol did not bother me. At the reaction of the newscaster I noticed that I was not allowed to formulate clear internally. He became immediately anxious and spoke of explosion. Therefore they had set the brain scanning machine on me! The scientists and the responsible persons of the earth had to be able to watch, what I was thinking, so that they could take measures, in order to prevent clear thoughts in me and so the supernova. Even the bitter consequence that they had to kill me in the interest of the earth, was not impossible. But they had confidence to me that I held out. Rainer was trained specially in America, in order to support me during the thought confusion, I thought by myself, looking at his star trousers. He was my eternal counterpart!
It was still weekend. My mother and my sister came to visit. Unfortunately, I could not deal with them. I had to confuse my thoughts. Afterwards I asked myself: Why could they away from home? Everyone still had to be on his place. Perhaps they not and perhaps I also not, I thought. Could I go home? I went out, however, was returned by the nurse. The ward door was locked specially because of me. I wanted absolutely outside and tore up the nurse her white coat, when I wanted to get her bunch of keys by force out of the smock bag. Fortunately I did not have success.
In the next week were the last three electro-treatments. I was driven again on the physician corridor. The devices, which they wanted to set on me, were certainly against the instability in my head. I passed out again. In the evening I woke up slowly from my doze. So it could not continue, I thought by myself. This thought confusion I certainly do not hold out.

Where was the solution? I discovered an exit sign at the door, behind there the old Grandpas were lying: A stylized person runs out of a green door. The head of the person was separate from the trunk. That had to be it! They had to eliminate me! Exactly like that it had to be done. But how and where?

I searched the ward. Finally I found the place, where it had to be happened. It was the patient WC of the watching hall. Above in the wall was a small window. Behind it I saw the other house. In a roof hatch a light was on. From there it had to be happened! Probably I will be dematerialized, I thought. But somehow I wanted to survive nevertheless. I tore out myself a quantity of hair and shifted it under the door through into the adjacent bathroom WC. If I would be now dematerialized, then the scientists could reconstruct me again from my hair-root DNA and then without head instability. Yes, so it will be, I assumed. I sat for a long time in the WC so there and waited for my dematerialization. To kill me by myself would have been a sin. Additionally it could have gone wrong and I would have get thereby terriblly clear thoughts. No, I remained sitting and waited. A patient, the dear God, asked me sometime, what I made so for a long time in the WC. I obeyed and went to bed.