Sominex and Sleep, 1971

On a dismal day in January, Pam buys a large bottle of Sominex. Her plan is to take a few every day, just to stay asleep, out of pain.

She and Lynnie are freshmen at Brown University. They didn't set out to go to college together, but neither got into her first-choice school - Hampshire for Pam and Wesleyan for Lynnie. Brown was No. 2 for both.

They arrive at Brown eager to establish their own lives - especially Lynnie. As part of her new image, she has discarded "Lynnie" for "Carolyn." The girls are put in the same dorm but have their own friends.

However, since September, the strangeness has been growing in Pam. She thinks the pharmacist at the local drugstore is watching her, and aiming his radiation at her. She'll walk blocks out of the way to avoid him. She believes that when her roommate wears a red sweater, she and her friends are plotting against Pam. Should she let them know she's aware of the plot, she wonders, or is it safer to pretend she doesn't know?

Carolyn is aware that Pam is becoming more bizarre. When Pam goes down to the lounge to read, she doesn't just sit on the couch or a chair. She moves a wing chair behind a wide drape and sits there hidden.

Pam arrives with her Sominex back at the dorm, where she sees her roommate. They argue and Pam, feeling as if she's lost her last friend, takes the entire bottle.

She leaves the bottle open and empty. Beside it is a note: "I've taken a few too many pills." She writes that she'll probably sleep them off, "but just in case, I'll be in the downstairs lounge."

She heads down the winding dorm stairs and suddenly, there is Lynnie coming up. She takes one look at Pam and knows her sister isn't right.

Pam hands her sister her room key and tells her she might want to check out the note she's left there. Carolyn hurries to her sister's room, finds the note. She grabs Pam's jacket and darts down to the lounge. She finds Pam behind the drape and tells her, "We're going to the infirmary."

The nurse gives Pam ipecac, but Pam is convinced she's going to die. She keeps telling the nurse to get Carolyn out of there. "I didn't want Lynnie to see me dead," Pam says now. "I didn't want that to be her last sight of me."

And Carolyn wants to leave. With Pam delivered to the infirmary, her job is done. When the nurse tells her to go back to the dorm, she does. She isn't really worried. She trusts that Pam will be fine. She doesn't call her parents. The nurses do. The next day, she doesn't check on Pam or visit. Years later, she wonders at her seeming unconcern, while also understanding it.

"I had a life. I had a boyfriend," she says. "I wanted the grown-ups to take care of her now."