JANUARY 1998
[if !supportEmptyParas]   [endif]
Matt lived in a one-bedroom garage apartment, so I stored his garage full with everything that I had brought with me. I slept in a sleeping bag in his dining area along with my dogs at night. I still daydreamed about Amelia, and I still prayed at night for a miracle that somehow I would be reunited with her someday.
As soon as I could, I began sending out resumes to places that I had found in the phone book or in the newspapers, but for about two weeks, nobody responded. Finally, I heard back from a residential designer that said he might have some use for me, and I went in and worked a couple of days for him. He was kind of an old hippie, with strange cloudy blue eyes. He loved Harleys, and rock and roll, and loved to talk about his hey-days in the sixties and seventies. When I came in the third morning to work, he regretted to tell me that there just weren’t enough houses at the time to work on, and that he hated to get my hopes up and then let me go. I thanked him for the 100 dollars he gave me, and went back home.
After about a week or so later, an ad appeared in the paper, it was exactly what I wanted in a job. The company designed and built clothing fixtures for retail stores nation-wide, and I had done this type of millwork design for a company when I had first got out of college, so I mailed in my resume. As I expected, I got an answer from them in a couple of days. They called and told me they needed me to come in to take a written exam to test my mathematic aptitude, and they also told me I had to come in within two days to take the exam. I agreed to come in and hung up the phone. One minute later, I hurried out the door to go to the library to start cramming on algebra and trigonometry.
The old pressure that I had once been so accustomed to was back. I needed this job, not because I really needed to pay bills, but because I needed to feel that I really could start over after what had happened to me. Before the first mental episode, the thought of losing my job had terrified me, but now that it had happened, I felt positive that getting this job would set me free. This was a very large company, and from working in the past for large companies, I knew that this meant big benefits and a chance for fast—track advancement in positions within the company. I had to pass this test.
After two days of studying day and night, I went in as scheduled for the exam. I hid my calculator, and they had not said that I couldn’t use one, but I was not taking any chances. Once that I had been shown to my cubicle at the testing room, I pulled out my calculator and went to work. I could hear the man next to me in the next stall cursing and erasing. He hadn’t brought a calculator, and I knew once I saw the exam that there was no possible way that I could get these answers right within the time allowed without one. I also noticed immediately that the exam was written to test for manual addition and subtraction of stacks of large complicated numbers, causing me to hide my precious calculator even more. I scribbled the equations on my scratch paper to feign the appearance that I was doing the problems in my head, finished the exam, and handed it in. The man who was observing the testing asked me to follow him back to the waiting area while they graded my papers. A short while after, he asked me to follow him to the engineering department for an interview with the supervisor. The halls were very lengthy, and six-foot high panels only divided each department, so I could hear the din of all the busy workers everywhere. I was in, I just knew it. The exam was difficult, but I knew that I had done well.
We walked past the receptionist in the main engineering department and the man handed me my test papers and pointed towards a glass-walled office. “This is where I leave you Michael, good luck.” he said, and then walked away. I opened the glass door and walked in to greet a stocky little bald man. His name was Gary, and he was very warm and business—like. He commented that my architectural lettering was the best he had ever seen, and that I had passed the test. I asked how well I had passed the test, and smiling, he said that he couldn’t tell me that information. Gary and I cracked jokes and went over some of my construction documents that I had brought with me, and then he shook my hand and said that I should report for work tomorrow at 7:30 sharp. He stopped me before I walked out the door and said that I should read carefully the dress code of the company, and gave me a smiling disdainful look at the denim shirt and jeans that I was wearing. I laughed at his little joke on me, and said that I would. He added that I needed to stop by the human resources department on the way out to fill out the W-2 and other needed contracts. We shook hands and I left. I walked back through the huge department and made an effort to find my way back to the human resources area. In one try I got there, another glass-walled office, but much larger. I told the receptionist that Gary had just hired me in the engineering department, and that I needed to finish the paper work. She asked me to sit down and that someone would be with me shortly. i sat quietly and pleased. i had started over, and with a company that I could be proud of. I couldn’t wait.
      A woman came and asked me to follow her back to her office, and we sat and talked about the forms. She asked me if I did any drugs, and I confidently said no. She asked me if I was on any medications, and I said no, which was true unfortunately. Then she said that it was mandatory that all employees take a drug—test as soon as they were hired, and I suddenly felt a subtle alarm go off in my mind. Just one month ago, at a New Year’s Eve party I had been drinking heavily and someone started rolling joints. At first I kept passing them on when they came around, but the longer I smelled the smoke, the more I wanted some. I hadn’t smoked pot in years, and it was too tempting. I never thought about getting tested. I was sure thinking about it now. After she had given me my paper—work to complete, she told me to just drop by sometime tomorrow after I had completed the forms, and that she would let me know when my drug—test appointment would be. I left for home, completely deflated that there was still another hurdle to cross before I got the job. The worst thing that bothered me was the possibility that it would now be a shameful rejection from the company if I tested positive for drugs, much worse than failing a written exam. I came home, went upstairs to the apartment, and waited for Matt to come home from work. The marijuana shouldn’t be still in my blood by now? It had been a full month since I smoked and I knew from the past that even heavy pot—smokers could pass a drug-test after approximately a month. I started thinking about buying one of those cheat-kits that would help you pass a drug-test; I knew I could get them at the local head shop. Thoughts started to consume me with worry. I began to get angry at myself for being so stupid, smoking pot before I tried to get a job somewhere . . . foolish. Matt finally came home and I told him the story. He told me I had nothing to worry about, and that I was over-reacting. Matt didn’t smoke pot, but he was right, I knew it. In logic I knew it, but I believe that at this time the subtle beginnings of schizophrenia were starting to cause me to not accept that I was safe. After dinner, I read through the company rule—book, and discovered what Gary had been talking about. All male employees were to wear long sleeved business shirts along with dress slacks and a tie every day, except Friday, then informal attire was allowed; denim jeans, etc. All women may only wear dresses of suitable length, except for Friday, same exception. I jumped up and went to spend my last 200 bucks on work-clothes. After returning home, I felt exhausted from worry, and retired early. I slept fitfully and was still exhausted when I awoke for work the next morning.
When I arrived at the company, I had to pass through the security crossing at the front, where all the employees checked in as they entered. The uniformed guard asked my business, and raised the cross—guard after I explained my being a new employee. The ordeal of talking to the security guard heightened my fears again about failing the drug-test. This company was scaring the hell out of me, and I hadn’t even started working yet. I went straight into the human resources department and handed in my paper work.           
         She told me that my appointment for the drug-test would be at 11:00 and all I had to do was tell my supervisor, and I would be allowed to go take the test while on the clock. I thanked her and went to see Gary. He shook my hand and showed me to my drafting board cubicle. There were around 30 board draftsmen in this area, and about 15 computer-aided draftsmen in another area. After he gave me my first assignment, the other co—workers started coming by to welcome me to the company. I was so pleased with everyone’s friendliness that I started to loosen up and enjoy my first day on the job. If I failed the drug-test, well, then I would just find another job. I went and told Gary the time that I was to leave for the drug-test, and then set down to work. Before I knew it, it was time to go. I left for the clinic without talking to anyone, and got there right at 11:00. I was told to take a seat, and sat in the waiting area.
The nurse handed me my urine—cup, and showed me the restroom where I was to perform my duty. I did my duty, handed the cup to the nurse waiting in the hall, and went back to the company to finish the workday. Gary came by later in the day and teased me about the drug-test, and then apologized for the company by saying that even he had to take the damn test. I began to really like Gary. I began to really like all the co-workers, and I started to worry that the drug-test was going to take all my new happiness away. At 5:30, we all went home.
Matt was already home when I got there, and I told him that I was still worried about the drug-test. We began discussing it for the next hour, mainly because I wouldn’t stop talking about it. He told me to call Tubby, a friend of his that smoked pot on a daily basis. I called Tubby and talked to him for another hour about the drug-test, and he begged me to just stop worrying about it and be happy about my new job. I decided that at least he was right about that, there was nothing I could do if I did fail the test, so I hung up the phone and drank a few glasses of wine to settle down. Matt and I played a few games of dice, and then I went to bed, worried.
I laid in bed while Matt sat in the living room watching TV. For the next two weeks, I thought any day the boss was going to walk up and say I had to pack my things. During this same two weeks, I was watching TV alone, and a young black girl came on a talk-show as a high-spirited gospel song and sang to just believe, keep on believing what you believe. I knew at that moment that the magic world I had left just one month ago was calling me back. Work was suddenly something to look forward to again. Everything was much better.
