 April 7, 1989    John Piper, Pastor    Bethlehem Baptist Church    Minneapolis, Minnesota        TEN REASONS WHY IT IS WRONG TO TAKE THE LIFE OF UNBORN   CHILDREN    
    
    This is not a defense of the humanity of the unborn. It is an   argument that if the unborn are human they ought not to be   aborted. There are some abortionists who believe that the unborn   are human beings. But these doctors do abortions regularly anyway   because they believe that taking innocent human life, while   tragic, is justifiable in view of the difficult circumstances   faced by mother and child. Some of these doctors want to be   Christian and Biblical, and do not see their practice as wrong. I   have written this brief paper to encourage these doctors to   reconsider.    
    
    1. God commanded, "Thou shalt not kill" (Exodus 20:13).    
    I am aware that some killing is endorsed in the Bible. The word   for "kill" in Exodus 20:13 is the Hebrew rahaz. It is used 43   times in the Hebrew Old Testament. It always means violent,   personal killing that is actually murder or is accused as murder.   It is never used of killing in war or (with one possible   exception, Numbers 35:27) of killing in judicial execution. Rather   a clear distinction is preserved between legal "putting to death"   and illegal "murder" .For example, Numbers 35:19 says, "The   murderer shall certainly be put to death." The word "murderer"   comes from rahaz which is forbidden in the Ten Commandments. The   word "put to death" is a general word that can describe legal   executions.    
    When the Bible speaks of killing that is justifiable it generally   has in mind God's sharing some of his rights with the civil   authority. When the state acts in its capacity as God's ordained   preserver of justice and peace, it has the right to "bear the   sword" as Romans 13:1-7 teaches. This right of the state is always   to be exercised to punish evil, never to attack the innocent   (Romans 13:4).    
    Therefore, "Thou shalt not kill," stands as a clear and resounding   indictment of the killing of innocent unborn children.    
    
    2. The destruction of conceived human life &#151; whether   embryonic, fetal, or viable &#151; is an assault on the unique   person-forming work of God.    
    Can we say anything from Scripture about what is happening when a   life in the womb is aborted? Consider two texts. Psalm 139:13   says, "Thou didst form my inward parts, Thou didst knit me   together in my mother's womb."    
    The least we can draw out of this text is that the formation of   the life of a person in the womb is the work of God. God is the   "Thou" in this verse. Further we can say that the formation of   life in the womb is not merely a mechanical process, but is   something on the analogy of weaving or knitting: "Thou didst knit   me together in my mother's womb." The life of the unborn is the   knitting of God, and what he is knitting is a human being in his   own image, unlike any other creature in the universe.    
    The other, less well-known, text is in the book of Job. Job is   protesting that he has not rejected the plea of any of his   servants, even though in that culture many people thought that   servants were non-persons and only property. The thing to watch   for here is how Job argues.    
    Job 31:13-15 says, "13) If I have rejected the cause of my   manservant or my maidservant, when they brought a complaint   against me, 14) what then shall I do when God rises up? When he   makes inquiry, what shall I answer him? 15) Did not he who made me   in the womb make him? And did not One fashion us in the womb?"    
    Verse 15 gives the reason why Job would be guilty if he treated   his servant as less than a human equal. The issue isn't really   that one may have been born free and the other born in slavery.   The issue goes back before birth. When Job and his servants were   being fashioned in the womb the key person at work was God. That's   the premise of Job's argument.    
    So both Psalm 139 and Job 31 emphasize God as the primary Workman   &#151; Nurturer, Fashioner, Knitter, Creator &#151; in the process   of gestation. Why is that important? It's important because God is   the only One who can create personhood. Mothers and fathers can   contribute some impersonal egg and some impersonal sperm, but only   God creates independent personhood. So when the Scripture   emphasizes that God is the main Nurturer and Shaper in the womb,   it is stressing that what is happening in the womb is the unique   work of God, namely, the making of a person. From the Biblical   point of view gestation is the unique work of God fashioning   personhood.    
    We can argue, I say, endlessly over what "full" personhood is. But   this we can say, I think, with great confidence: what is happening   in the womb is a unique person-forming work of God, and only God   knows how deeply and mysteriously the creation of personhood is   woven into the making of a body. Therefore it is arbitrary and   unwarranted to assume that at any point in the knitting together   of this person, its destruction is not an assault on the   prerogatives of God the Creator.    
    To put it positively: the destruction of conceived human life   &#151; whether embryonic, fetal, or viable &#151; is an assault on   the unique person-forming work of God. Abortion is an assault on   God, not just man. God is uniquely at work in the womb from the   moment of conception. This is the clear testimony of Psalm 139:13   and Job 31:15.    
    
    3. Aborting unborn humans falls under the repeated Biblical ban   against "shedding innocent blood."    
    The phrase "innocent blood" occurs about 20 times in the Bible.   The context is always one of condemning those who shed this blood   or warning people not to shed it. Innocent blood includes the   blood of children (Psalm 106:38). Jeremiah puts it in a context   with refugees and widows and orphans: "Thus says the Lord: Do   justice and righteousness, and deliver from the hand of the   oppressor him who has been robbed. And do no wrong or violence to   the alien, the fatherless, and the widow, nor shed innocent blood   in this place." Surely the blood of the unborn is as innocent as   any blood that flows in the world.    
    
    4. The Bible frequently expresses the high priority God puts on   the protection and provision and vindication of the weakest and   most helpless and most victimized members of the community.    
    Again and again we read of the sojourner and the widow and the   orphan. These are the special care of God and should be the   special care of his people.    
    "You shall not wrong a stranger or oppress him, for you were   strangers in the land of Egypt. (And you were all once babes in   the womb!) You shall not afflict any widow or orphan. If you do   afflict them, and they cry out to me, (like the blood of Abel   cried our to God from the ground, Genesis 4:10) I will surely hear   their cry; and my wrath will burn&yuml;.&yuml;.&yuml;." (Exodus   22:21-24).    
    "Father of the fatherless and protector of widows is God in His   holy habitation" (Psalm 68:5).    
    "Give justice to the weak and the fatherless; maintain the right   of the afflicted and the destitute. Rescue the weak and the needy;   deliver them from the hand of the wicked" (Psalm 82:3-4).    
    "They slay the widow and the sojourner, and murder the fatherless;   and say, 'The Lord does not see; the God of Jacob does not   perceive.'&yuml;.&yuml;.&yuml;.&yuml;But the Lord will wipe them   out for their wickedness" (Psalm 94:6,23).    
    
    5. By judging difficult and even tragic human life as a worse evil   than taking life, abortionists contradict the widespread Biblical   teaching that God loves to show his gracious power through   suffering and not just by helping people avoid suffering.    
    This does not mean we should seek suffering for ourselves or for   others. But it does mean that suffering is generally portrayed in   the Bible as the necessary and God-ordained, though not   God-pleasing, plight of this fallen world (Romans 8:20-25, Ezekiel   18:32), and especially the necessary portion of all who would   enter the kingdom (Acts 14:22; 1 Thessalonians 3:3-4) and live   lives of godliness (2 Timothy 3:12). This suffering is never   viewed merely as a tragedy. It is also viewed as a means of   growing deep with God and becoming strong in this life (Romans   5:3-5; James 1:3-4; Hebrews 12:3-11; 2 Corinthians 1:9; 4:7-12;   12:7-10) and becoming something glorious in the life to come (2   Corinthians 4:17; Romans 8:18).    
    When abortionists reason that taking life is less evil than the   difficulties that will accompany life, they are making themselves   wiser than God who teaches us that his grace is capable of   stupendous feats of love through the suffering of those who   live.    
    
    6. It is a sin of presumption to justify abortion by taking   comfort in the fact that all these little children will go to   heaven or even be given full adult life in the resurrection.    
    This is a wonderful hope when the heart is broken with penitence   and seeking forgiveness. But it is evil to justify killing by the   happy outcome of eternity for the one killed. This same   justification could be used to justify killing one-year olds, or   any heaven-bound believer for that matter. The Bible asks the   question: "Shall we sin that grace may abound?" (Romans 6:1) And:   "Shall we do evil that good may come?" (Romans 3:8). In both cases   the answer is a resounding NO. It is presumption to step into   God's place and try to make the assignments to heaven or to hell.   Our duty is to obey God, not to play God.    
    
    7. The Bible commands us to rescue our neighbor who is being   unjustly led away to death.    
    "Rescue those who are being taken away to death; hold back those   who are stumbling to the slaughter. If you say, 'We did not know   this,' does not He who weighs the heart perceive it? Does not He   who keeps watch over your soul know it, and will He not requite   man according to his work?"    
    There is no significant scientific, medical, social, moral or   religious reason for putting the unborn in a class where this text   does not apply to them. It is disobedience to this text to abort   unborn children.    
    
    8. Aborting unborn children falls under Jesus' rebuke of those who   spurned children as inconvenient and unworthy of the Savior's   attention.    
    "Now they were bringing even infants to him that he might touch   them; and when the disciples saw it, they rebuked them. But Jesus   called them to him, saying, 'Let the children come to me, and do   not hinder them; for to such belongs the kingdom of God'" (Luke   18:15-16). The word for "infant" in Luke 18:15 is the same word   Luke uses for the unborn infant in Elizabeth's womb in Luke   1:41,44.    
    "And Jesus took a child, and put him in the midst of them; and   taking him in his arms, he said to them, 'Whoever receives one   such child in my name receives me; and whoever receives me,   receives not me but him who sent me'" (Mark 9:36-37).    
    
    9. It is the right of God the Maker to give and to take human   life. It is not our individual right to make this choice.    
    When Job heard that his children had all been killed in a   collapsing house, he bowed to worship the Lord and said, "Naked I   came from my mother's womb, and naked shall I return; the Lord   gave, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the name of the   Lord" (Job 1:21).    
    When Job spoke of coming from his mother's womb, he said, "The   Lord gave." And when Job spoke of dying, he said, "The Lord has   taken away." Birth and death are the prerogatives of God. He is   Giver and Taker in this awesome affair of life. We have no right   to make individual choices about this matter. Our duty is to care   for what He gives and use it to His glory.    
    10. Finally, saving faith in Jesus Christ brings forgiveness of   sins and cleansing of conscience and help through life and hope   for eternity. Surrounded by such omnipotent love, every follower   of Jesus is free from the greed and fear that might lure a person   to forsake these truths in order to gain money or avoid   reproach.    
    * * * * * * * *    
    My prayer is that anyone involved in the practice of abortion   would consider these things very seriously and pray for the faith   and the courage to stand for life and love in Jesus Christ. We at   Bethlehem Baptist Church are ready to talk further about these   matters and pray with you and for you as you seek the strength to   follow the Jesus. 720 13th Ave. South, Minneapolis, MN. Phone: 612   338-7653.        Copyright 1989, 1998 John Piper      Piper's   Notes          
          
