V . LETTE RS FRO M ABROAD

On April 1 3, 1 964, Malcolm X left the United States on his first extended trip abroad in 1 964. Before returning o n May 21, he visited Egypt, Lebanon, Saudi Arab ia, Nigeria, Ghana, Morocco and Algeria. He m ade the pil­ grimage to Mecca that every Muslim seeks to complete, which entitled him to the use of "El Hajj" in his name, and he became known in the Muslim world as El Hajj Malik El Shabazz.   Besides consolidating h is relatio1UJ with orthodox Islam, he met with students, journalists, m em bers of parliament,   ambassadors and government leaders, and "never stopped talking about the race prob­

lem in America. "

Through this first trip Malcolm made a number of contacts that were to prove important in h is later efforts to "internationalize" the American Negro struggle. But its main impact seems to have been on him. "1 never would have believed possible - it shocked me when I considered it - the impact of the Muslim world 's influence on my previous thinking, n he said later. Two days after his return,

he said in a speech in Chicago:

"In the past, I have permitted myself to be used to make sweeping indictments of all white people, and these generalizatiqns have caused injuries to some white people who did not deserve them. Because of the spiritual rebirth which I was blessed to undergo as a result of my pil­ grimage to the Holy City of Mecca, I no longer subscribe to sweeping indictments of one race. My pilgrimage to Mecca . . . served to convince me that perhaps American whites can be cured of the rampant racism which is con­ suming them and about to destroy this country. In the future, I intend to be careful not to sentence anyone who has not been proven guilty. I am not a racist and do not subscribe to any of the tenets of racism. In all h onesty and

Letters From Abroad                                  59

sincerity i t can b e stated that I wish nothing but freedom, justice and equality: life. liberty and the pursuit of hap­ piness -for all people. My first concern is with the group of people to which I belong, the Afro-Americans, for we, more   than   any   other people,    are   deprived   of these inalienable rights. "

The follOWing excerpts, describing Malcolm '8 reactions,

are taken from letters written from abroad.

Jedda, Saudi Arabia April 20, 1 964

Never have I witnessed such sincere hospitality and the overwhelming spirit of true brotherhood as is p racticed by people of all colors and races here in this ancient holy land, the home of Abraham, Muhammad and all the other prop hets of the Holy Scriptures. For the past week I h ave been utterly speechless and spellbound by the graciousness I see displayed all around me by people of all colors. Last night, April 19, I was blessed to visit the Holy City of Mecca, and complete the "Omra" p art of my pil­ grimage. Allah willing, I shall leave for Mina tomorrow, April 2 1 , and be back in Mecca to say my prayers from Ml Arafat on Tuesday, April 22. Mina is about twenty miles from Mecca.

Last   night I   made my   seven circuits   around the Kaab a, led by a young M utawif named Muhammad. I drank w ater from the well of Zem Zem, and then ran b ack and forth seven times between the hills of Mt. AI-Safa and AI-Marwah.

There were tens of thousands of pilgrims from all over the world. They were of all colors, from blue-eyed blonds to black-skinned Africans, but were all p articipating in the same ritual, displaying a spirit of unity and brotherhood that my experiences in America had led me to believe could never exist between the white and non-white.

America needs to understand Islam, because this is the

one religion that erases the race problem from its soc i ety. Th roughout my travels in the Muslim world, I h ave ; met,

-----------------------------------------------------Page 32-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
60                                  Malcolm   X Speaks

talked to, and even eaten with, people who would have been considered "white" in America, but the religion of Islam in their hearts has removed the "white" from their minds.   They practice sincere and true brotherhood with other people irrespective of their color.

Before America allows herself to be destroyed by the "cancer of racism" she should become better acquainted with the religious philosophy of Islam, a religion that has already molded people of all colors into one vast family, a nation   or   brotherhood   of   Islam that   leaps   over all "obstacles" and stretches itself into almost all the Eastern countries of this earth.

The whites as well as the non-whites who accept true Islam become a changed people. I have eaten from the same plate with people whose eyes were the bluest of blue, whose hair was the blondest of blond, and whose skin was the whitest of white - all the way from Cairo to .Jedda and even in the H oly City of Mecca itself - and I felt the same sincerity in the words and deeds of these "white" Muslims that I felt among the African Muslims of Nigeria, Sudan and Ghana.

True   Islam   removes racism,   because people of all colors and races who accept its religious principles and bow down to the one God, Allah, also automatically accept each other as brothers and sisters, regardless of differences in complexion.

You may be shocked by these words coming from me, but I have always been a man who tries to face facts, and to accept the reality of life as new experiences and knowl­ edge unfold it. The experiences of this pilgrimage have taught me much, and each hour here in the Holy Land opens my eyes even more.   If Islam can place the spirit of true brotherhood in the hearts of the "whites" whom I have met here in the Land of the Prophets, then surely it can also remove the "cancer of racism" from the heart of the white American, and perhaps in time to save America from   imminent   racial disaster, the   same   destruction brought   upon   Hitler   by   his   racism   that   eventually destroyed the Germans themselves. . .      .

Letters From Ab road                                 61

Lagos, Nigeria M ay 1 0 , 1 964 Each place I have visited, they have insisted that I don't leave. Thus I have been forced to stay longer than I originally intended in each country. In the Muslim world they loved me once they learned I was an American Mus­ lim, and here in Africa they love me as soon as they learn that I am Malcolm X of the militant American Muslims. Africans   in general   and   Muslims   in   particular love militancy.

I hope that my H ajj to the H oly City of Mecca will officially establish the religious affiliation of the Muslim Mosque, I nc., with the 750 million Muslims of the world of Islam once and for all - and that my warm reception here in Africa will forever repudiate the American white man's propaganda that the black m an in Africa is not interested in the plight of the black man in America.

The Muslim world is forced to concern itself, from the moral point of view in its own religious concepts, with the fact that our plight clearly involves the violation of our

h uman rights.

The Koran compels the Muslim world to take a stand on the side of those whose hum an rights are being violated, no matter what the religious persuasion of the victims is. Islam is a religion which concerns itself with the human rights   of all   mankind, despite race, color, or creed. It recognizes all ( everyone) as part of one human family. Here in Africa, the 22 million American blacks are looked upon as the long-lost brothers of Africa. Our people here are interested in every aspect of our plight, and they study our struggle for freedom from every angle. Despite Western propaganda to the contrary, our African brothers and sisters love us, and are happy to learn that we also are awakening from our long "sleep" and are developing strong   love for   them.

-----------------------------------------------------Page 33-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
62                                  Malcolm   X Speaks

Accra, Ghana May 1 1 , 1 964

I arrived in Accra yesterday from L agos, Nigeria. The natural beauty and wealth of Nigeria and its people are indescrib able. It is full of Americans and other whites who are well aware of its untapped natural resources. The same whites, who spu in the faces of blacks in America and sic their police dogs upon us to keep us from "integrating" with them, are seen throughout Africa, bowing, grinning and smiling in an effort to "integrate" with the Africans - they want to "integrate" into Africa's wealth and beauty. This is ironical.

This continent has such great fertility and the soil is so profusely vegetated that with modern agricultural meth­ ods it could easily become the "breadbasket" of the world. I spoke at Ibadan University in Nigeria, Friday night, and gave the true picture of our plight in America, and of the necessity of the independent African nations helping us bring our case before the United Nations. The reception of the students was tremendous. They made me a n honorary member of the "Muslim Students Society of Nigeria," and renamed me "Omowale," which means "the child has come home" in the Yoruba language.

The people of Nigeria are strongly concerned with the problems of their African brothers in America, but the U.S. inform ation agencies in Africa create the impression that progress is being made and the problem is being solved. Upon close study, one can easily see a gigantic design to keep Africans here and the African-Americans from getting together. An African official told me, ''When one combines the number of peoples of African descent in South, Central and North America, they total well over 80 m illion. One can easily understand the attempts to keep the Africans from ever uniting with the African-Americans." Unity be­ tween the Africans   of the West and the Africans of the fatherland will w ell change the course of history. Being in Ghana now, the fountainhead of Pan-African­ ism,   the   last   days   of my tour should be intensely interesting and enlightening.

Just as the American Jew is in harmony ( politically,

Letters From Abroad                                   63

economically and culturally ) with world Jewry, it is time for all African-Americans to become an integral p art of the world's Pan-Africanists, and even though we might remain in America physically while fighting for the benefits the Constitution guarantees   us,   we must "return" to Africa philosophically   and   culturally   and develop a working unity in the framework of Pan-Africanism.