Ousting the Ogre, March

Pam is standing on the scale backward with her hands covering her eyes in O'Malley's office in Fairfield.

"Don't tell me anything, don't tell me anything, DON'T TELL ME ANYTHING!" says Pam. The scale belongs to Pam, but she leaves it in O'Malley's office because she can't bear having it at home.

Her midwinter resolve to stay on the Zyprexa and endure the extra weight has now melted with the snow.

She can no longer go on being fat. Since she can't cut out Zyprexa, she's decided to cut out food. For several days now, she has been drinking only soup and coffee. O'Malley has decided to get a baseline on her weight - to see if she's actually gaining or losing.

O'Malley checks the scale and Pam pleads: "Don't even tell me." And when O'Malley is done, "Take it away, take it away, take it away."

"Let me ask you, Pam, what do you think you weigh?"

Pam doesn't know and doesn't want to know.

"Is it too scary?" asks O'Malley.

"Yes."

O'Malley tells her that her heaviness has nothing to do with being evil or lazy. "It's not that you lack discipline. It's different from someone who is just casual about their weight," O'Malley tells her.

"No one is casual about their weight," Pam retorts.

"Lots of people don't pay attention to their bodies - believe it or not. But for you, it doesn't seem possible because it's such an important thing."

"Yes, because it's making me evil."

"No."

"Yes, it's making me fat and it's making me take up too much space in the world. It's making me into the ogre that ate Manhattan."

"No it's just making you heavier. All those other things are your add-ons. Zyprexa is helping you to function. Being heavier does not make you evil. It does not make you the ogre that ate Manhattan. It does not make you poison."

Pam pulls the brim of her black derby down over her eyes and folds her arms close to her.

"No one in the world - certainly I don't - feels that you're evil for having gained weight, but, Pam, that's your belief. ... Are you hearing voices commenting about that?"

"Yes."

"Do you talk back?

"Yes," Pam says. "I'll have a conversation with them and then realize: What the HELL am I doing?"

"That's awful, Pam. You know you didn't ask for this, Pam. You really didn't. And the voices are your illness."

Pam says that maybe it was seeing Lynnie recently - so slender - that made her feel worse about her own weight gain. O'Malley urges her to think logically.

"Lynnie isn't on Zyprexa and she does a lot of dancing. She works at her weight and she works at her body," says O'Malley. "She isn't thin because she's good or perfect."
