ARE YOU SURE OR SUPERSTITIOUS?Ps. 27:1 ?The Lord is my light and my salvation - whom shall I fear?  The Lord is the stronghold of my life - of whom shall I be afraid??INTRO.- ILL.- In front of a delicatessen, an art connoisseur noticed a mangy little kitten, lapping up milk from a saucer.  He recognized the saucer as being a rare and expensive piece of pottery.He went into the store and offered two dollars for the cat.  The owner said, ?The cat is not for sale.?  ?Look,? said the collector, that cat is dirty and mangy, but I?d still like to buy it.  I?ll give you five dollars for it.??It?s a deal,? said the owner of the store.  The buyer said, ?For that five dollars I?m sure you won?t mind throwing in that saucer the cat is drinking from.  He seems so happy drinking from it.??Nothing doing,? said the owner of the store, ?That?s my lucky saucer.  With that saucer I?ve sold 34 cats this week.?DO YOU HAVE A LUCKY SAUCER?  Or a lucky something that you are just absolutely convinced has brought you good luck in life?ILL.- DO YOU HAVE A FOUR-LEAF CLOVER HIDDEN SOMEWHERE SPECIAL TO BRING YOU GOOD LUCK?  The Druids of England believed the four-leaf clover to hold magical powers. They believed whoever found one would be able to see evil beings such as witches and devils, and therefore be able to avoid them.I know how to avoid the devil, but it?s not by carrying around a four-leaf clover.  A Bible would be better.  And better than that would be to hide the Word of God in your heart!  Ps. 119:11ILL.- DO YOU CARRY A RABBIT?S FOOT FOR GOOD LUCK?  If so, is it always in your left pocket? Are you sure it was the rabbit?s left hind foot? And, most important of all, was the animal killed at the full of the moon by a cross-eyed person?ILL.- DO YOU HAVE A HORSESHOE OVER YOUR DOOR?  One belief is that if you hang your horseshoe prong side down, good luck will come to you, keeping the Devil from crossing it.ILL.- Yesterday was St. Patrick?s Day.  And may the luck of the Irish be with you!  Did you wear the color green on Saturday for good luck?  Have you ever kissed the Blarney Stone?  I know someone who has and she?s....Are you a superstitious type person?  Do you tend to believe in certain things or certain practices in order to avoid bad luck and gain good luck?  Many people do.ILL.- WHEN SPILLING SALT, DO YOU QUICKLY THROW A PINCH OVER YOUR SHOULDER?  You better make it your left shoulder if you do.ILL.- DO YOU SAY, ?GOD BLESS YOU? WHEN SOMEONE SNEEZES?  Do you realize what you are doing?   When you sneeze friends are apt to say "God bless you" or the German expression "Gesundheit."  The custom of asking for God?s blessing began when early man believed that the essence of life, the spirit or soul, was in the form of air or breath and resided within one?s head. A sneeze might accidentally expel the spirit for a short time or even forever, unless God prevented it. Asking for God?s blessing or bowing toward the sneezer was counter-magic. For it meant, "May your soul not escape."I love to bless others by saying ?God bless you,? but not just when they sneeze.  I WANT TO BLESS PEOPLE ALL THE TIME!  I want God to bless them and direct them in life! And I have news for you: You can sneeze your head off, but don?t worry.   You still won?t lose your spirit.  Your spirit will not leave your body until you die.ILL.- DO YOU KNOCK ON WOOD FOR GOOD LUCK? This is one of the most popular superstitions. People knock on wood after boasting, making a prediction, or speaking of good fortune.Since wood comes from trees, this belief stems from ancient tree folklore. Down through the ages people believed that trees were the homes of gods. These were kind obliging gods if approached in the right way. Again, I have news for you: THERE IS ONLY ONE TRUE AND LIVING GOD AND HE DOESN?T LIVE IN TREES!ILL.- DO YOU AVOID BLACK CATS IN ORDER TO AVOID BAD LUCK?  This belief goes back to the Middle Ages when it was thought that a black cat was the companion or mascot of a group of witches, and that it changed into a witch or Satan after seven years of service. Therefore, people reasoned, a cat crossing one?s path might be a witch or the Devil in disguise, up to no good.  It is true that the devil is up to no good, but he is not disguised as a black cat.  HE IS MORE CLEVER THAN THAT.II Cor. 11:14-15 ?Satan himself masquerades as an angel of light.  It is not surprising, then, if his servants masquerade as servants of righteousness...?ILL.- DO YOU AVOID WALKING UNDER LADDERS?  Among certain Asiatic countries criminals were hanged from the seventh rung of a ladder which was propped against a tree. Since it was supposed that death was contagious, people were forbidden to walk under that ladder for fear that they would "catch death".ILL.- ARE YOU AFRAID WHEN YOU BREAK A MIRROR?  Break a mirror and you?ll have seven years bad luck is a superstition shared by millions of people. ILL.- DO YOU HAVE A FEAR OF FRIDAY THE 13TH?  Friday the thirteenth is considered the unluckiest of days, unless you were born on Friday the thirteenth. If you were born on this day then Friday the thirteenth is your lucky day.Brothers and sisters, these are just some of the many superstitions or superstitious practices that many people believe in.  BUT THERE ARE OTHERS WHICH ARE PERHAPS LESS NOTABLE.ILL.- Ever heard of Michael Jordan?  He may be coming back to basketball.  Did you know that when Michael Jordan led the Chicago Bulls to six NBA championships, he always wore his ?lucky? college gym shorts underneath his Bulls? uniform?ILL.- Golf sensation, Tiger Woods, usually wears the color red on Sunday.  Why?  Because red is his ?lucky? color!  He says it?s a belief that comes from his astrology-believing mother.ILL.- Actress Phylicia Rashad of the ?Cosby? TV show said she is not necessarily superstitious, but she does have a ritual that she follows.  She said, "The lid on the toilet must be closed and the door to the bathroom should be closed or else your money will go down the toilet, which is an old African belief.?Many of us, in fact, have little practices that we engage in which are really nothing more than superstitions. ILL.- On NBC?s Tonight Show some years ago, Johnny Carson read an item from the lost-and-found column of a Midwestern newspaper: "Lost dog--brown fur, some missing due to mange, blind in one eye, deaf, lame leg due to recent traffic accident, slightly arthritic. Goes by the name of ?Lucky.?"If that?s what you call ?luck? then I don?t want any of it!  In fact, I don?t believe in good luck, but I do believe in God?s blessing.  We are either blessed by God or we are not blessed by God.  What?s your preference?  I prefer to seek God?s blessing rather than to do things that I think might bring me good luck.Are you sure about life?  Are you sure about God?s love for you and His protection over you?  OR ARE YOU SUPERSTITIOUS?PROP.- In the remainder of this message I want to deal with two thoughts:1- The definition of superstition (what is it?)2- The direction of superstition (where does it lead us?)I. THE DEFINITION OF SUPERSTITIONThe word ?superstitious? is not found in the Bible except in the KJV in Acts 17:22 when the apostle Paul was in Athens.  He said to the philosophers who had gathered there, ?Men of Athens!  I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious.?  The NIV reads, ?Men of Athens!  I see that in every way you are very religious.?In Athens they had all kinds of idols or objects of worship.  And they were either very religious, in a sense, or very superstitious.Some people actually believe that God is a superstition.  In fact, just recently I actually had a lady tell me that she believed that God is a superstition.  WRONG!All of creation: plant and animal life, the starry universe, man himself, etc., all clearly and loudly shout to us:  GOD EXISTS! GOD IS!  GOD IS ALL-POWERFUL!  GOD IS ALL-WISE!  Please get it in your head: God is not a superstition!  He is real!   The word ?superstition? means an irrational but usually deep-seated belief in the magical effects of a particular action or ritual, especially in the likelihood that good or bad luck will result from performing it.The key word here is ?irrational.?  Most superstitions are completely irrational.  They are nonsense.  They are ridiculous.ILL.- Louis Pasteur (1822-1895), world-renowned French chemist and biologist, who founded the science of microbiology, proved the germ theory of disease, invented the process of pasteurization, and developed vaccines for several diseases, including rabies, is reported to have had such an irrational fear of dirt and infection he refused to shake hands. ILL.- President and Mrs. Benjamin Harrison were so intimidated by the newfangled electricity installed in the White House they didn?t dare touch the switches.  If there were no servants around to turn off the lights when the Harrisons went to bed, they slept with them on. ILL.- A preacher told about something that happened while he was waiting to catch a plane.  He said he bought three insurance policies before boarding the plane.  JUST IN CASE.  Then he stepped on a weight scale which also gave the person?s fortune.  His read, ?YOU HAVE JUST MADE AN INVESTMENT WHICH IS ABOUT TO PAY GREAT DIVIDENDS.?ILL.- The little seven-year-old girl was afraid of the dark.  One night her mother asked her to get the broom from the back porch.  She said, ?I can?t, because I?m afraid of the dark.?Her mother said, ?Honey, Jesus is out there, so there?s nothing to be afraid of.  Don?t you know that Jesus is everywhere?  He?ll protect you.??Are you sure that Jesus is out there?? asked her little girl.  ?Yes, honey, I?m sure Jesus is out there.?The little girl opened the door just a little and said, ?JESUS, WOULD YOU PLEASE HAND ME THE BROOM??Being afraid of the dark is a fear that some people have, but often, it is irrational.  In our own homes, we should not be afraid of the dark.  But, of course, there are certain places where it makes sense to be afraid of the dark.Such as in walking down certain dark streets in some cities across America!  Of course, there are probably some streets in America where we may not be safe even in the daytime!ILL.- My brother Ruben Casas who ministers in East Los Angeles, CA, wrote these words to me last week:  ?Thank you for letting the congregation know about our ministry in East Los Angeles.  Perhaps they can pray for the safety of our little church.?We have steel bars all around the building.  Every door and window needs to be protected in this way from intruders and thieves who think we have a lot of stuff inside.  We have a fence around the building, but it is not enough to deter some of the thieves around this neighborhood.  Many of them are drug users and need to steal in order to buy the next dose.?We have had shots fired at the windows.  As of now three small windows have been shattered by gunfire and we have not replaced them yet.  Knowing this will help your congregation understand better the situation under which we have to minister.?Now, brethren, I was planning on going to California to visit Brother Ruben, but now I have second thoughts!  Ha!  Some fears are irrational, BUT SOME ARE VERY REAL.ILL.- Some people are afraid of a recession.  And a recession is basically a temporary shutdown in the economy because of the stock market going down and people getting laid off from their jobs.  ILL.- Someone said, ?Recession is when the man next door to you loses his job.  Depression is when you lose your job.  Panic is when your wife loses her job.?Recession in the form of job layoffs is not funny!  It?s happening all the time!  And some people lose jobs that they never thought they would lose!And some people still fear the shortage of oil and the high prices for gasoline and heating oil.  We can understand this fear.  Our gasoline prices soared to $1.89 a gallon last summer.  Heating bills went up for most folks.This is very real fear that some people have.  However, there may be a reason behind this fear.ILL.- A friend sent me a note which read: ?There are a lot of folks who can?t understand how we came to have an oil shortage here in the USA.  Well, there?s a very simple answer.  Nobody bothered to check the oil.  We just didn?t know we were getting low.  The reason for that is purely geographical.  All the oil is in Texas, Oklahoma, Alaska, and Wyoming.  AND ALL THE DIPSTICKS ARE IN WASHINGTON, DC.?Some fears that we have are nothing more than superstitions and we need to recognize them for what they are.  However, some fears are very real and need to be dealt with as best we can.II. THE DIRECTION OF SUPERSTITIONWhere does superstition lead us?  What will it do in our lives?  Will it help us or hinder us in life?  ILL.- Mike Yaconelli of the ?The Wittenburg Door? wrote, I live in a small, rural community. There are lots of cattle ranches around here, and, every once in a while, a cow wanders off and gets lost.  Ask a rancher how a cow gets lost, and chances are he will reply, ?Well, the cow starts nibbling on a clump of green grass, and when it finishes, it looks ahead to the next clump of green grass and starts nibbling on that one, and then it nibbles on a clump of grass right next to a hole in the fence. ?It then sees another clump of green grass on the other side of the fence, so it nibbles on that one and then goes on to the next clump. The next thing you know, the cow has nibbled itself into being lost."Yaconelli said, ?Americans are in the process of nibbling their way into being lost. We keep moving from one clump of activity to another, never noticing how far we have gone from home or how far away from the truth we have managed to end up.?One clump leads to another clump and to another and to another.  Or one sin generally leads to another and another and another.ILL.- It?s like a youngster who may start his smoking habit by putting a stick or a straw in his mouth.  And before long he is smoking grapevines.  Then, before he realizes it he is smoking cigarettes.  Then grass or pot.  Then he?s into beer, and hard liquor and no telling what else.  ONE THING CLUMP LEADS TO ANOTHER AND TO ANOTHER AND TO ANOTHER.And the same is true of our fears and superstitions.  They may seem harmless, but before we know it we can be led into things we didn?t plan to do.ILL.- For example, some people faithfully read their horoscope.  Every day they have to find out what is supposed to happen to them.  If they find that something works or sounds true, then that could lead them into other things, such as calling a Psychic Hotline, seeking out Palm readers, Tarot Card readers, or playing with a Quija Board, which some people think is nothing more than a game.ILL.- Ben Alexander of Exposing Satan?s Power Ministry tells a story about a young boy who got involved in playing with the Quija Board.  The boy discovered that the thing actually worked for him.  The board would spell out words and tell him certain things.  Finally, after a period of time the board told him that he was going to die.  He was scared.  Frightened.  Didn?t know what to do.  The message that he was going to die so controlled him that he actually took his own life.  THAT?S WHAT PLAYING THE QUIJA BOARD DID!  And it is not a game!  IT IS A TOOL OF SATAN!Messing with superstitions and superstitious practices have lead some people to eventually seek out a Spiritual medium who performs what we call ?seances.?   Or someone who supposedly communicates with the spirits of deceased people.  The idea may sound attractive to some people, but it is strictly forbidden by God in Scripture.Lev. 19:31 ?Do not turn to mediums or seek out spirits, for you will be defiled by them.  I am the Lord your God.?Isaiah 47:12-14 ?Keep on, then, with your magic spells and with your many sorceries, which you have labored at since childhood.  All the counsel you have received has only worn you out!  Let your astrologers come forward, those stargazers who make predictions month by month, let them save you from what is coming upon you.  Surely they are like stubble; the fire will burn them up.  They cannot even save themselves from the power of the flame...?I don?t claim to know all that this Scripture is talking about, but it sure doesn?t sound very good to me!  I believe I will stay away from all forms of superstitions and sorceries and magic spells!ILL.- One time a preacher friend and I went to a meeting to hear the former Spiritual Medium, Ben Alexander, talk about spiritualism and the occult.  Ben is from England and somehow came to the US and became a Christian.  He then started a ministry to combat the evils of spiritualism.After attending the meeting that night, my preacher friend said, ?I believe him, but I would just like to go and see it for myself.?All I can say is, not me, brother!  Brothers and sisters, don?t be deceived by what you might consider to be harmless superstitions.  Stay out of the devil?s territory.  He?s a lot smarter than you and a lot tougher.There are not many who can invade the devil?s territory and come out alive or on top. James 4:7-8 ?Resist the devil and he will flee from you.  Come near to God and he will come near to you.?CONCLUSION--------------------------------------------We must not be controlled by our superstitions or superstitious practices!  WE MUST NOT LIVE BY FEAR BUT RATHER BY FAITH!Ps. 23:4 ?Even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I WILL FEAR NO EVIL.?Ps. 27:1 ?The Lord is my light and my salvation - whom shall I fear?  The Lord is the stronghold of my life - of whom shall I be afraid??Ps. 46:1-2 ?God is our refuge and strength, an ever-present help in trouble.  Therefore we will not fear....?Ps. 91:1-2, 5-6 ?He who dwells in the shelter of the Most High will rest in the shadow of the Almighty.  I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress, my God, in whom I trust...  You will not fear the terror of the night nor the arrow that flies by day, nor the pestilence that stalks in the darkness...?Brothers and sisters, do you get the idea that the Psalmist is trying to tell us something?  The way to defeat all fears in life, superstition or otherwise, is to put our trust in the Lord!  And in His Word!  And in His Spirit!  ILL.- Preacher John Wesley was on a ship one time, caught in a terrible storm on the Atlantic Ocean.  FEAR SEIZED JOHN WESLEY?S HEART.  Some of the people on board ship, however, did not seem to be afraid.  They were a little group of Moravian missionaries.  And when the storm finally subsided, Wesley asked them, ?Were you not afraid?  One of them replied, ?Afraid?  Why should I be afraid?  I KNOW CHRIST!?And then looking at Wesley, he asked, ?DO YOU KNOW CHRIST??Knowing Christ as our Lord and Savior makes all the difference in the world in overcoming any and all fears!  And people are who superstitious are generally controlled by fear.ILL.- Someone said, ?Unless there is within us that which is above us, we shall soon yield to that which is about us.?The only answer to fear and all of life?s problems is to know Christ as your Lord and Savior.  DO YOU KNOW HIM?  IS HE YOUR LORD AND SAVIOR?  If not, you need to let Him become such.  And if you?re not sure, you need to make sure.  Trust and obey.ARE YOU SURE OR SUPERSTITIOUS?Ps. 27:1 ?The Lord is my light and my salvation - whom shall I fear?  The Lord is the stronghold of my life - of whom shall I be afraid??INTRO.- ILL.- In front of a delicatessen, an art connoisseur noticed a mangy little kitten, lapping up milk from a saucer.  He recognized the saucer as being a rare and expensive piece of pottery.He went into the store and offered two dollars for the cat.  The owner said, ?The cat is not for sale.?  ?Look,? said the collector, that cat is dirty and mangy, but I?d still like to buy it.  I?ll give you five dollars for it.??It?s a deal,? said the owner of the store.  The buyer said, ?For that five dollars I?m sure you won?t mind throwing in that saucer the cat is drinking from.  He seems so happy drinking from it.??Nothing doing,? said the owner of the store, ?That?s my lucky saucer.  With that saucer I?ve sold 34 cats this week.?DO YOU HAVE A LUCKY SAUCER?  Or a lucky something that you are just absolutely convinced has brought you good luck in life?ILL.- DO YOU HAVE A FOUR-LEAF CLOVER HIDDEN SOMEWHERE SPECIAL TO BRING YOU GOOD LUCK?  The Druids of England believed the four-leaf clover to hold magical powers. They believed whoever found one would be able to see evil beings such as witches and devils, and therefore be able to avoid them.I know how to avoid the devil, but it?s not by carrying around a four-leaf clover.  A Bible would be better.  And better than that would be to hide the Word of God in your heart!  Ps. 119:11ILL.- DO YOU CARRY A RABBIT?S FOOT FOR GOOD LUCK?  If so, is it always in your left pocket? Are you sure it was the rabbit?s left hind foot? And, most important of all, was the animal killed at the full of the moon by a cross-eyed person?ILL.- DO YOU HAVE A HORSESHOE OVER YOUR DOOR? One belief is that if you hang your horseshoe prong side down, good luck will come to you, keeping the Devil from crossing it.ILL.- Yesterday was St. Patrick?s Day.  And may the luck of the Irish be with you!  Did you wear the color green on Saturday for good luck?  Have you ever kissed the Blarney Stone?  I know someone who has and she?s....Are you a superstitious type person?  Do you tend to believe in certain things or certain practices in order to avoid bad luck and gain good luck?  Many people do.ILL.- WHEN SPILLING SALT, DO YOU QUICKLY THROW A PINCH OVER YOUR SHOULDER?  You better make it your left shoulder if you do.ILL.- DO YOU SAY, ?GOD BLESS YOU? WHEN SOMEONE SNEEZES?  Do you realize what you are doing?   When you sneeze friends are apt to say "God bless you" or the German expression "Gesundheit."  The custom of asking for God?s blessing began when early man believed that the essence of life, the spirit or soul, was in the form of air or breath and resided within one?s head. A sneeze might accidentally expel the spirit for a short time or even forever, unless God prevented it. Asking for God?s blessing or bowing toward the sneezer was counter-magic. For it meant, "May your soul not escape."I love to bless others by saying ?God bless you,? but not just when they sneeze.  I WANT TO BLESS PEOPLE ALL THE TIME!  I want God to bless them and direct them in life! And I have news for you: You can sneeze your head off, but don?t worry.   You still won?t lose your spirit.  Your spirit will not leave your body until you die.ILL.- DO YOU KNOCK ON WOOD FOR GOOD LUCK? This is one of the most popular superstitions. People knock on wood after boasting, making a prediction, or speaking of good fortune.Since wood comes from trees, this belief stems from ancient tree folklore. Down through the ages people believed that trees were the homes of gods. These were kind obliging gods if approached in the right way. Again, I have news for you: THERE IS ONLY ONE TRUE AND LIVING GOD AND HE DOESN?T LIVE IN TREES!ILL.- DO YOU AVOID BLACK CATS IN ORDER TO AVOID BAD LUCK?  This belief goes back to the Middle Ages when it was thought that a black cat was the companion or mascot of a group of witches, and that it changed into a witch or Satan after seven years of service. Therefore, people reasoned, a cat crossing one?s path might be a witch or the Devil in disguise, up to no good.  It is true that the devil is up to no good, but he is not disguised as a black cat.  HE IS MORE CLEVER THAN THAT.II Cor. 11:14-15 ?Satan himself masquerades as an angel of light.  It is not surprising, then, if his servants masquerade as servants of righteousness...?ILL.- DO YOU AVOID WALKING UNDER LADDERS?  Among certain Asiatic countries criminals were hanged from the seventh rung of a ladder which was propped against a tree. Since it was supposed that death was contagious, people were forbidden to walk under that ladder for fear that they would "catch death".ILL.- ARE YOU AFRAID WHEN YOU BREAK A MIRROR?  Break a mirror and you?ll have seven years bad luck is a superstition shared by millions of people. ILL.- DO YOU HAVE A FEAR OF FRIDAY THE 13TH?  Friday the thirteenth is considered the unluckiest of days, unless you were born on Friday the thirteenth. If you were born on this day then Friday the thirteenth is your lucky day.Brothers and sisters, these are just some of the many superstitions or superstitious practices that many people believe in.  BUT THERE ARE OTHERS WHICH ARE PERHAPS LESS NOTABLE.ILL.- Ever heard of Michael Jordan?  He may be coming back to basketball.  Did you know that when Michael Jordan led the Chicago Bulls to six NBA championships, he always wore his ?lucky? college gym shorts underneath his Bulls? uniform?ILL.- Golf sensation, Tiger Woods, usually wears the color red on Sunday.  Why?  Because red is his ?lucky? color!  He says it?s a belief that comes from his astrology-believing mother.ILL.- Actress Phylicia Rashad of the ?Cosby? TV show said she is not necessarily superstitious, but she does have a ritual that she follows.  She said, "The lid on the toilet must be closed and the door to the bathroom should be closed or else your money will go down the toilet, which is an old African belief.?Many of us, in fact, have little practices that we engage in which are really nothing more than superstitions. ILL.- On NBC?s Tonight Show some years ago, Johnny Carson read an item from the lost-and-found column of a Midwestern newspaper: "Lost dog--brown fur, some missing due to mange, blind in one eye, deaf, lame leg due to recent traffic accident, slightly arthritic. Goes by the name of ?Lucky.?"If that?s what you call ?luck? then I don?t want any of it!  In fact, I don?t believe in good luck, but I do believe in God?s blessing.  We are either blessed by God or we are not blessed by God.  What?s your preference?  I prefer to seek God?s blessing rather than to do things that I think might bring me good luck.Are you sure about life?  Are you sure about God?s love for you and His protection over you?  OR ARE YOU SUPERSTITIOUS?PROP.- In the remainder of this message I want to deal with two thoughts:1- The definition of superstition (what is it?)2- The direction of superstition (where does it lead us?)I. THE DEFINITION OF SUPERSTITIONThe word ?superstitious? is not found in the Bible except in the KJV in Acts 17:22 when the apostle Paul was in Athens.  He said to the philosophers who had gathered there, ?Men of Athens!  I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious.?  The NIV reads, ?Men of Athens!  I see that in every way you are very religious.?In Athens they had all kinds of idols or objects of worship.  And they were either very religious, in a sense, or very superstitious.Some people actually believe that God is a superstition.  In fact, just recently I actually had a lady tell me that she believed that God is a superstition.  WRONG!All of creation: plant and animal life, the starry universe, man himself, etc., all clearly and loudly shout to us:  GOD EXISTS! GOD IS!  GOD IS ALL-POWERFUL!  GOD IS ALL-WISE!  Please get it in your head: God is not a superstition!  He is real!   The word ?superstition? means an irrational but usually deep-seated belief in the magical effects of a particular action or ritual, especially in the likelihood that good or bad luck will result from performing it.The key word here is ?irrational.?  Most superstitions are completely irrational.  They are nonsense.  They are ridiculous.ILL.- Louis Pasteur (1822-1895), world-renowned French chemist and biologist, who founded the science of microbiology, proved the germ theory of disease, invented the process of pasteurization, and developed vaccines for several diseases, including rabies, is reported to have had such an irrational fear of dirt and infection he refused to shake hands. - President and Mrs. Benjamin Harrison were so intimidated by the newfangled electricity installed in the White House they didn?t dare touch the switches.  If there were no servants around to turn off the lights when the Harrisons went to bed, they slept with them on. ILL.- A preacher told about something that happened while he was waiting to catch a plane.  He said he bought three insurance policies before boarding the plane.  JUST IN CASE.  Then he stepped on a weight scale which also gave the person?s fortune.  His read, ?YOU HAVE JUST MADE AN INVESTMENT WHICH IS ABOUT TO PAY GREAT DIVIDENDS.?ILL.- The little seven-year-old girl was afraid of the dark.  One night her mother asked her to get the broom from the back porch.  She said, ?I can?t, because I?m afraid of the dark.?Her mother said, ?Honey, Jesus is out there, so there?s nothing to be afraid of.  Don?t you know that Jesus is everywhere?  He?ll protect you.??Are you sure that Jesus is out there?? asked her little girl.  ?Yes, honey, I?m sure Jesus is out there.?The little girl opened the door just a little and said, ?JESUS, WOULD YOU PLEASE HAND ME THE BROOM??Being afraid of the dark is a fear that some people have, but often, it is irrational.  In our own homes, we should not be afraid of the dark.  But, of course, there are certain places where it makes sense to be afraid of the dark.Such as in walking down certain dark streets in some cities across America!  Of course, there are probably some streets in America where we may not be safe even in the daytime!ILL.- My brother Ruben Casas who ministers in East Los Angeles, CA, wrote these words to me last week:  ?Thank you for letting the congregation know about our ministry in East Los Angeles.  Perhaps they can pray for the safety of our little church.?We have steel bars all around the building.  Every door and window needs to be protected in this way from intruders and thieves who think we have a lot of stuff inside.  We have a fence around the building, but it is not enough to deter some of the thieves around this neighborhood.  Many of them are drug users and need to steal in order to buy the next dose.?We have had shots fired at the windows.  As of now three small windows have been shattered by gunfire and we have not replaced them yet.  Knowing this will help your congregation understand better the situation under which we have to minister.?Now, brethren, I was planning on going to California to visit Brother Ruben, but now I have second thoughts!  Ha!  Some fears are irrational, BUT SOME ARE VERY REAL!Brethren, some of the fears that we have are irrational.  And we need to realize this and deal with them.ILL.- Some people are afraid of a recession.  And a recession is basically a temporary shutdown in the economy because of the stock market going down and people getting laid off from their jobs.  ILL.- Someone said, ?Recession is when the man next door to you loses his job.  Depression is when you lose your job.  Panic is when your wife loses her job.?Recession in the form of job layoffs is not funny!  It?s happening all the time!  And some people lose jobs that they never thought they would lose!And some people still fear the shortage of oil and the high prices for gasoline and heating oil.  We can understand this fear.  Our gasoline prices soared to $1.89 a gallon last summer.  Heating bills went up for most folks.This is very real fear that some people have.  However, there may be a reason behind this fear.ILL.- A friend sent me a note which read: ?There are a lot of folks who can?t understand how we came to have an oil shortage here in the USA.  Well, there?s a very simple answer.  Nobody bothered to check the oil.  We just didn?t know we were getting low.  The reason for that is purely geographical.  All the oil is in Texas, Oklahoma, Alaska, and Wyoming.  AND ALL THE DIPSTICKS ARE IN WASHINGTON, DC.?Some fears that we have are nothing more than superstitions and we need to recognize them for what they are.  However, some fears are very real and need to be dealt with as best we can.II. THE DIRECTION OF SUPERSTITIONWhere does superstition lead us?  What will it do in our lives?  Will it help us or hinder us in life?  ILL.- Mike Yaconelli of the ?The Wittenburg Door? wrote, I live in a small, rural community. There are lots of cattle ranches around here, and, every once in a while, a cow wanders off and gets lost.  Ask a rancher how a cow gets lost, and chances are he will reply, ?Well, the cow starts nibbling on a clump of green grass, and when it finishes, it looks ahead to the next clump of green grass and starts nibbling on that one, and then it nibbles on a clump of grass right next to a hole in the fence. ?It then sees another clump of green grass on the other side of the fence, so it nibbles on that one and then goes on to the next clump. The next thing you know, the cow has nibbled itself into being lost."Yaconelli said, ?Americans are in the process of nibbling their way into being lost. We keep moving from one clump of activity to another, never noticing how far we have gone from home or how far away from the truth we have managed to end up.?One clump leads to another clump and to another and to another.  Or one sin generally leads to another and another and another.ILL.- It?s like a youngster who may start his smoking habit by putting a stick or a straw in his mouth.  And before long he is smoking grapevines.  Then, before he realizes it he is smoking cigarettes.  Then grass or pot.  Then he?s into beer, and hard liquor and no telling what else.  ONE THING CLUMP LEADS TO ANOTHER AND TO ANOTHER AND TO ANOTHER.And the same is true of our fears and superstitions.  They may seem harmless, but before we know it we can be led into things we didn?t plan to do.ILL.- For example, some people faithfully read their horoscope.  Every day they have to find out what is supposed to happen to them.  If they find that something works or sounds true, then that could lead them into other things, such as calling a Psychic Hotline, seeking out Palm readers, Tarot Card readers, or playing with a Quija Board, which some people think is nothing more than a game.ILL.- Ben Alexander of Exposing Satan?s Power Ministry tells a story about a young boy who got involved in playing with the Quija Board.  The boy discovered that the thing actually worked for him.  The board would spell out words and tell him certain things.  Finally, after a period of time the board told him that he was going to die.  He was scared.  Frightened.  Didn?t know what to do.  The message that he was going to die so controlled him that he actually took his own life.  THAT?S WHAT PLAYING THE QUIJA BOARD DID!  And it is not a game!  IT IS A TOOL OF SATAN!Messing with superstitions and superstitious practices have lead some people to eventually seek out a Spiritual medium who performs what we call ?seances.?   Or someone who supposedly communicates with the spirits of deceased people.  The idea may sound attractive to some people, but it is strictly forbidden by God in Scripture.Lev. 19:31 ?Do not turn to mediums or seek out spirits, for you will be defiled by them.  I am the Lord your God.?Isaiah 47:12-14 ?Keep on, then, with your magic spells and with your many sorceries, which you have labored at since childhood.  All the counsel you have received has only worn you out!  Let your astrologers come forward, those stargazers who make predictions month by month, let them save you from what is coming upon you.  Surely they are like stubble; the fire will burn them up.  They cannot even save themselves from the power of the flame...?I don?t claim to know all that this Scripture is talking about, but it sure doesn?t sound very good to me!  I believe I will stay away from all forms of superstitions and sorceries and magic spells!ILL.- One time a preacher friend and I went to a meeting to hear the former Spiritual Medium, Ben Alexander, talk about spiritualism and the occult.  Ben is from England and somehow came to the US and became a Christian.  He then started a ministry to combat the evils of spiritualism.After attending the meeting that night, my preacher friend said, ?I believe him, but I would just like to go and see it for myself.?All I can say is, not me, brother!  Brothers and sisters, don?t be deceived by what you might consider to be harmless superstitions.  Stay out of the devil?s territory.  He?s a lot smarter than you and a lot tougher.There are not many who can invade the devil?s territory and come out alive or on top. James 4:7-8 ?Resist the devil and he will flee from you.  Come near to God and he will come near to you.?CONCLUSION--------------------------------------------We must not be controlled by our superstitions or superstitious practices!  WE MUST NOT LIVE BY FEAR BUT RATHER BY FAITH!Ps. 23:4 ?Even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I WILL FEAR NO EVIL.?Ps. 27:1 ?The Lord is my light and my salvation - whom shall I fear?  The Lord is the stronghold of my life - of whom shall I be afraid??Ps. 46:1-2 ?God is our refuge and strength, an ever-present help in trouble.  Therefore we will not fear....?Ps. 91:1-2, 5-6 ?He who dwells in the shelter of the Most High will rest in the shadow of the Almighty.  I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress, my God, in whom I trust...  You will not fear the terror of the night nor the arrow that flies by day, nor the pestilence that stalks in the darkness...?Brothers and sisters, do you get the idea that the Psalmist is trying to tell us something?  The way to defeat all fears in life, superstition or otherwise, is to put our trust in the Lord!  And in His Word!  And in His Spirit!  ILL.- Preacher John Wesley was on a ship one time, caught in a terrible storm on the Atlantic Ocean.  FEAR SEIZED JOHN WESLEY?S HEART.  Some of the people on board ship, however, did not seem to be afraid.  They were a little group of Moravian missionaries.  And when the storm finally subsided, Wesley asked them, ?Were you not afraid?  One of them replied, ?Afraid?  Why should I be afraid?  I KNOW CHRIST!?And then looking at Wesley, he asked, ?DO YOU KNOW CHRIST??Knowing Christ as our Lord and Savior makes all the difference in the world in overcoming any and all fears!  And people are who superstitious are generally controlled by fear.ILL.- Someone said, ?Unless there is within us that which is above us, we shall soon yield to that which is about us.?The only answer to fear and all of life?s problems is to know Christ as your Lord and Savior.  DO YOU KNOW HIM?  IS HE YOUR LORD AND SAVIOR?  If not, you need to let Him become such.  And if you?re not sure, you need to make sure.  Trust and obey.