Sunday, February 26, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  Westboro Baptist Church in Topeka is an Old School or Primitive Baptist Church. It has existed in this place for 57 years, holding public preaching services every Sunday, year in and year out; expounding the Five Points of Calvinism and the absolute autonomy of the local church as the only message from God to man in the earth.  We now, again, go on record, as we have repeatedly gone on record for 57 years, as counting it a great privilege to thus be put in trust with the gospel in this evil place in these exciting last days of the human experiment on this planet. In these days when the unseen powers of eternity are preparing to wind up the affairs of this bankrupt and reprobate world system of things. In these days foretold by all the righteous men and prophets and seers from the beginning of this Adamic race to the present time. It is, I say, a great and unspeakable privilege for us to be counted worthy by God Almighty to be the ministers of Christ and stewards of the mysteries of God in this place. 1 Cor. 4:1. Moreover, it is required in stewards that a man be found faithful. 1 Cor. 4:2. Therefore, it is a very small thing with us that we should be judged of you or of man's judgment. 1 Cor. 4:3. Listen: And, therefore we "labour, working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it: being defamed, we intreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things unto this day." 1 Cor. 4:12-13. Listen: "And they departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name." (Acts 5:41)  And, God "shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you: whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began. ...Yea, and all the prophets from Samuel and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days." Acts 3:20-24. It is, I say, an exceeding great and precious privilege for us to dwell in the midst of a crooked and perverse population, such as the citizenry of this generation, in the darkest days of human history, and expound the truth. Listen: "Do all things without murmurings and disputings: that ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse people, among whom ye shine as lights in the world; holding forth the word of life." (Phil. 2:14-16)  Hear that: "In the midst of a crooked and perverse people, among whom ye shine as lights in the world." In the midst of crooks and perverts, is this word; a perfect description of the population of this world. Crooks and perverts, from the top to the bottom, from the least to the greatest; with very few and rare exceptions. "Among whom ye shine as lights."  Light is a favourite metaphor in the scriptures, standing for divine truth in the earth; divine knowledge and understanding. To shine is another favourite Bible metaphor; signifying to radiate forth the light of divine truth, or simply put: to preach it to crooks and perverts. And, I suggest to the crooks and perverts of this generation, that you might wish to read that passage in Phil. 2:14-16; and study it, if you would know what we are about at Westboro Baptist Church. It is, I say, a wonderful privilege as ambassadors of Jesus Christ, entrusted with letters of marque and reprisal, and with letters patent from the Most High God, to denounce the woes of Jesus Christ upon this generation of vipers going to make up the population of this generation. The whole counsel of God includes that certain official catalog of woes framed and put by Jesus Christ himself to the religious hypocrites and the governmental hypocrites of every age and place. "Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees,"--religious-- "hypocrites! For ye are as graves which appear not, and the men that walk over them are not aware of them." Lk. 11:44. And, listen: "Woe unto you, lawyers!"-- governmental hypocrites -- "For ye have taken away the key of knowledge: ye entered not in yourselves, and them that were entering in ye hindered." Lk. 11:52.  Sunday, February 26, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  My friend, contrary to what you may like to think, the message of Jesus Christ was not sweetness and light, except to his sheep. "Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom." Lk. 12:32. To his "little flock," and only to his "little flock," did Jesus Christ have a message of hope and good cheer. To the vast overwhelming majority of those to whom he preached, his message was a message of wrath, doom, damnation and woe. W-O-E, woe; that little, three-letter word packs a wallop! Webster's Unabridged International Dictionary accurately defines that word. Woe; it means grief, sorrow, misery. The Greek word in the original text, from which the English word, woe, translated is: Ouai! Ouai! And it is an exclamatory word; has an exclamation mark after it; being a primary or primeval exclamation of inexpressible grief. Close akin to the English word, Alas! Alas!  Now we are getting down to the truth; honest-to-God Bible truth. What, as a matter of fact, was the message of Jesus Christ? You had better know and you had better care. Listen: "Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell?" (Matt. 23:33)  And, the Greek word there translated "hell" is Gehenna, meaning the final hell of everlasting punishment, the lake of fire. Listen: "And whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire." Rev. 20:15. Listen: "But the cowards, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all lying heretics, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone." (Rev. 21:8)  I heard some phony, smiling preacher on a television talk show recently say, that God does not allow anybody to burn in hell forever, but that it is our own choosing as free moral agents by refusing to accept God's love and grace which results in anybody going to hell. Phooey! He said that that was his understanding of things. Well, he did not get that understanding from the plain language of Jesus Christ and scriptures. He got that understanding from the evil imaginations of his own depraved and unenlightened mind, and from the demon spirit that now works in the children of disobedience. Eph. 2:2. Nor did this heretic preacher refer to a single verse of scripture to support his lying thesis. Listen you religious hypocrites and moral crooks and perverts: "When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: and before him shall be gathered all peoples: and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats: And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left. ...Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand," -- the goats -- "Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his messengers." Matt. 25:31-41.  God Almighty from all eternal ages past has prepared a lake of fire for the devil and all his messengers, meaning all those who during their lifetimes on earth carry and articulate the Devil's message rather than God's message. And you know that if time permitted in this sermon I could marshal and bring forth and cite to you one thousand additional Bible passages in support of this plain doctrine of eternal retribution. Those of you now listening to me know that I could do that. You full well know that I have in my mind and am able to clearly articulate the message of God Almighty on this subject. And I say to all of you cowards and unbelievers and whoremongers and sorcerers and idolaters that go to make up the population of this world that the lake of fire was anciently prepared, specifically prepared, for you; and you carry the proof of it with you every day that you live on this earth, because you are a messenger of the devil. That is, you carry in your mind and articulate the Devil's message rather than God's message. Hence, Christ said: "By thy words thou shalt be justified," -- referring to his sheep -- "and by thy words thou shalt be condemned"--referring to the reprobates. Matt. 12:37.  Sunday, February 26, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  And so you see, contrary to what you may wish to believe, and deriving from what some sissy preacher told you or what some effeminate Sunday school teacher taught you using some silly flannel board presentation, the message of Jesus Christ is a message of woe, grief, sorrow, misery, ouai!: a primeval exclamation of inexpressible grief. Lk. 11:44 and 52. Woe to you religious hypocrites and woe to you governmental hypocrites, you lawyers. Listen again: "But Jesus turning unto them said, ...weep not for me, but weep for yourselves, and for your children. For, behold, the days are coming, in the which they shall say, Blessed are the wombs that never bare, and the paps which never gave suck. Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us." (Lk. 23:28-30)  And, "it had been good for that man if he had not been born." Matt. 26:24. And, "good were it for that man if he had never been born." Mk. 14:21. Hear that! Jesus Christ was the greatest preacher that ever lived. Don't talk to me about the power of positive thinking, you evil crooks and perverts of this Godforsaken generation. God's word for it, the day is fast approaching when you will cry out and say: Blessed are the wombs that never bare, and the paps that never gave suck.  The day is soon at hand when you will scream with pain in the lake of fire, and cry out in grief and sorrow and misery: "I wish to God that I had never been born." And, if you think I am taking rare and isolated verses from the Bible to make these points, you are indeed ignorant of the scriptures. I tell you that there are 31,173 verses going to make up the King James version of the English Bible, and for more than 65 years now I have been carefully and continuously studying these verses, in consultation with every commentator in print, ancient to modern; and if you think I am putting some kind of false gloss on this frightful Bible subject, you are indeed ignorant of the scriptures.  Contrary to what you might like to think, the message of Jesus Christ to you, the message of the Bible to you, my message to you, is a message of woe; certain, imminent woe; certain, imminent grief, sorrow, misery, ouai to you; alas; woe; a primeval exclamation of inexpressible grief and pain. Listen: "Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart: for I am called by thy name, O LORD God of hosts." (Jer. 15:16) "His word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with remaining quiet and was compelled to speak these things." (Jer. 20:9) Listen: "Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites!" -- that is, religious hypocrites -- "For ye are as graves which appear not, and the men that walk over them are not aware of them." Lk. 11:44. And, listen: "Woe unto you, lawyers!" -- hypocrites, governmental hypocrites -- "For ye have taken away the key of knowledge: ye entered not in yourselves, and them that were entering in ye hindered." Lk. 11:52.  I am preaching to you about the catalog of woes delivered by Jesus Christ himself to the religious hypocrites and to the governmental hypocrites of that day; and by a required extension, to the religious hypocrites and to the governmental hypocrites of every age and in every place of the inhabited earth. And the providence of a sovereign God has put me in this place, Topeka, Kansas, and in this day, even the 20th and 21st centuries AD, as the Adamic race winds up some six thousand years of experimental existence on this planet. And, as an ambassador of Jesus Christ, with letters of marque and reprisal and letters patent, and as a steward of the mysteries of God. 2 Cor. 5:20 and 1 Cor. 4:1.  I love you. Amen.  
