 Breaking Promises 
May 16, 2010 
Rev. Mark Belletini 
 
We are here
 after a week of rain mixed with sun,
 and days of cotton wood and pollen,
 to worship, to journey together in peace, 

with struggle, joy, surprise and growth 

as our sacred companions along the way. 

And so we set out now, with these words: 

 
Mindful that we share a common world, but approach 
that world in different ways, we begin 
our celebration together by kindling our promise of
 mutual honesty, attentiveness, and deep 
courtesy. May we become more proficient at gratitud
e and awareness, that we might more 
deeply embody the kind of justice and peace which e
mbraces everyone on earth. 
Sequence 

Oil on the waters; you spill in our own hearts. 

Windstorm in the sky; you betoken our smallness. 

Flowers in a vase; you are like hope in the heart. 

Fruits in a bowl; you are the diversity in the worl
d. 
Spirit of Life, you are like the water, 

great but vulnerable; you are like the wind, always
 moving, never finally still; you are like the flowe
rs, 
compellingly beautiful, yet limited; you are 

like the cornucopia, nourishing in many ways. 

So come now, Spirit of Life, 

alive like flame in the chalice, 

alive, like love in the hearts of those who embrace
 alive, like each of us right now, 

alive, like 
this
 moment, which flashes so bright 
 that past and future no longer clutch at us. 

Come, alive, alive, electrically alive, 

And open us to the unknown Ground 

From which silence itself blossomsñ
  
silence
  
Come, silence, and thread yourself through 

the broken and open places of our heart, 

as we call to mind and memory 

our relationships, our commitments, our friendships
, 
our families, our losses and our doubts and hopes. 

Naming those that inhabit in our hearts, aloud or 

quietly within, we link our present bright moment 

to every other moment of the week past 

and the week to come. 

 
 Naming 

Come, music.  You, like silence, are alive.
 Like water, you are vast. 

Like wind, you are powerful. 

Like flowers, you are colorful. 

Like the cornucopia, youôre a gift without bounds. 

The First Reading 
is a poem by the American poet and spiritual writer
, Mark Nepo. A cancer 
survivor, he shares what he learned from that exper
ience in many of his poems and writings. 
This is a simply written poem, but I donôt think it
 will be necessarily easy for everyone to wrestle 
with. 

Yes, it is true. I confess,
I have thought great thoughts,

and sung great songsäall of it
rehearsal for the majesty
of being held. 
The dream is awakened
when thinking I love you
and life begins
when saying I love you


and joy moves like blood
when embracing others with love.
My efforts now turn
from trying to outrun suffering
to accepting love wherever
I can find it. 
Stripped of causes and plans
and things to strive for,
I have discovered everything
I could need or ask for
is right hereäin flawed abundance. 

We cannot eliminate hunger,
but we can feed each other.

We cannot eliminate loneliness, but we can hold eac
h other.

We cannot eliminate pain, but we can live a life
of compassion.
Ultimately,
we are small living things
awakened in the stream,

not gods who carve out rivers. 

Like human fish,
we are asked to experience
meaning in the life that moves
through the gill of our heart. 
There is nothing to do
and nowhere to go.
Accepting this,
we can do everything
and go anywhere 

The Second Reading
 is a spiritual writing by Carol Prejean Zippert, wh
o reminds us, as one 
commentator puts it, that ?lost? always goes with ?
found.? They are always paired. 
Tell me what you do when you get lost? Tell me. Tel
l me what you feel, how things look to you. 
What happens in your head? What do you say to yours
elf? Tell me. Can you see anything when 
you get lost? Can you hear whatôs about you? Do you
 perceive life at all? Tell me. Tell me what 
scares you most when you get lost. Can you draw fro
m deep inside? What do you use to hold 
you up? Do you move yourself differently? Tell me. 
Tell me what you do to reach that special 
calm. Can you direct a prayer? When do you know to 
wait? When do you know to risk? Tell me. 
Tell me what you do when you get lost. Tell me. The
n tell me how you know when you are not 
lost (any) more. Tell me. 

 Sermon 

This morning, I want to do a number of things. I wa
nt to get clearer on the meanings of our 
theme for the month, agreement and covenant. I want
 to talk about limits in a free and  
welcoming congregation like ours. And---it may seem
 a bit odd---I want to talk about the 
demolished picnic table in the little forested area
 near the East parking lot. It was a gift to the 
church from one of our coming-of-age classes some y
ears ago, brightly-painted and festive, but 
now it lies in ruins. It is still used, even in its
 present wrecked state, not by us, but as an isolat
ed 
site for smokingñtobacco and other thingsñfor group
s apparently from the neighborhood, often 
on their way home from school. Maybe theyôre respon
sible for the broken table. Maybe not. But, 
having introduced the issue, I donôt want to wrestl
e with it just yet.  
So, as I said two weeks ago, our English-speaking r
eligious ancestors were very bold. They 
decided to toss a fifteen hundred years church orga
nization patterns and start afresh. They threw 
out strict hierarchy with life-long bishops. They t
hrew out regular synods of weighty and 
authoritative elders. They refused to make any use 
of mandatory creedal statements. They 
questioned all the hither-to-fore required rituals,
 like baptism by total immersion, or a members-
only communion service.  

Instead, they took fresh inspiration in texts found
 in the Hebrew Scriptures, like those of the 
eighth century BCE prophet Amos: 
?Can two journey together without first agreeing to
 do so??
  
They decided that what was absolutely basic about c
hurch was 
the agreement to journey 
together
. Everything else was secondary. They even 
expected
 that everything else 
would
 shift 
and changeñbelief, ritual and electoral practices, 
emotional connections. But they were 
convinced that what a congregation was, at its core
, a group of people committed to making 
communityñ. despite all the expected differences, c
hallenges, and conflicts. They knew that 
when human beings came together there would 
automatically
 be conflicts and differences of 
opinions, since every human being is unique. Our an
cestors were realistic.  They realized that 
community doesnôt happen by good will alone, but by
 steady and careful commitment to making 
it work, first and foremost, 
as the supportive, transformative framework
 for 
everything else we 
do
. 
 
So we agree to journey together. We agree to make c
ommunity. Our ancestors called that 
agreement a covenant. They also called the marriage
 ceremony a covenant. It too consists of an 
agreement made between two people. But what is it t
hat a couple agrees about?  Who does the 
dishes? Who initiates intimacy? Who pays the bills?
 No. The answer to those questions can 
change over the years, and marriage will still be m
arriage. Because marriage is the commitment 
to make the relationship work, despite the inevitab
le changes. But sometimes, as you know, 
marriages end. And sometimes, they donôt even begin
. Hereôs what I mean. 
 
Many years ago, a couple came to me to be married. 
I asked them, in my office, the usual 
questions, including what they imagined would be di
fferent, if anything, once they called 
themselves ?a married couple.?  After all, they had
 been living together for two years already. 
One of them said, ?Oh, thatôs easy to answer. When 
you get married, you give up of all of your 
other friends, because your spouse is totally your 
entire focus, and you really donôt need anyone 
else.?  The other person turned and said, ?What? Is
 that what you think marriage is? I renounce 
all my friends? Iôm telling you right now, I have 
no
 intention of giving up my bowling night on 
Thursdays. Thatôs crazy-talk!? 

 
Things got tense there in my office, as you may ima
gine. The two of them verbally duked it out 
in front of me. Clearly, they had never talked abou
t this, and had just assumed a common belief. 

 Eventually, I interrupted and told them that I didn
ôt see how I could marry them if they couldnôt 
even come to a basic agreement as to what marriage 
was.   I told them when they had come to a 
basic agree-ment as to what it meant, they could re
turn and see me. They never did.  
Now, two weeks ago I mentioned that I did not think
 that a covenant had to be written down in a 
permanent form on paper. Our ancestors did, and man
y congregations do, but it is not necessary. 
As I told our children this morning, I never made a
 promise to them about durians on paper or 
with words, but I understood very well that it woul
d have been unkind of me to open that fruit in 
a closed building. So I would never do such a thing
. The covenant, the agreement not to hurt 
each other, or hoodwink each other, or be mean to e
ach other, or take advantage of each other, 
seems pretty basic to me. In Mark Nepoôs words,
?The dream is awakenedñwhen embracing 
others with love. We cannot eliminate hunger, but w
e can feed each other. We cannot eliminate 
loneliness, but we can hold each other. We cannot e
liminate pain, but we can live a life of 
compassion. My efforts now turn from trying to out 
run suffering to accepting love wherever I 
can find it.? 

Now before someone runs up here shaking their finge
r and saying that this passage by Mark 
Nepo preaches against justice activities, I invite 
you to hear it again. ?The dream is awakened 
when embracing others with love,? and when we are ?
accepting love.?  What dream? Oh, the 
well known one summarized by Dr. King, or even the 
one summarized by the prophet Isaiah 
2500 years before that. I mean the dream of ?bindin
g up the wounded heart, proclaiming release 
to all captives, and liberation to the imprisoned, 
to comfort those who grieve. They shall build up 
the ruined citiesñ
as some of our teens will be doing in June down in 
New Orleans on their 
justice tripñ? The dream IS one of justice. Get cle
ar about that. 
 
But without reliable support in a loving community,
 justice-work doesnôt flow from love; it is 
too easily reduced to issues of righteousness, sham
e and guilt.  These emotions are not about 
justice for all people, but way too often the sourc
e of aggrandizement for the individual. This is a 
hard teaching to grasp, I knowñthat love comes firs
t, and that justice proceedsñrather 
immediatelyñ 
from
 love. But my whole life experience, and all of my 
study has led me to that 
understanding. 

 
But when someone breaks the agreement of love, of c
ommitment,ñwritten or unspokenñ that 
binds us as a community, what then? Thatôs tough. I
ôm thinking of a camp I once attended at 
Ferry Beach in Saco, Maine. I was the chaplain for 
a whole week, offering daily services in the 
outdoor chapel there.  

 
A psychologist around 50 years old was attending th
e week-long conference. In the first few 
days, we received reports about this man making agg
ressive and inappropriate sexual moves on 
younger people.  Not teens, mind you, or children. 
But he was touching individuals sexually, and 
was not taking no for an answer. The staff got toge
ther and talked with him. He said everyone 
else was misreading what he was doing, because they
 were all neurotic and he wasnôt. That was 
an unsettling answer right there. We warned him tha
t we were not interpreting the stories we 
heard that way, but he was to stop acting this way 
or leave. Within an hour someone came into 
our office in tears, assaulted by this man.   

 
We had tried. We had called him back into covenant 
with the rest of the retreat community. We 
asked him to respect the verbal agreement of safety
 and accountability that enabled the week-
long retreat to function at all. The words of that 
expected agreement were made clear from the 
beginning, even though they were not written down. 
But he did not respect this agreement. 
Clearly, he was no longer able to function in the c
ommunity without hurting people at almost 

 every encounter. Whether he was a sex addict or not
 was not ours to analyze, nor could we have 
magically changed him even if that were provable. T
he behavior was simply consistently 
inappropriate and endangering. So the whole staff g
ot together, bought him a bus ticket, and 
asked him to leave and go home, mid-week. He was an
gry, but he could see that his sense of 
entitlement to engage in any sexual encounter he wi
shed was not going to be convincing to us. 
So he departed, and we were left to deal with shake
n and violated people. Another psychologist 
present reported the incident to the professional o
rganization to which they both belonged. So 
sometimes, when an agreement is broken, the communi
ty is broken. Itôs sad, but again, itôs a 
realistic part of life.  

 
You and I probably could offer other examples of ag
reements ending and covenants being 
broken which are tough, but not as tough as the sad
 event at Ferry Beach. I remember when I 
expressed sympathy to a young cousin of mine becaus
e his parents were getting a divorce. He 
said to me, ?Are you kidding? Donôt be sorry. Thank
 God theyôre splitting up. Those two had no 
idea how to live with each other. And guess who liv
ed on the battlefield all the ding-dong day for 
17 years? Frankly, I like them much better now that
 they are apart.?   
 
I also remember a very positive ending of a covenan
t. An active member of this church, many 
years ago, loved the people here, but longed for a 
community where there was more agreement 
not just about community but about historically roo
ted words. He felt a need for ritual with deep 
history, and for memorized devotions that have been
 recited for centuries. It was fine that  
Emerson spoke a different Unitarian language than w
e do, but he wanted to speak words that had 
been spoken a century ago and remained in continuou
s use. So after talking for months, I helped 
him realize that he would grow spiritually if he co
venanted with a Jewish congregation. And this 
is what he did. But I had kept my covenant with him
ñto offer him encouragement to spiritual 
depth...in his own terms. And he agreed enough to p
eacefully break with this congregation and to 
study with a rabbi in preparation to become a Jew. 
  
 
Still, there are times when in the midst of a coven
anted community, I can feel a bit confused. 
Sometimes I feel pulled in so many directions that 
I feel dizzy. There are so many things to 
address in this world of oursñimmigration issues, w
ar, poverty, sexual oppression, racism and 
issues of class conflict.  And sometimes, where the
re are differences of opinion within the 
community about whatôs most important, or what our 
goals are, or even about theology, I feelñ
 wellñ lost. 

 
Thatôs why I love that poem of questions and demand
s by Carol Zippert. 
Tell me, what do you do 
when you get lost? Tell me. Tell me what you feel. 
  What happens in your head? What do you 
say to yourself? Tell me. Can you see anything when
 you get lost? Can you hear whatôs about 
you? Do you perceive life at all? Tell me. Tell me 
what scares you most when you get lost. Can 
you draw from deep inside? 

 
When I feel lost in a community situation, in a cov
enant of love, I do indeed try and figure out 
what I feel. But thatôs hard. My feelings are slow 
to name themselves sometimes. Worse, I might 
feel a little despondent; you know, I donôt know ho
w to respond to a situation, and I think I 
should
 know. Shouldnôt 31 years of parish experience coun
t for something? But sometimes I just 
donôt know. So I feel afraid. Scared. 
When do you know to wait?
 When do you know to risk? 
Zippert writes. Good questions. But waiting is not 
my strong suit. And risk? Well, that can be 
terrifying, canôt it? 

 
I try to ?draw from deep within me,? but sometimes 
that doesnôt work as well as it sounds on 
paper. 

  
But you know, when I look back over my life in mini
stry, it works more often than I sometimes 
think. And whatôs inside me?  Many experiences with
 both success and failure, which I have 
reflected upon over the years. Remember what Nepo s
aid in his poem
? Like human fish, we are 
asked to experience meaning in the life that moves 
through the gill of our heart.
 And he also 
says: 
Ultimately, we are small living things awakened in 
the stream, not gods who carve out 
rivers. 
Thatôs comforting to me. What makes me scared and d
espondent is when I confuse 
myself with a god who can carve out rivers, a great
 being with great power. But I am not that. I 
am a small living thing in the stream of life. 

 
And that stream was there before me and it will out
last me. And thus memory of what came 
before me is also inside me. And that brings me bac
k to the picnic table.  
 
You see, this vandalized picnic table is not a new 
thing for me. We had one in Hayward too, 
outside my former church. Also a gift. Also painted
. And it was also vandalized. Burnt. Our 
building was set back from the street like our pres
ent one is, but much further back, and that 
picnic table provided nice privacy for smoking, dri
nking and partying of all sorts. But when we 
found the black pit burned deep into the table, and
 beer cans littered all about, and roach papers 
caught in the weeds, our childrenôs play yard equip
ment thrown down the ravine, our wooden 
walls carved, and our metal door dented by thrown s
tones, we were all feeling a bit lost. Very 
lost. After all, we could hardly afford to post a g
uard. We were not there all the time. But the 
vandals in this case used fireñand that flame very 
easily could have burned our wooden 
building down too, if the wind caught just right.  

 
But then, lost as I was, I went deep within me. I r
emembered that I was a small thing in a stream, 
not a god. And I remembered that many years earlier
, in that same stream, another small thing, a 
Unitarian minister and amateur scientist named Jose
ph Priestley, had suffered 
total
 vandalism. 
He lost not just his table, but his whole house and
 all of his laboratory equipment. The citizens of 
his town of Birmingham, England got angry at his th
eology and politics and decided to teach him 
a lesson. Priestley left Birmingham for London afte
r this event, but he wrote a letter, ?To my late 
Townsmen and Neighbors,? dated July 19, 1791. The l
etter was quite long, but I want to quote 
two sentences from it: 

?I was far from expecting the injuries which I have
 lately received from you. And this has been 
done to one who never did, nor imagined you, any ha
rm.? 
 
So, remembering this letter, I got out a piece of w
hite cardboard and a magic marker, and wrote 
the following: 
?To those who have carved the benches, stoned the d
oor, set fire to the table, 
thrown our childrenôs playground equipment down int
o San Lorenzo Creekñ WHY? This is a 
small church. We struggle to get by. As the ministe
r of this church, I do not understand why you 
have chosen us, who have never done you any harm, w
ho let you sit here in peace, to hurt and 
disrespect us. I just donôt get it.?  
I then taped this to the burnt table.  The next day
, a leader in 
the congregation found the words ?we apologize? wri
tten in foot high gravel letters on the front 
porch of the building. And the vandalism, believe i
t or not, stopped from that day. 
 
I didnôt know the folks who vandalized the building
 and table. I never entered into verbal or 
written agreement with them. They were not part of 
our community, nor could we even say they 
were from our local neighborhood. We just didnôt kn
ow. But I called them to the basic unwritten 
agreement that makes communitiesñwhether congregati
ons, or families, or cities or even 
nationsñwork for the good. As I said earlier in the
 sermon, the covenant, the agreement not to 
hurt each other, or hoodwink each other, or be mean
 to each other, or take advantage of each 
other, seems pretty basic to me. 

  
When that covenant is broken in a tough way, we may
 feel lost. Confused. But when we return to 
the basic idea of the covenant, the basic agreement
 of love, of embraces and welcome, which 
brings us together in the first place, the lost its
elf gets lost, and a community, a congregation can 
find itself, and be strong in its dream, strong in 
its mission, strong in both its vision and 
embodiment of that vision. 

 
Community is not easy. Itôs not automatic. But fran
kly, I canôt imagine refusing to agree to take 
up that journey. We may not, as Nepo reminded us, b
e able to end hunger, loneliness, and pain, 
once and for all, and usher ourselves into the fina
l paradise, but we can feed each other now, hug 
each other now, be compassionate toward each other 
now, and agree that justice is worth the 
dream of it. 

Offering 

How lucky we are to be able to make 

and support community ourselves.  

The state cannot govern us,  

we can resist cultural norms when they  

are unhealthy and not flow with them; 

we are free to be who we are 

because we support ourselves: 

spiritually, ethically,  

intellectually, emotionally   

and responsibly. Although we may give 

in other ways, the offering in support 

of this congregationôs life will now be 

given and received. 

Closing Reading and Song 

 
 
 
