DECEMBER 1997
[if !supportEmptyParas]   [endif]
After a few days of resting and thinking about what to do, I called back my former employer and asked if I could have my old job back, and he agreed to let me come back, on the condition that I work in the very back room of the office, because the other co—workers were afraid of me. I didn’t want  to work back in that secluded room, but I felt I had no choice, so I went back. After about two weeks, I began feeling different about working. Before the first episode, I had a fervent work ethic and never doubted it, but after thinking for the last month that I was the beloved genius of the whole world, I had become deeply aware that now I didn’t even care if I worked or not. The credit—card debts that had put so much pressure on me to pay before, didn’t matter to me. The hospital bills had arrived, (almost 12,000 dollars worth for the two-week stay) I had no health insurance and I didn’t care if I paid that or not either. I wasn’t a millionaire, I wasn’t beloved, I was just a mentally ill designer that lived alone in a small rent-house with his two dogs. I decided to just quit my job. I packed up my tools, didn’t say anything to my boss, and walked out the door.

When I got home from work, I went in the back yard for the rest of the day, only going inside to get another beer from the refrigerator. After the sun had gone down and I had finished two six—packs, I went inside and lay down on the couch. I didn’t wake up until the next morning.
For the next two days, I felt free. Free from everything that had ever bothered me... taxes, work, love—worries, everything. The third day I got a call from my landlady who wondered where the rent was. I told her I’d get the money right to her, and that I had forgotten to pay it. (Which was true) I got in my checkbook, and wrote the check. I had 300 dollars left in my balance after I paid the rent. I went and looked into the bill drawer; I had a car payment and a student loan payment that was over-due. I had thrown out all of the credit-card bills, along with the hospital bills, but I couldn’t lose my car, and the only pride I had left financially was that I vowed to myself that I would finish paying off my student-loans. 300 dollars left. Worry set in with a flash.
I went to the phone and called my ex-boss, and humbly asked if I could have my job back. No, I had left without even saying good-bye, no, I could not have my job back, he said. I thanked him for giving me all the experience I had gained, and said good-bye. 300 dollars... what now?
I had called my friends and told them what I had done, and decided that I wasn’t going to worry about it. I still had a couple of months before the finance companies could threaten me with taking action against me, so I would just live on the 300 dollars until I found a new job.
One of my closest friends called me from Tulsa and said that he had decided that if I wanted to, I could come and live with him until I got a job in Tulsa. I jumped at the offer. I loved Tulsa, and I loved my friend Matt. My other good friend Paul also lived in Tulsa. I started packing my things. Anything too big or too heavy to take to Tulsa, I gave away. After two weeks of packing, my brother—in—law helped me move to Tulsa.
When I was two blocks away from my new home, I thought I saw Amelia pass me in a mini-van. Tulsa was where Amelia had grown up. She was here, in her home—town, welcoming me home. I never told anyone that I thought I had seen her. I still wasn’t taking my medications, but that thought wasn’t important to me. At that moment as I watched her pass by, the only thought I had was that I was right all along. Medications were for the insane, and I was not insane. At least I didn’t think I was. Later that night, I somehow convinced myself that it really wasn’t her in the mini—van, said my prayers, and went to sleep.
