  RETRACING
[if !supportEmptyParas]   [endif]
During this first episode, I continually tried to add sense to how and why all this was happening to me, because even to myself, I knew it seemed far-fetched by a long shot. To answer these doubts, I started looking deeper into the past. 1990 was the point in time when I had lost Amelia, and the beginning of all this must have been then. After I had left her, I had graduated from archgitecture, and began my career.
After that, nothing helped explain why, the doubt was growing, until I remembered a lyric I had read about myself before I was admitted to the hospital. The lyric told of a man that had found a head in a trashcan.  It all came back to me, I had read in the newspapers about the police finding body parts being placed all over the city, and then one morning I went outside to take out the trash, and there in the trash-can outside was a severed head and attached arm laying inside. I puked, ran inside, and called my employer and told him to call the authorities for me because of what I’d found, and waited for them to arrive. (All of this was not true, but I believed it.) Once the detectives got there, they apprehensively looked into the trash—can I pointed to, took a puzzled look at each other, and then looked at me. “What’s the idea of all this?” they asked. “I don’t know, I’m afraid that I might have done it.” I said. “Did what, son? Look in here.” They said pointing into the trashcan. I looked into the can at the head and arm inside, and began getting sick again. “Why is a pile of left-over spaghetti so hard for you to look at?” the detectives asked. “Maybe you ought to come with us.” they said. They took me to the station for questioning. News of this arrest traveled nationally and that’s how Amelia had found me again. She called to the station and reported that she and I had endured horrible break-up years ago and that she had hired private investigators to keep an eye on me in case I had ever tried to hurt her. They asked her to come in. Then, as they kept asking me about the real body parts that had been found, something happened to me. I had suffered some sort of collapse that put me into a coma. Amelia arrived at the station just as this was happening, and started crying that she loved me, and that she knew finally that I had never meant to hurt her. Two weeks later, the police had found the murderer and all charges were dropped against me. This is when all of the publicity had started, cause. The doctors found a way to communicate with me through hypnosis, and when they did, they discovered that I had an amazing capacity for inventing and designing all sorts of things. The profits from these popular inventions, along with the daily inflow of contributions from people who wanted me to return to consciousness, amassed to billions of dollars. Amelia married me while I was unconscious when the doctors had found that most of my emotional content under hypnosis was surrounding her. This convinced her of how essential she was to my survival. Amelia and I had inspired all popular movies. Powder, Apollo 13, etc.) Amelia and I inspired all songs. The whole world was waiting, but most of all, Amelia was waiting.
One attempt to bring me out of the coma had failed, sending me into deeper coma, and endangered me even more. Anyone in my world, the world where I lived consciously, was part of a state-of-the-art technology computer world. This world of mine was costing millions a month to keep running, and the company which kept it running employed thousands of the world’s greatest minds. It reminds me now of lust a glorified version of Humpty Dumpty, give or take a few million details.
I knew that since I had given the go-ahead to unplug my computer-life if this next attempt failed, I was possibly going to die this time, but before I died, I was going to give back to Amelia, and the world, all that I could. My mother had brought me an art—paper sketchpad, my guitar, and at my request, my radio, since the radio at the front desk had to be shared by all the other patients on the ward. She probably wouldn’t have done this if she had known that the radio was so important to me. Actually though, anything in a schizophrenic’s surroundings affects him/her, so it doesn’t really matter.
I began writing songs, and designing Amelia and I’s dream—home. I never wrote down the lyrics to any of the songs, because I knew that anything I said, thought, and did was recorded as I went along. The sketches for the mansion I began designing were grandiose. The floor plans included secret rooms, huge circular rooms, and a 40-foot fountain in the entry parlor.
                                                (the fountain had a glass floor below the water that was
connected to a cylindrical aquarium in the lower level which was the huge entertainment room below) There was also a below-ground garage that could hold up to 200 cars for visitors.
In the group sessions still being held at the ward, I met another guitarist, who started trading stage-space with me by playing for the patients, I that this man was actually. Vince Gill, because he always played Pure Prairie League songs, and Vince had at one time been a member of this band. Every time this man would play one of the band’s hits, I would have to run back to my room to cry. I was becoming more impatient with the whole ordeal of waiting for Amelia to finally appear and be with me. I had done my best to reveal the issues that I denied from my past, and still everyone was just playing along like they didn’t know what was happening. I decided to lust   keep dealing with their cruel pretending of not knowing who I really was, and enjoy my journey leading to the road of success, and true love. One new way I savored to punish them for keeping me from Amelia from me was to begin eating so that I would become fat. Surely, this would discourage their folly, and allow me to finally be taken out of the stupid ward. I began eating double-helpings of all meals, and constantly pleaded with the nurses to let me into the ice—cream that I knew was stock piled in the kitchen. The longer that they ignored my ordeal, the more I ate.
