In the last article we saw that realization of values is the funda­mental characteristic of individuals. But in this connection, the presence of evil in the lives of the individuals presents some difficulties. The problem of evil breaks itself into two distinct parts. There is, on the one hand, the purely natural evil, like pain and suffering and death. And on the other hand there is the moral evil, which, in a broad sense, includes facts like selfishness, cruelty, hatred, injustice, ignorance or ugliness. 
What meaning, if any, can these two kinds of evil have for the life of the individual? Are they only hindrances in the development of individuality? Or is it possible to look upon them as having some signifi­cance for the life of the individual? 
• 
-­-Shri	
  MeherBaba. 
Natural evil (which consists in pain and physical suffering) comes to us as evil, only if we cling to narrow hedonism. Once we free the idea of value from mere pleasure, the pro­blem does not present to us insuperable difficulty. Pain and suffering both have great educative value, and may be linked to the moral evil (according to the law of Karma) in such a manner that they contribute in upholding the dignity of the moral law. We find that it is often a condition of some kind of good which cannot exist through its negation. Just as an individual cannot acquiesce in the existence of evil as such, he can get satiated with a perfectly rounded paradise. Even if a man could live in a world which is, in the words of William James, "without a 

sin, without a victim, without a blot, without a tear", he would still pine to desert such a rounded paradise in order to take chances "in a big worldy winderness with all its sins and sufferings". There can be no room for courage, enterprise, sympathy and sacrifice in a world from which all evil is completely eliminated. 
Evil is thus, from another point of view, an opportunity. This recognition, however, need in no way result in the acquiescience of the individual in the existence of evil. For, it is not in the bare existence of evil but in the overcoming of it that some of the highest moral values come to be realized. 
Any estimate of the ultimate value of life is bound to remain shallow, until the idea of value itself is purified from the limitations of an unqualified and insipid hedonism. Why is it that we instinctively look with disdain upon the gods of the lotus-eaters? Tennyson describes them as lying beside the nectar and 
“ ................………smile in secret. 

Looking over wasted lands, 
Blight and famine, plague 
and earthquake, Roaring deeps and fiery sands, 
Clanging fights and 
flaming towns, 
And sinking ships and 
praying hands." 
It is not merely selfish resentment for being neglected that impels a man to recognize that the existence of these gods lacks something which gives dignity and worth to the life of an ordinary individual who prefers to fight the precarious battle against the existing evil and share the sufferings of his fellow-men. The truth about the matter is that perpetual basking in sunshine is not congenial for the development of the kind of individuality which is characteristic of a spiritual being. If an individual is to be more than a drowsy and a dreaming idol, he must evolve through suffering and evil. He grows as much through the sorrows, tears and struggle as through the joys, smiles and rest. 
Moreover, the individual himself is partly responsible for a great deal of suffering which appears in his life. He might, in his ignorance, pursue lines of action which are not in consonance with his own 

highest good, and eventually suffer through his mistaken essays for happiness. In such cases suffering has a great educative and purifying effect. Coming to the specific question of moral evil, as distin­guished from the natural evil, one may ask whether this also is in any way necessary for the spiritual growth of the individual. And it seems clear that although moral evil is not in any sense necessary, it is inevitably present as a possibility in securing the fundamental condition of there being an individuality in which any genuinely moral values can ever appear. Moral evil can be traced to the freedom of the will of the individual. No individual can be capable of realizing any genuinely moral values in the absence of such freedom. It is the voluntary renun­ciation of the evil in favour of the good which gives worth to the individual who chooses the good. And there is of course the real possibility that all the individuals might make that choice. The universe which makes moral evil possible is, therefore, better than the one which would make it impossible. 
Besides, it is quite legitimate to hope that on the whole there is the preponderance of the good over the evil—natural and moral—in the totality of existence. If there is such a considerable preponderance of the good over the evil, the presence of evil assumes the role of increasing the worth of the totality of existence by accentuating the goodness of the good by contrast, instead of the role of taking away from its worth by negation. From a quasi-aesthetic point of view, it would enrich existence, more or less like the presence of tragedy in art or an undertone in a composition of music. 
Some persons tend to lose their faith in the "moral order" of the universe when they observe that in this world moral goodness and happiness do not always go together. But the possibility of the immortality and pre-existence puts the whole question in a different perspective. The existing discrepancy between moral good and happiness in the lives of individuals may then be: — 
1) Partly attributed to their actions in their previous lives, or, 

2) Partly compensated for in the lives to come. IMMORTALITY AND REINCAR­NATION 
Of all the evils that obtain in life death seems to be an unqualified evil, an irreparable loss without any compensation; and this it would cer­tainly be if it were mere annihilation. However, if we devote proper thought to the phenomenon of death, we find that it is no evil, since it is only a gate-way to further life. 
Immortality of the finite individual and his reincarnation may be legitimately postulated on the strength of the implications of moral and religious consciousness. If we start with the faith that every finite in­dividual will ultimately attain the highest that is possible for him, or that there is at the heart of reality a spiritual principle expressing itself in a moral order, the logical postulate of this faith would be a belief in the immortality of the individual as well as his reincarnation, so that death does not prevent the ultimate fruition of his life, and the reign of moral law asserts itself by suitable compensa­tions. 
In fact, there cannot be for immortality or reincarnation any proof which is stronger than the one which is based on adequate philosophical grounds. Psychical research or any scientific inves­tigation into the nature of life after death can at best only prove the survival of the finite individual after his death, and not his immortality. We should still be wanting a further guarantee that the life after death will not itself come to a termination. And no amount of scientific investigation into the past or the present is enough to entitle a confident forecast about the future. It is a matter of a primary faith in life. 
But it might be argued that life after death or reincarnation is not a logical postulate of the ideals and aspirations of the individual. The individual can be content with the survival of values, as distinguished from his own survival. Is it not enough that the individual contri­butes to the irnmortality of the species, and also leaves behind him a spiritual heritage of books, inventions, insti­tutions, and a subtle but real influence on all that comes into contact with him? He lives in the memories of his friends for a considerable time, but even when he is utterly forgotten by everyone, the effect of his actions or thoughts remains indestructible. Such influence on the society may not be very appreciable, and yet may never­theless be real. And in so far as this influence is preserved throughout the human history, the individual might be said to have a vicarious immor­tality through others. It might, therefore, be argued that the individual need not attach any importance to his personal immor­tality. 

There is a good deal that is admirable in this attitude to life. The moral elevation of the tone given to life by eliminating all personal considerations including any hope for personal immortality is unquestion­able. But the immortality of the individual is not postulated on the ground that he desires it at his highest. It is postulated on the ground that the highest he desires is not necessarily attainable within a lifetime, and cannot come into existence except by a gradual realization of his ideal. 
The higher spiritual values cannot be automatically inherited by one individual from another. They have to be cultivated and built up into the personality by every single individual for himself. One individual can at best create for others an atmosphere in which they will have opportunities to see and realize the values which he saw and realized. But the real values are themselves quite inalienable from the individual in whom they come to be realized. There is, therefore, no survival of values, in a genuine sense, except in the survival of the individuals in whom they are realized; and we cannot avoid positing immortality and reincarnation as necessary for fulfilling the aim of life. Conservation of all values and the ever-increasing worth-whileness of life is guaranteed only by the personal immortality of the soul and its reincarnation till the goal is attained. 
We have thus come to the conclusion that pain, suffering, sin and death cannot be looked upon as real evils in the sense of creating eternal discord in God's universe. They can all be explained in terms of values. They are not ultimate facts. Theme which, in words of Shri It is possible to go beyond them and Meher Baba, has in store for treat them as merely provisional and everyone, "the ocean of Love, Bliss, as necessary conditions of the fulfil-Knowledge and Goodness". ment of the Divine 

