


You Must Believe It 

By Dr. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF 

     The female Saint Rabia of Basrah, famous as half Qalandar in the Sufi lore, lived in the early part of the century after the Arabian Prophet and was of slave extraction. Slavery was in vogue at the time, and these slaves were at the mercy of their masters. 

A woman brothel-keeper, being struck by Rabia's personal charm and beauty, purchased her for a fat sum, hoping she would prove an asset to the establishment. The woman little knew the spiritual state of Rabia who, after the manner of the profession, was made to sit in the balcony gaily attired and made up. 

Rabia as expected didn 't belie the hopes of the establishment, and proved a star attraction. But the world of admirers and profiteers outside, were not aware of the spiritual drama that was daily being enacted in the privacy of Rabia with her prospective custom≠ers. No sooner a customer found him≠self alone with her, she would always beg permission to offer her prayers a few minutes  and would even ask the party to join her if possible. This in≠vitation to prayers was seldom resisted, as the spiritual atmosphere about her unconsciously cowed them into willing acquiescence. In the few moments thus occupied, Rabia, with her divine powers, used to transform the man spiritually and send him out a saint. This state of affairs continued for months, and hundreds coining in as sinners went out into the world as saints. 

In the meanwhile the owner of the establishment became curious and inquisitive. She began to wonder as to why a customer, after having once visited Rabia, never turned up again, which fact was contrary to her long experience in the matter. The woman decided to look into the affair and ascertain the cause for herself. One day she kept watch, and after ushering in a visitor as usual, she began peeping into Rabia's chamber through a slit in the door. 

What the prying eyes of the woman witnessed behind 



doors, made her contrite and awe-stricken. She was afraid lest the heinous crime she was responsible for, be visited upon her in some drastic man≠ner. Trembling and crying she fell at Rabia's feet beseeching forgiveness on the plea of ignorance as to her true spiritual state, and declared her free from slavery from that day. 

Rabia regretted her interference, saying, " You fool of a woman, why were you so inquisitive? Your inter≠ference has cut off my spiritual current to the world today."

    The above spiritual episode in the life of St. Rabia, is an instance, amongst many, of spiritual beings resorting to strange and peculiar ways and means of imparting spirituality to different strata of humanity. They never cease dispensing spirituality in what≠ever circumstances they are placed; nay, they even deliberately create or invite such compromising situations whereby their object of approaching the eligibles and keeping off the ineligibles is achieved or rendered easy. One can never tell in what conditions of life saintly personages can be found. They very often turn up in the most impossible and u n expected quarters. It is well known, Hazrat Moosa Sohag of Ahmedabad passed his life amongst eunuchs singing and dancing; Hazrat Baba Tajuddin of Nagpur passed eigh≠teen years in a lunatic asylum, and Hazrat Babajan of Poona was per≠petually surrounded by drunkards and opium and ganja (Indian hemp) smokers. 

    Such deliberately accepted external surroundings and life by saints is very often a smoke screen which keeps off the world from noticing them, thereby helping those not already perfect to pursue their spiritual progress unham≠pered, and the perfect ones this way shield themselves against undesirables. No wonder, the world refuses to see or acknowledge high spirituality under such circumstances and surroundings, and consequently deny to themselves the light of spiritual knowledge. 

When the great Sufi Abu Saeed Abul Khair was told by people that 'men of God' must be found in mosques only, he replied, "No, they are also to be found in the under-world. Look for them in all guises. " 



. 
