				WHEN WILL YOU SUBMIT?I first of all ask Allah (swt) to give me strength and clarity to deliver a message that is beneficial and its something that remains in the hearts and minds of myself included and all the Muslims because the subject that I have chose that I have chosen to share with you today is of really a paramount importance and typically what I like to do in Khutbah is to focus on some portion of Allah's words. And the portion I have selected for you today is the 54th ayah of Surah-An Nisa. Surah Nisa happens to be the surah as early Madni by most accounts. And includes in it many instructions for Muslims and how to set up themselves as a community. So some of the foundations or principles for Muslim community to be established in Madina in the life of Madina. And in it it also has principles for us of how to go beyond the community and really truly become a nation. So you know there is this idea of us the smallest unit of humanity being an individual and beyond that being a family and beyond that being a neighbourhood and beyond that being a community and even beyond that  being a nation. And so these stepping stones that lead us to become a solidify nation, an ummah. And Allah mentions these ayahs in these injunctions in one after the other in this surah . So of them having to do with divorce law, others having to do with fighting in the path of Allah, spending in the path of Allah. And you find a very interesting contrast. You find Allah talking to two groups of people. One group of people that is refusing to accept Islam. And another group of people who have accepted Islam on the outside but have walked away on Islam from the inside, the Munafiqoon. And there are different kinds of hypocrites, there are those who never really believe to begin with and it was a fasad to begin with ????? ????????? ??????????? ?????? ???? ???????? ????  Right? They never had to begin with. On the other hand there are those who may have come with good will they actually thought Islam has something good to offer and they accepted it thinking it is the truth its convincing and its a beautiful thing. But when it came to its instructions and injunctions and its demands they said I love Islam but this is getting a little too much. This is a lot to ask of a person. They were not like a lot of these people who came in to Islam a good number of them were not like the Sahaba of Makkah. You know when you come into Islam in Makkah, it is not a bed of roses to begin with. They already know if I become a Muslim now, well all the Muslims I know are being cursed at, tortured, beaten up, made fun of. They are getting kicked out from their families home. So if I join these people then I guess that's coming in my future too. There is no added advantages in becoming a Muslim in the worldly sense, not in Makkah anyway. When Prophet(saw) migrates to Madina, the Muslims are to begin with a strong community. Significantly stronger when they were in Makkah. And now if you become a Muslim the challenges are not the same as the challenges were in Makkah for the Muslim who become in Makkah that is, they are not the same. So a lot of times people would jump into Islam not realizing the consequences. What they are getting themselves into. This Deen is not an easy thing. This is not something you can take casually. It really is a change of course of your entire life.  So Allah in these ayaat talks specifically there is an entire passage dedicated to a discussion for the Munafiqoon, for the hypocrites. And the hypocrites would walk away from Islam in 2 ways. And this is important. One is obviously leaving Islam altogether,  ????? , outright you become Muslim and everybody knows you are no longer Muslim, you have become a Kaafir again. But there is another form of turning away from Deen and that is from outside you say you profess to be from the Muslims because that has social consequences if you walk away from Islam outright but for all practical purposes and on the inside there's nothing left. There is really noting left. Especially, now you have become a person of thinking and choosing what you take from the Deen and what you don't take from the Deen. And this is one of the central messages of this surah. That you are not in a position to negotiate what it is from this Deen that you accept and what it is from this Deen that you don't accept or you don't find yourself comfortable so you are not you know you are not gonna necessarily take it. This is one of the central ideas communicated in this Deen. Just recently actually yesterday over the internet I was talking to a youth group in DC and you know a question came up in the discussion, it was a young sister who asked the question, “I love everything about Islam except hijab. And it seems like hijab is to protect men from looking at us. I really don't see a point in it” and instead of arguing the social benefits of hijab or what hijab does to honour women all of that stuff, that is already going in the wrong direction, that conversation. We need to take a step back and ask more fundamental question. Lets take a step back and ask Ibrahim (as). Ibrahim (as) loves Islam too but then Allah make a tiny little request how about you go in the middle of a desert and leave your family there. Right? He is not one who's gonna say I love everything about Islam but this whole leaving my family in the middle of a die thing, I don't know. I am not that comfortable with that. And after he is done with that you know what? why don't you jump in to the fire. You know I love everything about Islam except this whole you know burning myself alive. That's asking a little too much. No! You don't find that question. Then Allah says put a knife on your son's throat. Go ahead. I love Islam but I also love my son. I don't know can you give me a logical explanation for why I should do this? Can you tell me the social benefits or some of the other reasons, other benefits of why should I be obeying you????? ????? ???? ??????? ???????? ????? ?????????? ??????? ????????????? That is the lesson Allah has taught us inn Surah al Baqarah. Whenever Allahs aid give yourself up, submit, surrender. He said I surrender I give myself up, I submit myself entirely before the Master of all people ??????? ????????????? . So before we talk about any aspect of Deen and try to figure out the logic of it, understand the larger purpose. Allah as made this Deen one to submitting to Him. If you are having a hard time submitting to him. You are having a hard time with Islam itself. The very central idea of Deen itself. It's not to say you shouldn't understand the Ahkaam of Allah but you and I have to be the one once we when understand them whether we get it or not whether we see the logic of it or not, we have to give it up. We have to just give it up, you know. Allah even acknowledged in Surah Al-Baqarah when it came to Riba.??????? ??????????? ??????? ???????? ????????? ?????? ????????  Its a very interesting discussion. Allah  says there are people who consume riba and they say that business is just like riba. I mean if you looked at liquid transactions, and solid transactions, and money and cash its a complicated discussion it could go either way. You can't even tell the difference. 1920, pate do pata do, one two lines in a contract. I mean what's the big deal. It is the same and if you sit and have a 4 hour argument with a finance major about whether riba is halal or not you know or what is the difference between riba and business you might say yeah its the same yeah. I don't see the practical difference. But Allah didn't make only one line instead of explaining to you the fine line differences between them, He(swt) said there is only one more thing you need to know now that you understand to you and your head that they are similar there is only one more thing ????????? ??????? ????????? ????????? ???????? ? End of story. Allah has made business halal and riba haram. That is it.. That's the conclusion. Now with that background in your mind I want you to in shaa Allahu ta'aala reflect upon the words of this profound ayah  ??? ???????? ????????? ???????   of course the ayah is addressing us. ??? ????????? ??????? ??? ??????? the one who turns away among you  ??????? ??? ??????? from his Deen the one who turns back from among you from his Deen. Allah didn't say all of us are turning back from our Deen. A group from among us and ???  is an interesting word in Arabic it could refer to something plural and it can also refer to something that is singular. So from the point of view of Taqleel it could be even a single person is walking away from Deen, you are walking away from the religion. And I have already mention this to you, it can happen in two ways. One, practically they denounce Islam altogether and two for all practical purposes internally in their hearts, in their heart of hearts in their thoughts they really don't submit to Allah. They really don't see a point of living by Allah's teachings. They don't see the point in that any more. So for those practical purposes they have walked away from the Deen. Also even if no body else human beings don't see it we see a Muslim outside they are suppose to say Assalamualaikum warah matullah. We are not suppose to judge what's in their heart. But Allah can. Allah sees what's inside. So who ever of you has walked away or does so then what does Allah say???????? “then soon” and ?????? is the Arabic word that implies “very soon”. Allah won't take very long to take immediate steps and what are those steps? ??????? ??????? ???????? Allah will bring about a nation. Allah will bring about, Allah will bring forward a nation. Its very interesting The first part was even if one of you walks away and then Allah says Allah will bring a whole nation around. In other words you start thinking you are special? you think Allah needs you? You think you are a contributor to Islam nobody else can be? That you are irreplaceable? Allah essentially says what to speak of you I will bring a nation instead of you. You are not an asset. Don't think of yourself that high. Already we are being put in our place. And one of the central embedded teachings of this ayah is humility. That we understand our place. That in this Deen when we get an honour to say La ilaha illallah, when we have the honour to say Muhammad ur-Rasoolullah (saw), then this is an honour and a gift given by Allah. And if you don't appreciate this gift then who needs you there is plenty of others who can appreciate this gift more than you and I. There is plenty of others. Similarly we have to stop thinking of those among us who are involved in religious activity. They are involved in positions of leadership, of volunteering, of helping out Islamic causes. Whatever they are doing in whatever capacity. Sometimes you start thinking man if I don't do it, it won't get done. If I am not the one giving the Khutbah, if I am not the one helping out volunteering at the Masjid, if I am not on the board, if I am not the MSA president, if I am not running the dawah organisation, mann this work cannot happen. I can't even believe, I am surprised what was happening before I got here because I am God's gifted Islamic work, right? Without me how would it even move forward. And Allah is letting us know all of us know that you know his Deen is beyond you and I. And its not like other people will come forward and so we give other people credit. Allah says ??????? ??????? ????????  not  ??????? ?????? . ??????? ?????? will be a nation will come. ??????? ??????? ????????  Allah will bring a nation. Its not even that new nation gets a credit. Allah gets credit from bringing them out. Allah gets credit for the replacement. We are replaceable. Nd we are in the place of privilege and honour. We have to accept that and admit that. And that's a humbling thing. And at the same time its an honour and at the same time you and I should be humble that Allah has chosen us and given us this responsibility. We should take it very very seriously. And in no aspect of our Deen, and in no ounce of our attitude should we be people that turn their back from our Deen in any capacity, altogether or partly. We shouldn't be of those people. We should be of the people who move forward. You know there are interesting expressions in the Quran for Muslims moving forward. And essentially if you are not moving forward, its not that you are in your place you are actually headed backwards.  ??? ???????? ????????? ??????? ??? ?????? ????? ????? ?????? ???????? ??? ??????? ??????? ????????????? ????? ?????????  ?????????? ???????????? ?????????? ???? ?????????? ? Surah At-tawbah is very harsh language. What's wrong with you those who claim to have Iman when you are told to march forward in Allah's path, your feet get planted in to the earth. What's happened to you? You prefer Dunya over Aakhirah? That's what happened to you? It is understandable that a disbeliever who has no concept of Paradise, who has no concept of Hell-fire,  who has no concept of Judgement Day. If he prefers this world, it is logical I can understand. You are Muslims! You have been given far more better information. You know a lot more about what's ahead. And if you still prefer this world there is some serious problem. ??? ??????  is rightfully said “what would be wrong with you?”. What is wrong with you that you don't march forward in Allah's path. Anyhow, ???????? ??????? ??????? ????????Then Allah gives us qualities of this nation. And it is important to understand the comprehensive message of this ayah. Allah says there are people who may walk away from His Deen and now Allah is describing people who don't walk away from His Deen. People who will look to the teachings of His Deen. People that He expects a nation to be like. So when he gives us qualities of these replacements. Really we should have these qualities so we are not replaced. That's the point of giving us these qualities. Its that we should aspire to carry these qualities in ourselves as an Ummah. And may Allah make it easy for all of s to carry these qualities in ourselves. Allah says??????????? ??????????????“He loves them and they love Him back”. He loves them and they love Him. Allah mentions His love first and one of the embedded teachings is that He already loves us. He already loves us. And when we appreciate that we should truly love Him back. He has given us an honour. You know when you,  a lot of times young people especially as they are raised sometimes unfortunately in this country you know by Muslim families. Our families, we fail to teach our children what an amazing thing it is to be a Muslim. We just raise them on cruise control, thinking we are raised Muslims so our kids are gonna be automatically appreciating Islam without us having to put any extra effort in it. OK maybe we drag them to Jummah prayer, half way through the Salah, or we bring them to Sunday school and leave them outside whatever and they do what they do 4 hours and automatically somehow they will become righteous. And reality hits you when they  become teenagers. And then you come to the Imam saying can you talk to my boy or my girl because they seem a little different now. Ever since they got a license. I don't know what's happen to them. You know, ever since they got their cell phone. I am worried who their friends are because they do not talk to me any more. That's what starts happening. But from the very beginning we are suppose to be instilling certain values in to our kids, in to our next generation. And one of those values is that this Deen is actually a gift; not a prison, not a curse. A lot of times our young people, when you ask them what do you think of Islam, what do you know about Deen. They will make a whole list of things that are haraam. This is haraam that's haraam, smiling is haraam, happiness, joy, taking a breathe, relaxation, having good friend's company. Here is a whole list of things that I shouldn't be doing. That's what seems like Islam is. You ask them what you know about Allah? Well Allah will take revenge, destroy the Kuffar and He has destroyed nations before and He has created Hell-Fire. On Judgement Day He will humiliate people etc. The first thing that comes to their mouth is not mercy. Its not mercy, its not guidance. Its not help. First thing that comes to their mind is judgement, punishment. Here is what I can't do. I can't live my life freely. That's what they think. But you know what the reality is? All other people are slaves, we are the only ones that are free. We are the only ones that are free. Every body else is either a slave to their nafs or they are a slave to their entertainment or they are a slave to their bank account or they are a slave to their job or their career or their appearance or their fashion sense or their car or their house or their payments. And we are slaves to Allah; freeing us from all of these things. It frees us from all of them. We are the only ones that are free. You walk around, this is suppose to be our country, this is suppose to be the expression of individual freedom. You enter in to the High School and you see a bunch of clicks dressed the same. All the Goth kids dress the same, all the Hip Hop kids dress the same. All the the other groups of kids they all dress the same. It like they are enslaved in to dressing a certain way. They have a uniform. This is suppose to be an individual country. Right? This is suppose to be individual. Everybody has to listen to the same song and watch the same movie and then report back to their friends I saw it too. This is individualism? This is what you call individualism?Subhan Allah. Allah has given us that honour that we don't have to follow a crowd, we don't have to turn into sheep. We don't! He has freed us from this by making us slaves to His. Coming back to the ayah. ??????????? ?????????????? Now next part is really hard, and I want that to be heart of my Khutbah. What really I want to share with you. Allah says the next quality and some argue that this quality is a result of the first quality. Meaning if they really love Allah. If Allah loves them and they really love Allah then next part is natural and that is????????? ????? ??????????????And a lot of times we skip  ????????? ????? ??????????????  and we go straight to  ????????? ????? ?????????????  thats easier. ????????? ????? ?????????????? they are powerless, weak, humble, meek, soft in their dealings with believers. They are easy going with believers. They are forgiving with believers. They are courteous in their language. They are not judgemental. They are not harsh with other Muslims. One of the worst qualities of a community that claims to be a believing community is that they are judgemental and harsh and back-stabbing towards each other. This is one of the worst qualities Bani Israel had developed so when Allah reminded them of fundamentals of their Deen He included in those fundamentals ???????? ???????? ??????? speak to people nicely. Speak to people nicely. You will find nowadays unfortunately a stigma associated with Muslims, the more religious they get, the more constipated they get socially. The more difficult it is to talk to them. The angrier they look. If the guy has got a beard, it means he is just gonna constantly be upset on something. And you gonna avoid trying to talk to him. If a woman starts wearing hijab it mean she is gonna judge you because you are not wearing one. And she will look with her eyes that will burn right through your hair. Right? That's the perception. But the closer you come to Deen that much bore you are suppose to become courteous and kind, and generous and understanding and forgiving of others. That's what you are suppose to be instead of looking at someone who is living in ignorance. A lot of Muslims do ignorant things nowadays. Maybe your friends do and and you don't do it any more. But if your friends are doing ignorant things your first thought “Astaghfirullah, I just can't believe these people they are my friends. Such ignorance they do. They do Bida', they do shirk, they do haraam they don't care about anything”. You are that guy two years ago. That was you? Who guided you? You guided yourself? ????????? ?????? ????? ???????? ????? ???????????????????? ???????? ? The same ayah which says????????? ?????? ???????????“Then He put love between your hearts” and then the same ayah says “you were at very edge of Hell. You were at the edge of the ditch and He rescued you”. So if somebody else is at the edge of the ditch instead of getting angry at them and kicking them off. Be patient. Be courteous. Be patient. Some you come and ask Imam or a scholar “you know I am trying to give dawah to my brother or to my friends. Its been like to months nothing is happening. What should I do? Give me some magical thing to say. Tell me what I can do”. You know what? What's Noah (as)'s magic trick. Its Sabr. He is talking to his own son for a very long time. His own community for a very long time. And its not like he talks to a group of people and they don't listen, he says you know what? I am packing my bag. I am going somewhere else where maybe I can find a better crowd elsewhere. No! Same crowd, same crowd. We have to be patient with each other. Especially believers. Especially believers. And that's Noah (as) with Kuffar. That's him with Kuffar. That's a messenger (saw) with a decade with the Quraish of Makkah the worst of the worst for a decade.  We are talking about Muslim families. We are talking about your own friends and neighbours. We have to humble ourselves before them. Its a very serious problem; Arrogance. You know one the great central teachings of our religion Lailaha illalah, the beginning, the beginning of our religion, is acknowledging the greatness of Allah. An the more you realize Allah's greatness, the natural result of that should be the more you realize your own lesser status. The more you make Allah, declare Allah's greatness, the more humble you should become. That's the natural result of declaring Lailaha illallah. Every time you and I saw “Allahu akbar”, its not just a statement of Allah's greatness, its a statement of our own weakness. Its a statement of our own humility. But when people who say “Allahu Akbar”, then pass judgement of anybody who walks in to the Masjid. And they look at the size of their beard or they look how they are dressed or they look at the accent of their language. You know when that happens. When people who even working in Islamic causes  look each other with suspicious eyes. When they can't trust each other. When people say Salam without meaning Salam. Assalamualaikum, all of you know what that means. But when it implies there is no beef between us, I don't dislike you, I love you, there is absolute peace and harmony between us. When you say “Assalamualaikum Brother!”, you don't mean it. You mean exact the opposite. I hate your guts brother. But you are saying Assalamualaikum, that's what you are saying and this is absolute hypocrisy. You can't say Assalamualaikum to someone and have feelings against them. You can't. Then you are saying something you don't mean. That's what you are doing. So you and I have to internalize ????????? ????? ?????????????? first. Humbled before the believer. ????????? ????? ????????????? “And they are tough, harsh, authoritative against Kafireen”. And Kafireen here are not non-Muslims. Kafireen here is enemies of Islam. Kafireen is here who are undermining Islam. The Muslims were not harsh with all non-Muslims in Madina. Who were they harsh with? The enemies of Islam. Those who are trying to undermine Islam, attack Islam, insult the religion, say things against the Prophet, say things against the Quran. Those who are trying to attack Madina from Makkah. Those people. They have to be harsh towards them. They are not gonna be back awe. They are not gonna take it sitting. They stand up for themselves. So over learning here is a fine line between we are not arrogant because we are humble at the same time its not like you walk all over us either. We stand up for ourselves. We don't take it sitting down. Our young men, lot of them go to public school, young men and our girls they go to public school and people pass comments at them. Stand up for yourself. Stand up for yourself. Don't take it just, “ aww I have to be patient. I have to be humble” and you are walking like you got a back surgery or something and your back is lowered and you think this is like Islamic that you have to look like you are weak or you are sick or something. No! We have to lower our gaze that's fine but that doesn't mean we have to lower our heads. It doesn't mean that. We have to be confident people. WE have to instil confidence in our den so much, so much that when we see Kufr we look at its inferiority. We see how inferior and pathetic it is and we see pride and greatness that Allah has given us in Islam. We are not arrogant but we certainly are confident. That's what we have to be.????????? ????? ?????????????Then Allah goes further to say??? ?????????? ???????? ??????? ? “They are not afraid of any blame of any blamer”. In other words, people will say things to us, people will accuse us of things. People will literally????? accuse. People will accuse us of things. The Peter kings of the world will accuse us of things before Congress. They will do so. But we won't be afraid of it. We will not gonna go, “You know what he said about Muslims? Oh my God what's gonna happen?” No! No! No! No! We knew what's gonna happen. We knew what's gonna come.  And we are not afraid of it. We don't have to explain ourselves to you. You don't have to tell us you guys are crazy, this, that or the other. And we have to exhaust or breath-telling. No! No! No! we are not crazy. We are normal. We are OK. No! No! That's what they want. They want to keep us busy constantly telling them that we are not crazy. Muslims are not violent, Muslims are not extremist, Muslims are not this, Muslims are not that. They want us to make a whole list of what Muslims are not. So we never get to tell them what Muslims are. Right? That's the point. You are constantly busy explaining ourselves. ??? ?????????? ???????? ??????? . And then finally Allah says ? ???????????? ??? ??????? ???????Allah argues ???????????? ??? ??????? ??????? “they struggle as hard as they can in Allah's path”. In other words, this Ummah has come together because this Ummah is on  a journey. Its on a journey. It has a goal. And its gonna get to that goal. And they have to take care of the business inside the house. Before they can reach there. Before they can deal with a higher goal. You have to have your health in order to do bigger and better thing. Allah has made us an Ummah for a very high cause. Its called ?????? ??? ??????? ???????  we are not afraid of that term, it is a noble term in the Quran. And has nothing to do with the craziness associate with it. We have to confidently study this term and understand what it refers to. It refers to the mission of all messengers. All messengers. We are doing ?????? ??? ??????? ???????. Esa (as) did ?????? ??? ??????? ???????. Musa (as) did ?????? ??? ??????? ???????. Muhammad ur-Rasoolullah (saw) did ?????? ??? ??????? ???????. They struggled in Allah's path. Allah gave them a mission and they struggled in it. This Ummah has a mission. It has a goal to accomplish. It has to clarify the teachings of this Deen to the rest of the world. It has to show the beauty of Islam. That's a big goal. Its not a small goal. With all the billions of dollars being pushed in demonising Muslims, this ummah has a goal to overcome that because they may have finances on their side but Allah is on our side. Allah is on our side. So we have a goal. We have a mission. But if we can't accomplish this mission. If we are bickering each other and arguing among ourselves and we are too busy in dealing with these pathetic things that is holding from what Allah has created us for ???????????? ??? ??????? ??????? . And then Allah ends??????? ?????? ???????“That is a favour of Allah”. That is the favour of Allah. If you and I become an Ummah that truly struggles for the sake of Allah that show humility to each other that become tough against the enemy. We become stern. We don't become lying down. We become these people. Then Allah is saying that is Allah's favour. Now these people are standing up for themselves. Now they are doing what I commanded them to do. Now they are moving forward. We are constantly thinking in our communities we are never gonna be “Oh! Alhumdulillah we have accomplished everything we need to as a community”. We are always thinking what we need to do. What's the next step. Its a Sabeel (???????), a path. What's the next step in this path. What's the next milestone. What more we need to get done. We are constantly thinking ahead. What more we need to do. And what we need to instil in to our kids. We only got this for you. You guys gonna go further. This is just a beginning. These are the people Allah says this is a favour of Allah. This is a blessing of Allah. ????????? ??? ??????? ? “He gives it to whoever He wants”. And he has given it right now to us. He has given it to us. And Allah didn't say He has given it to us and we can hold on to it. We walk away from these responsibilities we are replaceable. SubhanAllah. ????????? ??? ??????? ????????? ??????? ???????“Allah is Vast and All Knowledgeable”. He knows what we are saying on our tongues and He knows what we mean inside our hearts. He knows what we represent. Are we people who move forward or people who don't move forward. Just because you have been hired for a job, doesn't mean you do it. Just because we are Muslims doesn't mean the job will get done. We have to all get serious. We have to all re wire our thinking as individuals, families and communities. Be part of the Masjid. Bring your family to the Masjid. Listen to the lectures that are being offered every week. Bring your kids to the Khutbah. Let them hear the message every week. This is important part of them developing their thinking. If you don't associate them, these are the only safe heavens left for our Deen. Don't rely on a computer because computer comes with many good things but it also comes with a lot of garbage. If Allah has given us the blessing to be able to establish His houses all across this country including his great Masjid here. You have to answer Allah for not appreciating it.  You have to answer Allah for not breaking some part of your child's life. You guys are gonna grow older. Your kids are 7, 8, 9, 10, 12 years old now when they are 50 and 60 maybe they have abandoned Salah and the thought come to their mind you know what my dad took me to the Masjid I should go back. I have heard people like that they left Salah. Left Deen altogether. And then at the age of 60 he comes back to the Masjid. We were just talking why did you come back. He said I remember my dad used to take me here. So something in my heart said I should do that again. And he came back. We want to instil these memories in to our children's life. Do that. Take that responsibility. Start with these first steps. May Allah make us of those who love Him and He loves us. May Allah make us of whose who are not afraid of the blame of any one who blames us. May Allah make us of those who truly do struggle in His path. And may Allah make all of our efforts in this Deen however many shortcomings they have had. May Allah accept all of our efforts and overlook those shortcomings. And may Allah accept our sincere repentance before Him.