Sunday, August 2, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according  to the faith of God's elect, and the acknowledging of the truth  which is after godliness; In hope of eternal life, which God, that  cannot lie, promised before the world began; But hath in due times  manifested His word through preaching, which is committed unto  me according to the commandment of God our Savior; To Titus,  mine own son after the common faith...Holding fast the faithful  word as he hath been taught, that he may be able by sound  doctrine both to exhort and to convince" ­ (i.e., to confute, to  confound, to refute decisively, to overwhelm with tight and cogent  and irrefutable argument ­ maybe even irrefragable, meaning  incapable of being answered) ­ "to convince the gainsayers. For  there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, specially  they of the circumcision;" ­ (i.e., works righteousness Arminians) ­  "Whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses,  teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake."  Titus 1:1-4,9-11.  Beloved, we have come upon a string of Bible verses and passages that not only permit the modus operandi ­ (i.e., the method of operating ­ conducting the affairs) ­ of Westboro Baptist Church; but which MANDATE our methodology in preaching the pure Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ to every creature. E.g., take the holy oracle of Habakkuk; to wit: "I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will watch to see what he will say unto me, and what I shall answer when I am reproved. And the Lord answered me, and said, WRITE THE VISION, AND MAKE IT PLAIN UPON TABLES" ­ (a table here means a slab or tablet intended for bearing an inscription, from a primitive root meaning to glisten or shine ­ and I put it to you, could a more accurate description of our bright, shining, beautiful, colorful, state-of-the-art, pure Gospelpreaching signs be composed?) ­ "that he may run that readeth it." ­ (The sense is, that the pithy message printed on the sign is so powerful that it demands urgent, immediate and drastic action if the reader of the message is to escape the yawning jaws and maw of Hell; and, that the letters and symbols on the tables are so large and plain that the reader may easily understand the dreadful message from a dead run; ergo, ­ "THAT HE MAY RUN THAT READETH IT.") ­ "For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not tarry. Behold, his soul which is lifted up is not upright in him; but the just shall live by his faith." Hab. 2:1-4.  Hence, you see, that the message of pure Calvinism (the just shall live by faith, or, by grace are ye saved), is the message that is written "plain upon the tables," of Habakkuk. Hab. 2:2. Likewise, with respect to the "banners" and "ensigns" so often mentioned by the prophets; e.g.: "Thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be displayed because of the truth. Selah." Psa. 60:4. We believe, that the Lord has chosen this humble little church to sound the alarm throughout the world, that God's eschatological clock is ticking, and the end of the world is near, and the nations will soon hear the "hissing" of WBC's amazing signs, and move swiftly to their doom; to wit: "Therefore is the anger of the Lord kindled against his people, and he hath stretched forth his hand against them, and hath smitten them; and the hills did tremble, and their carcases were torn in the midst of the streets. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. And he will lift up an  Sunday, August 2, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  ENSIGN to the nations from far, and will HISS unto them from the end of the earth;  and, behold, they shall come with speed swiftly." (Isa. 5:25,26)  (Ensign. A sign, flag, or standard, from a primitive root meaning to gleam from afar. Again, our signs are well described by these words.) We should be very humble and grateful, Beloved, that the great God has counted us faithful, and is allowing us to be His somewhat exclusive representatives on earth in these last of the last days. Think of it (!) We are literally preaching to the whole world, the expression "beyond the rivers of Ethiopia" signifying the furthest reaches of the inhabited and important areas of the earth; to wit:  "Woe to the land shadowing with wings, which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia; That sendeth ambassadors by the sea, even in vessels of bulrushes upon the waters, saying, Go, ye swift messengers, to a nation scattered and peeled, to a people terrible from their beginning hitherto; a nation meted out and trodden down, whose land the rivers have spoiled (!) All ye inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on the earth, see ye, when he lifteth up an ENSIGN ON THE MOUNTAINS; and when he bloweth a trumpet, hear ye." (Isa. 18:1-3)  Translated: Listen up, all you earth-dwellers; the end is near. You had better pay desperate attention when you see the ensign on the mountain and when you hear the last trumpet sound. "The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see. Lift ye up a BANNER UPON THE HIGH MOUNTAIN," ­ (i.e., publish this message from God, utilizing the fullest extent of your resources and powers, far and wide, to the ends of the earth; for this is indeed A BANNER UPON THE HIGH MOUNTAIN; for so the full context of the passage indicates; and the commission to publish the blessed message, in this hour, is ours), ­ "exalt the voice unto them, shake the hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles. I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my mighty ones for mine anger, even them that REJOICE IN MY HIGHNESS (!) The noise of a multitude in the mountains, like as of a great people; a tumultuous noise OF THE KINGDOMS OF NATIONS (!) gathered together; the Lord of hosts MUSTERETH THE HOST OF THE BATTLE (!)" ­ (And, Beloved, you better believe that this host, thus assembled by the Lord of hosts, will PASS MUSTER, as they say). ­ "They come from a far country, from the end of heaven, EVEN THE LORD, and the WEAPONS OF HIS INDIGNATION, to destroy the whole land. Howl ye (!); for THE DAY OF THE LORD IS AT HAND; it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty." Isa. 13:1-6.  And, remember Beloved, that all this glorious display of the wrath of God was set on foot by the Elect of God hoisting a beautiful, well-worded sign ­ (like those we now push in the faces of all mankind) ­ I say hoisting a sign, or, in other words, lifting a banner, "UPON THE HIGH MOUNTAIN," or, in other words, publishing this sign-message far and wide over all the earth via TV, the World Wide Web, and all the wizardry of modern technology, which the Lord our God is revealing to mankind in these last days ­ FOR OUR USE.  Last Sunday a 33 year old woman in San Antonio, Texas, killed her 3 week old baby son with two swords and a knife, and then proceeded to dismember him, including tearing off his face and cutting off his head; and then eating his brain, his nose, and his toes. (!) Now, those are the rock solid, gruesome, facts. They constitute the Providence of God, as defined in every major confession of faith, from the London Confession to the Westminster Confession to the Philadelphia Confession, etc., for the last five centuries or so; to wit: "All things whatsoever that come to pass in time, were decreed to come to pass in eternity past." That is, whatsoever comes to pass, comes to pass by virtue of the absolute, omnipotent, will of God, which is the primary and supreme cause of all things.  Sunday, August 2, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  That is, all things arise from and depend upon the divine appointment; to wit: "Thou hast created  all things, and for Thy pleasure they are and were created." (Rev. 4:11) "Our God is in the  heavens; He hath done whatsoever He hath pleased." (Psa. 115:3) "He doeth according to His  will, in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay His  hand, or say unto Him, What doest Thou?" (Dan. 4:35) "Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did  He in heaven, and in earth, in the seas, and all deep places." (Psa. 135:6) "Are not two  sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall to the ground without your Father."  (Matt. 10:29)  To all of this, the great and humble Augustine, bishop of Hyppo in the 4th century AD, says: "Nothing is done but what the Almighty wills should be done, either efficiently or permissively." To which Luther adds: "This therefore must stand; to wit: the unsearchable will of God, without which nothing exists or acts." And again Luther says, "God would not be such if He was not Almighty, and if anything could be done without Him." This is undoubtedly the doctrine of Holy Scripture, and it applies to the horrific crime of maternal cannibalism last Sunday in San Antonio, Texas. It is a "sign of the times," which the Lord Jesus said every offspring of Adam has the absolute duty to discern ­ and to discern accurately; adding, that none but hypocrites regularly fail, neglect, and refuse to do! To wit:  "He answered and said unto them, When it is evening, ye say, It will be fair weather; for the sky is red. And in the morning, It will be foul weather today; for the sky is red and lowring. O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky; but can ye not discern the signs of the times?" (Mat. 16:2,3)  Here the Savior puts a rhetorical question to all mankind, the answer to which is YES (!) ­ and condemns all mankind for the Hell-bound hypocrites they are. The red-hot news item of the mother who ate her baby son last week is front-page, above-the-fold, world-wide news. Therein, God is speaking to the world, and it is easily discernable what He is saying to every individual of mankind. For several years now we have been preaching from the Bible that such cannibalism (exactly !) is a part of the run-up to the final outpouring of God's wrath at the end of the world ­ the great and dreadful Judgment Day; to wit:  "And I will make this city desolate, and an hissing; every one that passeth thereby shall be astonished and hiss because of all the plagues thereof. And I WILL CAUSE THEM TO EAT THE FLESH OF THEIR SONS AND THE FLESH OF THEIR DAUGHTERS." (Jer. 19:8,9) Jeremiah was preaching from the list of final plagues of Leviticus 26 and Deuteronomy 28, from which we also and often preach; to wit:  "But if ye will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these commandments; And if ye shall despise my statutes, or if your soul abhor my judgments, so that ye will not do all my commandments, but that ye break my covenant ...Then I will walk contrary unto you also in fury; and I, even I, will chastise you seven times for your sins. And YE SHALL EAT THE FLESH OF YOUR SONS, and the flesh of your daughters shall ye eat." (Lev. 26:14,15,28,29)  These passages of Holy Writ have been available from the Holy Ghost through the sanctified pen of Moses, the light of nature, from-father-to-son, and otherwise, for more than 3,500 years. Every individual of mankind is equitably estopped from denying that he knew them. Then when God's "signs of the times" brings the cannibalism of San Antonio right before your eyes, you scream, Why? and you begin the pagan drumbeat of the witchdoctor's psychobabble ­ yaking about such as postpartum psychosis, chronic depression, delusional Satanic thoughts and hallucinations; and other such nonsensical attacks upon the Holy Integrity of a Sovereign God.  Sunday, August 2, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  Listen up, you hypocrites. You have a duty to know as much about God's threatened plagues ­  including cannibalism upon your sons and daughters preliminary to God's outpoured wrath at the  end of the world ­ as I do. God's holy signs of the times are exactly the same to every son and  daughter of Adam. Furthermore, WBC has been preaching this message to the whole world for  some years now. Nobody, but nobody, can profess ignorance of exactly what happened and why,  when the San Antonio mother killed and ate her son last week. We have preached specifically  from Lev. 26:29, Jer. 19:9, and Deut. 28; to wit:  "And thou shalt eat the fruit of thine own body, THE FLESH OF THY SONS and of thy daughters, which the Lord thy God hath given thee; in the siege, and in the straitness wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee. So that the man that is tender among you, and very delicate, his eye shall be evil toward his brother, and toward the wife of his bosom, and toward the remnant of his children WHICH HE SHALL LEAVE (i.e., left alive and uneaten yet, and/or, the leftovers)." (Deut. 28:53-54) Gill: "Such of them as were left not eaten by him; or his eye should be evil upon them, he should look with an evil eye on them, determining within himself to kill and eat them next. Josephus says, `that in every house where there was any appearance of food, there was a battle; and the dearest friends fought with one another, snatching away from each other the miserable supports of life;' as the husband from his wife and children, and the wife from her husband and children. In after- times, we are told by the Jewish historian Shebet Judah, that wrote an account of their sufferings and distresses since their dispersion, that at Fez the Jews sold their children for slaves for a little bread." "So that he will not give to any of them of the flesh of his children whom he shall eat; because he hath nothing left him in the siege, and in the straightness wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee in all thy gates. The tender and delicate woman among you, which would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom, and toward her son, and toward her daughter. And toward her young one that cometh out from between her feet, and toward her children which she shall bear; for SHE SHALL EAT THEM for want of all things, SECRETLY, in the siege and straightness, wherewith thine enemy shall distress thee in thy gates." (Deut. 28:55-57)  Gill: "Neither give to a brother, nor to a wife, nor to any of his remaining children, the least bit of the FLESH OF A CHILD HE HAS KILLED AND DRESSED FOR HIS OWN FOOD; which adds to the BARBARITY of his action. Every creature being eaten up; dogs, cats, etc, and whatsoever else could be any ways made food of; as the dung of beasts, girdles, shoes, the leather on shields, etc., as Josephus says, they did eat; and this being the case, nothing eatable remaining, therefore his heart would be hardened against his nearest relations, and not allow them the least part with him, even of what was so shocking and unnatural."  There is no question but that these things were prophesied by Moses, and that they happened to a limited degree at various times historically as adumbrations of much larger events to come as a run-up to the horrific End of the World ­ which is where we are now on God's great eschatological Clock. WBC is again warning mankind, from the plains of godless Kansas; the Lord Jesus Christ is ordering you to accurately discern the momentous signs of the times, particularly those arising at this hour from Texas & Tel Aviv; to wit: "Prepare to meet thy God," is the message that this evil nation and this Hell-bound world should get from the Cannibalism in San Antonio. I love you. Amen.  
