Sunday, March 6, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And Stephen, full of faith and power, did great wonders and miracles among the people... Then said the high priest, Are these things so? And he said, Men,  brethren, and fathers, hearken; The God of glory appeared unto our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran... Then said the Lord to him (i.e., to Moses, at the burning bush), Put off thy shoes from thy feet; for the place where thou standest is holy ground. I have seen, I have seen the affliction of my people which is in Egypt, and I have heard their groaning, and am come down to deliver them. And now come, I will send thee into Egypt. This Moses whom they refused, saying, Who made thee a ruler and a judge? The same did God send to be a ruler and a deliverer by the hand of the angel which appeared to him in the bush. He brought them out, after that he had showed wonders and signs in the land of Egypt, and in the Red sea, and in the wilderness forty years. This is that Moses which said unto the children of Israel, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear. This is he, that was in the church in the wilderness with the angel which spake to him in the mount Sina, and with our fathers; who received the lively oracles to give unto us; To whom our fathers would not obey, but thrust him from them, AND IN THEIR HEARTS TURNED BACK AGAIN INTO EGYPT, Saying unto Aaron, MAKE US GODS (i.e., idols, graven images) TO GO BEFORE US; for as for this Moses, which brought us out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him. And they made a calf in those days, AND OFFERED SACRIFICE UNTO THE IDOL (i.e., they engaged flagrantly in the ancient religious practice of idolatry), AND REJOICED IN THE WORKS OF THEIR OWN HANDS." Acts 6:8,7:1-4,33-41.  (I.e., they took great sensual pleasure in practicing idolatry and particularly in that school of idolatry known as self-will worship, or salvation by works rather than by pure grace, which brand of self-will idolatry is today known as Arminianism ­ vis-a-vis Five-Point Calvinism). Note: The lying Arminian doctrine of will-worship ­ the foolish, nonsensical notion that God loves everybody ­ leads directly and immediately to that form of nation-destroying idolatry that doomed the world of the wicked antediluvians. The greatest theological treatise ever written ­ i.e., "The Letter of Paul to the Romans" ­ begins with describing how male and female sodomites got that way (Note: "homosexual" is not a Bible word; it was invented by imaginative sodomites in hopes of thereby moderating something of their ignominy and shame). How did fags get the way they are?  Well, Beloved, The predestinating power of an absolutely sovereign God ultimately disposes of all things whatsoever. If you are a sodomite, you are a sodomite because an Almighty God predestinated you to be a sodomite from all eternal ages past. God hates you, and He has blinded you to the truth, thereby assuring that you will die and go to Hell. "The election hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded. (According as it is written, God hath given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear,) unto this day." Rom. 11:7,8.  Furthermore, the Lord God has stamped a kind of indelible physical mark of the pagan sodomite upon you for your sins; to wit: "The show of their countenance doth witness against them; and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their soul! for they have rewarded evil unto themselves. Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him; for they shall eat the fruit of their doings. Woe unto the wicked! It shall be ill with him; for the reward of his hands shall be given him." (Isa. 3:9-11)  Sunday, March 6, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  Also, twice the Lord God has declared that sodomites are shameless, Hell-bound creatures who cannot blush despite their abominable practices. It stands to reason. The whole world knows that every sinner must heartily repent and come with a broken and a contrite spirit and confess and forsake his sins in order to stand any chance whatsoever of entering Heaven when he dies. But now, take the case of the shameless sodomite, whose very nature renders him totally unable to blush while committing filthy sins of the flesh, indeed, while living an abominable lifestyle. Twice, TWICE the Lord God declares the sodomite's hopeless condition herein, and pronounces his  inevitable doom; to wit:  "Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? Nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush; therefore they shall fall among them that fall; at the time that I visit them they shall be cast down (into Hell), saith the Lord." (Jer. 6:15)  "Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? Nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush; therefore shall they fall among them that fall; in the time of their visitation they shall be cast down (into Hell), saith the Lord." (Jer. 8:12)  "For he saith to Moses" (the standing symbol of God's Elect) disputing with Pharaoh (the standing symbol of the reprobate), including all sodomites, resisting the inflexible Bible doctrine and disputed proposition that all impenitent reprobates, including all sodomites, are predestinated to die and spend eternity in Hell) I repeat, "for he saith to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion. So then it is not of him that willeth (NO FREE WILL), nor of him that runneth (i.e., NO WORKS-RIGHTEOUSNESS FOR SALVATION), but of God that showeth mercy. For the scripture saith unto Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, THAT I MIGHT SHOW MY POWER IN THEE, AND THAT MY NAME MIGHT BE DECLARED THROUGHOUT ALL THE EARTH." Rom. 9:1517. Just here, Beloved, is a sermonette that ought to be preached to every sodomite on earth ­ one on one ­ as the primary Bible notion of genuine love, according to Lev. 19:18; to wit: failure to warn your neighbor that his sodomite sins are taking him to Hell is to hate your neighbor in your heart (i.e., absolute human responsibility); AND, the reason for having you born and raised up to maturity, was just so that God could send you to Hell as eternal punishment for a filthy life of sodomite sin (i.e., the absolute sovereignty of God in all things). There, my goofy, sodomitedisputer friend, is the only sensible and honest exposition of Rom. 9:17,18; to wit:  "For the scripture saith unto Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee (by pickling thee in sin, and sending thee to Hell), and that my name might be declared throughout all the earth. Therefore HATH HE MERCY ON WHOM HE WILL HAVE MERCY, AND WHOM HE WILL HE HARDENETH." (Rom. 9:17,18)  To such wonderful preaching and plain expounding of God's everlasting Word, every sodomite in the world immediately raises a profane squawk and howl, to the effect that it's not fair for God to predestinate them to live lives of abominable sinfulness, and then send them to Hell for such sinfulness ­ which such sodomite squawking and howling, the apostle anticipates and answers in a most definitive and dispositive manner; to wit: "Thou wilt say then unto me, Why then doth he yet find fault? For who hath resisted his will?" Romans 9:19. Beloved, this is the old spurious, GOD-MADE-ME-DO-IT! defense; and here is God's answer to that defense:  "Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus? Hath not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor?  Sunday, March 6, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with  much longsuffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction? And that he might  make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had afore  prepared unto glory, Even us, whom he hath called, not of the Jews only, but also of  the Gentiles?" (Rom. 9:20-24)  You see from these verses, very plainly, that every sodomite is a vessel of wrath fitted (predestinated) to destruction. It is the duty of the Gospel preacher, when engaged in publishing God's holy Word, to read that Word distinctly, to give the sense of the portion read, and to cause his auditors to understand it; to wit: "So they read in the book in the law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the reading." (Neh. 8:8)  We have now arrived at Romans, chapter 9, where it is most extraordinarily important that great plainness of speech be employed. I am preaching to God's people about filthy sodomites, who have pushed themselves to positions of power and influence at all levels of society. The Bible has much to say about these abominable sodomite creatures and their enablers, such that it would not be possible any longer to be a faithful Bible preacher without exposing the evils of Sodom, sodomy, and sodomites ­ from homosexual orgies among the elite in the Bohemian Groves of northern California to the Whitehouse and Congress itself of Washington, D.C.  The voice of WBC is the Voice crying in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord; make His paths straight. God has willed a thing in the Council Halls of eternity, and He has purposed to bring it to pass in due course of time; to wit; God has willed to make His wrath and his power known to all mankind and all the world in all generations; and God's mighty Modus Operandi (His method of operating) in making His wrath and power known, is that God would create many millions of human beings, and predestinate them to live in sin and die in sin, and go to Hell and suffer eternal punishment for their sin and rebellion against Him; and these many millions include all sodomites and all other reprobates, generally; AND, God has also willed to tolerate these filthy fags for a long, long time before finally destroying them for all eternity in Hell; to wit: "What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, ENDURED WITH MUCH LONGSUFFERING the vessels of wrath (and vessels of dishonor, fags) fitted (predestinated) to destruction." AND, what if God willing to "make known the riches of his glory" and mercy; (Romans 9:22-23) and His Modus Operandi for the execution of this divine will, is, that He would create a great host that no man could number, out of every nation, kindred, race and tongue; and to predestinate those chosen ones to repent of their sins, live righteous lives under the blood of Christ, die as forgiven sinners, and spend eternity in bliss and glory in Heaven. Listen up, you filthy sodomite. You are a vessel of dishonor, because the great Potter arbitrarily made you that way to demonstrate His power in destroying you and your evil kind; to wit: "And these shall go away into everlasting punishment." Mat. 25:46.  WBC members are vessels of honor, because our dear Lord Jesus made us that way to demonstrate his love and kindness; to wit: "That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus." Eph. 2:7. It appears that the sodomites had some little knowledge of God ­ enough to damn them; not enough to save them. They pervert the Scriptures, and would gladly overthrow every vestige of religious truth in their desperate efforts to somehow justify their monstrous sins and idolatrous practices; "Because that, WHEN THEY KNEW GOD, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, And changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things." Rom. 1:21-23.  Sunday, March 6, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  Behold, Beloved, how quickly rote religion and free-will Arminian doctrine degenerate into rank, raw idolatry on the ground, with human beings actually bowing down and praying to and worshipping reptiles. And, it is noteworthy that "MAN" is the first of the "CORRUPTIBLE" creatures that sodomites and reprobates substitute for God to worship and serve, according to verse 25; to wit: "Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves; Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the CREATURE (man) more than the CREATOR (God), who is blessed for ever. Amen." (Rom. 1:24,25)  Notice that three times in five verses it is roundly declared that God has given sodomites up; whereas our dear Lord Jesus ­ God in the flesh ­ repeated an everlasting holy principle when He said, "NO MAN CAN COME TO ME EXCEPT THE FATHER WHICH SENT ME DRAW HIM; and I will raise him up at the last day. It is written in the prophets, And they shall be all taught of God. Every man therefore that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father, cometh unto me." John 6:44,45.  Now, Beloved, does not this process of declarative reasoning for ever eliminate all sodomites from any possibility of going to Heaven; to wit: 1) Because sodomites changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man and animals, GOD GAVE SODOMITES UP TO UNCLEANNESS. 2) Because sodomites changed the truth of God into a lie, GOD GAVE SODOMITES UP TO VILE AFFECTIONS. 3) Because sodomites did not like to retain God in their knowledge, GOD GAVE SODOMITES UP TO A REPROBATE MIND (meaning they can't think straight about anything). See, Rom. 1:24,26,28.  Now, Beloved. There is no need to pussyfoot around with sodomites on this issue. It is axiomatic. When the only Power in the universe capable of drawing a soul to repentance, saving faith, and salvation ­ I say, when that divine Power declares three times that He has given all sodomites up, finally, sine die! Pray tell, where is there any power at all that can reverse that pronunciation of final doom? Listen up, you forked tongue sodomite! Christ has spoken to you, and is speaking to you now! No man! no power! can come to me except the Father which hath sent me draw him; and I will raise him up at the last day. Our dear Lord Jesus ­ whom you have reviled and slandered and blasphemed ­ will not raise you up at the last day. You are doomed to burn in Hell forever more. You have not been taught of God. You have not heard his voice, calling you to repentance, saving faith, and salvation. But you have heard His voice, through the Bible, and the preaching of WBC, nature, and the signs of the times or providence. And conscience. You will be charged with all such light. Your women changed the natural use into that which is against nature. Your men left the natural use of the woman to lust after each other. And, here are more descriptive words and phrases which apply to your filthy sinful sodomite lifestyle; to wit: "Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity, whisperers, Backbiters, haters of God (or, rather, hated by God), despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents, Without understanding, covenantbreakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful; Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them." (Romans 1:29-32)  Sodomite enablers are worse than sodomites. Rom. 1:32.  I love you. Amen.  
