Sunday, December 6, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And Cush begat Nimrod; he began to be mighty upon the earth." 1  Chron. 1:10. "And Cush begat Nimrod; he began to be a mighty one  in the earth. He was a mighty hunter before the Lord; wherefore it is  said, Even as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the Lord. And the  beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and  Calneh, in the land of Shinar." Gen. 10:8-10.  Let us study the career and history of Nimrod ­ the world's first One-Worlder, or, to more accurately label him, Nimrod was the first One-World Empire Builder. Not unlike the world's first Antichrist, the Man of Sin of 2 Thes. 2, the Beast rising out of the restless sea of depraved and blasphemous mankind, foaming up mire and dirt, of Rev. 13. In Nimrod's day, he ruled and dominated all mankind, even to the extent that the most popular proverb of the day implicated Nimrod and praised his invincibility, even in contests of strength and political popularity, AND EVEN WITH THE LORD GOD HIMSELF (!); to wit: "Wherefore it is said," ­ (i.e., it was said among the masses, from the least to the greatest, from Joe Six-pack, as they say, to the Oval Office, sui generis) ­ "Even as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the Lord." Gen. 10:9. (Think, Obama).  The Biblical expression, "before the Lord," means contemptuously and impudently and blasphemously and obscenely (think middle finger raised) in the Face of God. Who among us will not go at once to Obama's education chief, Kevin Jennings, publishing in his memoirs for all the world to read, that he had decided to quit believing in God, and in fact had said, "Screw you!" to God, with a few other filthy things, in anger and rage against God for creating him gay, while at the same time making homosexuality a sin and an abomination to God that will take you to Hell. This ridiculous public fight that Obama's Education Czar had with God received extensive media attention, all of which Obama relished because the blood of Nimrod flows in Obama's and in Kevin Jennings' veins.  Make no mistake. The Jennings "Screw you," remark to God is attributable to Obama under the universal law of Ratification by Silence ­ and otherwise. Obama feels the same way about God that his Education Czar and soul-mate Kevin Jennings does as reflected in his highly-publicized blasphemous insult to his Creator; to wit: "Screw you, Buddy (!)"  As a highly-relevant anecdotal aside, and for the glory of God, and in humble thanksgiving to the Captain of our salvation in allowing us to publish His Word, I herewith report a preaching trip WBC made to picket Beast Obama, his U.S. Department of Education, and his Education Czar Faggot Kevin Jennings, in Washington, DC, last Nov. 9, 2009. We advertised our glorious and sanctified adventure, beginning Tue., Nov. 3, 2009, across the nation and around the world, in writing, as follows; to wit:  WBC to Picket the Fag-Infested Education Dept. & Fag Education Czar Kevin Jennings, Son of a Backslidden Baptist Minister: U.S. Department of Education, 400 Maryland Ave., SW, Washington, DC, Mon., Nov. 9, from 8:25 - 9:00 a.m., "Be not deceived; God is not mocked;" Gal. 6:7. "Prepare to meet thy God." Amos 4:12. Pervert Jennings, founder of GLSEN, teaches children "it's OK to be gay" in brutish defiance to God's perfect standard: "Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind; it is abomination." Lev. 18:22. Jennings told God, "Screw you, buddy!" and Beast Obama hired him BECAUSE his hands work iniquity. Psa. 5:5. "The foolish shall not stand in thy sight; thou hatest all workers of iniquity." Psa. 5:5. God hates fags. God hates fag-enablers. God hates out-of-the-closet Fag Kevin Jennings, and, God hates the sodomitical president of the United States, the  Sunday, December 6, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  murderous Beast of Rev. 13, the Antichrist, the Man of Sin of 2nd Thes. 2, the mighty  Tower-of-Babel tyrant of Gen., the Satanically reincarnated Nimrod, the mighty  hunter "before the Lord."  Beloved. We at Westboro Baptist Church ­ IN THE NAME OF GOD (!) ­ do not intend to let this Kevin Jennings matter drop ­ EVER. The appointment of the militant gay activist ­ out-ofthe-closet sodomite ­ Kevin Jennings ­ to the high-ranking position affecting every public school child in America ­ there are millions of them ­ I say, to a position that does not require Senatorial approval ­ symbolizes the way in which this demon-possessed son of Ham intends to sodomize and criminalize America on his way to One-World Satanical rule. Take a good look at Kevin Jennings and you will see the Devil. Moreover, you will see the Devil in every public school room in America. And you will see every important decision-making and policy-making position in American government at every level, and all false religions, involved in unlawful use of federal funds, however far-fetched the rationale. Therefore, beloved, it is vital to take a closer look at Kevin Jennings ­ because the stakes just got higher. Satan has been taking VERY close looks at all these Obama guys and gals for a long time, now; preparing for the big push for these final days, and knowing that his time is short; to wit: "And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ; for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night. And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the death. Therefore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them. Woe to the inhabiters of the earth and of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, HAVING GREAT WRATH, BECAUSE HE KNOWETH THAT HE HATH BUT A SHORT TIME." (Rev. 12:10-12)  There are about 2.5 million people working for the federal government, plus the uniformed military establishment. Obama's appointments will largely govern and control this huge federal work force, hiring, promoting, firing, and transferring, largely at will. They will all work Obama's will to a greater or lesser degree. Look at Kevin Jennings ­ and get a frightening picture of the "signs of the times." His father was a backslidden, Arminian, Southern Baptist Preacher who died when Kevin was 8. Kevin discovered he was "gay" as a teenager, but the preachers promised him in God's Name that God would help him over all temptations of the flesh and make him a happy, well-adjusted young man. At 17 his boyfriend Peter broke up with him, so he took 140 aspirins and nearly died. At that time he decided God had lied and let him down, so he reached the crisis that turned his life around.  Jennings tells about it in one paragraph of his memoirs ­ published two years ago, ­ at page 101. The name of his book: Mama's Boy, Preacher's Son; A Memoir. The hot paragraph goes like this: "I developed a new attitude toward God as a result. Before, I was the one who was failing God; now I decided He was the one who had failed me. I had tried to please Him, had placed my faith in Him, had prayed for Him to lift this cross from my shoulders, and He had repeatedly let me down. Why put faith in him? God hadn't saved my dad, hadn't saved me, had done nothing but cause me pain and anguish through His inaction and malevolence ­ throughout my childhood. I decided I had done nothing wrong: HE had, by promising to `set you free' and never delivering on His promise. What HAD he done for me, other than make me feel shame and guilt. Squat. Screw you, buddy ­ I don't need you around anymore, I decided. The Baptist Church had left me only a legacy of self-hatred, shame, and disappointment, and I wanted no more of it or its Father. The long erosion of my faith was now complete, and I, for many years, reacted violently to anyone who professed any kind of religion. Decades passed before I opened a Bible again."  Sunday, December 6, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  This evil man formed the first GSA, gay-straight alliance, and went on to form GLSEN, the Gay, Lesbian, Straight Education Network, now a national education organization with a presence in all fifty states. Responsible for millions of kids in public schools being indoctrinated in the souldamning lie that it's OK to be gay. We see the fruit of his Satanic handiwork every week in the high schools and colleges of the nation. Now, with his new position, with thousands of tax-paid employees and a multimillion dollar federal budget, it boggles the mind to consider the damage he can do worldwide to the bodies and souls of multimillions or even billions of kids compelled by law to attend thousands of public schools all across America. The bone that Jennings tossed Bible-believers, with the veiled suggestion that perhaps he has now "opened a Bible again" (Memoir, p. 101) ­ he immediately snatches back when he issues his "Acknowledgments" at the end of the book (Memoir, p. 266).  At 63, Kevin Jennings is still the filthy, anal-copulating son of Belial he's always been, shacking with some fellow-fag named Jeff Davis; to wit: "The reason I am alive and wish to go on living is my partner, Jeff Davis. There are times when he holds my hand and looks at me with those big blue eyes that I think my heart is going to burst. I must have been a very good person in one of my past lives to have landed him as my partner and to have had as our `children' our golden retrievers Luke (1989-2000) and Amber (2000-present)." Jennings now has the power of federal law to force-feed a captive audience of millions of American kids, that it's OK to be gay, despite God's plain command with which Jennings is very familiar; to wit: "Thou shalt not lie with mankind as with womanhood; it is abomination." Lev. 18:22. Is bestiality ­ sex with golden retrievers and other animals ­ OK, too; and does Jennings teach his captive audience of kids that it is? After all, the same passage of Scripture that condemns sodomy, also condemns bestiality; to wit: "Neither shalt thou lie down with any beast, to defile thyself therewith." (Lev. 18:23)  It's pitiful. Beloved. Two old Hell-bound rump-rangers pretending to be happily cycling down the Hershey highway. Hold it! You turkeys (and especially you, Kevin Jennings). You have some unfinished business with the Great King. A while back ­ well before your so-called "massive heart attack" ­ you did some smash-mouth, in-your-face, smart-ass cursing of God ­ the Great Creator who holds your body and soul over the fires of Hell by a very, very slender thread. (See, "Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God," by, Jonathan Edwards.) You have not repented of your ribald blasphemy, hoisting your smelly finger in God's face every time you publish and republish, ad infinitum, your clever, profane, sacrilegious, and now-famous, "hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him (God)," Jude 15; to wit: "Squat. Screw you, buddy ­ I don't need you around anymore, I decided." (Memoir, p. 101). Every copy of Jennings' book sold and/or read is a re-publishing of his "hard speeches against God." By appointing Jennings as Education Czar, and otherwise ratifying his hard speeches against God, President Barack Obama gave Jennings a platform and a bully pulpit to make his audience infinitely larger; and Obama otherwise has become a co-conspirator with Jennings in his Nimrodian (Tower of Babel) rebellion against God ­ which itself followed the pattern of the antediluvian (before the Flood) rebellion against God; to wit: "And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, (sodomites), saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands (myriads) of his saints, To execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, AND OF ALL THEIR HARD SPEECHES WHICH UNGODLY SINNERS HAVE SPOKEN AGAINST HIM." (Jude 1:14,15)  Sunday, December 6, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  We have identified Nimrod as the first One-World Empire Builder, driven by ambition for earthly power, and seeking world-wide dominion. Josephus and other ancient Jewish historians record Nimrod and his people as raging rebels against God because God sent the Flood and killed all their ancestors and friends, and they were determined to build a city and tower so high that God would never again be able to send another flood and wipe out the world's population. In other words, they did not like the way God Almighty was governing His universe and were determined to thwart Him at every turn. This sounds like Obama & Jennings. They don't like the way God creates fags and dykes, and they don't like the way God allows unwanted pregnancies; and then God issues orders that sodomy and abortion (murder) invoke the death penalty. Obama is engaged in a tax-funded campaign to ingratiate himself with the world's leaders, by flatteries, and win their support as de facto king of the world; to wit: "Then shall stand up in his estate a raiser of taxes in the glory of the kingdom; but within few days he shall be destroyed, neither in anger, nor in battle. And in his estate shall stand up a vile person, to whom they shall not give the honor of the kingdom; but he shall come in peaceably, and obtain the kingdom by flatteries." (Dan. 11:20,21)  Obama will also make war with the righteous by flattering wicked rulers to persecute them; but they shall prevail; to wit: "And such as do wickedly against the covenant shall he corrupt by flatteries; but the people that do know their God shall be strong, and do exploits." (Dan. 11:32)  His campaign of Satanic flatteries has taken Obama and his Queen-of-Sheba-size train ­ in the last few weeks ­ to the leaders of Japan, South Korea, China, India, 9-member trade conference, Copenhagen and the European Union ­ implicating a large majority of the 6+ billions of the world's population. Nimrod's i.e. Obama's war is with WBC. Call it, The Quarrel of the Covenant, The Wars of the Lord, and/or The Controversy of Zion. "International" is a golden word for Obama. The White House has announced that next month Obama will attend a Global Warming Summit involving international laws, courts, penalties and bureaucracies. It is only a short step to international "hate speech" laws, making it a crime to preach God's precious Word. Praise the Lord. The Lord is coming.  Recapitulation: It's the same fight that Nimrod had with God. Nimrod was outraged with God because God sent the Flood and killed all the earth's inhabitants ­ relatives of those then alive on the earth, all of whom were political constituents and fervent devotees of Nimrod. A little demagoguery began working on Nimrod. By urging the people to join in a massive effort to build a Great Tower, they could give God a black eye, so to speak. In the first place, they should all hate God for killing all their relatives and friends in the Great Flood ­ not love Him as Creator and Benefactor to all mankind.  In the second place, they were exhorted to work together on a master plan ­ a One-World Empire ­ for building a tower so high that no flood could reach high enough to drown the world ever again ­ thereby thwarting God: "Go to, let us build us a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven...And the Lord said, Let us go down, and confound their language... Therefore is the name of it called Babel." (Gen. 11)  I love you.  Amen.  
