  In our first message of this series on the pleasuresof God we saw that God delights in his Son.  For all eternityGod has been exuberantly happy in the fellowship of the Trinity. He has been overflowing with satisfaction as he looks out overthe endless panorama of his own perfections reflected in the radianceof his Son's face.    Then we saw that one of the lessons to be learnedfrom that divine happiness is that God is complete in himself. He has no deficiencies.  And therefore he can't be bribed withsomething he craves or blackmailed with some secret weakness orcoerced by some superior power.  And so all that he does, he does,not under constraint, but according to his own good pleasure. He is free, and he takes pleasure in all that he does.  Today we focus on one of the most astonishing thingsthat God has done: he has created the universe, and what a universeit is!  And there are two questions that I want to try to answer:1) Does God take pleasure in his creation?  And 2) if so, whydoes he?    The first question I would answer with a resounding,Yes!  God does take pleasure in his creation.    How do we know this?  Genesis 1 describes for usnot only the fact of an ordered creation by God, but also God'sresponse to his creation.  Five times, you recall, God standsback, as it were, and takes stock of his creation.  Each timethe text says, And God saw that it was good (vv. 4,12, 18, 21, 25).  And when all was finished and man and womanwere created in his own image, it says, And God saw everythingthat he had made, and behold, it was very good.  I take this to mean that God was delighted with hiswork.  When he looked at it, it gave him pleasure.  He was pleasedand happy with his creative effort.  Today's text, Psalm 104, is a song to express thejoy God has in his creation.  The key verse for our purpose isverse 31:   May the glory of the Lord endure for ever, may theLord rejoice in his works.   This is not a prayer for something that might nothappen.  The psalmist does not mean: O, I hope God willrejoice in his works, but I am not sure he will.  If thatwere the meaning then the first line of the verse would have tohave the same sense: O, I hope God's glory will endure forever, but I am not sure it will.    That is surely not what he means.  The rock solidconfidence of the whole Bible is that the glory of the Lord willnot only endure for ever but that it will cover the whole earthlike the waters cover the sea (Numbers 14:21; Habakkuk 2:14).  The psalmist is not praying that an uncertainty mightcome to pass.  He's exulting in a certainty that will come topass.  There is no doubt behind the shout, May the gloryof the Lord endure for ever!  And there is no doubt behindthe shout: May the Lord rejoice in his works!  So the answer to the first question is YES!  Goddoes take pleasure in his creation.  He delights in the work ofhis hands.  Now the question is, WHY?  There are two reasonswhy this question is important to me.     1.  One is that I feel compelled to explain why thispleasure God has in his creation is not an act of idolatry.     Why is this pleasure that God has in creation not a dishonor tothe Son of God?  Why shouldn't the Son be jealous?  Should theFather really share his affection with the world?  Should he notbe totally satisfied in the beauty of his own perfections reflectedback to him in the person of his Son?   2.  The other reason for asking why God delightsin his creation is that we need to know this before the delightitself can tell us very much about God's character.   Two people can desire the same thing for such different reasons that oneis honorable and the other is perverse.    So for these two reasons at least let's try to answerthe question why God takes pleasure in his creation.  I'll tryto sum it up in five statements based on this psalm and some otherparts of Scripture.    These seven statements about why God delights inhis creation are not really seven separate reasons because theyoverlap so much.  But they each express a little differently thebasic reason.  So let's begin with the basic reason that seemsto me to be right here in verse 31.   May the glory of the Lord endure for ever, May theLord  rejoice in his works.   What this suggests to me is that the joy that Godhas in his works is owing to the fact that they are the expressionof his glory. In other words, I think the two halves of this verseare related something like this: As long as the glory ofthe Lord endures in his works, God will indeed rejoice in hisworks.  Or you could say, May the glory of the Lordendure for ever, so that the Lord may rejoice in his works. So my first and most basic, statement is that    1.  God rejoices in his works because his works arean expression of his glory.   This is what Psalm 19 makes very clear:   The heavens are telling the glory of God; and thefirmament proclaims his handiwork.   So the most basic reason that God delights in hiscreation is that in creation he sees the reflection of his ownglory, and therefore he is not an idolater when he delights inhis work..  But what about the Son of God?  Does this mean thatthe creation is in competition with the Son for the affectionof the Father?  Remember that the Son, too, is called the reflectionof God's glory (Hebrews 1:3).  Does God delight partly in theSon and partly in the creation?  Does the creation rob the Sonof any of the Father's delight?  Should the Son be jealous ofthe creation?  No.  Before creation the Father and the Son rejoicedin each other with overflowing satisfaction.  And when the timecame for creation the Bible says that both the Father and theSon were active in the work of creation (1 Corinthians 8:6; Colossians1:16).    In the beginning was the Word and the Word was withGod and the Word was God.  All things were made through him andwithout him was not anything made that was made. (John 1:3)  In other words the work of creation is not merelythe work of the Father as though he had to satisfy a need thatthe Son couldn't meet.  Nor was creation merely the work of theSon as though he had to satisfy some need that the Father couldn'tmeet.  Instead it was the work of both of them together.     And so when the Bible teaches that creation expressesthe glory of God, we mustn't think merely of the glory of theFather or the glory of the Son, but rather the glory that theyhave together.  And the glory that they have together is thatoverflowing mutual joy in each other's perfections.  So creationis an expression of the overflow of that life and joy that theFather and the Son have in each other.    There is no competition or jealousy in the Godhead. The Son and Father are equally glorified in creation, becausecreation is the overflow of gladness that they have in each other.  So the first and most basic statement we can makeabout why God rejoices in his work of creation is that creationis an expression of his glory.      2.  God rejoices in the works of creation becausethey praise him.   In Psalm 148 the psalmist calls on creation itselfto praise the Lord:   Praise him, sun and moon, praise him, all you shining stars! Praise him, you highest heavens, and you waters above the heavens! Let them praise the name of the Lord! For he commanded and they were created. . . Praise the Lord from the earth, you sea monsters and all deeps. (vv. 3-5,7)   What does this mean?  Well we might say that sunand moon and stars praise God by testifying to us about God. That would be true -- that's what Psalm 19 says.  But what aboutverse 7: Praise the Lord you sea monsters and all deeps!  One of my favorite poems is Elegy Written ina Country Churchyard by Thomas Gray in 1751.  One of thestanzas says,    Full many a gem of purest ray serene, The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear: Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,  And waste its sweetness on the desert air.    Gray had been moved by the thought that on the bottomof the ocean there were beautiful gems that no human eye wouldever see, and that in distant deserts millions of flowers wouldbloom, blush with vivid colors, give off a sweet fragrance andnever be touched or seen or smelled by anybody -- but God!  The psalmist is moved by the same thing it seemsin verse 7:  Praise the Lord you sea monsters and all deeps! He doesn't even know what is in all the deeps of the sea!  Sothe praise of the deeps is not merely what they can testify toman.    It seems to me that creation praises God by simplybeing what it was created to be in all it's incredible variety. And since most of the creation is beyond the awareness of mankind(in the reaches of space, and in the heights of mountains andat the bottom of the sea) it wasn't created by merely to servepurposes that have to do with us.  It was created for the enjoymentof God.  Ranger Rick arrives in our house.  I open it andread about the European water spider that lives at the bottomof a lake, but breathes air.  It does a somersault on the surfaceof the water and catches a bubble of air, and holds it over thebreathing holes in the middle of its body while it swims to thebottom of the lake and spins a silk web among the seaweed.  Thenit goes up and brings down bubble after bubble until a littleballoon of air is formed where it can live and eat and mate.  I sit there with my mouth open and I think God smilesand says, Yes John, and I have been enjoying that littlepiece of art for 10,000 years before anybody on earth knew itexisted.  And if you only knew how many millions of other wondersthere are beyond your sight that I behold with gladness everyday!  Right here in our text, Psalm 104:25-26 it says,   Yonder is the sea, great and wide,  which teems with things innumerable, living things both small and great.   There go the ships,  and Leviathan which thou didst form to sport in it.    Why did God create great sea monsters?  Just to play,to frolic, in the ocean where no man can see but only God.  Theteeming ocean declares the glory of God, and praises him a hundredmiles from any human eye.  That's the second statement about whyGod rejoices in his works.   3.  God rejoices in the works of creation becausethey reveal his incomparable wisdom.   Look at verse 24:   O Lord, how manifold are thy works! In wisdom has thou made them all; the earth is full of thy creatures.   In wisdom thou hast made them all!  Inother words the Lord delights in the expressions of his wisdom. This universe is simply a masterpiece of wisdom and order.  Orif you just take a part of it like the human body -- what an amazingwork of knowledge and wisdom.  Who can fathom the human brainand the mystery of mind and body!  The world is full of the wisdom of God.  Take diatomsfor example.  In December Ranger Rick had color photographs ofmicroscopic diatoms.  There are 10,000 known species of diatoms! In a teaspoon of lake water there may be a million of these tinyinvisible plants.  And what are they doing while entertainingGod with their microscopic beauty?  They are making tons and tonsof oxygen so that the animals in the water can breathe!   O Lord, how manifold are thy works! In wisdom hast thou made them all.   The psalmist simply marveled at how everything workedtogether.  You see this in verse 14.   Thou dost cause the grass to grow for the cattle, and plants for man to cultivate, that he may bring forth food from the earth.   What a wonderful experience it is when God grantsus a moment in which we don't take anything for granted, but seethe world as though it were invented yesterday!  How we wouldmarvel at the wisdom of God.   The Lord is the everlasting God,  the Creator of the ends of the earth, He does not faint for grow weary,  his understanding is unsearchable. (Isaiah 40:28)    4.  God rejoices in the works of creation becausethey reveal his incomparable power.   In Isaiah 40:26 Isaiah looks up the the star-filledsky -- perhaps on a night like I remember on a mountain in Utahin September 1968, when the sky was literally a sheet of lightand star could not be distinguished from star -- he looks up andsays,    Lift up your eyes on high and see: who created these? He who brings out their host by number, calling them all by name; by the greatness of his might,  and because he is strong in power not one is missing.   If Isaiah was stunned at the power of God to createand name and sustain every star in the heaven that he could see,what would be his worship today if he were shown that the nearestof those stars in his sky, Alpha Centauri and Proxima Centauriare 25 million million miles away, and that what he was seeingin his night sky was a tiny patch of our galaxy which has in ita hundred billion stars, and that beyond our galaxy there aremillions of galaxies?  What is this universe but the lavish demonstrationof the incredible, incomparable, unimaginable exuberance and wisdomand power and greatness of God!  And what a God he must be!  Whata God he must be!  Which brings me to the final statement.   5.  God rejoices in the works of creation becausethey point us beyond themselves to God himself.   God means for us to be stunned and awed by his workof creation.  But not for its own sake.  He means for us alwaysto look at his creation and say: If the work of his hands is sofull of wisdom and power and grandeur and majesty and beauty,what must this God be like in himself!!  These are but the backside of his glory seen througha glass darkly.  What will it be to see the Creator himself! Not his works!  Not even a billion galaxies will satisfy the humansoul.  God and God alone is the soul's end.  And so our text draws to a close like this (Psalm104:31-34):   May the glory of the Lord endure for ever, may the Lord rejoice in his works, who looks on the earth and it trembles, who touches the mountains and they smoke! I will sing to the Lord as long as I live; I will sing praise to my God while I have being. May my meditation be pleasing to him, for I rejoice in the Lord. Let sinners be consumed from the earth, and let the wicked be no more! Bless the Lord, O my soul! Praise the Lord!   In the end it will not be the seas or the mountainsor the canyons or the or the clouds or the great galaxies thatfill our hearts to breaking with wonder and fill our mouths witheternal praise.  It will be God himself.    
