Sunday, July 31, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites; afterward shalt thou be gathered unto thy people. (How magnificent (!) Moses, who led his people out of Egyptian bondage and destroyed the whole Egyptian army in the Red Sea, to launch his public career serving the Lord; will now be gathered to his people in Heaven, fresh from a glorious victory over the false prophet Balaam, as Moses the warrior and law-giver for his people and for all mankind.) And Moses spake unto the people, saying, Arm some of yourselves unto the war, and let them go against the Midianites, and avenge the Lord of Midian. Of every tribe a thousand, throughout all the tribes of Israel shall ye send to the war. So there were delivered out of the thousands of Israel, a thousand of every tribe, twelve thousand armed for war. And Moses sent them to the war, a thousand of every tribe, them and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, to the war, with the holy instruments, and the trumpets to blow in his hand. And they warred against the Midianites, as the Lord commanded Moses; AND THEY SLEW ALL THE MALES. And they slew the kings of Midian, beside the rest of them that were slain; namely, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, five kings of Midian; BALAAM ALSO THE SON OF BEOR THEY SLEW WITH THE SWORD." Num. 31:1-8.  It now appears that Balaam was working closely with Balak and the Midianites, notwithstanding the hostile parting of their ways following Balaam's repeated failure to call down God's wrath on Israel; and, in fact, instead, invoking God's BLESSING on Israel in some of the most glorious language in all the Bible used to express God's unfailing and eternal love for His Elect people; e.g., to wit: "And he took up his parable, and said, Rise up, Balak, and hear; hearken unto me, thou son of Zippor; God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should repent; hath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken, and shall he not make it good? Behold, I have received commandment to bless; and he hath blessed; and I cannot reverse it. He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seen perverseness in Israel" ­ (Note this powerful point of pure Calvinism, coming out of the mouth of this slick, Arminian, moneygrubbing, heretic, false prophet, Balaam. As much as though God had said, "There certainly is much iniquity and perverseness in Jacob aka Israel, just as there is in all my Elect people, but I have not seen it, because my beloved Son has died for all the sins of all the Elect and washed them all away in His precious blood;" Ergo, "There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. ... Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect?") ­ "the Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a king is among them. God brought them out of Egypt; he hath as it were the strength of an Unicorn." (Num. 23:18-22; Rom. 8:1,33.)  Indeed, it looks as though Balaam were goading Balak, who is under great stress, in constant fear of losing his kingdom ­ and his life ­ if he is unable somehow to stop the invincible march of Israel to the "Promised Land." Twice, in the same language, Balaam reminds Balak that God, through a series of miracles beginning at Egypt and the Red Sea, has enabled Israel to eat up all nations that opposed them. This enraged Balak; to the point of hysteria and a nervous breakdown ­ if one may judge from the words escaping out of Balak's mouth mixed with a tad of educated speculation; to wit: "God brought Israel forth out of Egypt; he hath as it were the strength of a rhino or wild ox; he shall eat up the nations his enemies, and shall break their bones, and pierce them through with his arrows. He couched, he lay down as a lion, and as a  Sunday, July 31, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  great lion; who shall stir him up? BLESSED IS HE THAT BLESSETH THEE, AND  CURSED IS HE THAT CURSETH THEE." (Num. 24:8,9)  Well now, Beloved. That tore it. "And Balak's anger was kindled against Balaam, AND HE  SMOTE HIS HANDS TOGETHER; and Balak said unto Balaam, I called thee to curse mine  enemies, and, behold, thou hast altogether blessed them these three times. Therefore now flee  thou to thy place (i.e., Run for your life! Get back where you came from, and hide!); I thought to  promote thee unto great honor; but, lo, the Lord hath kept thee back from honor. And Balaam  said unto Balak, Spake I not also to thy messengers which thou sentest unto me, saying, If Balak  would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the commandment of the  Lord, to do either good or bad of mine own mind; but what the Lord saith, that will I speak? And  now, behold, I go unto my people; come therefore, and I will advertise thee what this people shall  do to thy people in the latter days. And he took up his parable, and said, Balaam the son of Beor  hath said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said; He hath said, which heard the words of  God, and knew the knowledge of the most High, which saw the vision of the Almighty, falling  into a trance, but having his eyes open. ...And he took up his parable, and said, Alas, who shall  live when God doeth this! (!) ...And Balaam rose up, and went and returned to his place; and Balak also went his way." (Num. 24:10-25.)  Now, Beloved. I put it to you. That was anything but a peaceful and friendly parting of the ways between false-prophet Balaam and his employer, king Balak, who hired Balaam to put a curse on Israel (standing in this case for God's Elect people). And so it is with some surprise when Balaam turns up six full chapters later ­ (i.e., Numbers, chapters 25 through 30). And, stranger still, when he does show up after such a long hiatus, in the middle of a red-hot, full-scale, but LOSING WAR WITH MOSES AND THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL AGAINST THE MOABITES AND THE MIDIANITES. And, to add some additional drama to the glory of the situation, please take note that the war was a war of vengeance, and that it was a swan song war of Moses in that Moses was to die as soon as the war was over; to wit: "And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites; afterward shalt thou be gathered to thy people." (Num. 31:1,2)  From relevant verses scattered throughout the Scriptures we may accurately piece together a reasonable synopsis of Balaam's six-page hiatus; to wit: O my people, remember now what Balak king of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him from Shittim unto Gilgal; that ye may know the righteousness of the Lord." (Mic. 6:5.)  Although it certainly appeared that the breach between Balak and Balaam was permanent and strong at the time, it soon appeared to have been healed; and that what Balaam could not do (i.e., bring down God's curses upon Israel) directly; he was able to do, indirectly (i.e., send large numbers of Moabite and Midianite whores to seduce young Israelite men to eat things sacrificed to idols and to commit fornication, thereby bringing down God's wrath in the form of a deadly plague; "And those that died in the plague were twenty and four thousand." (Num. 25:9.) All as taught, counseled and consulted with Balak by Balaam. It may be that Balaam had not yet earned the entirety of the retainer of fees advanced to him by Balak. In any case, by the time Moses was ending his war of God's revenge against Balak, it was pretty well known that Balaam was the master mind behind the plague that killed 24,000. More proof; to wit:  Sunday, July 31, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  "And Moses was wroth with the officers of the host, with the captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, which came from the battle. And Moses said unto them Have ye saved all the women alive? Behold, these caused the children of Israel, THROUGH THE COUNSEL OF BALAAM, TO COMMIT TRESPASS AGAINST THE LORD IN THE MATTER OF PEOR, and there was a plague among the congregation of the Lord. Now therefore kill every male among the little ones, and kill every woman that hath known man by lying with him. But all the women children, that have not known a man by lying with him, keep alive for yourselves." (Num. 31:14-18)  It is obvious that Moses intends to annihilate the Moabite and Midianite nations in revenge for what they did to Israel at Baal-Peor in committing whoredom with the daughters of Moab, and for calling the people unto the sacrifices of their gods, where the people bowed down to their gods, causing the anger of the Lord to be kindled against Israel. And it is further obvious, that Moses was determined to make the whores themselves pay with their lives. Remember, Beloved. It was God Himself that assigned this mission of bloody revenge to Moses, waging war to get the job of vengeance done, as the last major assignment in a life filled with glorious events. Right down to the end the Elect of God in the churches have to struggle with Balaamism, the doctrine of Balaam, the way of Balaam, and the errors of Balaam; to wit: "And to the angel of the church in Pergamos write; These things saith he which hath the sharp sword with two edges; I know thy works, and where thou dwellest, even where Satan's seat is; and thou holdest fast my name, and hast not denied my faith, even in those days wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain among you, where Satan dwelleth. But I have a few things against thee, BECAUSE THOU HAST THERE THEM THAT HOLD THE DOCTRINE OF BALAAM, who taught Balak to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto idols, and to commit fornication. So hast thou also them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate. Repent; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against them with the sword of my mouth. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the churches; To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it." (Rev. 2:12-17) A piece of beautiful jewelry ­ personalized, and worthy of a king to receive, and befitting our Father-God to give. Rare and Precious. Signifying eternal blessedness in Christ Jesus in Heaven. Yet, a cloud has arisen over it all, with the arrival of a letter to my church, even the church in Pergamos, where I am a member, ordering us to repent, in very harsh language, from my kindhearted and gentle Savior; to wit: "These things saith he which hath the sharp sword with two edges; Repent; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against THEM with the sword of my mouth." Rev. 2:12,16. I take note that the "THEM" against whom the Lord Jesus will fight with the sword of His mouth appear to be Balaam and his religious hypocrites; to wit: "But I have a few things against thee, because thou hast there them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto idols, and to commit fornication." Rev. 2:14.  Jonathan ben Uzziel, one of their Targumists, on Numb. 24:14, said the instructions Balaam gave to Balak is here called his doctrine; and it was that Balak should get some of the most beautiful women in his kingdom to ply ­ (i.e., give them drink after drink of booze until they are fallingdown drunk) ­ ply the men of Israel, and draw them into uncleanness, and so into idolatry; by  Sunday, July 31, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  which means, God being angry with them, he (Balak) might get an advantage over them; that the  Israelites did commit whoredom with the daughters of Moab, and did eat things sacrificed to idols,  and bowed down to Baal Peor, it is certain, Numb. 25:1,2,3; but that this was brought about  through the counsel of Balaam is not so plainly expressed, though it is hinted at in Numb. 31:15,16  (where Moses ordered the violent deaths of all the involved young women). But the Jewish writers  are very express about this matter. One of them has Balaam speaking to Balak as follows; to wit: "Come, and I will counsel thee. Go and set up inns, and place in them whorish women, to sell food  and drink at a low price; and this people will come, and eat, and drink, and be drunken, and will lie  with them, and deny their God; and they will be quickly delivered into thine hands, and many of them shall fall." This now was the stumbling-block he taught Balak to lay before them. And elsewhere the Targumists say, "that Balaam, the wicked, gave counsel to Balak the son of Zippor,  to cause the Israelites to fall by the sword; he said to him, THE GOD OF THIS PEOPLE HATES  WHOREDOM. CAUSE THY DAUGHTERS TO COMMIT WHOREDOM WITH THEM, AND YE SHALL RULE OVER THEM."  Then the Targumists go on to relate how they built shops, and placed an old woman without, and a young woman within; and when the Israelites came to buy, how well they used them (charging only a fraction of an item's worth, with bargains galore, etc.), and what familiarity they admitted them to; how they made them drink of Ammonitish wine, which inclined to lust; and when they signified their desire, obliged them to worship Baal Peor, and renounce the law of Moses. Both Philo and Josephus ­ two ancient history highly respected authorities ­ speak of this counsel of Balaam in much the same manner and to much the same purpose. The Samaritan Chronicle says that this counsel pleased the king, Balak, and he swung into action to immediately execute and implement every part of Balaam's suggestions. For instance, on the next Sabbath-day, holy unto the Jews, Balak sent into the camp of Israel twenty-four thousand young women, by whom the Israelites were so seduced, that they did everything Balak desired of them, including idol-worship, public renunciation of the God of Israel, and fornication all around. And, it was no small incident ­ but rather a huge national insult ­ sending 24,000 young whorish women into Israel's camp, to taunt and seduce ­ it being the exact number that died in the plague (Num. 25:9).  The Island of Lesbos, which was run by Lesbians is just off shore a few miles from Pergamos, where Satan's world headquarters was located at that time, and where Pastor Antipas was martyred. No doubt the lesbian and sodomite influence was very strong throughout that region, especially at Pergamos. Rev. 2:12. Early on, the little church at Pergamos disappeared. I have a few things against thee, because thou hast there them that hold the doctrine of Balaam. Not that the good church members were guilty of such sins themselves, but they let such scoundrels remain as members, when their plain duty was to expel them from their membership. (1 Cor. 5:1-13.) To wit: "But I have a few things against thee, because you keep heretics and fornicators on the church rolls ­ a very serious offense, defiling the Bride of Christ, a Chaste Virgin." Greed was the manifest downfall of Balaam. "But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. For the love of money is the root of all evil; which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows." (1 Tim. 6:9-10) I love you. Amen.  
