 
In order to have a comprehensive idea of what is implied in perfection, it is necessary to classify it into two categories. There is the spiritual perfection, which consists in the inner 
realization of a transcendent state of 
consciousness which is beyond duality. 
And there is perfection as expressed and seen in the domain of duality. All related existence which is a part of the manifold world of manifestation admits of degrees: and when we are concerned with perfection as seen in this manifested world, we find that, like the other things which come under the domain of duality, it also admits of degrees. Bad and good, weakness and strength, vice and virtue are all opposites of duality. But, in fact, all these aspects are expressions of the one reality in different degrees. 
Thus evil is not utterly evil but good in its lowest degree; weakness is not mere incapacity but strength in its lowest degree; and vice is not pure vice but virtue at its lowest. In other words, evil is the minimum of good; weakness is the minimum 
of strength; and vice is the minimum of virtue. All the aspects of duality have a minimum and a maximum and all the other intervening degrees: and perfection is no exception to this. The whole range of humanity is included in the two extremes of perfection and imperfection: and both 
perfection and imperfection are essentially matters of comparison, contrast and relative existence. So perfection in the domain of duality is only relative perfection. It is only when we compare it with imperfection that it comes to us as perfection. 
When perfection is concerned with duality, it consists in the excellence of some attribute or capacity. And in this context, perfection in one respect does not necessarily include perfec­tion in other respects. For example, a man who is perfect in science may not be perfect in singing, or a man who is perfect in singing may not be in science. There is a sense in which excellence can be exhibited even in crimes. When a murder 
is committed in such a manner that not a single clue is left for tracing the murderer, it is called a perfect crime. So even in crimes or sins there is a sort of perfection. But this type of per­fection which consists in the excellence of a quality or capacity should be carefully distinguished from spiritual perfection, which is not in the domain of 


duality. The different types of excellence which are characteristics of duality are all within the scope of the intellect, for such excellence can be easily envisaged by the extension (in imagination) of something good which is found in the limited experience of everyday life. But the perfection which belongs to the spiritually realized souls is not in the domain of duality, and is as such entirely beyond the scope of the intellect. It has no parallel in the domain of duality. When a person becomes spiritually perfect, he knows that nothing exists except God, and that what seems to exist in the domain of duality and is capable of being grasped by the intellect is only illusion. For the spiritually perfect man God is the only reality. Science, art, music, weakness, strength, good and evil are all to him nothing but dreams. His perfection consists in the knowledge of one indivisible existence. 
When a spiritually perfect soul wants to use all his knowledge and powers, it is always for the spiritual upliftment 
of other souls. His knowledge of others 
is not based upon their expressions. 
Thought comes first, and its expression 
in words follows later. But as he directly 
knows the minds of all, he is not 
dependent upon the expression of thought. For him words are unnecessary. If he wants to know something before it is manifested, he can do so; but he does so only when it 

is necessary for spiritual reasons. In the same way, if he wants to have excellence in any other matter, he can have it without any difficulty. All sorts of excellence are latent in spiritual perfection. Krishna was spiritually perfect. He was also perfect in everything. If he had wanted to, he could have shown himself as a perfect drunkard, a perfect sinner, a perfect rogue, or a perfect murderer: but that would have shocked the world. Though possessed of perfection in every respect, it was not necessary for him to exhibit it in fulfilling his Mission. The spiritually perfect souls can exhibit supreme excellence in any mode of life which they may be required to adopt for the spiritual upliftment of other souls. But they do not do so merely to show themselves as perfect in that respect. Excellence of capacities is used by them only when there is a spiritual need for it, and not merely to satisfy the curiosity of others: and when they use such excellence of capacity, they do so with utter detachment. Just as a person who wears gloves may touch the dirt of the universe without getting soiled, a spiritually perfect soul can be engaged in universal activity without being bound by it. 
Perfection is the full development of all the aspects of 
personality. So perfection must be all-

PERFECTION MUST 
sided. Perfection in one respect is no 
BE ALL-SIDED 
perfection; it is only a lopsided growth of a faculty or capacity resulting in inflexibility or the incapacity to adjust oneself to the ever changing and multitudinous vicissitudes of life. Such a person cannot maintain a moving equilibrium of mind while keeping pace with the swift changes of life. If he is in an environment which by its nature gives scope for the faculty which he has developed, he is temporarily happy, and enjoys a sense of being in harmony with the world; but if he finds himself in a hostile environment where his faculty is a misfit, he has a sense of failure, and his poise is disturbed. Therefore perfection implies perfection in every respect. 

This means that though perfection transcends the opposites, it also includes them. If you try to grasp the nature of perfection by means of a set standard (implying an 
PERFECTION 
opposite) you are bound to limit it, and 
INCLUDES THE 
thus fail to understand its real significance. 
OPPOSITES AND 
Perfection includes the opposites and
TRANSCENDS 
transcends them. Therefore the perfect
THEM 
man is not bound by any rule or limited ideal. He is beyond good and bad: but his law for those who are good, gives good reward; and for those who are bad, it responds in their own coin. Krishna proved to Arjuna, who was his devotee, that his apparently bringing about the physical and mental annihilation of Kauravas, who were vicious, was for their spiritual salvation. Perfection might manifest itself through killing or saving according to the spiritual demands of the situation. The heart of the Perfect One is at once soft like butter and hard like steel. Perfection is not in its expression limited to any one of the opposites, i.e., it cannot 
exclude the possibility of finding expression through the other opposite also. It can express itself through either of the opposites according to the logic which is implied in the situation. 
That is why it transcends the opposites, and is capable of giving a rational response to all the possible situations in life. It ensures perfect adaptability without surrendering the standpoint of the Truth, and secures an unshakable peace and a sense of harmony in the midst of diverse situations, which must be baffling to those who have not had all-sided development. 
Human activities are limited by the opposites, and perfection 
is beyond them. It should not, however, be imagined that perfection has no human touch about it. Human beings are unhappy, and they laugh to make themselves and others happy; but even a Perfect, Man who is eternally happy, is not without a sense of 
humour. Perfection, in other words, does not consist in being inhuman but superhuman; it is the full development of that rationality which is implicit in humanity. 
Perfection does not belong to God as God, nor does it belong to man as man: but we get perfection when man becomes God, or when God becomes man. The finite being who is conscious of his being finite is obviously short of perfection; but when he is conscious of his being one 


7 
with the Infinite, he is perfect. That is what happens when man gives up the illusion of being finite and attains Godhood by realizing his divinity. If by the Infinite we mean that which is opposed to the finite or that which is away from the finite and necessarily other than the finite, that Infinite is already limited by its being unable to assert itself in and through the finite. In other words perfection cannot belong to such an Infinite. The Infinite, therefore, has to discover its unlimited life in and through the finite without getting limited by this process. God’s perfection is revealed only when he manifests himself as man. The conscious descent of God into the limited form of man is known as his Avatar; and this again is a case of perfection. Thus we have perfection when the finite transcends its limits and realizes its infinity, or when the Infinite gives up its supposed aloofness and becomes man: in both cases, the finite and the Infinite do not stand outside each other. When there is a happy and a conscious blending of the finite and the Infinite, we have perfection. Then we have the Infinite revealing itself through the finite without getting limited thereby; and we have the finite transcending its sense of limitation in the full knowledge of its really being the revelation of the Infinite. 
