THE ALLIES OF

AL-QĀ’IDAH IN SHĀM

Abū Hamzah al-Muhājir (rahimahullāh) said in his advice to the nationalist factions of Iraq, “To those who fight for the sake of the nation and under the banner of patriotism and nationalism, I say, did not a man come to Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam), as reported by al-Bukhārī and Muslim on the authority of Abū Mūsā (radiyallāhu ‘anh), and say, ‘O Rasūlullāh, what is fighting fī sabīlillāh? One of us might fight out of ghadab (anger) or fight out of hamiyyah (zeal).’ So the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) lifted his head towards him and said, ‘Whoever fights so that the word of Allah becomes supreme, then he has fought fī sabīlillāh (‘azza wa jall).’ An-Nawawī, Ibn Hajar, and others said that hamiyyah is to fight out of pride, jealousy, or in defense of the clan. Rather, al-Hāfidh Ibn Hajar said in ‘Al-Fath,’ ‘It is possible that fighting out of hamiyyah could mean fighting to repel a harm and that fighting out of ghadab could mean fighting to attain a benefit.’ So has your fighting, O people, gone beyond what the
 Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) warned against? Rather, it is the full extent of your purpose, whereas what is demanded by Allah’s Sharī’ah is just as al-Hāfidh Ibn Hajar said in ‘Al- Fath,’ ‘Fighting is not fī sabīlillāh unless the only purpose of his fighting is to make Allah’s word supreme.’ Liberating the nation and other goals enter into this as a consequence but not as the purpose. You have known the harm in this form of fighting, as most of the Arab rulers today came to power after wars under the banners of nationalism. How do you see the outcome? Is it not loss in the Dunyā and Hereafter?” [The Second Interview].

Amīrul-Mu’minīn Abū ‘Umar al-Baghdādī (rahimahullāh) said, “The idea of nationalism and patriotism contradicts the religion in a number of its fundamentals. First, preferring people to others is in accordance with their piety not their blood. Allah (ta’ālā) said, {O mankind, indeed We have created you from male and female and

dabiq

7

-----------------------------------------------------Page 7-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
THE ALLIES OF AL-QĀ’IDAH IN SHĀM

made you peoples and tribes that you may know one another. Indeed, the most noble of you in the sight of Allah is the most righteous of you} [Al-Hujurāt: 13]. Second, it contradicts the creed of walā’ and barā’ – a great fundamental of the religion – and uproots it. The Arab Iraqi Christian is their brother who has all rights whereas the Indian or Turkish Muslim has no rights. The Sharī’ah of these people necessitates preferring ‘Uqbah Ibn Abī Mu’ayt and Abū Jahl to Bilāl the Ethiopian and Salmān the Persian. Third, it opposes the bond between the believers. Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alahyi wa sallam) said, ‘The believer to the believer is like a building, each part holding up the other ’ [Reported by al-Bukhārī and Muslim on the authority of Abū Mūsā al-Ash’arī]. He (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) also said, ‘The example of the believers with regards to their love, mercy, and sympathy is like that of a single body, if a limb feels pain, the rest of the body responds to it with sleeplessness and fever ’ [Reported by al-Bukhārī and Muslim on the authority of an-Nu’mān Ibn Bashīr]. … Fourth, it is based upon the da’wah to jāhiliyyah and partisanship. Allah (ta’ālā) said, {When those who disbelieved had put into their hearts hamiyyah – the hamiyyah of Jāhiliyyah} [Al-Fath: 26]. Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) said, ‘Whoever calls to ‘asabiyyah (factionalism) is not one of us’ [Reported by Abū Dāwūd on the authority of Jubayr Ibn Mut’im]” [Adhillah ‘Alal- Mu’minīn A’izzah ‘Alal-Kāfirīn].

Amīrul-Mu’minīn Abū ‘Umar al-Baghdādī (rahimahullāh) also said, “Sadly, some of the fledglings of secularism spread the occupation’s lie, formulated a basis for it, argued in favor of it, and raised the banner of blindness in the name of nationalism and patriotism, both of which are exactly what the Magian state constitution entails. They made the resources of Iraq – especially the water and oil – the property of those who possess Iraqi citizenship! So what if Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) were to migrate to our lands? Indeed, he (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) migrated to a land other than his and settled in a home other than his.

8 ARTICLE

So are those resources halāl for him and his Companions in accordance with the doctrine of these people? No. As for him (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) and the muhājirīn after him having authority and leadership, then for that to occur would necessitate facing the harshest of opposition from these people! How not, when these people are those who said, ‘Iraq is for all the Iraqis and its resources are the property of all the Iraqis.’ Yes, for all of the Iraqis, even if they are from the Yazīdī devil worshippers or Sabian Mandaeans. All of them according to them have equal rights whether he is a Sunnī Muslim or Rāfidī Magian! It does not concern him whether this Iraqi worships our Glorious Lord or a rebellious devil. His right will be protected! O muwahhidīn, our creed is that a Muslim is our brother even if he is a Filipino Asian and that the devil worshipper is our enemy even if he is definitely Iraqi” [Fa’ammaz-Zabadu Fayadhhabu Jufā’ā].

On “25 December 2014,” the Shāmiyyah Front was announced in Aleppo. It consists of the “Islamic” Front, the Army of “Mujāhidīn,” the “Nūr ad-Dīn Zinkī” Movement, “Fastaqim Kamā Umirt,” the Authenticity and Development Front, and most recently, the Hazm Movement. Most of these factions are members of the nationalist Syrian Revolutionary Command Council. All these factions receive supposedly “unconditional” aid from either the Gulf regimes, the CIA, the Syrian National Coalition, or the Free Syrian Army (FSA) Supreme Military Council while “not belonging ” to any of them. In “February 2015,” the new front agreed with the Kurdish Autonomous Democratic Administration and the People’s Protection Units (YPG) – the armed branch of the Democratic Union Party (PYD), which is the Syrian branch of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) – to implement the Sharī’ah in ‘Afrīn! How exactly the nationalist “Islamists” plan to implement the “Sharī’ah” alongside Marxist and democratic secularists is unfathomable. One question to ask them is whether or not the crusader planes backing the PKK in ‘Ayn al-Islām will aid in the implementation of the “Sharī’ah”…

-----------------------------------------------------Page 8-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
THE NATIONALIST BANNERS OF AL-QĀ’IDAH’S ALLIES

The scenario of nationalist “Islamism” working together alongside nationalist secularism to set up a nationalist government with elements of “Islam” and democracy within a constitutional framework is the same scenario that Egypt, Libya, and Tunisia have experienced. The crusaders, expecting the eventual division of the two sides over the cake, sit back and wait to support the side more favorable towards their interests against the other. The two sides compete to display more and more apostasy so as to win the favor of the crusaders and their allies – the Arab tawāghīt.

Although the game is clear to those with a

THE ALLIES OF AL-QĀ’IDAH IN SHĀM

sound understanding of īmān and wāqi’ (current affairs), it was unclear to the jihād claimants of Shām (the Jawlānī front). These deviants instead fought against the Islamic State alongside the Sahwah factions that later formed the Shāmiyyah Front while claiming these factions were battalions of sincere mujāhidīn. The “sincerity ” with which the Jawlānī front insists upon describing these factions is becoming clearer by the day.

Below is a transcript of an address given by the head of the political and media department of the Shāmiyyah Front – Zakarīyā Malāhifjī – in a conference held by “the Revolutionary Forces of Aleppo” in Turkey on “1 March 2015.” He said: “In response to the demands of the revolutionists and the insistence of the masses of the revolution in Aleppo on unification and organization so as to face the tyrannical aggression, and in the name of the Shāmiyyah Front, I want to reaffirm before you a number of fixed principles.”

“First, the Shāmiyyah Front is a part of the great Syrian revolution whose forces must unify to achieve victory. Unity is the only path towards victory. Division always serves the interests of the criminal regime.”

THE NEWLY-ANNOUNCED NATIONALIST SHĀMIYYAH FRONT

dabiq

9

-----------------------------------------------------Page 9-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
THE ALLIES OF AL-QĀ’IDAH IN SHĀM

“Second, the Shāmiyyah Front is a faction that represents Syria and the Syrian people. It considers Syria to be for all the Syrians. Liberating the Syrian nation and the Syrian people from the Iranian occupation and toppling Asad’s regime are our main goals to end oppression and establish the nation of freedom.”

“Third, we consider the Syrian national identity to be the identity of all the components of the Syrian people: Arabs, Kurds, Turkmen, Circassians, Assyrians, and Syriac peoples, as well as all the other religious components.” “Fourth, Syria as it exists now with its internationally recognized geographic borders is a nation for all the Syrian people. The front refuses the division or formation of Syria according to any factional, political, or partisan agenda or ambition.”

MALĀHIFJĪ - HEAD OF THE SHĀMIYYAH FRONT’S POLITICAL DEPARTMENT

“Fifth, the world all knows that the Syrian regime was and continues to be the sponsor of the worst terrorism in the region. It has trained and organized gangs of terrorists and through them, it has carried out terrorist operations and assassinations in all the neighboring countries. This regime has called them for help today and

10 ARTICLE

used them in its war against the Syrian people’s revolution.”

“Sixth, it is clear to all of us that the Syrian revolution faces the coalition of the most arrogant regimes of terrorism in the region. This coalition is led by Iran, which has occupied a number of regions in Syria. At the same time, the world community and its organizations have abandoned their responsibility to fulfill their moral and legal obligations to stop the ongoing massacre against the Syrian people, which has been going on for four years. They did not protect the peaceful civilians who went out in enormous protests throughout the first year of the revolution.”

“Seventh, the Shāmiyyah Front presents thanks to the brothers and friends of the Syrian people, foremost of which are Turkey, Saudi Arabia, and Qatar, as well as all the other countries. It also asks them to take a resolute stance to save the Syrian people from the Iranian occupation, the Iranian gangs, and the crimes of the regime.” “Eighth, the Shāmiyyah Front believes that Demistora’s proposal does not present a plan as a political solution for Syria, nor did he present a written document, rather he proposes a ceasefire in Aleppo to save the regime from its continuous defeats and give the regime a chance to exterminate Douma, Daraa, and all the other Syrian regions. Demistora wants to jump over the decrees of the Geneva I and II Conferences on Syria, which the revolutionists had agreed to under the condition that its first decree be the change of the criminal regime and the transition to a free and independent Syria. O brothers, this emphasizes for us the importance of issuing a unified standpoint towards Demistora’s proposals and others’, not divided standpoints, because it is a responsibility for all of us before the blood of the martyrs and the masses of the Syrian revolution.”

“Ninth, the Shāmiyyah Front calls to exert sincere efforts to prevent judgment by arms

-----------------------------------------------------Page 10-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
in the various disputes of the revolutionists. The last of these disputes occurred in Aleppo. It calls for an independent judiciary to place matters in their right place and prevent the spilling of blood that serves the interests of the criminal regime.”

“Tenth, we thank the brothers attending, and we thank the brothers in the Syrian National Coalition and in the Syrian Interim Government. We ask them to continue to provide the constant and organized support for the revolutionists in Aleppo and to work continuously with the allies and friends of the Syrian people so that they do not cut off or reduce this support and thus the criminal machine can thereby continue to be confronted. We also reaffirm to the masses of our people that we will continue with Allah’s support to either attain martyrdom or achieve victory. Finally, we salute this gathering, which we hope becomes a unified front for the revolution encompassing all of the city of Aleppo and beyond it, all the Syrian lands, for there is a definite reality that when we unite, the regime will collapse. And finally, we thank you all.”

‘ABDUL-’AZĪZ SALĀMAH - LEADER OF THE SHĀMIYYAH FRONT

That ends his deviant words… So, according to the allies of al-Qā’idah in Syria, there is no difference between Muslim, Christian (Assyrian/Syriac), and Nusrayrī, Rāfidī, Durzī, and Ismā’īlī; Syria is a country for all of them! According to the allies of al-Qā’idah in Syria, the Syrian National Coalition, the Syrian Interim Government, and the regimes of Turkey, Āl

THE ALLIES OF AL-QĀ’IDAH IN SHĀM

Saud, and Qatar are all their Muslim brothers! 1 According to the allies of al-Qā’idah in Syria, it is more important to unify upon nationalism and revolution than to divide for the sake of tawhīd and the truth! And they make these deviant statements while standing under the erected flag of nationalist jāhiliyyah, the flag of the two crusaders – Sykes and Picot!

The questions that every follower of the jihād claimants should ask are: Why did the leadership of the Jawlānī front ally with these factions against the Islamic State? What is the ruling of those who entered into different operations rooms and alliances with these and worse factions against the Islamic State? What is the ruling of those who have cooperated and coordinated with these and worse factions against the Islamic State? Why do these factions publically make blatant statements of jāhilī nationalism – many of their statements being kufr – yet the Jawlānī front continues to ignore these mistakes and not denounce them publically (sometimes even defending them!) and instead focuses its media campaign against the Islamic State? Are the mistakes of the nationalists insignificant compared to the supposed “mistakes” of the Islamic State!

Finally, what is the real difference between Hazm and Syria Revolutionaries Front (former Jawlānī front allies) and between the Army of “Mujāhidīn,” “Zinkī,” “Fastaqim Kamā Umirt,” the Authenticity and Development Front, and the various factions of the “Islamic” Front? Is it just centimeters of beard length and the superficial differences between Morsi and Sisi, both of whom ruled by tāghūt law and led campaigns against the mujāhidīn of Sinai?

The Jawlānī front will find that its betrayal of the muhājirīn and ansār of the Islamic State will end up in the Sahwah’s betrayal of the Jawlānī front, and some of this has already begun… ______________

1 These Sahwah factions of apostasy kill the people of Islam (the muhājirīn and ansār of the Islamic State whom they label Khawārij) and leave the people of idolatry alone (the murtaddīn of the Syrian National Coalition and Syrian Interim Government whom they call brothers)!

dabiq

11

-----------------------------------------------------Page 11-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
‘Umar (radiyallāhu ‘anh) said, “By He in whose hand is my soul, if Abū Bakr had obeyed us, we would have committed kufr in a single morning, and that was when they asked him to go easy concerning zakāh [by not waging war against the apostates over it], but he refused. He said, ‘If they were to withhold from me a short rope, I would wage jihād against them over it ’” [Musannaf Ibn Abī Shaybah].

He (radiyallāhu ‘anh) also said, “We almost committed kufr in a single morning if not that Allah saved us through Abū Bakr as-Siddīq (radiyallāhu ‘anh)” [Al-Ibānah al-Kubrā].

Abū Rajā’ al-‘Utāridī said, “I entered al-Madīnah and saw the people gathered around a man kissing the head of another while the kisser was saying, ‘May I be killed in your defense!

12 HISTORY

If not for you, we would have been ruined.’ So I asked, ‘Who is the kisser and who is the one being kissed?’ They said, ‘That is ‘Umar kissing Abū Bakr ’s head for his war against the people of apostasy who resisted zakāh” [Tārīkh Dimashq].

Abū Hurayrah (radiyallāhu ‘anh) said, “By He other than whom there is no god, if Abū Bakr had not been appointed khalīfah, Allah would not be worshipped on the Earth!” He repeated this three times [Al-I’tiqād – al-Bayhaqī].

Wakī ’ Ibn al-Jarrāh (rahimahullāh) said, “If not for Abū Bakr, Islam would have perished” [Al- Ibānah al-Kubrā].

Al-Hasan al-Basrī (rahimahullāh) said, “The Arabs apostatized, so Abū Bakr consulted the

-----------------------------------------------------Page 12-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
people concerning them. They all counseled him to accept prayer from them and leave zakāh up to them. So he said, ‘By Allah, if they were to withhold a short rope that they used to give Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam), I would wage jihād against them.’ If not for what Abū Bakr had done, the people would have practiced ilhād (heresy) concerning zakāh until Resurrection Day ” [Tārīkh Dimashq].

‘Umar (radiyallāhu ‘anh) said, “By Allah, a day or night of Abū Bakr ’s (radiyallāhu ‘anh) is better than ‘Umar and the family of ‘Umar since they were born … As for the day then it was the day that Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) passed away and those who apostatized from the Arabs apostatized and said, ‘We will pray but not give zakāh nor collect it. So I came to him never neglecting to advise him. I said, ‘O Khalīfah of Rasūlullāh, attract the people and be soft with them, for it is as if they ’ve been deserted.’ So he said, ‘I had hoped for your support and you came with your forsaking? Are you severe in Jāhiliyyah and cowardly in Islam? With what may I attract them? With contrived poetry or fabricated sorcery? That can never be! The Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) passed away, the revelation has ceased, and the religion has been completed. Shall it decrease while I am still alive! By Allah, I will wage jihād

ABŪ BAKR AS-SIDDĪQ’S MONUMENTAL STANCE

against them as long as my hand can still hold the sword, even if they only withhold from me a short rope!’ So I saw him to be wiser and firmer than me in this. He disciplined the people over matters, making their hardships easier for me to deal with when I was given authority over them. This was his day ” [Musnad al-Fārūq – Ibn Kathīr; Jāmi’ al-Usūl – Ibnul-Athīr].

Abū Hurayrah (radiyallāhu ‘anh) said, “When Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) passed away, Abū Bakr was appointed khalīfah after him, and the Arabs apostatized, ‘Umar (radiyallāhu ‘anh) said, ‘How can you fight the people when Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) has said, ‘I was ordered to fight the people until they say, ‘There is no god but Allah.’ So whoever says it, then his wealth and blood is saved from me except by its due right, and their judgment is for Allah.’’ Abū Bakr said, ‘By Allah, I will fight those who differentiate between prayer and zakāh, for zakāh is from the right due upon wealth. By Allah, if they were to resist giving me a short rope that they used to give to Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam), I would fight them over their resistance to giving it.’ ‘Umar (radiyallāhu ‘anh) said, ‘By Allah, as soon as I saw that Allah opened Abū Bakr ’s heart (radiyallāhu ‘anh) towards war, I knew it to be the truth’” [Al-Bukhārī and Muslim].