IN THE WORDS OF

THE ENEMY

Over the last month, a number of crusaders voiced their concerns over the power and drive of the Islamic State, its revival of Islam and the caliphate, and its eventual expansion into Europe and the rest of the world.

The Catholic crusader and American politician Rick Santorum had the following to say:

“This is a caliphate that has been established and that means they are calling people from all over the world to come and fight this battle. As long as they hold ground and continue to expand that ground, more and more will come. The fact that we are delaying means that the Caliphate continues to exist. They are not losing ground. They are not being discredited in the eyes of the Muslim world. They will get stronger. … This is really important to understand. The reason the West had a thousand year war with Islam is that Islam was ever expanding. When Islam began to contract, it collapsed, and the caliphate was eliminated. Now they have established a caliphate. They are dead serious about expanding it. Unless we begin to take back that ground and make this caliphate just irrelevant in the eyes of the radical Muslim world, we are going to have a bigger and bigger problem.”

The American Crusader

GARY BERNTSEN

57 ENEMY‘S WORDS

The Catholic Crusader

RICK SANTORUM

And the American crusader and former CIA mission commander Gary Berntsen had the following to say:

“In the last six weeks we’ve seen groups in Pakistan have sworn allegiance to ISIS, Ansār Bayt al-Maqdis in the Sinai Peninsula has sworn allegiance to them, Libyan groups have, and now Boko Haram. … ISIS has billions of dollars. They have a network of communications. They’re reaching out to these people and it just shows you how deadly and effective ISIS is. ISIS truly is the most successful Sunni terrorist group in history because they’ve carved out a space for a nation-state. These groups recognize that. … Those in these countries

-----------------------------------------------------Page 57-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
see this group as an Islamic group, and it ’s an Islamic terrorist group but it ’s a terrorist group that has become a nation-state. And it ’s accepted broadly in these areas by individuals now that refuse to accept the concept of secular nation-states. And ISIS has been brilliant in its pushing out of propaganda. It has really sold itself to the hundreds of millions of people around there that are looking for a message.”

Finally, the American crusader and Virginia state senator Richard Black said the following:

“One thing is clear, if Damascus falls, the dreaded black and white flag of ISIS will fly over Damascus. Within a period of months after the fall of Damascus, Jordan will fall and Lebanon will fall. With that area of expansion for the most extreme Islamists, I think you will automatically see a beginning of a historic push of Islam towards Europe and I think, ultimately, Europe will be conquered, and that ’s why I look at Syria as the center of gravity. That ’s what we used to talk about in the army war college when we would study wars and the objective. There was always a center of gravity – the thing which would determine the outcome of the war. If you defeated the center of gravity, then you won. What I see is Syria is the center of gravity for Western civilization. If it falls, then we will begin to see a very rapid advance of Islam on Europe and I think ultimately, potentially, the collapse of all of Europe.”

58 ENEMY‘S WORDS

The American Crusader

RICHARD BLACK