IN THE WORDS OF

THE ENEMY

BENJAMIN NETANYAHU

Benjamin Netanyahu – the head of the Jewish state – was asked on the CBS News program “Face the Nation” if the Islamic State posed a threat to the Jewish state. He replied:

“Absolutely. I mean, ISIS has got to be de- feated because it is doing what all these militant Islamists are trying to do. They all want to first dominate their part of the Middle East and then go on from there for their twisted idea of world domina - tion. […] Essentially, they want to accu- mulate enough power to then carry out their mad ambitions. So, that is the dan- ger with ISIS. It is creating a statement. It has two million petrodollars a day. It ’s weapons it has taken over from the Iraqi army and so on. And it is dangerous, no question.”

He was then asked if the Jewish state would get more directly involved in the war against the Islamic State. So he re- plied:

“We are ready to support and help in ev- ery way that we are asked to do.”

Finally, he was asked for his opinion on expanding the American airstrikes to in -

BENJAMIN NETANYAHU, THE TĀGH ŪT OF THE JEWS

dabiq

56

-----------------------------------------------------Page 56-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
clude Nusayrī regime targets. He replied:

“I think, right now, the real issue is ISIS. ISIS has taken over oil supplies in Syria. It has got – it basically uses Syria as a safe haven and as a launching ground for attacks. And I think, wisely, a decision has been made that ISIS tar- gets in Syria and Iraq are equally targetable.”

CHUCK HAGEL REVISITED

On “November 19, 2014,” the crusader and former US Secretary of Defense was asked: “The question is do we have the will and the capacity to influence the events as we used to?”

He replied:

“I think it isn’t so much the will, I don’t think. I think our capacity is different because the threats and the challenges are far more dif - fuse and varied. I talked about asymmetric threats. I mean the sophistication of ISIL – just take that for a moment. We’ve never seen an organization like ISIL that is so well-organized, so well-trained, so well-funded, so strategic, so brutal, so completely ruthless. We’ve never seen anything quite like that in one institution. Then they blend in ideology which will eventu - ally lose*, we get that, and social media. The sophistication of their social media program is something that we’ve never seen before. You blend all of that together, that is an incredi - bly powerful new threat. So we’re adjusting to this and we’re trying to – we can’t do it alone.”

_____________

* Allah (ta’ālā) said, {It is He who has sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to manifest it over all religion, even if the mushrikīn despise such} [At-Tawbah: 33].

57 THE ENEMY’S WORDS

THE AMERICAN CRUSADER CHUCK HAGEL

-----------------------------------------------------Page 57-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
MELTDOWN

BY JOHN CANTLIE

War is on the increase, oil values on the decrease, and America is printing $85 billion dollars a month to stave off total collapse. Economic meltdown is approaching fast and the world needs a stable currency it can rely on. For 5,000 years, that currency has been gold.

There’s simply too much “money” in the world these days and as a consequence things won’t run quite so smoothly within the next few years. You can see it in every economy of nearly every coun - try. The cost of living is going up as currencies be - come worth less and central banks try and inflate the problem away by printing ever more pieces of paper with numbers on them.

It’s been tried dozens of times through history and it always fails. The dollar’s going down but this time it’s taking the world with it.

Since 1971, the world’s financial system has been based on trust. Currencies are only worth some - thing in exchange for goods because banks say they are – $5 bought you a coffee and a sandwich yesterday so you have faith that it will do so tomor - row. But as trust in financial matters between the public and governments drops to a low not seen

58 SPECIAL

since the 1930s, and with none of the world’s cur- rencies tied to anything of true value, the reality of global economic meltdown draws ever closer. As the world’s reserve currency and, until now, the sole currency of trade for oil, the US dollar forms around 60% of the value of all the currency on the planet, and over half those dollars reside outside the United States. So as the dollar collapses, it cre- ates a domino effect and the rest come crashing down with it.

At such times, the world looks to something with a little more worth than paper to prop up its financ- es. That thing has to have intrinsic value, a value that does not climb or descend wildly at the press - ing of a few buttons in a central bank. It could be a cow, a sack of grain, or a barrel of oil, but for the last thousands of years the most popular item of value has been gold.

-----------------------------------------------------Page 58-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
There is a finite amount, so it will never lose its value, banks can’t just print more of it when they choose, and it is worth what the market says it is, not what banks dictate. It is durable, you can exchange it for goods, and it ’s worth as much or more today as it was thousands of years ago. Now that ’s real money.

It ’s amazing to think that a lump of gold that may have been used for trade thousands of years ago is still in circulation. It may have been melted down and be part of a bullion bar or it may be worn around someone’s neck, but it ’s still around. Try that with a piece of paper.

WHY ARE WE TALKING ABOUT MONEY?

Last month the Islamic State announced plans to mint their own range of gold dinars and sil - ver dirhams in a move to separate themselves from dollar-linked fiat currencies and to estab- lish their own money, a currency that has in - trinsic value.

Any country needs its own currency and a move by the Islamic State to gold dinars would be a smart one in today ’s turbulent markets. Financial website Quartz wrote, “The gold di- nar taps into a deep history of Islamic coinage that stretches back almost to the time of Mu- hammad himself. The Islamic dinar appeared in 696 AD, when the Umayyad empire – based in Damascus – stretched from the Iberian pen- insula to the Indus River in South Asia.”

And the value of gold is soaring. In 2006, I pos- sessed a 1 kg bar of gold that was worth, at the time, around $17,000. Sadly it wasn’t mine; a bullion dealer loaned it to me for an article. Staff from all over the building heard about it and would come to ogle over its beauty. Pure gold makes people go a bit strange like that. But if I’d had the money to buy it, that same bar would be worth over $60,000 today.

As they move to expand the Caliphate, it would

MELTDOWN

THE ISLAMIC STATE HAS ANNOUNCED THE MINTING OF NEW COINS

dabiq

59

-----------------------------------------------------Page 59-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
MELTDOWN

be befitting for the Islamic State to introduce their own dinars and dirhams. It is a workable, practical form of currency that puts spend- ing power into the hands of businesses and consumers. The gold dinar is one of the most enduring currencies in the world. Gold makes sense when there is an economic crisis fast ap - proaching the likes of which hasn’t been seen in a very long time.

The stranglehold the US dollar had on the world since the Bretton Woods agreement of 1944 – when the world’s currencies were pinned to the dollar, which in turn was pinned to gold at $35 per ounce – is long over. The world had sent America their gold for safekeeping during World War 2 and they’d amassed some 20,000 tons of the stuff. Over the space of a few war- torn years, the dollar became the reserve cur - rency of the globe through an internationally recognized gold standard.

America was rolling in cash. But over-expendi- ture, warfare, and plain greed meant that by the 1960s they were printing far more dollars than they could redeem in gold. The US is estimated to have spent $546 billion alone during the Cold War. They were printing dollars like they were going out of fashion, so the world got nervous, started returning dollars, and asking for their gold back instead.

This created a landslide and the Federal Reserve was forced to admit they didn’t have enough gold to hand back in return. By 1971, President Nixon declared America would no longer re- deem dollars for gold unless it was in the “inter- ests of the United States.”

It was the biggest default in modern history. Nixon quickly replaced gold with oil in 1973 by stating that all international transactions with the oil-producing countries of OPEC were to be made in dollars. The infamously corrupt Saudi royal family agreed. In return for using dollars only as the trade currency for oil and invest -

60 SPECIAL

ing billions in US bonds, America would pro- vide them military support and protect their oil fields. At Saudi’s bidding, the other OPEC coun- tries fell into line, and the petrodollar was born. The dollar had been pinned to gold, now it was pinned to oil.

THE TĀGH ŪT FAISAL STANDING WITH NIXON

“No dollars, no access to the world’s most im- portant commodity,” says Nick Giambruno, a financial advisor at Casey Research. “If Italy wanted to buy oil from Kuwait, it had to first purchase US dollars on the foreign exchange market to pay for the oil, thus creating an artifi- cial demand for US dollars that wouldn’t exist if Italy could pay in euros.”

FOR A WHILE, THINGS WENT TO PLAN.

Saudi made trillions. America made trillions. But then Saddam annexed Kuwait in 1991 and the US, holding up their part of the bargain, de- stroyed his Baathist army. But they didn’t stop there. They then imposed crippling sanctions on the Iraqi people themselves that, through pov- erty, resulted in the deaths of over 500,000 chil- dren alone, until in 2000, the former Baathist

-----------------------------------------------------Page 60-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
regime declared they would sell their oil only in euros and not to “an enemy state.”

America went back in 2003 under the pretense of “weapons of mass destruction” and the “war on terror ” and, after ruining the country for its people, immediately turned the oil sales back into dollars. America would start wars and kill hundreds of thousands of people to protect the value of the dollar amongst other economic in - terests. This was made obvious when the US and its allies sat back and watched while Asad slaughtered more than 200,000 of the people of Syria. However, as soon as the Islamic State moved towards the oil fields of Iraq and Arabia, America immediately got involved.

And despite the aggression to protect the worldwide value of the dollar, leading US pol- iticians and financiers know its days are now numbered. Congressman Ron Paul says a dollar collapse is imminent. “We will know that day is approaching when oil-producing countries de- mand gold, or its equivalent, for their oil rather than dollars or euros,” he says.

And that ’s what ’s happening right now. Russia and China trade oil in their own currencies and are amassing so much gold bullion that they are ready to kill the dollar and petrodollar as inter - national tools of trade. China has built a gold

THE NEW “COLORED” EDITION OF THE US DOLLAR

MELTDOWN

mountain of 6,500 tons of bullion. Other coun- tries are trading in euros and gold or planning to do so in the near future.

The largest natural gas producer on the planet, Russian company Gazprom, has recently signed agreements to switch payments from dollars to euros. Gazprom is also a huge producer of oil and it ’s a big move in Russia’s de-dollarization efforts. China will follow suit.

And the military actions of the Islamic State have further put the squeeze on the American oil monopoly by attacking, harassing, and taking over the oil supply in lands they have expanded into.

Iraq is the second-largest supplier of oil after Saudi, but Islamic State gains there have heav- ily disrupted oil supply. Libyan supply has been disrupted by Islamic State attacks while Nigeri- an production is being hit by mujāhidīn there. It ’s no coincidence and a smart way of hitting America where it hurts, so the US has to rely more on its own supply. In a panic to stop the situation from getting worse, America has in- vested billions into their own oil and gas drill - ing programs, making them now the largest oil producer in the world at 11 million barrels per day and entering into an oil price war with their Saudi friends.

So suddenly the market is flooded with cheap oil that everyone can now buy with their increas - ingly worthless US dollars. You don’t have to be a financial expert to see where it ’s all headed. Wars, economic implosion, chronic deflation and, eventually, a new global financial system that will emerge from the ashes.

Turning to gold at such times makes sense. Gold and silver are still considered the strongest monies in the world because people demand them. They know their value and have used them for millennia. Nobody has invented a bet- ter place for humans to live than in a house.

dabiq

61

-----------------------------------------------------Page 61-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
MELTDOWN

Nobody has discovered a better way for peo- ple to stay warm than wearing clothes. And nobody has found a more stable money than gold. In 1944, the dollar was pinned to gold at $35 per ounce – today it would need to be $15,400 per ounce to cover the number of dollars in circulation!

Venezuelan leader Hugo Chavez could see it coming and started a campaign in 1998 to get Venezuela’s 211 tons of gold back from the US. It took a huge amount of wrangling before their gold came home; countries don’t like letting go of gold once it ’s in their vaults. But he started the ball rolling and now everyone wants their bullion. Switzerland, Ecuador, Hol- land, and Austria are all shouting for their gold back. Germany asked the Fed for their gold in 2012 and was simply told it wasn’t there.

Countries are now rapidly distancing them - selves from the dollar before the foreseeable meltdown occurs. Therefore, it makes enor - mous sense for the Islamic State to mint their own gold dinars. If you’re trading in a mon- ey that has value on the free market when many other countries are running around with wheelbarrows of paper money to pay for a loaf of bread, you’re in a much stronger position than they. Your economy will flourish while theirs will collapse.

Gold and warfare have always lived hand in hand, as financial author David Graeber writes. “Over the course of the wars of expan- sion during the time of the Umayyad Empire, enormous quantities of gold and silver were looted from palaces, temples, and monaster - ies and stamped into coinage, allowing the Caliphate to produce gold dinars and silver dirhams of remarkable purity.”

Of course, many central banks around the world rubbish the idea of a return to gold or a gold standard in the 21 st Century, citing that it would be a huge step backwards. But it ’s

62 SPECIAL

the job of mega bankers to rubbish gold, be - cause if the world were to return to a monetary system based on precious metals, the control they and governments have over the country and financial health of the public would cease to exist. They ’d be out of a job. You cannot ma- nipulate the value of gold. It is what the market demands it be. But with paper money you can fiddle around as much as you like. And it ’s all designed to bleed as much money as possible out of the average consumer ’s pocket.

“Our monetary system steals from the middle class and transfers the wealth to the banks,” says financial expert Mike Maloney. “We’ve seen this throughout history and it just repeats over and over again.”

The world banking system is a scam designed to feed itself and governments. Nothing tangible exists, just a huge amount of paper and lots of numbers on computers. With today ’s system, the governments and banks hold all the gold while the public have worthless pieces of paper to play with, and when the economy collapses guess who’ll still have the gold…

That ’s why putting precious metal into circu- lation is good for everyone except the banks. It reverses the process and puts paper money back into the system while the real wealth, pre - cious metals, is in the hands of the people. The US Federal Reserve is now printing over $1 trillion per year in “Quantitative Easing 3” in a desperate effort to stave off deflation and print its way out of collapse. They may run out of pa - per in their efforts, but it still won’t work. The dollar ’s time is now coming to a close like every other fiat currency before it, and despite the deaths of hundreds of thousands of people to postpone it, history shows it ’s inevitable. And for the first time ever, all the world’s currencies are also fiat currencies backed by absolutely nothing. When the collapse comes, it will be shattering…

-----------------------------------------------------Page 62-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
Anas Ibn Mālik (radiyallāhu ‘anh) nar- rated that Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alay- hi wa sallam) said, “Prior to the Dajjāl there will be deceptive years in which the truthful person is belied, the liar is believed, the trustworthy is accused of treachery, the treacherous person is trusted, and the ruwaybidah speaks.” It was said to him, “What is the ru- waybidah?” He said, “The fuwaysiq (worthless fāsiq) who speaks concern- ing the affairs of the general public.”