Because much of what has befallen the Ummah is due to this deviant innovation, it is important for the muwahhid mujāhid to have insight about the phenomenon especially in how it pertains to jihād.

The Salaf and Their Severe

Warning against Irjā’

The Salaf who witnessed the emergence of Irjā’ warned against it early on. They knew that it would lead to abandonment of both learning and practicing the religion.

Sa’īd Ibn Jubayr (rahimahullāh – d. 95AH) said, “The Murji’ah are the Jews of the Qiblah” 1 [As- Sunnah – ‘Abdullāh Ibn al-Imām Ahmad].

Ibrāhīm an-Nakha’ī (rahimahullāh – d. 96AH) said, “I fear the fitnah of the Murji’ah for this Ummah more than the fitnah of the Azāriqah [a sect of the Khawārij]” [As-Sunnah – ‘Abdullāh Ibn al-Imām Ahmad].

He also said, “I fear the Murji’ah for the people of Islam more than their number of the Azāriqah” [As-Sunnah – ‘Abdullāh Ibn al-Imām Ahmad]. He also said, “In my opinion, the Khawārij are more excused than the Murji’ah” [As-Sunnah – ‘Abdullāh Ibn al-Imām Ahmad].

He also said, “The Murji’ah left the religion flimsier than a very thin garment” [As-Sunnah – ‘Abdullāh Ibn al-Imām Ahmad].

He also said, “The Murji’ah invented an opinion, so I fear them for the Ummah. The evil from them is great, so be very wary of them” [Ash-Sharī’ah – Al-Ājurrī].

He also said, “I don’t know of a more foolish people by way of their opinion than these Murji’ah” [As-Sunnah – ‘Abdullāh Ibn al-Imām Ahmad].

Mujāhid (rahimahullāh – d. 104AH) said, “They

40 FEATURE

start off as Murji’ah, then become Qadariyyah [those who deny the Qadar], then turn into Majūs [fire-worshippers]” [Al-Lālikā’ī].

Qatādah (rahimahullāh – d. 118AH) and Yahyā Ibn Abī Kathīr (rahimahullāh – d. 129AH) both said, “There is no deviance more feared by us for the Ummah than Irjā’” [As-Sunnah – ‘Abdullāh Ibn al-Imām Ahmad].

Muhammad Ibn ‘Alī Ibn al-Husayn (rahimahullāh – d. 118AH) said, “There is nothing in day or night more similar to the Jews than the Murji’ah” [Al- Lālikā’ī ].

______________

1 The Murji’ah invented a religion whose followers expect to enter Jannah while completely abandoning the essential deeds of Īmān (the four pillars of Islam after the testimony of faith) and claiming to affirm its words! Accordingly, they are similar to the deluded Jews who {believe in part of the Scripture and disbelieve in part} [Al-Baqarah: 85] and say, {“We hear and disobey”} [Al-Baqarah: 93], yet they declare, {“Never will the Fire touch us except for a few days”} [Al-Baqarah: 80] and {“We will be forgiven”} [Al-A’rāf: 169]. The Salaf also compared Irjā’ to Christianity, as some of them were reported to have said, “Be wary of Irjā’ for it is an aspect of Christianity ” [Al-Lālikā’ī]. This is because the Christians, like the Jews, claim salvation is attainable by mere words with absolutely no deeds to back those words; Allah (ta’ālā) responded to the Jews by saying, {Say, “Have you taken a covenant with Allah? For Allah will never break His covenant. Or do you say about Allah that which you do not know?” Yes, whoever earns evil and his sin has encompassed him – those are the companions of the Fire; they will abide therein eternally. But they who believe and do righteous deeds – those are the companions of Paradise; they will abide therein eternally} [Al-Baqarah: 80-82]. He (ta’ālā) responded to the Christians as well as the Jews by saying, {And they say, “None will enter Paradise except one who is a Jew or a Christian.” That is [merely] their wishful thinking, Say, “Produce your proof, if you should be truthful.” Yes on the contrary, whoever submits his face in Islam to Allah while being a doer of good will have his reward with his Lord. And no fear will there be concerning them, nor will they grieve} [Al-Baqarah: 111-112]. See also Sūrat an-Nisā’, verses 123-124. The Jews and Christians both declared that the mere claim of faith in their messengers was sufficient to save them from Hellfire while they abandoned the essential implications of this faith, which was for them to follow the final Prophet Muhammad (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) in both words and deeds, as he was prophesized in their scriptures. Finally, Allah’s mercy and forgiveness is not an excuse to commit sins and injustices never mind shirk and kufr!

-----------------------------------------------------Page 40-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
Az-Zuhrī (rahimahullāh – d. 124AH) said, “No deviance was innovated after the advent of Islam more harmful to its people than Irjā’” [Ash- Sharī’ah – Al-Ājurrī].

Mansūr Ibn al-Mu’tamir (rahimahullāh – d. 133AH) said, “The Murji’ah and the Rāfidah are the enemies of Allah” [Al-Lālikā’ī].

Mughīrah ad-Dabbī (rahimahullāh – d. 133AH) said, “By Allah who there is no god but He, I fear the Murji’ah more than the fussāq [sinful] for this religion” [As-Sunnah – ‘Abdullāh Ibn al-Imām Ahmad].

Al-A’mash (rahimahullāh – d. 148AH) said, “By Allah who there is no god but He, I do not know of anyone more evil than the Murji’ah” [As-Sunnah – ‘Abdullāh Ibn al-Imām Ahmad].

Sufyān ath-Thawrī (rahimahullāh – d. 161AH) said, “The religion of Irjā’ is an innovated religion” [As-Sunnah – Al-Khallāl].

He also said, while turning the pages of the Qur ’ān, “No one is farther from it [the Qur ’ān] than the Murji’āh” [Al-Lālikā’ī].

Sharīk (rahimahullāh – d. 177AH) said, “The Murji’ah are the filthiest people. The Rāfidah were filthy enough, but the Murji’ah lie against Allah” [As-Sunnah – ‘Abdullāh Ibn al-Imām Ahmad].

Ibnul-Mubārak (rahimahullāh – d. 181AH) was asked, “Who emerges first, the Dajjāl or the Beast?” He replied, “The Jahmī so-and-so being appointed as a judge over Bukhārā is more severe

IRJĀ’ – THE MOST DANGEROUS BID’AH

for the Muslims than the emergence of the Beast or the Dajjāl!” The judge was from the extreme Murji’ah [As-Sunnah – ‘Abdullāh Ibn al-Imām Ahmad].

An-Nadr Ibn Shumayl (rahimahullāh – d. 204AH) was asked about Irjā’ so he answered, “It is a religion in agreement with the desires of the kings by which the Murji’ah obtain some of the kings’ dunyā and lose some of their own religion” [Al-Bidāyah wan-Nihāyah]. 2

If the Salaf warned so severely against Irjā’, how can this innovation be so grossly ignored by the Muslims?

The Origin and Meaning of Irjā’

Irjā’ was a reaction to the deviance of the Khawārij. The Murji’ah attempted to distance ______________

2 The Murji’ah of the past – by diluting the religion and downplaying the danger of sins – gave the Muslim kings justification to commit more sins and injustices. Some of the contemporary Murji’ah justified for the modern-day tawāghīt the legislation of manmade laws and allying with the Jews, Christians, pagans, and apostates against the Muslims.

dabiq

41

-----------------------------------------------------Page 41-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
IRJĀ’ – THE MOST DANGEROUS BID’AH

themselves from the Khawārij without adopting the Sunnah; in doing so, they invented their own sect. This was best explained by the scholar of the Salaf, Sa’īd Ibn Jubayr (rahimahullāh), who said, “The example of the Murji’ah is like that of the Sabians. They went to the Jews and asked them, ‘What is your religion?’ They answered, ‘Judaism.’ They asked, ‘What is your book?’ They answered, ‘The Tawrāh.’ They asked, ‘Who is your prophet?’ They answered, ‘Mūsā.’ They asked, ‘What is there for those who follow you?’ They answered, ‘Jannah.’ Then they went to the Christians and asked them, ‘What is your religion?’ They answered, ‘Christianity.’ They asked, ‘What is your book?’ They answered, ‘The Injīl.’ They asked, ‘Who is your prophet?’ They answered, ‘’Īsā.’ They asked, ‘What is there for those who follow you?’ They answered, ‘Jannah.’ They then declared, ‘We are between these two religions’” [Al-Lālikā’ī].

The Murji’ah countered the Khawārij who made the performance of all obligations and abandonment of all sins essential for one to be Muslim, by responding with their own innovation, claiming that the abandonment of all obligations and the performance of all sins does not affect one’s Īmān even if one were to completely abandon the pillars of Islam! They expelled action from the reality of Īmān thereby “delaying ” action beyond Īmān’s definition, and this is the linguistic root for the word Irjā’, as Irjā’ means “a delay.”

Their innovation has numerous characteristics, manifestations, and practical consequences – some of which will be discussed – but it is important first to remember that the superficial agreement of some scholars and du’āt with the Salaf ’s definition of Īmān does not mean they have freed themselves of Irjā’. This becomes most clear when one examines the statements of contemporary “Salafī” palace scholars who say that ruling by manmade laws and siding with the kuffār against the Muslims is major kufr but then do not implement the practical consequences of these theoretical rulings upon the Saudi regime.

42 FEATURE

Rather, they twist the statements of the Salaf and the scholars so as to innovate an escape and a justification for their masters’ kufr. Similarly, there were individuals in this era who specialized in the field of hadīth and regularly repeated the Salaf ’s definition of Īmān word for word, “Faith is statements and actions; it increases and decreases.” Yet they blatantly opposed the implications of this definition by claiming that if a Muslim were to completely abandon altogether the prayers, zakāh, fasting, and hajj, while mocking Allah, he could still be a Muslim who would eventually enter Jannah! They thereby made Islam into a mere claim having no reality.

THE PALACE MUFTI OF ĀL SALŪL

The Salaf’s Definition of Irjā’

The original Murji’ah expelled actions from the definition of Īmān, leaving only the statements of the heart and tongue within its essence, the statement of the tongue being the testimony that there is no god but Allah and Muhammad is Allah’s Messenger. They also claimed that Īmān does not increase nor decrease. Their understanding of Īmān had a number of implications, consequences, and transformations, most important of which are that the complete abandonment of obligations does not affect one’s Īmān, that hypocrisy does not exist as a phenomenon, and that ignorance of the famous and well-known matters of the

-----------------------------------------------------Page 42-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
religion – known to every Muslim by necessity – is inconsequential.

Submission Is

Inconsequential According to

the Murji’ah

The Murji’ah opposed Ahlus-Sunnah by claiming that submission of the limbs to Allah was not an essential part of faith. Sufyān Ibn ‘Uyaynah (rahimahullāh – d. 199AH), was asked about Irjā’, so he replied, “The Murji’ah say that Īmān is a statement. And we say it is statements and actions. The Murji’ah obliged Jannah for one who testifies that there is no god but Allah while he resolves in his heart to abandon the obligations 3 . They called abandonment of the obligations a sin just like any other sin, although they are not equal, for committing sins without istihlāl (considering the sin to be halāl) is merely sinful, whereas abandoning the obligations consciously without ignorance or excuse is kufr. What clarifies this is the matter of Ādam (‘alayhis-salām), Iblīs, and the Jewish rabbis. As for Ādam, then Allah (‘azza wa jall) forbade him from eating from the Tree and made it harām for him, but he consciously ate from it to become an angel or become immortal, so he was called disobedient without kufr. As for Iblīs (may Allah curse him), then Allah obligated upon him a single prostration but he consciously refused it, so he was called a kāfir. As for the Jewish rabbis, then they knew the description of the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) and that he was a prophet and messenger, just as they knew their own children, and they acknowledged this with their tongues, but they did not follow his Sharī’ah, so Allah (‘azza wa jall) called them kuffār. So violating the prohibitions is like the sin of Ādam (‘alayhis-salām) and that of other

IRJĀ’ – THE MOST DANGEROUS BID’AH

prophets. As for abandoning the obligations with refusal, then it is kufr like the kufr of Iblīs (may Allah curse him). As for abandoning the obligations with awareness but without refusal, then it is kufr like the kufr of the Jewish rabbis. And Allah knows best” [As-Sunnah – ‘Abdullāh Ibn al-Imām Ahmad].

Al-Humaydī (rahimahullāh – d. 219AH) said, “I was told of people who say, ‘Whoever acknowledges the prayer, zakāh, fasting, and hajj, but does not perform any of them until he dies, and prays with his back to the Qiblah until he dies, then he is a believer as long as he doesn’t deny these obligations, if he knows that not denying these obligations ensures his faith and if he acknowledges the obligations and the direction of the Qiblah.’ I said: This is open kufr and in opposition to Allah’s book, His Messenger ’s Sunnah, and the Muslims’ scholars. Allah (ta’ālā) said, {And they were not commanded except to worship Allah, [being] sincere to Him in religion, inclining to truth, and to establish prayer and to give zakāh. And that is the correct religion} [Al-Bayyinah: 5]” [Al-Lālikā’ī]. Imām Ahmad also commented, “Whoever says this has disbelieved in Allah and rejected Allah’s order and what the Messenger came with” [Al-Lālikā’ī].

Ishāq Ibn Rāhawayh (rahimāhullāh – d. 238AH) said, “The Murji’ah fell into extremism to the point that some of them said, ‘Whoever abandons the obligatory prayers, the Ramadān fast, the zakāh, the hajj, and the obligations in general without denying their obligatory

DĪWĀN AZ-ZAKĀH IN THE CITY OF JARĀBLUS

______________

3 By obligations, he means the four pillars of Islam after the testimony of faith (prayer, zakāh, fasting, and hajj), as is clear in the subsequent quotes. The Sahābah explicitly agreed that abandoning prayer was major kufr. As for the other three pillars, then there is difference of opinion amongst the later scholars regarding the ruling on a person who abandons one of these three. And Allah knows best.

dabiq

43

-----------------------------------------------------Page 43-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
IRJĀ’ – THE MOST DANGEROUS BID’AH

status, then we do not make takfīr of him and his matter is with Allah thereafter because he acknowledges these obligations.’ These are the Murji’ah about whom there is no doubt” [Masā’il al-Imām Ahmad wa Ishāq Ibn Rāhawayh].

The Salaf also used as proof: {And when the sacred months have passed, then kill the mushrikīn wherever you find them and capture them and besiege them and sit in wait for them at every place of ambush. But if they should repent, establish prayer, and give zakāh, let them [go] on their way. Indeed, Allah is Forgiving and Merciful} [At-Tawbah: 5] and {But if they repent, establish prayer, and give zakāh, then they are your brothers in religion; and We detail the verses for a people who know} [At-Tawbah: 11]. These verses indicate that the mushrikīn’s establishment of prayer and payment of zakāh are conditions for their repentance from shirk to be accepted.

The scholars also used as proof all verses that indicate that turning away from the Messenger (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) – by completely abandoning obedience to him – is kufr. {Say, “Obey Allah and the Messenger.” But if they turn away – then indeed, Allah does not like the disbelievers} [Āl ‘Imrān: 32] . 4

They also used as proof the hadīth reported by al-Bukhārī and Muslim on the authority of ‘Umar and Abū Hurayrah (radiyallāhu ‘anhumā). In it, Jibrīl (‘alayhis-salām) said to the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam), “O Muhammad, tell me about Islam.” The Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) said, “Islam is to testify that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is Allah’s Messenger, to establish the prayer, to give the zakāh, to fast Ramadān, and to perform hajj if you are able to.” In another narration, Jibrīl asked him, “If I do so, then I am a Muslim?” He replied, “Yes” [Sahīh: Reported by Ibn Mandah].

They also use as a proof the hadīth of the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam), “I was ordered to fight the people until they testify that there is

44 FEATURE

no god but Allah and that Muhammad is Allah’s Messenger, establish the prayer, and pay the zakāh. If they do so, then they have protected their blood and wealth from me except by the right of Islam. And their account is with Allah” [Al-Bukhārī and Muslim].

They also use as a proof the hadīth of the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam), “Whoever prays our prayer, faces our Qiblah, and eats the meat of our slaughtered animals, then he is the Muslim who has the protection of Allah and His Messenger ” [Reported by al-Bukhārī on the authority of Anas].

They also used as proof the ijmā’ of the Sahābah in considering the abandonment of prayer to be apostasy and the ijmā’ of the Sahābah in declaring those tribes who resisted zakāh to be apostates. The latter is the evidence proving the kufr of parties who forcefully resist other clear-cut and famous shar ’ī rulings such as the prohibition of khamr (alcohol), the prohibition of incest, and the prohibition of ribā (usury).

Al-Marwazī (rahimahullāh – d. 294AH) said, “We then mentioned the reports narrated from the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) declaring the kufr of he who abandons prayer, expelling him from the religion, and legalizing the killing of one who resists performing it. Also, similar reports reached us from the Sahābah (radiyallāhu ‘anhum). Nothing reached us from them contradicting this” [Ta’dhīm Qadr As-Salāh]. Al-Fudayl Ibn ‘Iyād (rahimahullāh – d. 187AH) said, “Allah said, {He has ordained for you of religion what He enjoined upon Nūh and that which We have revealed to you and what We enjoined upon Ībrāhīm and Mūsā and ‘Īsā – to establish the religion and not be divided therein} [Ash- Shūrā: 13]. So the religion is affirmation [of faith] through action which is as Allah described and ______________

4 See also verse 47 of Sūrat an-Nūr, verses 31-32 of Sūrat al-Qiyāmah, verses 15-16 of Sūrat al-Layl, and verse 48 of Sūrat Tāhā. Note: There is a difference between merely disobeying the Messenger (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) in some matters, which is sinful, and between completely disobeying him by not following any of the orders of his religion at all. This condition of absolute disobedience would entail abandonment of the five daily prayers, which is kufr.

-----------------------------------------------------Page 44-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
how He ordered His prophets and messengers to establish the religion. Being divided therein is to abandon action and divide between statement and action. Allah (‘azza wa jall) said, {But if they repent, establish prayer, and give zakah, then they are your brothers in religion} [At-Tawbah: 11]. So Allah required that repentance from shirk be in both word and deed by establishment of prayer and payment of zakāh. The people of Ra’y (false opinions) said, ‘Prayer is not from Īmān nor is zakāh nor any other of the obligations.’ They did so lying against Allah and opposing His Book and the Sunnah of His Prophet. If what they said were true, Abū Bakr would not have fought the people of apostasy” [As-Sunnah – ‘Abdullāh Ibn al-Imām Ahmad].

Al-Qāsim Ibn Salām (rahimahullāh – d. 224AH) said, “So if they resist zakāh after acknowledging it, offering this with their tongues, having established prayer but only resisted zakāh, that resistance would negate everything before it including their acknowledgement and prayer, just as their refusal to pray before would negate their acknowledgement. What testifies to this is the jihād of Abū Bakr as-Siddīq (radiyallāhu ‘anh) with the Muhājirīn and Ansār under his command against the Arab resistance towards zakāh. His jihād was just like the jihād of Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) against the people of shirk, as there was no difference between the two jihāds with regards to the spilling of blood, the enslaving of families, and the seizing

IRJĀ’ – THE MOST DANGEROUS BID’AH

of wealth. And they only resisted zakāh without denying it” [Al-Īmān].

Ibn Abī ‘Āsim (rahimahullāh – d. 287AH) said, “Abū Bakr as-Saddīq in my view is the most knowledgeable after Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) from amongst the Sahābah, as well as the most virtuous, the most zāhid, the bravest, and the most generous of them. From the proof for this is his statement regarding the people of apostasy, when the Companions of the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) debated with him so that he would accept from the apostates some of the religion, but he refused to accept anything less than all of what Allah obligated upon them or else he would fight them. He saw that committing kufr with regards to some of the revelation rendered their blood lawful, so he resolved to fight them, and he knew it to be the truth” [As-Sunnah]. After the initial debate to which Ibn Abī ‘Āsim refers, the Sahābah reached consensus. ‘Umar (radiyallāhu ‘anh) said, “By Allah, as soon as I saw that Allah (‘azza wa jall) had opened Abū Bakr ’s heart to waging war, I realized he was upon the truth” [Al-Bukhārī and Muslim].

Sulaymān Āl ash-Shaykh (rahimahullāh) said, “Shaykhul-Islām Ibn Taymiyyah said when he was asked about the issue of fighting the Tatars while they claimed to adhere to the shahādatayn (testimony of Islam) and claimed to follow the basis of Islam, ‘Every party that resists the manifest and definite laws of Islam from these people or others, then it is obligatory to fight them until they comply with its laws even if they pronounce the shahādatayn and follow some of its laws, just as Abū Bakr and the Sahābah (radiyallāhu ‘anhum) fought those who resisted the zakāh. The fuqahā’ after them agreed upon this.’ He then said, ‘So any resistant party that resists some of the obligatory prayers, fasting, hajj, or resists abiding by the prohibition of spilling blood, looting wealth, alcohol, gambling, incest, or resists adherence to jihād against the kuffār or the enforcement of jizyah upon Ahlul-Kitāb, or abiding by anything else of the obligations and

dabiq

45

-----------------------------------------------------Page 45-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
IRJĀ’ – THE MOST DANGEROUS BID’AH

prohibitions of the religion, those rulings which no one has an excuse for being ignorant of or abandoning and which the individual commits kufr by denying, then the resistant party is fought over these rulings even if it acknowledges them. This is something of which I know no difference between the scholars.’ He said, ‘These – according to the most judicious scholars – are not on the same level as the bughāt (the rebels). Rather they have exited Islam on the level of those who resisted zakāh.’ … So if a person who adheres to all the laws of the religion but resists the prohibition of gambling, usury, or fornication 5 is a kāfir whom it is obligatory to fight, how much more so is the case of he who practices shirk with Allah and is called to offer the religion sincerely to Allah and declare barā’ah and kufr towards everything worshipped besides Allah, but instead he arrogantly refuses and is from the kāfirīn” [Taysīr al-‘Azīz al-Hamīd].

Shaykhul-Islām Ibn Taymiyyah (rahimahullāh) also said, “The Sahābah did not say ‘Do you acknowledge that it’s obligatory or do you deny its ruling?’ This wasn’t known from the Khulafā’ and the Sahābah. Rather, as-Siddīq said to ‘Umar (radiyallāhu ‘anhumā), ‘By Allah! If they were to resist giving me only a short rope that they used to give to Allah’s Messenger (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam), I would fight them over their resistance to giving it.’ So he made their resistance towards payment the basis for the permissibility of fighting them, not their denial of its obligation. It was reported that a group from amongst them used to acknowledge its obligation but were stingy in paying it, but in spite of this the Khulafā’ dealt with them all in the same manner: killing their fighters, enslaving their families, taking their wealth as booty, and testifying that their fighters are in Hellfire. And they labeled them all people of apostasy” [Al-Kalimāt an-Nāfi’ah – ‘Abdullāh Ibn Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdil-Wahhāb].

Finally, if the abandonment of prayer is apostasy, how much more so is the nullification of tawhīd by major shirk! Similarly, if the resistance with force towards zakāh is kufr, how much more so

46 FEATURE

is the daw’ah to the pagan religion of democracy and the battle for its cause!

The “Virtue” of Ignorance According to the Murji’ah

According to some of the Murji’ah, basic knowledge is not an essential part of Īmān even when this knowledge is very widespread and well known.

It was reported that one of those accused of Irjā’ was asked in al-Masjid al-Harām if a man who said the following was a believer, “I know the Ka’bah is true and that it is the House of Allah (‘azza wa jall) but I don’t know whether it is this one or not [in another narration: but I don’t know whether it is this one in Makkah or another one in Khurāsān].” He replied, “He is a believer.” [Sufyān ath-Thawrī said, “I testify that in the sight of Allah he is from the kāfirīn until he knows that it is the Ka’bah erected in al-Haram.”] He was then asked if a man who said the following was a believer, “I know that Muhammad (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) is true and that he is a messenger [in another narration: I testify that Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdillāh is a prophet], but I don’t know if he is the one who was in Madīnah from Quraysh or another Muhammad [in one narration: or a man who was in Khurāsān] [in another narration: but I don’t know if he is the one whose grave is in Madīnah or not].” He replied, “He is a believer.” [Sufyān ath-Thawrī said, “I testify that in the sight of Allah he is from the kāfirīn.”] [Reported by ‘Abdullāh Ibn al-Imām Ahmad, al-Khallāl, and al-Lālikā’ī]. Al-Humaydī and Imām Ahmad both commented on this story saying, “Whoever says this has committed kufr ” [Al-Lālikā’ī]. It was also reported that the answerer was made to repent because of his replies [Al-Lālikā’ī]. 6 ______________

5 His words explain that the forceful resistance against these prohibitions is major kufr. As for the mere practice of gambling, usury, or fornication, then such is sinful but not major kufr.

6 The fact that the Ka’bah is in Makkah, that Prophet Muhammad (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) is from Quraysh, that he lived in al-Madīnah (after his hijrah from Makkah), and that his grave is in al-Madīnah, is something known by Muslims everywhere. Rather, this is even known by many Jews and Christians. So how can one claim ignorance of this while living in dārul-Islām during the rule of the Umawī and ‘Abbāsī khulafā’ and the era of the major fuqahā’ and while standing in front of the Ka’bah inside al-Masjid al-Harām!

-----------------------------------------------------Page 46-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
This exaggerated understanding of excuse due to ignorance (al-‘udhr bil-jahl) 7 is based upon the wrong understanding of Īmān not increasing nor decreasing and only consisting of the statement of the heart and the tongue (the acknowledgement of faith in the heart and in words only). Those who held this belief were confronted with the fact that people have different amounts of awareness, knowledge, and acknowledgment, which implies that Īmān can increase and decrease in this regards 8 . So some Murji’ah responded by saying that Īmān is an unspecific acknowledgement of Allah and His Messenger (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) – by the heart and tongue – having no details. Therefore, if someone “acknowledged” that Muhammad is Allah’s Messenger, but knew nothing about him or his religion, he could still be considered a believer, even if this information was widespread, well known, and easily learnable and accessible, and even if the person had much time and opportunity to learn this essential and basic knowledge!

This exaggerated understanding of excuse due to ignorance that encompasses every issue, every circumstance, and every individual, has rendered excuse due to ignorance the default supposition and it thereby becomes better for one to remain ignorant than to learn the fundamentals of his religion! Ash-Shāfi’ī (rahimahullāh) said, “If the ignorant person were excused due to his ignorance, ignorance would be better than knowledge, for ignorance releases him from the burdens of responsibility and relieves his heart of the various punishments. Accordingly, there is no excuse for the slave with regards to his ignorance after the delivery [of the proof] and the ability to access it, {so that mankind will have no argument against Allah after the messengers} [An-Nisā’: 165]” [Al-Manthūr fīl-Qawā’id].

Ash-Shafi’ī explains that there is general knowledge that “no sane adult is excused for being ignorant of, such as the five daily prayers, that Allah obligated the fasting of Ramādan upon the people, the performance of hajj if they are able to do it, zakāh upon their wealth,

IRJĀ’ – THE MOST DANGEROUS BID’AH

and that He prohibited them from fornication, murder, theft, and alcohol, and similarly, matters that the worshippers were held responsible for understanding, learning, and delivering from themselves and their wealth, and that they stop themselves from doing what Allah prohibited them from. This knowledge is all found explicitly in the book of Allah and is widespread amongst the people of Islam. Their laymen convey it from those who came before them of Muslim laymen. They relate it from Rasūlullāh. They do not differ in its account nor in it being obligatory upon them. This general knowledge cannot be wrongly narrated nor misinterpreted, and disagreement is not possible with regards to it” [Ar-Risālah]. Ash-Shafi’ī’s words encompass the obvious laws of Islam, so how much more apparent is the clear-cut obligation of tawhīd?

Al-Barbahārī (rahimahullāh – d. 329AH) said, “’Umar Ibnul-Khattāb (radiyallāhu ‘anh) said, ‘There is no excuse for anyone regarding deviance he commits while thinking it guidance, nor guidance he abandons while thinking it deviance, for the matters have become clear, the proof has been firmly established, and excuse has been finished’” [Sharh as-Sunnah].

The scholars mention numerous verses from the Qur ’ān to prove that one cannot be considered a Muslim when he ignorantly negates the basis of Tawhīd and Īmān and opposes the fitrah and the Qur ’ān. {A group [of you] He guided, and a group deserved [to be in] error. Indeed, they had taken the devils as allies instead of Allah while they thought that they were guided} [Al-A’rāf: 30]. {Say, “Shall we inform you of the greatest losers as to [their] deeds? [They are] those whose effort is lost in worldly life, while they think that they are doing well in work.” Those are the ones who disbelieve in the verses of their Lord and in ______________

7 Excuse due to ignorance is a shar ’ī concept but not in the exaggerated form proposed by the Murji’ah. See the quote from Imām Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdil-Wahhāb on page 48 for an explanation of when the concept is correctly applied.

8 According to Ahlus-Sunnah, Īmān can increase and decrease at the level of the heart, tongue, and limbs, in statements and actions, not only at the level of knowledge concerning different matters of creed.

dabiq

47

-----------------------------------------------------Page 47-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
IRJĀ’ – THE MOST DANGEROUS BID’AH

[their] meeting Him, so their deeds have become worthless; and We will not assign to them on the Day of Resurrection any importance} [Al-Kahf: 103-105]. {And if any one of the mushrikīn seeks your protection, then grant him protection so that he may hear the words of Allah. Then deliver him to his place of safety. That is because they are a people who do not know} [At-Tawbah: 6]. {Those who disbelieved among the People of the Scripture and the mushrikīn would not have departed [from their kufr] until there came to them the clear evidence – a Messenger from Allah, reciting purified scriptures within which are upright writings} [Al-Bayyinah: 1-3]. {And of the people are some who say, “We believe in Allah and the Last Day,” but they are not believers. They [think to] deceive Allah and those who believe, but they deceive not except themselves and perceive [it] not. In their hearts is disease, so Allah has increased their disease; and for them is a painful punishment because they [habitually] used to lie. And when it is said to them, “Do not cause corruption on the earth,” they say, “We are but reformers.” Unquestionably, it is they who are the corrupters, but they perceive [it] not. And when it is said to them, “Believe as the people have believed,” they say, “Should we believe as the foolish have believed?” Unquestionably, it is they who are the foolish, but they know [it] not} [Al-Baqarah: 8-13]. {O you who have believed, do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet or be loud to him in speech like the loudness of some of you to others, lest your deeds become worthless while you perceive not} [Al-Hujurāt: 2]. 9

Accordingly, there is no excuse due to ignorance for the claimant of Islam regarding its testimony – there is no god but Allah and Muhammad is Allah’s Messenger – its meanings and implications (sincerity towards Allah by practicing tawhīd and submission to Him by following the Prophet – sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam). 10 As for the remaining pillars, then a new Muslim might be ignorant of some of them, but this condition is excusable only temporarily, for he is obliged to seek knowledge

48 FEATURE

so as to eliminate this ignorance, as one of the nullifiers of Islam the scholars spoke about is “turning away from the religion of Allah (ta’ālā) by neither learning it nor practicing it. The proof is the statement of Allah (ta’ālā), {And who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the verses of his Lord; then he turns away from them? Indeed We will take retribution from the criminals} [As-Sajdah: 22]” [Nawāqid al-Islām – Imām Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdil-Wahhāb].

Imām Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdil-Wahhāb (rahimahullāh) also said, “What you mentioned … of your doubt concerning the condition of these tawāghīt and their followers and whether or not the proof has been established on them, then this is strange! How can you doubt this after I have clarified it to you over and over? The person on whom the proof has not been established is the newcomer to Islam and the person raised in a distant nomadic land, or when the matter is obscure … in such a case, takfīr is not made upon him until he is informed of the matter. As for the fundamentals of the religion, which Allah clarified and explicated in His book, then the proof of Allah is the Qur ’ān, so whoever the Qur ’ān reaches has received the proof ” [Ar-Rasā’il ash-Shakhsiyyah].

Hypocrisy Is Nonexistent According to the Murji’ah

In the view of some of the Murji’ah, hypocrisy does not exist, neither in its major nor its minor forms.

Sufyān ath-Thawrī (rahimahullāh) said, “The difference between us and the Murji’ah is three matters. We say that Īmān is statements and actions, whereas they say it is statements without actions. We say that Īmān increases and ______________

9 See also verses 42-43 of Sūrat an-Naml, verses 25-29 of Sūrat Hūd, the tafsīr of Abū Ja’far at-Tabarī (rahimahullāh – d. 310AH) – the imām of the mufassirīn – on some of the verses quoted in the article, and his book “At-Tabsīr fī Ma’ālim Usūl ad-Dīn.”

10 See also pages 22-23 of issue #7 of Dābiq. The scholars have mentioned that knowledge, submission, and sincerity – in addition to other matters – are conditions for this testimony. These conditions are opposites to ignorance, the complete abandonment of practice, and shirk. Accordingly, how can one who practices shirk or abandons prayer be considered a Muslim?

-----------------------------------------------------Page 48-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
decreases, whereas they say it neither increases nor decreases. We say that hypocrisy exists, whereas they say hypocrisy does not exist” [Sifat an-Nifāq – al-Firyābī]. 11

Al-Hasan al-Basrī (rahimahullāh – d. 110AH) was told about people who claim that hypocrisy does not exist and who do not fear hypocrisy. He said, “By Allah, to know that I was free of hypocrisy would be more beloved to me than to possess as much gold as would fill the Earth” [As-Sunnah – al-Khallāl]. He also said, “There has never been nor will there ever be a believer, except that he fears hypocrisy. And there has never been nor will there ever be a hypocrite, except that he feels safe from hypocrisy. Whoever does not fear hypocrisy for himself is a hypocrite” [Sifat an- Nifāq – al-Firyābī].

One of the Murji’ah said in front of Ayyūb as- Sikhtiyānī (rahimahullāh – d. 131AH), “There is only kufr and Īmān,” implying there was no hypocrisy. Ayyūb said to him, “Go and read the Qur ’ān! Every āyah that mentions hypocrisy, then I fear it applies to me!” [Al-Ibānah al-Kubrā – Ibn Battah].

“GO AND READ THE QUR’ĀN!” - AYYŪB AS-SIKHTIYĀNĪ

Hudhayfah Ibn al-Yamān (radiyallāhu ‘anhumā) warned of sects that would appear in the future. He said, “One sect will say, ‘We are believers in Allah and our belief equals that of the angels. There is no kāfir nor hypocrite amongst us.’ It is befitting of Allah (‘azza wa jall) to gather them

IRJĀ’ – THE MOST DANGEROUS BID’AH

with the Dajjāl” [As-Sunnah – al-Khallāl].

Ibn Mas’ūd (radiyallāhu ‘anh) said, “They say, ‘There is no kāfir nor hypocrite amongst us.’ May Allah fracture their feet” [Al-Ibānah al-Kubrā – Ibn Battah].

Imām Ahmad (rahimahullāh) listed that amongst the matters the Murji’ah denied was the description of the hypocrites; he then said, “Be wary that the Murji’ah make you slip away from the matter of your religion” [As-Sunnah – al-Khallāl].

The Murj’ah who denied hypocrisy did so in two different ways. One sect – the Karrāmiyyah – claimed that Īmān was only the statement of the tongue even if the heart contained major hypocrisy. They labelled the hypocrites at the time of the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) to be believers, although they believed these “believers” would go to Hellfire. Another sect claimed that Īmān did not increase nor decrease. This claim demanded the denial of minor hypocrisy, as its existence in a person necessitated the decreasing of his Īmān. However, the existence of hypocrisy – both major and minor – is from the most obvious matters clarified by the Qur ’ān and Sunnah. In addition to Sūrat al-Munāfiqūn and Sūrat at-Tawbah, there are numerous āyāt and ahādīth describing this phenomenon.

Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) said, “The example of the hypocrite is that of the hesitant lamb between two flocks of sheep. It goes with this flock one time and with the other flock another time” [Reported by Muslim on the authority of Ibn ‘Umar]. In another narration, “It does not know which flock to follow” [Sahīh: Reported by an-Nasā’ī on the authority of Ibn ‘Umar]. This hadīth indicates that the hypocrite wanders in the grayzone between kufr and Īmān. He (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) also said, “Indeed, the majority of my Ummah’s hypocrites are its ______________

11 See pages 62-66 of issue #7 of Dābiq to read about the traits of major hypocrisy that the partisans ignore and the proofs from the Qur ’ān obligating jihād against the hypocrites if they come out with their hypocrisy.

dabiq

49

-----------------------------------------------------Page 49-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
IRJĀ’ – THE MOST DANGEROUS BID’AH

qurrā’” [Hasan: Reported by Imām Ahmad on the authority of ‘Abdullāh Ibn ‘Amr]. Al-Bukhārī (rahimahullāh) said that these hypocritical qurrā’ include, “The qurrā’ of those who negate Allah’s attributes, the Jahmiyyah, the people of deviant desires, as well as others” [Khalq Af ’āl al-‘Ibād]. The term qurrā’ was used in the time of the Sahābah to refer to the scholars of the religion, for the scholars are most famous for memorizing, reciting, and understanding the Qur ’ān, as in the hadīth, “The qurrā’ – whether they were elderly or young men – were the members of ‘Umar ’s shūrā council” [Sahīh al- Bukhārī].

Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) said,

“Indeed, what I fear most for my Ummah is every articulate hypocrite ”

[Sahīh: Reported by Imām Ahmad on the authority of ‘Umar].

These articulate hypocrites are amongst the misleading scholars mentioned in another hadīth. Abū Dharr (radiyallāhu ‘anh) narrated that while he was walking with the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam), the Prophet said three times, “Indeed, there is something I fear for my Ummah more than the Dajjāl.” Abū Dharr asked him, “What is this that you fear for your Ummah more than the Dajjāl?” He responded, “The misleading imāms” [Sahīh: Reported by Imām Ahmad on the authority of Abū Dharr]. The people of bid’ah also have many traits of minor hypocrisy – which is a major sin – in addition to many of them being full-fledged hypocrites and heretics. This is because the root of bid’ah is kufr and it is a gateway to kufr. Shaykhul-Islām Ibn Taymiyyah (rahimahullāh) said, “Bida’ (innovations) are derived from kufr, for there is no innovated opinion except that it entails a branch of the branches of kufr ” [Minhāj as-Sunnah]. Bid’ah is also a stance between

50 FEATURE

pure Islam and blatant kufr… another grayzone of hypocrisy.

Al-Fudayl Ibn ‘Iyād (rahimahullāh) said, “When I see a person from the people of Sunnah, it is as if I see a person from the Sahābah of Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam); and when I see a person from the people of bida’, it is as if I see a person from the hypocrites” [Sharh as- Sunnah – al-Barbahārī]. He also said, “The sign of hypocrisy is that a man walks and sits with a person of bid’ah” [Al-Ibānah al-Kubrā – Ibn Battah]. Abū Qilābah (rahimahullāh – d. 104AH) said, “I did not find any example like that of the people of bid’ah except hypocrisy, for Allah has mentioned hypocrisy as being conflicting words and conflicting deeds” [As-Sunnah – al-Khallāl]. Ibn Taymiyyah (rahimahullāh) also said, “When the people of bida’ possess strength, they are similar to the kuffār in considering it halāl to kill the believers and in making takfīr of them, as the Khawārij, Rāfidah, Mu’tazilah, Jahmiyyah, and their branches do. Some of them fight when they are a strong faction, like the Khawārij and Zaydiyyah. Others strive to kill individuals from their opponents either by using their authority or by deception. When they are weak, they are similar to the hypocrites. They use deception and hypocrisy, like the condition of the hypocrites. That is because innovations are derived from kufr, for when the mushrikīn and Ahlul-Kitāb possess strength, they wage war against the believers, and when they are weak, they act with hypocrisy towards them” [Al-Fatāwā al-Kubrā]. Accordingly, Sallām Ibn Abī Mutī’ (rahimahullāh – d. 173AH) said that the scholar of the Salaf “Ayyūb [as-Sikhtiyānī] would label all the people of innovation as Khawārij; he would say, ‘The Khawārij differ in name but agree on the sword’” [Al-Lālikā’ī].

And the ruling for fighting the people of bid’ah if they take up arms is well known. It is the Sunnah of the fourth righteous Khalīfah ‘Alī Ibn Abī Tālib (radiyallāhu ‘anh) in his fight against

-----------------------------------------------------Page 50-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
the Khawārij. He carried out the Sunnah of Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) upon these claimants of Islam whose hearts were diseased with innovation and hypocrisy.

The founder of the Khawārij (Dhul-Khuwaysirah) said to the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam), “O Muhammad, be just!” ‘Umar Ibnul-Khattab (radiyallāhu ‘anh) then said, “O Rasūlullāh, let me kill this hypocrite.” He answered, “I seek the refuge of Allah to prevent the people from saying that I kill my companions. This person and his companions recite the Qur ’ān and it does not go beyond their throats. They leave the religion like the arrow leaves the bow” [Reported by Muslim on the authority of Jābir Ibn ‘Abdillāh]. Here the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) did not denounce ‘Umar ’s labelling of the man as a hypocrite, rather the Prophet supported ‘Umar ’s claim by describing a trait of hypocrisy: religious deeds that have no reality in the heart – recitation of the Qur ’ān that merely passes through the throat. He then prevented ‘Umar from killing the founder of this deviant sect citing the same reason for not killing the famous hypocrite ‘Abdullāh Ibn Ubay (Ibn Salūl) who said, “If we return to al-Madīnah, the more honored will surely expel therefrom the more humiliated.” When ‘Umar asked permission to kill Ibn Salūl, the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) told him not to “so that the people don’t say that Muhammad kills his companions” [Reported by al-Bukhārī and Muslim on the authority of Jābir Ibn ‘Abdillāh]. The Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) said, “They [the Khawārij] will kill the people of Islam and leave the people of idolatry alone. If I reach their time, I will kill them [until they are eradicated] just as the people of ‘Ād were eradicated” [Reported by al-Bukhārī and Muslim on the authority of Abū Sa’īd al-Khudrī].

The above ahādīth show the similarity between hypocrisy and innovation and their common root. The last narration also shows the Sunnah of Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) towards the Khawārij.

IRJĀ’ – THE MOST DANGEROUS BID’AH

Again, some of the modern day Murji’ah are confused. They think that total abandonment of jihād is an absolute trait of hypocrisy, and because the modern-day hypocrites participate in battles and defend frontlines, they could not be considered hypocrites. They forget that Dhul-Khuwaysirah and ‘Abdullāh Ibn Salūl both participated in fierce battles, that the Khawārij fought battles for the sake of their deviance, and that the Bedouin hypocrites fought battles during the wars of apostasy on the side of Musaylamah and those who resisted zakāh. The hypocrites abandon battles when there is no worldly gain in return, when it does not serve their hypocritical interests, and when the expected hardship is unbearable for them.

Hudhayfah (radiyallāhu ‘anh) heard someone supplicate, “O Allah, eradicate the hypocrites.” Hudhayfah told him, “If they were eradicated, you would not be able to exact revenge on your enemies” [As-Sunnah – al-Khallāl].

This is in accordance with the hadīth of the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam), “Indeed, Allah will aid this religion through people who have no share of the religion” [Hasan: Reported by Imām Ahmad on the authority of Abū Bakrah]. Abū Hurayrah (radiyallāhu ‘anh) said, “We took part in a battle with Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam). He said about a man who claimed Islam, ‘This person is from the people of Hellfire.’ When the fighting started, the man fought fiercely until he was wounded. It was said, ‘O Rasūlullāh, the person you said was from the people of Hellfire fought today fiercely and has died.’ So the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) said, ‘He went to Hellfire.’ Some of the people almost had doubts. While they were in that condition, they were told, ‘He did not die. He had severe wounds and when night came, he could not bear with his wounds, so he killed himself.’ The Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) was informed about this and said, ‘Allāhu akbar! I testify that I am the slave of Allah and His messenger.’ He then ordered Bilāl to announce to the people that, ‘Indeed,

dabiq

51

-----------------------------------------------------Page 51-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
IRJĀ’ – THE MOST DANGEROUS BID’AH

no one enters Jannah except a Muslim soul’ and that ‘Indeed, Allah aids this religion by fājir men.’” [Reported by al-Bukhārī and Muslim]. The fājir is one who commits fujūr, which is one of the traits of the hypocrites, as in the hadith of the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam), “If four traits are found in a person then he is a complete hypocrite, and if he has one of the traits then he has a trait of hypocrisy until he abandons it. If he speaks he lies, if he makes a covenant he betrays it, if he makes a promise he breaks it, and if he argues he fajar (commits fujūr)” [Reported by al- Bukhārī and Muslim on the authority of ‘Abdullāh Ibn ‘Amr]. Ibn Rajab (rahimahullāh) said, “What is meant by fujūr is that he intentionally leaves the truth to the extent that truth becomes falsehood and falsehood becomes truth. This is from the matters that lying leads to, as the Prophet (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) said, ‘Be wary of lies, for lies lead to fujūr and fujūr leads to Hellfire’” [Jāmi’ al-‘Ulūm wal-Hikam]. An-Nawawī said while commenting on the word fajar, “Meaning he inclines away from the truth and speaks falsehood and lies” [Sharh Sahīh Muslim].

The above narrations indicate that hypocrites might take part in jihād and even be crucial to the victory of some battles.

Shaykhul-Islām Ibn Taymiyyah said, “The hypocrites who said, {“We believe in Allah and the Last Day”} [Al-Baqarah: 8] but who are not believers are those who are externally believers. They pray with the people. They perform hajj and participate in offensive battles. The Muslims and the hypocrites marry from each other and inherit from each other ” [Majmū’ al-Fatāwā].

Imām Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdil-Wahhāb said, “The hypocrites at the time of Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam) would perform jihād fī sabīlillāh with their wealth and lives, pray the five daily prayers with Rasūlullāh (sallallāhu ‘alayhi wa sallam), and perform hajj with him” [Ad-Durar as-Saniyyah].

Furthermore, a number of verses of the Qur ’ān

52 FEATURE

were revealed regarding the hypocrites who participated in the battles of Tabūk and Banil- Mustaliq, including: {And if you ask them, they will surely say, “We were only conversing and playing.” Say, “Is it Allah and His verses and His Messenger that you were mocking?” Make no excuse; you have disbelieved after your belief. If We pardon one faction of you – We will punish another faction because they were criminals} [At- Tawbah: 65-66], {They swear by Allah that they did not say [anything] while they had said the word of kufr and committed kufr after their Islam and planned that which they were not to attain. And they were not resentful except [for the fact] that Allah and His Messenger had enriched them of His bounty. So if they repent, it is better for them; but if they turn away, Allah will punish them with a painful punishment in this world and the Hereafter. And there will not be for them on earth any protector or helper} [At-Tawbah: 74], and {Indeed, those who came with falsehood are a group among you…} [An-Nūr: 11]. The last verse and others from Sūrat an-Nūr cover the events in which the hypocrites started their campaign of slander against the Mother of the Believers, ‘Ā’ishah (radiyallāhu ‘anhā). This was during the expedition for the battle of Banil-Mustaliq.

The Irjā’ of the Jihād Claimants

If one examined the battleground of Shām, he would see that the military factions before the Islamic State’s official expansion fell mostly into four categories:

1) Islamic factions with an international agenda. 2) “Islamic” factions with a nationalist agenda. 3) Nationalist factions with an “Islamic” agenda. 4) Secularist factions with a democratic agenda. The first category encompassed all Islamic factions that eagerly received muhājirīn and was not fearful of their presence. The

-----------------------------------------------------Page 52-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
IRJĀ’ – THE MOST DANGEROUS BID’AH

THE MURTADD SPONSORS OF AL-QĀIDAH’S ALLIES

second category encompassed all factions that proposed an “Islamic” agenda but mixed it with elements and different degrees of nationalism. The third category encompassed all factions that proposed a nationalist agenda while using “Islamic” language and culture as inspiration and justification in their propaganda; they claimed to be non-secularist 12 . The difference between the second and third categories is almost superficial except that leaders in the second category factions have a “Salafī” background and their soldiers display more religious “practice.” The fourth category encompassed those factions officially belonging to the Free Syrian Army (FSA) Supreme Military Council based in Turkey. There was no doubt amongst most fighters belonging to the first category that the fourth category was one of apostasy 13 . The problem for those infected by Irjā’ was mainly the second and third categories who all received both private support (but well-known by the other factions) and public support from Arab regimes, the West, Turkey, the Syrian National Coalition (SNC), the FSA, the “Muslim” Brotherhood, the
 Surūriyyah (essentially a “Salafī” version of the “Muslim” Brotherhood), and the Saudi palace scholars. Many leaders of the “Islamic” and nationalist factions themselves also belonged as individuals to the SNC, the FSA, and the “Muslim” Brotherhood, although this membership was in most cases kept unofficial, it was still well known by the other factions. Neither friend nor foe could deny these relationships, the support, and the memberships. Above all this, most of these factions were internally infected by bid’ah (some of which was kufrī) but their bida’ were never their “official” creeds. The “Islamic” factions were infected with Surūriyyah, Jāmiyyah (pro-Saudi “Salafiyyah”), and Irjā’. The nationalist factions were infected with Jahmiyyah (extreme Irjā’ ______________

12 They are referred to as nationalist factions to differentiate them from the openly secularist/democratic factions.

13 Because of the nature of the Syrian people, these apostate factions of secularism were the least effective in deviating the jihād. The apostates based in Turkey – the FSA and the SNC – had to rely more on the second and third categories to gain influence on the events in Shām. They used their relations and aid for this purpose. The apostate factions of secularism – the Military Councils of the FSA and their different battalions – were mostly eclipsed by the hypocritical factions claiming a more “Islamic” agenda and culture. Note: The hypocritical factions are referred to as such for historical reasons. They later moved from the grayzone of hypocrisy to the darkness of apostasy both in words and deeds after they got the “freedom” to come out with their kufr through their Sahwah.

dabiq

53

-----------------------------------------------------Page 53-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
IRJĀ’ – THE MOST DANGEROUS BID’AH

AHMAD JARBĀ - THE MURTADD FORMER HEAD OF THE SNC

and negation of Allah’s attributes), Ikhwāniyyah (the “Muslim” Brotherhood methodology), Sufism, and Qubūriyyah (grave-worship).

Then comes the hypocrisy… The nationalist and “Islamic” factions would say they were independent of the SNC and the FSA based in Turkey, but would receive support from the SNC and the FSA leadership, representatives from the SNC and the FSA based in Turkey would visit the headquarters of these factions in Shām, and the leaders of these factions would visit the hotels of the SNC and FSA in Turkey. The leaders of these factions would also regularly be received as guests by Arab diplomats in Qatar and Saudi Arabia. Again, all the factions – including the Jawlānī front –

THE NATIONALIST FSA

54 FEATURE

knew that the “Islamic” factions had intricate relationships with Arab regime apostates including diplomats, intelligence, media, and “scholarship,” as a lot of it was public. All these deviant factions would regularly claim they received only “unconditional” support from their backers. The “Islamic” and nationalist factions would also declare each other brothers and claim to differ with the SNC and FSA for political or military reasons. The leaders of these “Islamic” and nationalist factions would also make deviant statements with implicit, or worse yet, sometimes explicit kufr. When confronted, they would retract their words, distort them towards a more “favorable” meaning, or sometimes defend their falsehood with “shar ’ī” arguments.

These different factions – although possessing power – never implemented Allah’s Sharī’ah in their “liberated” territory. Rather, they would set up “shar ’ī” and “mutual” committees and courts that were “planning ” – for more than two years – to implement the Sharī’ah but would not execute the hudūd, enforce the good, and ban the evil either because the committee claimed it was not the right time to do so or because the court ruled over only certain domains of life (so that it would not clash with the emotions of the masses and not contradict the interests of the other factions). These committees and courts consisted of different judges from the various deviant backgrounds mentioned before: the Surūriyyah, Jāmiyyah, Murji’ah, Jahmiyyah, Ikhwān, Sūfiyyah, Qubūriyyah, and even secularist lawyers, and worse yet, secularist judges who only recently abandoned the Baathist regime but never repented from apostasy! All of these – in addition to the jihād claimants’ “scholarship” – were tasked with implementing the Sharī’ah together… The nationalist factions also had within their ranks large numbers of soldiers who neither

-----------------------------------------------------Page 54-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
observed the five daily prayers nor the Ramadān fast and operated like gangs tormenting the Muslim population with regards to its lives, wealth, and families.

Then the Sahwah was launched and these hypocrites and deviant innovators took up arms against the muhājirīn and ansār of the Islamic State. They did so alongside and in cooperation with the military councils of the FSA, the Syria Revolutionaries Front of Jamāl Ma’rūf, the Marxists of the PKK, and the media and “scholarship” of the Arab tawāghīt. They even publically thanked the Arab tawāghīt for their aid.

THE MURTADD JAMĀL MA’RŪF

So what did the Murji’ jihād claimants of Shām do? They claimed that the hypocritical factions (who had come out with their hypocrisy and committed apostasy) had to be treated exactly like the most senior and virtuous muhājir mujāhidīn. Essentially, they invented a new Irjā’ī claim, “The Īmān of ‘Abdullāh Ibn Ubay (Ibn Salūl) and that of Abū Bakr as-Siddīq are equal,” and accordingly, had Ibn Salūl lived to the khilāfah of as-Siddīq and taken up arms against the Muhājirīn and Ansār during the wars of apostasy, then as-Siddīq

IRJĀ’ – THE MOST DANGEROUS BID’AH

would have had to set up an independent or mutual court to judge between him and Ibn Salūl so as to determine whether Ibn Salūl committed apostasy or not despite all the clear-cut traits of major hypocrisy Ibn Salūl had manifested throughout his life before his rebellion. Worse yet, the independent or mutual court would have to include judges from other hypocrites – who without doubt held Ibn Salūl in esteem – under the condition they did not belong to Ibn Salūl’s same tribe. This “independent” court would also have to determine if as-Siddīq had committed any injustices against Ibn Salūl!

In addition, every statement and action of kufr the hypocritical factions made after the Sahwah – and in many cases before it – would be reinterpreted to a favorable meaning so as to justify the jihād claimants’ alliance with the apostate Sahwah against the Islamic State. If they said, “We fight for democracy, a civil state, and want American support against the Islamic State. We are against terrorism” They say, “Maybe they think that democracy is shūrā and that a civil state is the opposite of a police state. And maybe they want unconditional support against the Khawārij whom some of the scholars made takfīr of. And maybe by terrorism they mean terrorism against Muslims. In the end, they are all excused due to their ignorance and it is obligatory to treat them as full-fledged Muslim mujāhidīn until the independent/mutual court is set up, and whoever makes takfīr of them or implies such, are Khawārij!” In the end, the excuse of ignorance was the shield the jihād claimants would use to defend the hypocritical factions whose apostasy had become apparent and – in many cases – to defend the blatantly secularist factions, all against the Islamic State! 14

If someone pointed out that these factions did not rule by the Sharī’ah despite their control of “liberated” territory and fought against the state that had implemented the Sharī’ah, the ______________

14 If ignorance is such an encompassing excuse for the contemporary Murji’ah, what will prevent some of them from excusing the Dajjāl due to ignorance when he claims prophethood and lordship only to fight alongside him against those who make takfīr of him?

dabiq

55

-----------------------------------------------------Page 55-----------------------------------------------------
﻿
IRJĀ’ – THE MOST DANGEROUS BID’AH

jihād claimants would say that Shām was dārul-harb 15 and that hudūd should not be implemented therein! Others would say that defensive jihād against those who violate Muslim lives and families is given precedence over implementation of tawhīd (the Sharī’ah), somehow implying that the two obligations conflicted with each other!

If one were to point out that some of these factions have entire units of soldiers who neither pray the five daily prayers nor fast Ramadān and who only kill Muslims and steal their wealth, they would respond that after fifty years of life under the rule of the Baathists one had to excuse these factions for their “mistakes” and rely upon them in fighting the common enemy, the Islamic State!

So these jihād claimants exaggerated the concept of excuse due to ignorance to encompass the basis of the religion (the basics of the shahādatayn), its well-known fundamentals (the famous convictions, obligations, and prohibitions), and realities obvious to most laymen now (such as the meaning of democracy, the mechanics of the democratic system, and the secularism of the SNC and the FSA). They also downplayed the danger of abandoning the pillars of Islam and the implementation of the Sharī’ah in general. They also denied the phenomenon of hypocrisy in practical rulings. This deviant Irjā’ then became the driving force

56 FEATURE

{They want to extinguish the light of Allah with their mouths, but Allah refuses except to perfect His light, even if the disbelievers despise such}

[At-Tawbah: 32].

for the jihād claimants of Shām (the Jawlā n ī front) to assist the Sahwah of apostasy in the war against the Islamic State! The ruling of this is well known; Imām Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdil- Wahhāb (rahimahullāh) said that from the nullifiers of Islam was “backing and aiding the mushrikīn against the Muslims. The proof is the statement of Allah (ta’ālā), {And whoever is an ally to them among you – then indeed, he is one of them. Indeed, Allah guides not the wrongdoing people} [Al-Mā’idah: 51]” [Nawāqid al-Islām]. And so the jihād claimants made their religion flimsier than the frailest of garments until it left them stripped of the religion and exposed like their Sahwah counterparts.

Sadly, Western and Arab intelligence were able to take advantage of this Irjā’ in Shām by sitting back and watching as the jihād claimants fought against the Islamic State and defended the Sahwah. They hope to repeat the experience in other lands of jihād but forget that Allah (ta’ālā) said, {They want to extinguish the light of Allah with their mouths, but Allah refuses except to perfect His light, even if the disbelievers despise such} [At-Tawbah: 32]. ______________

15 Ibn Qudāmah (rahimahullāh) said, “The hudūd are to be implemented in the thughūr (frontier outposts). There is no difference we know of regarding this. This is because the thughūr are from the lands of Islam and there is a need to deter its people from committing sins just as there is a need to deter others. ‘Umar wrote to Abū ‘Ubaydah ordering him to flog eighty times whoever drinks alcohol. This was while Abū ‘Ubaydah was in Shām and it was from the thughūr ” [Al-Mughnī]. If the Muslims’ thughūr are from dārul-Islām, how much more so are the territories defended by the thughūr? These Murji’ah distorted the meaning of dārul-harb to mean a land experiencing war when the term only refers to a land being ruled by kuffār having no truce with the Muslims even if the land is not experiencing war!