 December 11, 2011 
Hope not Hype 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 Greeting, Centering, Kindling, Opening:   
 
We are here 

at the sunny beginning of a week
, 
to worship, to question easy answers 

at the same time 

as we answer the tougher questions 

about life, love and truthfulness 

with our lives.  

 And so, without guarantees, we lean into joy, and b
end toward a just way of life, both for 
our own sakes, and for the sake of our children and
 all beings with whom we share the 
earth. We would engage our mission wholeheartedly, 
with courage, self-questioning, 
compassion, vulnerability and honesty. 

 
Sequence
 That our eyes open onto the world when we are born.
 That we grow and struggle and laugh and weep. 

That we learn and unlearn. 

That we suffer ourselves, and hurt others. 

That we succeed beyond our wild dreams, 

and bungle unconsciously as well. 

That we can heal most of the time. 

That we can live with uncertainty about many things
,  
even as we sometimes lunge clumsily toward certaint
y. 
That we can love, and that hearts can break,  

and that broken-heartedness can be transcended. 

That we can let go. That we can bless. 

That we can be grateful and upset on the very same 
day. 
That we must each day struggle with what we can con
trol and what we cannot control. 
That we can be completely shocked and yet understan
ding in the same week of our lives. 
That we think about the mystery that everything is,
 and that life and death are a package deal, 
and that we never signed on the dotted line for the
 deal but here we are. 
That we will one day close our eyes and not open th
em onto anything we now know. 
That we have done this all of our lives, as each da
y delivers its cargo of surprises and change. 
That finally, we can struggle to name the Nameless,
 and still live loving lives though every name 
we speak eventually fades into silence. Let us open
 our hearts and palms and receive the gift of 
this moment. 

 
Silence 

 That we are not alone even when we feel alone.
 That a great cloud of witnesses surrounds us, 

to whom we are related by love and/or blood. 

That we can remember them when they are gone, and i
magine them when they are not here, 
and depend upon them and love them even when they a
re far away.  
Even when they are close. 

That we can name them, in our hearts, or whispered 
aloud in our shared community of love and 
life. That we can do that now–. 

 
Naming 

That music celebrates both heart and holidays, 

and befriends us to ourselves and the world. 

 
Music/Anthem
  
The First Reading 
comes from therapist David Richo™s excellent book T
he Five Things We 
Cannot Change, published in 2005.  

 
There are five unavoidable givens: 
1.
 Everything changes and ends. 
2.
 Things do not always go according to plan. 
3.
 Life is not always fair. 
4.
 Pain is part of life. 
5.
 People are not loving and loyal all the time. 
 
In the face of life™s givens, we might take refuge 
in rituals of safety we devise to protect 
ourselves from what we believe is a scary, unpredic
table or even punitive world. This is 
magical thinking, using our wishes or fears to expl
ain what is happening or can happen. 
Here are some examples:  
 
1. We get what we deserve. 

2. If it had not been for this one thing happening,
 everything would be perfect now. 
3. If I don™t remain in control, everything will fa
ll apart. 
4. Happiness will not last if I enjoy it too much. 
Full-on exuberance is dangerous. 
5. I have to grasp this opportunity right now or lo
se it. There is no time for a mindful pause. 
6. Prosperity will be followed by catastrophe. 

7. There is a by-and-by time to come in history in 
which there will be no violence or evil, and the 
human shadow will disappear. 

8. If people knew me the way I really am, they woul
d not love me or want me. 
9. Dangerous forces will erupt if I do not adhere t
o very precise rules. 
10. If I bring an issue out into the open, it will 
become even more dangerous. If I never mention 
it, it will go away. 

11. The spiritual does not exist since it cannot be
 confirmed or controlled. 
12. I am always indebted. I always owe something to
 God, or have to keep paying for something 
I have done that remains unfixably wrong.
  
 The Second Reading
 is a poem by Naomi Shihab Nye, a well-respected po
et out of San Antonio, 
Texas 

                                                   
                                                   
                                     
Enthusiasm in Two Parts 

Maybe a wasp will sting my throat again  

so the high bouillon surge of joy 

sweetens the day.  

Shall I blink or wave?  

Simply stand below the vine? 

Since the singer first pierced my throat  

and a long-held note of gloom suddenly lifted, I™ve
 considered poisons  
with surprise applications. Happy venom.  Staring d
ifferently  
at bees, spiders, centipedes, snakes. 

* 

We™re more elastic than we thought. 

Morning™s pouf of goodwill  

shrinks to afternoon™s tight nod.  

We deliver cake  

to aged ladies who live alone,  

just to keep some hope afloat. 

Those who are known, rightly or wrongly,  

as optimists, have a heavier boat than most.   

If we pause, or simply look away,  

they say, 
What™s wrong?
  
They don™t let us throw anything overboard  

even for a minute. 

But that™s the only way we get it back.
  
Sermon 

 
Just after college, I found good work as a child-ca
re worker for children with a variety of serious 
mental conditions. They lived together in a residen
tial treatment center. It was work I really 
enjoyed. One day, as I was driving down the now fam
ous Eight Mile Road in Detroit, heading to 
my afternoon shift on a hot summer day, two yellow 
jackets flew into my open window while I 
was stopped for a light. They hummed around my head
, then landed on my neck and for no 
particular reason that I could discern, stung me, j
ust like that. Then they flew out the window. I 
was startled, but didn™t feel dizzy or anything, so
, when the light changed, I preceded to work. 
 
By the time I got there, my neck was swollen as if 
I had a goiter, and the head nurse, visibly 
horrified, gave me some medicine to reduce the swel
ling, and sent me home. At first I was just 
plain annoyed that the whole thing happened. My nec
k hurt, and my head was dizzy. And then I 
realized that I had driven down Eight Mile a thousa
nd times, and that this had only happened 

 once in my whole life. I realized that random suffe
ring strikes most everyone™s life, the powerful 
and the disenfranchised both. And I was suddenly gl
ad to be alive, glad that suffering was 
random and for me, unhitched from any theology impl
ying a vengeful God, or a flippant Devil, 
was behind it all. The suffering suddenly opened up
 onto hope and gratitude, and for some 
reason, those two things have been linked in my hea
rt ever since. The suffering was real, but so 
was my hope and gratitude. 

 
I™m not the only one to feel such a linkage. Naomi 
Shihab Nye reveals a similar story in the first 
part of her poem. In her case, it™s a wasp that sti
ngs her throat–and yet she says ?a long-held 
note of gloom suddenly lifted? with that sting. She
 even wonders whimsically if she should stand 
below the vine where the wasps hover and wave at th
em, inviting further stings, a strange 
thought for sure, but clearly meaningful to her. Pe
rhaps her bewildering and heart-changing 
experience was a lot like mine–she linked random su
ffering to gratitude and hope...it would 
seem so, at least, from her poem. 

 
I experienced my mother™s death, as I wrote in my n
ewsletter column, through the same lens.  I 
wept mightily, I was torn asunder by the immensity 
of the loss, felt desolation–
 and, at the exact 
same time, I experienced the joy of thanksgiving th
at she was my mother and I her son, and that I 
had gotten to know her so much more deeply and joyf
ully in the last two years. I saw her life as 
part and parcel of my whole life of love and hope w
hich links all the living and the dead in my 
heart–my son Tony who lives down the street from me
, my friend Stefan Mistler gone now 15 
years, my friends Kim and Jane and Chuck with whom 
I dined in Boston last week, and my late 
friends Devere and Jeff who died in the last two ye
ars at very young ages, 25 and 39 
respectively. All of a piece. All part of the world
 of my life forever.  All part of the love, the 
giving away of my affection and care and praise and
 thanks, that fills the sails of my hope.  
 
In the second part of her poem, Nye speaks of that 
hope, putting it this way: 
We deliver cake to 
aged ladies who live alone, just to keep some hope 
afloat.
 She is affirming that we can simply 
and realistically be there for others. Bring a cake
. Then she adds, speaking of herself: 
Those who 
are known, rightly or wrongly, as optimists, have a
 heavier boat than most.  If we pause, or 
simply look away, they say, What™s wrong? They don™
t let us throw anything overboard even for 
a minute. 

But that™s the only way we get it back.
  
In other words, a hopeful optimist like Nye is not 
foolish. Her optimism isn™t flighty or some 
Pollyanna creed. Her feet are on the ground. She™s 
perfectly aware that suffering exists in the 
world, some of it random and relatively small, like
 a wasp sting; some of it terrible, inflicted by 
people who are convinced that their right to do wha
t they do is blessed by their religion, 
corporation, nation or family. Nye is not afraid to
 throw her sense of bright hope overboard for a 
while, and to grieve deeply, knowing, as she puts i
t, that it™s the only way she™ll get her sense of 
hope back in full. 

Hope is not wishful thinking, you see, any more tha
n forgiveness is telling the person who has 
deeply injured you: ?Oh, that™s OK!?  The greater t
he concept, unfortunately, the more the 
distortion and debasing of it in pop culture. No, h
ope is a suspicion, Brazilian theologian and 
therapist Rubem Alves insists. Not a sunny word, I'
d say. It™s a refusal to let the creative act 

 dissolve in immediate experience. It™s planting an 
apple tree with the deep conviction that your 
children will eat off that tree, even though you ma
y not.  
And, he adds, profoundly: ?hope and suffering live 
from each other.? Too much suffering 
without hope, he says, and you court despair and re
sentment. Too much hope, without being 
impacted by the real suffering in the world leaves 
you with illusions and a powerless naiveté. 
My favorite spiritual writer David Richo affirms th
e same thing, that suffering–pain is his 
word–
is part and parcel of life. Loss is inevitable, too
, he says.  Our best laid plans sometimes 
come to nothing. Life is clearly not always fair. A
nd people can be trusted most of the time, but 
sometimes not at all. Add to these realities the pr
esence of deranged people firing guns on 
campuses, the present finagling of finances all aro
und the world threatening to capsize the whole 
ship, unpredictable earthquake fault-lines running 
invisibly under our shining cities, and windy 
weather catastrophes of all kinds, and some would s
ay a case can be made for pessimism. 
 
I don™t agree. Human life has been living with thes
e realities for ten thousand years, and as far as 
I am concerned, a confident pessimism seems a lot m
ore like what David Richo calls Magical 
Thinking than a healthy response to suffering. It™s
 a way of saying ?If you don™t expect anything 
good to happen, then you won™t be disappointed when
 it doesn™t happen.?  
 
Naomi Shihab Nye™s optimism is something that opens
 and closes on the hinge of real life.  
Pessimism, like all forms of magical thinking, tend
s to nail the door shut once and for all. 
 
Magical thinking seems to have a lot to do with con
trol. Why don™t we have control over the 
suffering or pain that befalls us? What kind of a c
osmos is this, that terrible things can happen 
randomly so much? Shouldn™t we be able to stop all 
pain, all suffering once and for all forever? 
 
No, I don™t think that™s possible. Oh, I still live
 in hope, that is, keep myself open to positive 
change in many areas and in my lifetime, but I am n
ot at all waiting for the Perfect Society to 
descend from the clouds, magically undoing all the 
systems we™ve put in place to keep everyone 
arbitrarily in their place, all to the end that tho
se who claim control for themselves can keep it. 
The society of justice and love which Jesus called 
the Reign of God, or some Japanese Buddhists 
call the Pure Land, or some Socialists the ?classle
ss society,? is not so much a detailed portrait of 
something achievable in final perfection, as it is 
a path that moves us with integrity and honesty 
toward greater wholeness of life. But I say utopia 
can not ever be perfectly realized, since we™ll 
never be able to agree as to what final perfection 
would look like in the first place. After all, loss
, 
disappointment are inevitable, and nothing can chan
ge that, even the arrival of a longed-for 
dream, the Reign of God, or Utopia. 

 
Yet I do understand why people want relief from pai
n. I want it when I suffer, be it broken foot, 
a cold, depression, economic losses, or the death o
f a loved one. But it™s sad to me that so many 
of us seek relief in magical thinking, myself inclu
ded, a surprising amount of time. Magical 
thinking has been going on for ten thousand years t
oo. The modern slang for the therapeutic term 
?magical thinking? is hype. Hype is the reduction o
f hope to instant and magical satisfaction. I 
hope, but what I hope for has to be here in front o
f me right now. Ever hear the television 
commercial where people are shouting ?It™s my money
, and I want it now!?? That is the very 
definition of hype in dramatic form. Our email acco
unts are filled with newfangled hype: instant 

 love and devotion from Russian brides or Polish par
amours; instant fortunes from African 
widows who want to use our bank accounts to store t
heir cash; instant turnarounds for our 
lagging love-making with the help of pills or herbs
; instant facial perfection due to painless 
plastic surgery, or some ab machine that will give 
you a ten pack in ten days. All hype. Free 
giveaways on television, free ocean liner trips to 
the Bahamas on my voicemail. Make sure your 
car is protected with our policy now–time is runnin
g out. You™ll be left out in the cold if you 
don™t apply now. You™re already approved, so why ar
e you waiting? You know you want this. 
You know you cannot live without it. All your pain 
will end if you buy what we™re offering. 
 
Hype, hype, hype. 

 
Nothing hopeful about it. Hope is a form of suspici
on after all, and hype tells us to put our 
suspicion down. It may be on our electronic media t
hese days, but it™s still all a form of bottled 
snake oil of the American frontier. 

 
Yet snake oil predates America. Instant cures in a 
bottle. Ancient Romans and Egyptians and 
Greeks sold talisman and herbal potions that could 
cure anything. In the Middle Ages, charlatans 
stole the consecrated communion wafer, and placed i
t in a poultice to heal a variety of afflictions. 
And in our own Central Ohio area, Samuel Hartman of
 Columbus OH made a fortune selling 
actual bottled snake oil. He still has a loft-build
ing downtown named after him. Hartman was a 
physician from Pennsylvania who decided regular med
ical practice wasn™t good enough unless it 
provided a universal cure-all for everything. He de
cided that all health problems, from cancer to 
appendicitis, were due to a substance called catarr
h, or mucus, and that a universal solution was 
available to all for a small price: Paruna. A bottl
e of Paruna, made here in Columbus and sold 
nationwide, was largely pure 151 alcohol colored wi
th burnt sugar, or caramel coloring as we 
would say today, and flavored with cubebs, which is
 a kind of peppercorn that tastes vaguely like 
cloves. A few jolts of Paruna, and even if you were
 in pain, you felt it no more–for a while. 
 
Total hype that made its producer a great fortune. 
And that, after all, is what it™s all about; 
making a fortune by getting people to believe that 
their pain is a mistake, not a given. That their 
loneliness can be ended by Russian mail-order bride
s, or their sickness ended by a sip of bottled 
potion made from alcohol, or the embarrassment of t
heir "middle-classness" fixed by a "free" 
exotic three day and two night trip to Orlando, pro
mised them on the phone by someone entirely 
too cheerful and peppy. 

 
But none of the snake oil, ancient or modern, is tr
ue. A grounded and good theology which 
teaches us to be grateful for the world as it actua
lly works, suffering and hope woven together 
tight, can help us not to fall for sparkling promis
es made by those whose theology is hurtful, 
promising us that pain and suffering can be eradica
ted forever. For a cost. No, pain and suffering 
are part and parcel of life. They are not mistakes.
 They are woven tight with everything else in 
life, including joy, gratitude and happiness–and th
e open heart of hope. 
 
No scalpel exists sharp enough to separate joy from
 pain forever. The bees that stung me hurt, 
but my thanksgiving for life itself, a joyful thank
sgiving mixed with buoyant hope, is inseparable 
from those stings. My mother™s death brought me tea
rs and left me desolate and grieving for 
years, but also brought me thanksgiving, and a joyf
ul reminder that the love I felt for her still is 

 alive in me, and completely blended with all the te
nder love I nurture for family, friends, 
members of the congregation, and even a stranger or
 two I meet on a plane and never see again, 
or even, for that matter, myself. 

 
Offering
  
Prayer Looking East: A Circle Prayer 

 
People, look South: it™s almost summer in Adelaide 
Australia and Christchurch New Zealand and 
Puerto Montt Chile, and the flowers are shooting up
 so fast you can almost see them.  One world. 
We are part of that summery field of flowers too. 

 
People, look West: the snow is falling in the Rocki
es, and the winds are blowing in California, 
and the currents are cooling in the Pacific by the 
action of El Niña. One world. We are part of 
those wind, snows and cooler currents too. 

 
People look North. The cooler air of early winter i
s approaching, the north star is invisible, 
hidden under the slate gray clouds, the great citie
s of Canada are hunkering down, with glowing 
warmth shining from café windows. One world.  We ar
e part of the winter, the invisible stars, the 
warmth in cafes too. 

 
People, look East. Tears and fear at Virginia Tech;
 holiday bustling in New York, Paris and 
Berlin; Three women, two from Africa and one from Y
emen, opening their Nobel Peace Prize 
and championing the voices of women. Carols of Adve
nt and songs of Hanukkah getting ready 
to roll out through the candlelit night perfumed of
 winter roses. One world. We are part of the 
tears, the bustling, the championing of each voice,
 the carols and songs, the scent of rose too. 
 
#226 People Look East 
 
 
 
    

  
