BE AN ENCOURAGERHeb. 10:25 ?Let us not give us meeting together, as some are in the habit of doing, but let us encourage one another and all the more as you see the Day approaching.?INTRO.- ILL.- Chuck Swindoll in his book Growing Deep in the Christian Life tells about a man getting ready to make an around-the-world voyage in his homemade boat.  Without exception everyone on the pier was vocally pessimistic.  Everyone was telling him everything that could possibly go wrong.  ?The sun will broil you.?  ?You won?t have enough food.?  ?That boat of yours won?t withstand any storms.?  ?You?ll never make it.?A man standing nearby heard all these discouraging words and decided instead to offer some words of encouragement.  As the little boat began pulling away from shore, he went to the end of the pier and began waving both his arms wildly and shouted, ?BON VOYAGE!  YOU?RE REALLY SOMETHING!  WE?RE WITH YOU!  WE?RE PROUD OF YOU!  GOOD LUCK, BROTHER!?Brethren, this story is so similar to our lives.  In a sense, all of us are in a little boat.  We are on a long journey, not knowing if we are going to make it or not.  And as we push out to sea, there are very few people who stand there giving us encouragement.  Most are only critical or negative.That?s a pretty sad commentary on life, but often, it?s very true for most of us.  THERE ARE MANY DISCOURAGERS IN LIFE BUT FEW ENCOURAGERS!Many people are better at discouraging others than encouraging them.ILL.- Many people are quick to say things like:?That will never work.??We?ve never done it that way before.??I can?t see anything good in that.??Why did they do that???Well, that was really dumb.??Why doesn?t somebody do something to change things???I wish he?d stop doing that.?And so on.Nothing but criticism and negative thinking.ILL.- One three-year study found that most school teachers were 75% negative and critical in dealing with their students.  The study also indicated that it takes four positive comments to offset the effect of one negative or critical comment.Now, brethren, there is also the other side of the coin.ILL.- On May 24, 1965, a 13 1/2 foot boat slipped quietly out of the marina at Falmouth, MASS.  Its destination was England.  It would be the smallest boat ever to make the trip.  Its name was TINKERBELLE.  And its pilot was Robert Manry.  He had been a copyeditor for the CLEVELAND PLAIN DEALER for ten years and was bored, so he took a leave of absence to fulfill his secret dream.Robert Manry was afraid, though not of the ocean.  He was afraid of all those people who would try to talk him out of the trip.  So he didn?t tell many people, just a few relatives and his wife, Virginia who was his greatest supporter and encourager.The trip was anything but pleasant.  He spent many sleepless nights trying to cross the shipping lanes without getting run down and sunk.  Weeks at sea caused his food to become tasteless.  Loneliness caused him to have hallucinations.  His rudder broke three times.  Storms swept him overboard, and had it not been for the rope he had tied around his waist, he would never have made it back on board.  Finally, after 78 days alone at sea, he sailed into Falmouth, England.During his many nights, he fantasized about what he would do once he arrived in England.  He expected simply to check into a hotel, eat dinner alone, then the next morning see if the Associated Press might be interested in his story.  But word of his approach had spread far and wide.  To his amazement, three hundred vessels, with horns blasting, escorted TINKERBELLE into port.  And 40,000 people stood screaming and cheering him to shore.Robert Manry became an overnight hero.  And his story has been told around the world.  BUT ROBERT MANRY COULDN?T HAVE DONE IT ALONE!  Standing on the dock was an even greater hero, his wife Virginia.  She had refused to be critical and negative about her husband?s trip.  She gave him constant encouragement which enabled him to pursue and complete his dream!And, brethren, the world needs a whole lot more people just like Virginia Manry!  Amen?!  Both men and women alike who will give others the needed encouragement for life and it?s obstacles!Barny the preacher was just such a person.  DID YOU EVER READ ABOUT BARNY THE PREACHER IN THE BIBLE?Acts 4:36 LB ?There was Joseph (the one the apostles nicknamed ?Barny the preacher.??NIV reads ?Joseph, a Levite from Cyprus, whom the apostles called Barnabas (which means Son of Encouragement.?Barny the preacher was actually Barnabas, the one who encouraged others.  He was apparently a great guy...an optimistic man...a positive person....an enthusiastic encourager of others!Barnabas had a very important ministry even though he wasn?t an apostle.  His name is mentioned at least 25 times in the book of Acts and 5 times in the epistles.  Not everyone can be bold like Peter, Paul or John were.  But everyone can become a Barnabas!  And we certainly need more encouragers like Barnabas!PROP.- I want to consider several passages from the book of Acts to see how Barnabas encouraged others and hopefully, we can learn from him.  Barnabas encouraged others in certain ways.1- Encouragement in finances2- Encouragement in fellowship3- Encouragement in failureI. ENCOURAGEMENT IN FINANCESActs 4:37 says that Barnabas ?sold a field he owned and brought the money and put it at the apostles? feet.?Why did he do that?  Because he had a generous heart!  He wanted to share with others, with those in need.  And giving money to those in need is real source of encouragement!ILL.- A mother wanted to teach her little girl a lesson about giving.  She gave her a quarter and a dollar for church.  She said, ?Put one in the collection plate and keep the other for yourself.?  As they were leaving the church, her mother asked her what she had put in the offering plate.  ?Well,? the little girl said, ?I was going to give the dollar but just before the collection was taken the man saidthat we should be cheerful givers.  I figured I?d be a lot more cheerful if I gave the quarter and kept the dollar, so I did.?Brethren, I think that?s exactly the way a lot of people think and do, but that?s not what the Scripture says nor is it the way giving works.Jesus said, ?It is more blessed to give than to receive.? Acts 20:35  The greater blessing belongs to the person who gives from a heart of compassion.Rom. 12:13 ?Share with God?s people who are in need.?Heb. 13:16 ?Do not forget to do good and to share with others, for with such sacrifices God is pleased.?Prov. 11:24-25 ?One man gives freely, yet gains even more; another withholds unduly, but comes to poverty.  A generous man will prosper; he who refreshes others will himself be refreshed.?When we share with those in need God will never let us down!  He will also take care of us and bless us.ILL.- When Santa Clara, CA, financial analyst Chris Gross heard about the Oklahoma City bombing which took place in April, 1995, he couldn?t get that shocking incident out of his mind.  He didn?t? know any of the victims and he?d never been to Oklahoma City, but he felt he just had to do something.So, in a move that stretched his lifestyle to the limits, the 26-year-old man pledged every cent of his salary that year - $53,874.08 - to launch a scholarship fund for the children of those who died there.  He said, ?Donating my salary was a sacrifice, but I thought it was a statement and might encourage others to follow.?  DID YOU HEAR THAT?  ?It might encourage others to follow.?  Chris Gross then challenged his employer, Santa Clara?s Applied Materials Inc., to match his donation, and they did.  His goal at that time was to raise $1 million dollars.Brethren, the interesting thing is that Chris Gross isn?t a rich man.  He had at that time a 9-year-old car and had saved a few thousand dollars for a down payment on a house.  Gross said, ?These children may never know me, but they will know that someone out there really cares.?I don?t know if Chris Gross is a Christian man or not, BUT HE DID WHAT A CHRISTIAN SHOULD DO!  The only difference might be is that most Christians would probably give their money to help others through the church or through some mission?s organization.Brethren, giving money in any form to someone in need is a tremendous source of encouragement to them!HAVE YOU EVER GIVEN MONEY TO SOMEONE IN NEED?  To some college student or some single person who was having a tough time paying bills and buying food?....to a young couple with children having difficulty making ends meet?....to anyone with a special need?ILL.- Many years ago I rolled my Plymouth Horizon.  I was preaching at that time at the First Christian Church of Iberia, MO, was married with two small children.  The car was a mess and had to repaired before it could be driven.  One of the elders in the church loaned me an older model Oldsmobile to drive until I could get mine fixed or get another vehicle.The next Sunday after church was over and nearly everyone was gone that same elder pulled out his billfold and handed me a $50 bill and said, ?Here!  You?re going to need this.?What an encouragement he was!  And his encouragement was not just in the form of money, BUT THE MONEY CERTAINLY HELPED!Brethren, there are times when we all have the ability to give something to someone in need and when the opportunity arises we should give it!  Giving to people in need can be a tremendous source of encouragement and it is doing what Jesus wants us to do.II. ENCOURAGEMENT IN FELLOWSHIPBarnabas was also an encourager in Christian fellowship.  After Saul was converted to Christ, the Scripture says in Acts 9:26 ?When he (Saul) came to Jerusalem, he tried to join the disciples, but they were all afraid of him, not believing that he was really a disciple.?Those Christian people were afraid of Paul.  They had heard of his persecution of Christians, his murderous ways.  They did not believe the stories about his conversion.Acts 9:27 ?But Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles.  He told them how Saul on his journey had seen the Lord and that the Lord had spoken to him, and how in Damascus he had preached fearlessly in the name of Jesus.?BARNABAS BELIEVED SAUL AND BELIEVED IN HIM.  He believed that he had truly given his life to Christ.  And it?s always nice when someone believes you and believes in you.  Barnabas gave Saul the kind of Christian fellowship that he needed.Rom. 12:10 ?Be devoted to one another in brotherly love.?Is there some Christian brother or sister out there who needs your support, your encouragement and your fellowship?  I?m sure there is and you need to give it!ILL.- A Public Broadcasting special on TV showed one time Dr. Daniel Boorstin, the Librarian of Congress, with a box labeled, ?contents of President Lincoln?s pockets on the night of April 14, 1865.?  And that was the night that Lincoln was assassinated.There were five things in that box:- a handkerchief, embroidered ?A. Lincoln.?- a country boy?s penknife.- a glasses case- a purse containing $5- some old newspaper clippings.The librarian said, ?the clippings were about the great deeds of Lincoln.  And one of them actually reported a speech by John Bright which said that Abraham Lincoln was ?one of the greatest men of all time.??Today, we know this is true; that Lincoln was one of the greatest men of all time, but back then, in 1865, millions of people had a different view of Lincoln.  His critics were fierce and many.  Often, Abraham Lincoln was a lonely man.Sometimes that?s the price of being a leader.  Misunderstood.  Left alone.  Criticized.  Joked about. Of course, these things happen to other people as well.  A person doesn?t have to be in a high position in order to be misunderstood and lonely.Brethren, do you know of someone out there who is lonely?  Or all alone?  Some widow or widower who is all alone?  Someone who just lost a loved one in death?  Or is there someone you know who is misunderstood by others?  Or perhaps someone who is downcast over losing a job?  Or losing money?  Or losing a friend?Why not be a Barnabas to them and give them your friendship, your fellowship, your support, your prayers, and your encouragement?And there is something else that Barnabas did for Paul that not many people like to do.In Acts 11:25-26, 12:25 the Scripture reads ?Barnabas and Saul? and then suddenly in Acts 13:42 it reads ?Saul and Barnabas.?  What took place?  What happened?  There is a good possibility that Barnabas the encourager gave Paul the priority in their ministry, because suddenly Paul got ?top billing.?Without any hint of jealousy, he allowed Paul to take the leadership and set the pace for their missionary journey.  That could be called ?encouragement in followship.?Many people don?t like the idea of following somebody else.  They want to be up front and lead the show, but Barnabas was willing to let Paul lead.Is there someone you know who needs your backing?  Your followship?  Then, like Barnabas, you need to give it.  And it will encourage him or her on to greater service in the Lord.  And you?ll be blessed for it too.Not everybody can be a leader, but everybody can be a good follower!  And a good encourager!1- Encouragement in finances2- Encouragement in fellowship and followshipIII. ENCOURAGEMENT IN FAILUREOr we could say, encouragement in spite of failure.   Acts 15:36-39 Paul and Barnabas agreed on the importance of this missionary trip but they couldn?t agree on who totake with them.Sometimes we think that disagreements exist only the modern day church but this is not true.  Paul andBarnabas were human beings just like us.Paul didn?t want to take John Mark with them because he had deserted them earlier in their ministry. The ministry was too important and the work was too demanding to have someone along they couldn?tdepend on.ILL.- One writer suggested that their conversation may have went something like this:Paul: Mark?  We can?t take him.  He failed us the last time.Barnabas: But that was the last time.Paul: He?s likely to do it again.  You can?t trust him.  He?s a deserter.Barnabas: But he?s had time to think over what he did.  We?ve got to give him another chance.  He?sgot the makings of a good missionary.Paul: Barnabas, do you feel this way because he?s your cousin?Barnabas: That?s not fair, Paul.  You know that I?ve tried to help other people who were not myrelatives and you?re one of them!  I believe that we need to give Mark another chance and give himencouragement.Paul: But we need some who can stand up against persecution, angry mobs, beatings, and evenimprisonment.  I just don?t think we can trust him.Barnabas:  But Paul, I have talked to him about his mistakes and failures and I am sure he won?t do itagain.  He needs encouragement and we need to give it to him.Barnabas probably quoted Jesus about forgiving one another seventy times seven in Matthew 18:21.  And Paul may have quoted Prov. 25:19, ?Like a bad tooth or a lame foot is reliance on the unfaithful intimes of trouble.?When Paul couldn?t agree with Barnabas, He took Silas and went in one direction and Barnabas took Mark and went in another direction.WHO WAS RIGHT IN THIS DISAGREEMENT BETWEEN PAUL AND BARNABAS?  I?m sure that both were right on some points and both were wrong on some points.  No one is right about everything.We do know, however, that later on John Mark did make it in the ministry.  And Paul forgave him, loved him and accepted him.II Tim. 4:11 ?Get Mark and bring him with you, because he is helpful to me in my ministry.?Brethren, the important thing to remember is this: Barnabas wanted to encourage Mark in spite of his failure!  And what a tremendous lesson for us!  Is there some Mark out there who has failed?  Who has fumbled, really dropped the ball?  Someone who has really blown it in life and in a royal way?  Are you big enough, strong enough in the faith, forgiving enough to forgive them and try to encourage them to do right?  To keep on, keeping on?ILL.- Scottish minister, Henry Drummond, once said, ?How many prodigals are kept out of the kingdom of God by the unlovely characters of those who profess to be inside.?Barnabas encouraged others in spite of their failure and we need to do the same thing.CONCLUSION--------------------------------------ILL.- Jan Paderewski was a famous Polish composer/pianist who lived from 1860 to 1941.  One time he was scheduled to perform at a great concert hall in America.  It was evening to remember - black tuxes and long evening dresses, a real high-society deal.That evening a mother was present with her fidgety 9-year-old son.  Weary of waiting, the boy squirmed constantly in his seat.  His mother was in hopes that he would be encouraged to practice the piano if he could just hear the great Paderewski.As she turned to talk with some friends, her son slipped away, drawn to the ebony grand piano on the huge stage.  Without much notice from the audience, the boy sat down at the stool, and stared at the black and white keys.  He placed his small fingers on the keys and began to play ?chopsticks.?Soon the crowd hushed and frowned at the boy.  Irritated by his actions, they began to shout, ?Get that boy away from there!?Backstage, the master pianist, Paderewski heard the shouting.  Hurriedly, he grabbed his coat and went out on stage.  Without a word of announcement, he stooped over behind the boy, reached around both sides of the boy and began to play the piano with him.  As the two played together, Paderewski kept whispering in the boy?s ear, ?Keep going.  Don?t quit.  Keep on playing.  Don?t stop.?AND SO IT IS WITH US.  We hammer away at life, which may seem about as important as playing ?chopsticks? to some people.And while many complain and criticize us or what we are doing or what we are not doing, along comes some Paderewski or some Barnabas who says, ?Keep going.  Hang in there.  Don?t quit.  You can do it.  The Lord will be with you.  With the Lord on your side you can make it.?Brothers and sisters, are you an encourager like Barnabas?  Or are you something else?  Above all, people need encouragement in life.  Life can be awfully tough and mean.  So be an encourager.  Let Christ fill your heart and fill with you with encouragement for others.