BUILDING THE CHURCH, BUILDING YOU!Phil. 1:6-8INTRO.- ILL.- A certain congregation was about to build a new building.  The building committeepassed the following resolutions:1- We shall build a new building.2- The new building is to be located on the site of the old one.3- The material in the old building is to be used in the new one.4- We shall continue to use the old building until the new one is completed.Brethren, those people were never going to build a new building!  And that?s the way some of our plansgo.  They sound good, but they never get off the ground.  I want us to think today about building the church!  I believe that the Lord wants us to do somethingabout building the church.ILL.- Have you ever seen Robert Schuller?s Crystal Cathedral on his ?Hour of Power? TV show?  It islocated in Garden Grove, CA.  The building was dedicated in September of 1980.  The Cathedral hasmore than 10,000 windows of tempered silver colored glass.  In addition, two 90-foot tall doors openelectronically behind the pulpit to allow the morning sunlight to enhance the worship services.  The sanctuary seats 2890 people and 1000 singers and instrumentalists can perform in the 185 footlong chancel area.What do you make of that?  But here?s a better one; a bigger one.ILL.- At one time televangelist Jim Bakker of the famous PTL Club was going to build the world?s largestchurch building.  The building was going to be big enough to seat 30,000 people at the Heritage USAcomplex in Fort Mill, S.C.  The cost was estimated at $100 million!  It was also to have a 5,000-seat TVstudio and about 200 conference rooms and parking underneath.BUT, AS WE ALL KNOW, IT DIDN?T HAPPEN!  Brethren, I believe that the Lord wants the church to be built, but is this what God is truly interested in? Is the church just about fabulous buildings and fancy budgets?  NO, I DON?T THINK SO!I don?t think God is opposed to big buildings and big budgets as long as churches have their priorities inproper order.Remember the Tower of Babel? Gen.  11:1-4 ?Now the whole world had one language and a common speech.  As menmoved eastward, they found a plain in Shinar and settled there.  They said to each other,?Come, let?s make bricks and bake them thoroughly.?  They used brick instead of stone, andtar for mortar.  Then they said, ?COME, LET US BUILD OURSELVES A CITY, WITH A TOWERTHAT REACHES TO THE HEAVENS, SO THAT WE MAY MAKE A NAME FOR OURSELVES....??Let?s make a name for ourselves.  If any church is just interested in making a name for themselves,then they need a ?wake up? call!  God didn?t put us here to make a name for ourselves, be it a church, a preacher, a ministry orwhatever!  GOD PUT US HERE TO GLORIFY HIM!I Cor. 10:31 ?So whether you eat or drink or whatever you do (including building a churchbuilding), DO IT ALL FOR THE GLORY OF GOD.?A church building may be a part of God?s business, But His real business is people!  Building people,building a people of faith!Eph. 2:10 ?For we are God?s workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to do good works, whichGod prepared in advance for us to do.?  We are God?s workmanship!  God is primarily interested in people, not buildings!  I am thankful for this nice old building that we have for our worship and studies and youth meetings,but I am more thankful for our nice old people who worship here!  Er uh, I mean, nice people whoworship here!  GOD?S SUPREME CREATION IS PEOPLE!And God is still at work in people?s lives!  Phil. 2:13 ?For it is God who works in you to will and to act according to His good purpose.?I know that when you look at this corrupt world and all the evil things that are taking place in it, youwonder sometimes if God is still working in people?s lives.  BUT BELIEVE ME, HE IS!  Or you and Iwouldn?t be here!We must continue to allow God to work in us and through us!  He can and will, but only if we let Him!ILL.- Someone once described our lives as a picture that is being painted.  When we are born into thisworld God begins to paint the picture of our lives through our parents.  The paintbrush is in their hands,so to speak.  Then along comes other people who help to paint the picture of our lives: grandparents,other family members, school teachers, Sunday School teachers, etc.When we come to the age of accountability (i.e. when we begin to be accountable for our own actionsand lives) we take the paint brush from God?s hand and those whom He uses and begin to paint thepicture of our lives for ourselves.  And sometimes we don?t do a very good job of it, do we? SOMETIMES WE MESS UP THE PICTURE!If we come to surrender to Christ in faith and obedience then we transfer the paint brush back intoGod?s hand.  And once again, God begins to use people to paint a beautiful of our lives.Brethren, we need to allow God to paint the picture of our lives!  And we need to be used by God tohelp paint a beautiful picture in other people?s lives!We must allow God to use us to bless others!  PROP.- From this text in Philippians chapter one I want us to look at some words that tellus about how God builds the church, i.e. how God builds you!1- Confidence2- Concern3- CooperationI. CONFIDENCEV. 6 ?Being confident of this, that He who began a good work in you will carry it on to completion untilthe day of Christ.?Christians should live confidently!  Are you a confident person?  Do you have any confidence in who youare or in what you do?ILL.- Someone said that confidence is the thing that enables you to eat blackberry jam on a picnicwithout having to see if the seeds move.  Could be.ILL.- After a sign reading, ?Boy Wanted? was hung in a store window, a long line of applicants gatheredat the door.  One especially anxious boy scribbled a note which he handed quietly to the examiner.  Itread, ?Don?t do anything until you?ve seen me.  I?m the last in the line, but I?ve sure got the goods.?Is that you?  If not, why not?Christians should be somewhat confident in what they do in life, because the Lord is at work in them,giving them direction, grace and strength!  We Christians don?t have to take a backseat to anybody in life!  That doesn?t mean that we will alwaysdo everything right or perfect or the best, but it means that the Lord will be with us in whatever we do!Phi. 4:13 ?I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me.?  Paul had confidence in Christ!  He believed that with the Lord?s help and strength he could do anythingin life!  If we are ever going to help build the church and build people up in the faith we must put ourconfidence in the Lord most of all!Where is our faith in the Lord?  Where is our confidence in Him to work in this world?  And in our lives? And in the lives of others?ILL.- Neville Taylor said, ?Convictions are the forces that move the world.  The world will never bemoved by flabby Christians who believe their doubts and doubt their beliefs.?Taylor also said, ?Sin has put the compass out of order!  Man must get right with God first and then theSupreme Guide will take over the direction of the life put under His control.?Where is our faith in the Lord?  Where is our confidence in the Lord?  We?ve allowed the world, theflesh and the devil to weaken our faith!  And we need to put a stop to it!ILL.- For a period of time I attended the Anna Heights Baptist Church in Anna, IL.  It?s a SouthernBaptist church, which is my heritage.  The music minister was leading the singing (contemporaryChristian music) and he wasn?t getting the response that he wanted.  He stopped and said somethinglike: ?I must have a bad attitude this morning.?  And I just couldn?t help myself.  I said out loud, ?GET OVER IT!?Brethren, we need to ?get over? some things in life and get on with living by faith in the Lord!  We needto ?get on? with living confidently in the Lord!ILL.- James Boice said these powerful words, ?The God of the Bible is not weak.  He is strong.  He isall-mighty.  Nothing happens without His permission or apart from His purposes - even evil.  Nothingdisturbs Him or puzzles Him.  His purposes are always accomplished.  Therefore those who know Himrightly act with boldness (and confidence), assured that God is with them to accomplish His owndesirable purposes in their lives.?That turns me on!  That lights my fire!  That cranks me up!  The apostle Paul had confidence in the Lord and so must we!  He also had confidence in the Lord?speople.  And so must we!II Tim. 1:12 ?That is why I am suffering as I am.  Yet I am not ashamed, because I knowwhom I have believed, and am convinced (or confident) that He is able to guard what Ihave entrusted to Him for that day.?Paul?s confidence and faith was in the Lord, first and foremost.  That?s where it has to be before it canever be in the Lord?s people!If you don?t have any confidence in the Lord?s people, it?s probably because you don?t have much faithand confidence in the Lord!  We must believe in the power of Christ to work in and through His people! We must have this confidence!ILL.- Brother Harvey Ligon was an elder in the First Christian Church of Anna, IL, when I went there in1984.  Bro. Harvey was up in his 70?s at that time.  The first service I attended was a Wednesday nightBible study and Harvey taught the study.  And I was amazed at his depth and insight into Scripture.  Iwas also very pleased with his gracious humor.  He was a great teacher!  He had been a serious Biblestudent all his life and he knew God?s Word and how to relate it, illustrate it and apply it.From that time on, I trusted Harvey explicity to do the right thing for the church.  And guess what?  He trusted me as well.  Harvey always closed his eyes when I preached.   When Iasked him what he was doing and why he did that, he said, ?I heard you preach and I believe what youare preaching is the truth.  I trust you.  I don?t have to worry about you.?Brethren, we trusted one another.  We believed in one another.  We had confidence in one another.  And that?s exactly what we need in our church if the church is ever to go forward and be built up!DO YOU BELIEVE IN ME?  I believe in you.  How do we build confidence in one another?- We each do what is right- We pray for one another- We encourage one another- We remain open to one anotherThese things build confidence in one another.  Confidence in the Lord and in one another builds the church.II. CONCERNPaul had a genuine concern for his Philippian brethren.V. 7 ?I have you in my heart....?Do you have anybody in your heart?  You better have.  Your mate.  Your children.  Your familymembers.  ILL.- My mom, Juanita Shepherd, will soon be 81 years old.  She is getting sicker all the time.  Foryears, she has had Lupus disease which has caused her kidney trouble.  In fact, for a while she thoughtshe might have to go on dialysis.  Some years ago mom contracted Parkinson?s disease.  We don?t know how or where it came from.  Butshe?s go it and it has really done a number on her in the last several years.  And it just keeps gettingworse.But do you know what?  I THINK MORE HIGHLY OF HER NOW THAN EVER BEFORE!  Some of youmight be tempted to say, ?Well, it?s about time!?  Yes, time, age, maturity has a way of making us allappreciate our loved ones a lot more.  I have mom in my heart all the time!  I call her at least twice a day.  And you might think that?s silly,BUT SHE DOESN?T.  I have her in my heart more than ever because I don?t know how much longer Iwill have her.  At least, in this life.Brethren, we need to treasure people in our hearts more than ever before!  We need one another!  Andwe need to exhibit concern for one another!Paul loved the Philippians.  He ministered to them, loved them, and prayed for them.  Ministering to oneanother builds a strong relationship to one another.  If you minister to no one, you will have little or noconcern for them.  BUT MUCH MINISTRY EQUALS MUCH CONCERN!  And this is what we need in thechurch.  More ministry and more concern.ILL.- I preached for almost 11 years at the First Christian Church of Iberia, MO.  Iberia has a populationof 852 but the church actually had a bigger average attendance than MCC.  When I left there we wereaveraging 150?s on Sunday morning.  But the pay wasn?t the best.  I was raising a family and we livedfrom paycheck to paycheck.  And sometimes, like a lot of people, we robbed Peter to pay Paul.As a minister I had to make estimated tax payments every quarter, which I hated and still do.  Andnearly every year at tax time, April 15th, I?d come up short and have to borrow money to pay my taxbill.Ralph Riemensnider was an elder in our church and was also a bank president at a nearby town.  I?d goin and tell Ralph my embarrassing sob story about needing a $1,000 or $2,000 for taxes.  ?Could Iborrow the money??  And Ralph would say, ?Sure, and I?ll just cosign this loan for you.?Talk about concern!  When you?re talking money and cosigning a loan that?s either genuine concern oridiocy!Brethren, we need more concern for one another in the church today.  A concern that is willing tospend and be spent for others!A concern that exhibits itself in loving compassion, praying for one another, sharing with one another,rejoicing with one another, weeping with one another, etc.ILL.- Mamie Adams always liked the friendliness of the people at her post office.  She went there justbefore Christmas to buy stamps and the line was extremely long.  Someone pointed out to her thatthere was no need to wait in line because there was a stamp machine in the lobby.  She said, ?I KNOW,BUT THE MACHINE WON?T ASK ME ABOUT MY ARTHRITIS.?That?s the kind of concern that we should have for one another in the church.  ILL.- ?Brother Steve, how?s your back?  How?s your hip?  How?s your head?  You look terrible,brother!...?V. 8 Paul said, ?I long for all of you with the affection of Christ Jesus.?Today, we might say, ?I love you with the very heart of Christ.?  And that?s exactly what we need to do. We need the heart of Christ and we need love one another like Christ.  And that?s the best love there is,because nobody loved people better than Christ!How do we get that love and concern for one another?  It must come from Christ or it won?t come atall.  Spend time with Him, listening to Him, learning from Him.  And you?ll acquire a greater concern forpeople and the church will be built and built up!1- Confidence2- ConcernIII. COOPERATIONv. 7 ?Whether I am in chains or defending and confirming the gospel, all of you share in God?s gracewith me.?The Philippians shared with Paul in the ministry of the gospel.  THERE WAS COOPERATION BETWEENPAUL AND THE PHILIPPIANS!ILL.- An ocean liner was sinking (Titanic-like) and the captain yelled, ?Does anybody know how topray??  A preacher on board said, ?I do.??Good,? said the captain, ?You start praying.  The rest of us will put on our lifejackets.  We are onelifejacket short.?That?s cooperation.  Somebody?s got to pray and somebody?s got to do something else.ILL.- Let?s have some cooperation around here.  There is a toilet stool leaking in the women?s restroom. I?ll pray and....ILL.- The church in Anna, IL, is located right on mainstreet and gets a lot of traffic on it, including thesidewalk.  Several years ago the old sidewalk was getting so beat up and cracked that the church boarddecided to tear it out and replace it.  We announced that on such and such a Saturday that we wouldneed help with jackhammers, picks and shovels, etc.  That Saturday came and you would not believe all the men in the church who showed up to help tearout that old sidewalk and pour a new one.  TALK ABOUT COOPERATION!  We had cooperation and thejob was done in no time!Brethren, there has to be some cooperation in the church if she is ever to grow or be built up!ILL.- It is said that preacher P. H. Welshimer preached at the First Christian Church of Canton, Ohio, for55 years.  During his long ministry that church grew from 350 members until it became the largestChristian Church in the world, with a Sunday School attendance of between 3000 and 4000.  And thatwas back in the 30?s and 40?s, I believe.Brethren, a church doesn?t get built up like that without some cooperation between the members andthe leaders!ILL.- Another tremendous example is the large Southeast Christian Church of Louisville, KY.  Thatchurch was started with something like 130 people in 1966 and now they run around 14,000 inattendance in three services every weekend!  That?s one service on Saturday evening and two onSunday morning and in a building that seats 9000!Again, a church doesn?t get built up like that without some cooperation between the members and theleaders!ILL.- In 1993, the Southeast Christian Church worshipped in a building that seated 2400.  On theweekend of May 8-9, 1993, they had 8,413 for their four worship services: one Saturday night and threeon Sunday morning.  They had obviously outgrown their facilities.  They took a vote to decide whether or not to buy propertyand build another building.  HOW DID THEY VOTE?  94.4 percent of the people voted to buy propertyand build another building.  That?s the spirit of cooperation!  And it is that spirit of cooperation thatbuilds the church and builds up people.Does Bob Russell, their Sr. Minister, do everything right?  No.  Do the elders and deacons do everythingright?  No.  Do they ever disagree at times?  Why, of course, they do.  But there is a spirit ofcooperation in that church!  The church will never go anywhere...It will never be built up or build up people without the spirit ofcooperation!We must work at cooperating with one another!  How do we do that?ILL.- Someone put it this way: ?The mule can?t kick and pull at the same time.  And neither can thechurch member!?If we are going to pull together and cooperate then we must stop kicking one another!Phil. 2:14-15 ?Do everything without complaining or arguing, so that you may becomeblameless and pure, children of God without fault in a crooked and depraved generation, inwhich you shine like stars in the universe.?Brethren, we won?t shine like stars in the universe if we go around griping and complaining all the time. And the church will not grow and be built up!Do I do everything right?  No.  Do the elders and deacons do everything right, all the time, 100% of thetime?  Probably not.  But we have to ?bear with another? and cooperate the best we can, not the leastwe can.  That is, if we want to see the church grow and be built up!We need to stop kicking one another and start pulling together!  That means we must focus on thegood things and not what we consider to be bad or negative.ILL.- No marriage will ever stay together if a couple dwells on the negative things in each other?s lives. It will only last and grow and get better when they dwell on the good and the positive things.  Andbuild on those things!  And so with any church.CONCLUSION-------------------------------------------------We are God?s workmanship!  We are God?s building!  We are God?s people!  And God wants His churchto grow and be built up and we need to help it along!  - We must have confidence in the Lord and in one another- We must demonstrate concern for one another- We must work at cooperating with one anotherI think that I shall never seeA church that?s all it ought to be;A church whose members never strayBeyond the strait and narrow way.A church that has no empty pews,Whose Pastor never has the blues,A church whose deacons always deak,And none is proud, and all are meek.Where gossips never peddle lies,Or make complaints or criticize,Where all are always sweet and kind,And all to other?s faults are blind.Such perfect churches there may be,But none of them are known to me,But still, we?ll work, and pray and plan,To make our own the best we can.