INTRO.- ILL.- Lawyer and statesman Daniel Webster was a powerful orator who gave early evidence of his quick mind and his way with words.  One day Webster?s father, who was to be absent from the home, left Daniel and his brother Ezekiel specific work instructions.  But on his return he found the task still undone, and questioned his sons about their idleness.  "What have you been doing, Ezekiel?" he asked.  "Nothing, sir."  "Well, Daniel, what have you been doing?" "Helping Zeke, sir."That sounds like some people today.  ?Why should I do something if no one else is??  Some reason this way: ?I don?t see anybody else around here doing anything, so why should I??Or some may think, ?Why should I do much of anything?  Isn?t this what we pay people for??  That?s the thinking that many people have when it comes to the church.  ?Isn?t this what we pay a preacher for??  We may incorrectly assume that if a church is to grow it?s the preacher?s responsibility to make it happen.  And if it doesn?t happen, then it?s his fault.  It doesn?t work that way, however.What did you do this last week?  I mean, to serve the Lord and to serve someone else?  Did you just live for you or did you do something kind, something good for someone else?And what plans have you made to serve the Lord within the programs of the church?  Are you thinking about volunteering to do something in the church? ILL.- The sign on the stage proclaimed: "The Motionless Man: Make Him Laugh.  Win $100."  The temptation was irresistible.  For three hours boys and girls, men and women, performed every antic and told every joke they knew.  But Bill Fuqua, the Motionless Man, stood perfectly still.  Fuqua discovered his unique talent at the age of fourteen while standing motionless in front of a Christmas tree as a joke.  Doing nothing is really impossible--even for the Motionless Man. He may not laugh at your jokes, but he readily admits that he still has to breathe and blink--occasionally.  Sometimes, however, he appears so motionless during his routines at shopping malls and amusement parks that he is sometimes mistaken for a mannequin. "The Motionless Man.?  Sounds like a lot of churches today.  They have mastered the fine art of doing almost nothing.  Is this also true of us personally when it comes to the Lord and serving?  Romans 12:6-8 ?We have different gifts, according to the grace given us.  If a man?s gift is prophesying, let him use it in proportion to his faith.  If it is serving, let him serve; if it is teaching, let him teach; if it is encouraging, let him encourage; if it is contributing to the needs of others, let him give generously; if it is leadership, let him govern diligently; if it is showing mercy, let him do it cheerfully.?PROP.- Let?s examine these last four basic spiritual gifts in order to help us find ways to serve.1- ENCOURAGINGILL.- There is a story about a preacher leaving a church.  At his farewell dinner, he tried to encourage the members, saying, ?Don?t be so sad.  The next preacher might be better than me.?  One member replied, ?That?s what the last preacher said, but it just keeps getting worse.?Those words certainly didn?t encourage that preacher!  That?s kind of like saying, ?Don?t let the door hit you on your backside as you leave.?  What a left-handed slap that was!ILL.- William Arthur Ward said, ?Flatter me, and I may not believe you.  Criticize me, and I may not like you.  Ignore me, and I may not forgive you.  Encourage me, and I will not forget you.?    The gift of encouragement is very special.  And obviously, not everyone has that gift.  Some people just seem to have a knack for making others feel good and for building them up.And that?s what encouragement does.  IT BUILDS UP PEOPLE.Romans 15:1-2 ?We who are strong ought to bear with the failings of the weak and not to please ourselves.  Each of us should please his neighbor for his good, to build him up.?I Cor. 14:12 ?Since you are eager to have spiritual gifts, try to excel in gifts that build up the church.?ILL.- I?ve heard it said that if it doesn?t build up people then don?t do it.  This goes for the programs of the church and all of life.  I know of a church that changed their youth program from Wednesday night to Sunday nights and the attendance fell off.  They didn?t change back to Wednesday but the falling attendance should have told them something.Likewise, if we adopt some program in the church and the people don?t get too excited about it then perhaps we shouldn?t do it.  If people don?t support some program with their attendance, then it must not be something that builds up people.II Cor. 10:8 ?For even if I boast somewhat freely about the authority the Lord gave us for building you up rather than pulling you down, I will not be ashamed of it.?Eph. 4:29 ?Do not let any unwholesome talk come out of your mouths, but only what is helpful for building others up according to their needs, that it may benefit those who listen.?We?re in the building business regardless of whether we are extremely gifted at it or not. We ALL should speak words that build up people.  Anybody can say something nice to someone if they think about it.ILL.- During quail season in Georgia, an Atlanta journalist met an old farmer hunting with an ancient pointer at his side.  Twice the dog ran ahead and pointed. Twice his master fired into the open air.  When the journalist saw no birds rise, he asked the farmer for an explanation.  "Shucks," grinned the old man, "I knew there weren?t no birds in that grass. Spot?s nose ain?t what it used to be, but him and me, have had some wonderful times together.  He?s still doing the best he can -- and it would be mighty mean of me not to encourage him at this stage of the game!"I guess everybody needs encouragement, including dogs.  But why is it that dogs get more encouragement than humans?  Eph. 6:21-22 ?Tychicus, the dear brother and faithful servant in the Lord, will tell you everything, so that you also may know how I am and what I am doing.  I am sending him to you for this very purpose, that you may know how we are, and that he may encourage you.?Paul was sending his brother Tychicus to give encouragement to others.  I?ve heard that some people encourage with their appearance and some with their disappearance.  WHAT ABOUT YOU?  Col. 2:2-3 ?My purpose is that they may be encouraged in heart and united in love, so that they may have the full riches of complete understanding, in order that they may know the mystery of God, namely, Christ, in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.?My purpose.  What is your purpose in life?  Those who have the gift of encouragement live for others!  Their aim in life or purpose is to bless others!  With or without the gift of encouragement we all should think more about encouraging one another.ILL.- Warren G. Harding said, ?There?s good in everybody.  Boost. Don?t knock.?ILL.- Booker T. Washington said, ?If you want to lift yourself up, lift up someone else.?ILL.- Charles Schwab, US president of Carnegie Steel (1897), US Steel Corp (1901), Bethlehem Steel (1903) said, ?I consider my ability to arouse enthusiasm among men the greatest asset I possess.  The way to develop the best that is in a man is by appreciation and encouragement.?    If you are quick to spot the good in others, then please, do not keep quiet about it.  Commend them.  Encourage them.2- CONTRIBUTINGPhil. 4:10-13 ?I rejoice greatly in the Lord that at last you have renewed your concern for me.  Indeed, you have been concerned, but you had no opportunity to show it.  I am not saying this because I am in need, for I have learned to be content whatever the circumstances.  I know what it is to be in need, and I know what it is to have plenty.  I have learned the secret of being content in any and every situation, whether well fed or hungry, whether living in plenty or in want.  I can do everything through him who gives me strength.?A renewed concern.  What is Paul talking about?  I think he is talking about a renewed financial concern.  The Philippians helped Paul financially.  And there needs to be more people like this in our churches.  I realize that it?s hard enough to take care of yourself without also trying to take care of someone else, but contributing to the needs of others is a great way to bless others.  I know because I?ve had this sort of thing happen to me on different occasions when I was having financial difficulties.ILL.- After my son Shane had surgery at the age of 8 days old, I had whopping hospital bill 25 years ago.  How much?  $5,000 much and no insurance.  In 1980 that was a lot of money for anyone who lived from paycheck to paycheck.  Shane was born at the St. Mary?s Health Center in Jefferson City, Mo and that?s where he had his exploratory abdominal surgery.  When I went to the finance department to make arrangements for paying the bill in payments the lady said, ?You qualify for Catholic charity.  They will pay a portion of your bill.  Do you want it??Now what do you suppose I said?  Later, at my church there were also some people who made special contributions to me in order to help me pay that hospital bill.  WASN?T THAT KIND AND GRACIOUS OF ALL THOSE PEOPLE?  Amen.Do you have this gift?  The gift of contributing?  How can a person know if they have this gift?   Well, let?s put it this way.  DO YOU HAVE ANY EXTRA MONEY IN THE BANK THAT YOU COULD SHARE WITH SOMEONE IN NEED?Of course, just because some people have money it doesn?t mean they are going to share it, but there are some people who just have a great heart for sharing with others.  THEY ARE BLESSED WITH THE GIFT OF GIVING.ILL.- I have a preacher friend who told me that one of the members in his past church who is a multi-millionaire, said to him, ?Let me know if you need any money.  I have plenty for both of us.?  And I keep asking him if that church needs a preacher!3- LEADINGILL.- Winston Churchill was not only an inspirational leader against the terror of Nazi Germany, but he was also something of a humorist.  Adolf Hitler had announced at a Nazi rally during the Battle of Britain that Germany would wring England?s neck like a helpless chicken. Churchill spoke the next day in Parliament and said that Hitler was in for a big surprise because he would find out that England is "some chicken with some neck." Churchill?s words, his cigar, his hat, and his proper London suit were humorous jabs at terrible fears.  As Churchill demonstrated, leaders need to rise above their circumstances.  ILL.- News writer, Cal Thomas found himself called a "Christian leader" by a leading Christian magazine and he wondered what that meant.  More speaking engagements?  Perhaps an appearance on a Christian talk show? He said, "It would certainly give me the right to start putting Scripture references under my signed name in books I have written.  I would surely sign more Bibles, which I find a curious practice since I didn?t write that Book." Thomas wonders if we have reversed things.  God?s strength is made perfect in weakness, the apostle Paul said.  He said, "In a church I once attended, there was a man of tremendous faith.  His wife is an alcoholic.  His daughter has psychological problems.  He was often poor in health.  Yet, week after week, he never complained.  He always smiled and asked me how I was doing.  He faithfully brought to church a young blind man who had no transportation.  He always sat with the blind man, helping him sing the hymns by saying the words into his ear.  That man was a `Christian leader? if ever there was one."  ILL.- Preacher Tony Evans said, ?Leadership in the local church should be determined by spirituality, not notoriety.?  Just because someone is notable in a community it doesn?t mean they?ll make a good leader in the church.  Spirituality should be the dominating factor.  ILL.- A preacher friend in Missouri had a deacon one time who was a self-defense instructor; a judo instructor, I believe.  And that?s not bad because generally they are very self-mastered or self-controlled people, but not this guy.  My friend said he would get mad in board meetings and then challenge some other board members to go outside and fight, knowing he could whip them.Such a man should NOT BE on any church board or in any kind of leadership position.  I Tim. 3:2-3 ?Now the overseer must be above reproach, the husband of but one wife, temperate, self-controlled, respectable, hospitable, able to teach, not given to drunkenness, not violent but gentle, not quarrelsome, not a lover of money.?ILL.- Bible scholar Matthew Henry went to London, met a young lady who was wealthy, and they fell in love.  She went to ask her father if she could marry him and he said, "He?s got no background, you don?t know where he?s come from."  She said, "Yes, I know, but I know where he?s going and I want to go with him."  A leader knows where he?s going and it?s a good place.4- DEMONSTRATING MERCYILL.- I don?t know if this story is true, but it sounds good.  In the early days of his presidency, Calvin Coolidge woke one morning in his hotel room to find a cat burglar going through his pockets.  Coolidge spoke up, asking the burglar not to take his watch chain because it contained an engraved charm he wanted to keep.  Coolidge then engaged the thief in quiet conversation and discovered he was a college student who had no money to pay his hotel bill or buy a ticket back to campus.  Coolidge counted $32 out of his wallet -- which he had also persuaded the dazed young man to give back, declared it to be a loan, and advised the young man to leave the way he had come so as to avoid the Secret Service! If this story is true, then President Calvin Coolidge was a man of mercy!  He could have easily had the man thrown in jail.  Most of us would have.ILL.- After Lee?s surrender, Lincoln spoke to a large crowd from the balcony of the White House.  He told them about the considerate policy he had in mind for the South.  At the end of his speech, Senator Harlan asked, ?What shall we do with the rebels??The vindictive crowd shouted back, ?Hang them!?  Tad (his son) then turned to his father and said, ?No, no, Papa.  Not hang them. Hang on to them!??That?s it!? replied Lincoln joyfully.  ?Tad has it.  We must hang on to them!?  At the time, Tad was only eleven. Hanging on to someone in spite of their guilt and sin is an act of mercy.  And mercy is what we want but we don?t always give it. We should, however, and here?s a very good reason.Matthew 5:7 ?Blessed are the merciful for they will be shown mercy.?Ephesians 2:4-5 ?But because of his great love for us, God, who is rich in mercy, made us alive with Christ even when we were dead in transgressions?it is by grace you have been saved.?Titus 3:4-6 ?But when the kindness and love of God our Savior appeared, he saved us, not because of righteous things we had done, but because of his mercy.  He saved us through the washing of rebirth and renewal by the Holy Spirit, whom he poured out on us generously through Jesus Christ our Savior.?We read a lot in Scripture about God?s mercy and this should tell us something.  He wants us to be like Him and demonstrate mercy and not law.  ILL.- If Jesus had laid down the law, the woman caught in adultery would have been stoned.  If Jesus had laid down the law He would not have talked to the Samaritan woman about living water.  If Jesus had laid down the law no lepers would have been healed.  If Jesus had laid down the law no one could be saved.God help us all to demonstrate mercy.CONCLUSION-----------------------------ILL.- Erma Bombeck is quoted as saying, ?When I stand before God at the end of my life, I would hope that I would not have a single bit of talent left, and could say, ?I used everything you gave me.?We must be committed to doing something in life for others.  We must use whatever God gives us to bless others, anywhere, any time, etc.  