INTRO. - ILL.- Charles Sawyer, former U.S. Secretary of Commerce (under Harry Truman), told about the planeload of people flying across the Atlantic.  A voice came on the intercom:  ?We are now flying at 35,000 feet.  If you will notice, out the right window, the two engines on that side are on fire, and the engines on the left had to be stopped.  If you look directly below, you will see a yellow sea recovery raft with six small dots on it.  The dots are the pilot, co-pilot, flight engineer, navigator, and two hostesses.  This is a recording.?What do you fear the most in life?  I think most people fear something: loss of life, loss of health, loss of family members, etc.  These are probably the most feared things in life.  Fears grabs us all.  ILL.- Christianity Today recently had an article entitled, "Fear Not the Compass."  What was this about?  It?s about the new movie entitled, "The Golden Compass," which has many people talking about its atheistic emphasis.  The film is based on the first book of a trilogy by Philip Pullman, an atheist who has expressed his disdain for Christianity and who, in the course of his three books, has a young girl named Lyra join with people who are trying to kill God and the Christian faith ? and they succeed. (in the movie)  Many Christians have expressed their concerns regarding the film.Should Christians be afraid of The Golden Compass?  Mercy, no.  Discerning, yes.  But not afraid.  God is not threatened by Philip Pullman.  And people who stop to think through Pullman?s story, and how he "refutes" Christianity, will see what a feeble "attack" against Christian belief really is.It?s interesting to note that Pullman?s dismissal of Christianity skips over one big detail: Jesus.  Pullman?s story never makes any attempt to explore or refute the claims and ministry and person of Christ.As people who believe in the all-powerful God of the universe should fear cloud or cover our lives?  Of course, not!Some people do, however, fear the thought of becoming a Christian and following Christ in life.  How could that be?  Why would anyone be afraid to become a Christian?ILL.- When I worked for Safeway in the early 1960?s in Joplin, MO, I tried to witness to most of the other employees about Christ because I was a new convert and fired up for Christ.  DO WE EVER LOSE OUR FIRE AFTER A PERIOD OF TIME?The meat department manager was Duane Morris.  Duane didn?t go to church but his wife was a faithful and committed Christian. And even though Duane didn?t go to church I was not afraid to talk to him about Christ.  So I asked him why he didn?t go to church.  He plainly but kindly told me that he was not a Christian.  It wasn?t that he didn?t believe in Christ, because he did.  But he said he didn?t want to become a Christian because he knew that he would have to change his life.  Ah ha!  He knew that there were some things in his life that were not right or not in keeping with the Christian life and he wasn?t ready to give them up.  But listen to this:  He also said that he had noticed that his wife had gone through some difficulty as a Christian, which he didn?t specify.  And he wasn?t sure he wanted to endure that!I never did ask him what he was talking about but it was some trials or difficulty that she experienced because of her faith.  And he feared that.  He didn?t want any part of it.Even as Christians there are times when we fear certain things in life.  That?s because of our human nature.  However, I believe that faith is the victory that overcomes the world.  Now what about Christmas?  This is supposed to be one of the most joyous times of the year for the Christian.  We believe that Jesus is the Savior of the world!  And we honor Him by involving ourselves in Christmas activities: church, singing carols, giving gifts, etc.  So what is there to fear about Christmas?  There may well be some things that certain people fear about Christmas.PROP.- As we think consider the Christmas story, let?s consider the thought of fear.1- Fear not the birth2- Fear not the angel3- Fear not the announcementI. FEAR NOT THE BIRTH4So Joseph also went up from the town of Nazareth in Galilee to Judea, to Bethlehem the town of David, because he belonged to the house and line of David. 5He went there to register with Mary, who was pledged to be married to him and was expecting a child. 6While they were there, the time came for the baby to be born, 7and she gave birth to her firstborn, a son. She wrapped him in cloths and placed him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the inn.ILL.- A man and his wife were making their first doctor visit, the wife being pregnant with their first child.  After everything checked out, the doctor took a small stamp and stamped the wife?s stomach with indelible ink.The couple was curious about what the stamp was for, so when they got home, the husband got out his magnifying glass to try to see what it was.  In very tiny letters, the stamp said, "When you can read this, come back and see me." ILL.- One man said: On a flight to Florida, I was preparing my notes for one of the parent-education seminars I conduct as an educational psychologist.  The elderly woman sitting next to me explained that she was returning to Miami after having spent two weeks visiting her six children, 18 grandchildren and ten great-grandchildren in Boston.Then she inquired what I did for a living.  I told her, fully expecting her to question me for free professional advice.  Instead she sat back, picked up a magazine and said, "If there?s anything you want to know, just ask me." There are probably several ways to look at this birth business. Becoming a first-time parent (father, mother) and the fact of the virgin birth.Do you remember how it used to be?  That is, at least, the sex of the baby was a complete mystery until he or she came into this world.  And what about poor Roger and Barbara McMillan?  It is my understanding that they had no idea they were getting twins when Shanda (6 lbs.) and then Shelle (5 lbs. 11 oz.) were born some 36 years old. What a surprise!  What a shock!  And what a job!  Becoming a first-time parents can be a fearful thing!  To think that you are bringing a baby into this world and that baby will grow to adulthood.  And you are responsible!  That?s scary!  We may wonder if they are going to grow to adulthood and become decent, hard working people, and most importantly, become a Christian!I think that was probably my greatest fear as a parent, wondering if my daughter and then my son would ever give their lives to Christ.  So that kind of fear is good, because it may make us work harder to be the best parents we can be.NOW WHAT ABOUT THE VIRGIN BIRTH?  Where?s the fear come in?  Just this.  Some people, some Christians fear there is no such thing!ILL.- Larry King, the CNN talk show host, was once asked who he would most wanted to interview if he could choose anyone from all of history.  He said, "Jesus Christ."  The questioner said, "And what would you like to ask Him?"  King replied, "I would like to ask Him if He was indeed virgin-born.  The answer to that question would define history for me." The virgin birth defines history for most people.  If Jesus was indeed virgin born then He is who He claimed to be.Was Jesus born of the virgin Mary?  We say "yes."  But how do we know for sure?  We don?t.  It?s still a matter of trusting the Word of God.  DO WE BELIEVE GOD OR NOT?  Do we believe the Bible or not?  Only those who walk by faith can answer this question with a resounding "yes!"  Yes, we believe!  Yes, we trust God?s Word.  Our only and ultimate hope is in Jesus Christ the virgin born savior of the world!II. FEAR NOT THE ANGEL8And there were shepherds living out in the fields nearby, keeping watch over their flocks at night. 9An angel of the Lord appeared to them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were terrified.   An angel appeared to those lowly shepherds. ILL.- Billy Graham told about an experience that Dr. S. W. Mitchell, a celebrated Philadelphia neurologist, had a good many years ago.Dr. Mitchell had gone to bed after an exceptionally tiring day. Suddenly he was awakened by someone knocking on his door. Opening it he found a little girl, poorly dressed and deeply upset. She told him her mother was very sick and asked him if he would please come with her.  It was a bitterly cold, snowy night, but though he was bone tired, Dr. Mitchell dressed and followed the little girl.He found the mother desperately ill with pneumonia.  After arranging for medical care, he complimented the sick woman on the intelligence and persistence of her little daughter.  The woman looked at him strangely and then said, ?My daughter died a month ago.? She added, ?Her shoes and coat are in the clothes closet there.? Dr. Mitchell, amazed and perplexed, went to the closet and opened the door.  There hung the very coat worn by the little girl who had brought him to attend to her mother.  It was warm and dry and could not possibly have been out in the wintry night. Billy Graham asked, ?Could the doctor have been called in the hour of desperate need by an angel who appeared as this woman?s young daughter?  Was this the work of God?s angel on behalf of the sick woman?? What do you think?  I think this is entirely possible.  God is very unpredictable.  He often does things that we would never expect and in ways we would never expect.Heb. 1:14 "Are not all angels ministering spirits sent to serve those who will inherit salvation?"If there are indeed angles ministering to us, protecting us, etc. why would we ever be afraid of them?If an angel ever appeared to us the way he did to those shepherds of old we would be afraid!  An angel of the Lord appeared to them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were terrified. Have you ever been startled or afraid by any bright light?  I have not, but I certainly would have been afraid had I been a shepherd at that time.  Because that angel no only appeared with a brightness but also spoke.ILL.- I?ve mentioned before about the Spook Light of Hornet, MO.  It?s a strange light that just comes up a highway and glows.  Scientists all over the world have studied it and have no answer.  I have seen the Spook Light, but of course, it was many years ago when I was a child. I think I saw it twice and once with the Boy Scouts.  And I didn?t particularly think it was all that spooky.  But if that light had spoken to us, this shepherd boy would not have stayed around very long.  And this may be something like how those shepherds of old felt.  ILL.- I remember as a kid walking home from somewhere at night.  It was dark but I was very familiar with where I was walking.  However, there was a certain house that I had to walk by and no one seemed to know who lived there.  In fact, it was something of a mystery.  Well, as I was walking by that certain house I heard a scream and that?s when my running career started!Not exactly, but I?ll tell you that I DID NOT stick around to find out who was screaming or exactly where it came from!  I never ran so fast in my life!  All I could see was the bright lights of the Dairy Queen in the next block and to me that DQ meant the light of God and salvation and I was going to get there just as fast I could!Should we ever fear the working of God in any form? Angels or otherwise?  Many times in life we go through great difficulty and then when we get through it, we look back and we can see how God was at work and we no longer fear.  Our faith was strengthened.  We rejoice.  We give thanks.  We fear not any longer.  God help us to walk by faith, not fear.III. FEAR NOT THE ANNOUNCEMENT10But the angel said to them, "Do not be afraid. I bring you good news of great joy that will be for all the people. 11Today in the town of David a Savior has been born to you; he is Christ the Lord. 12This will be a sign to you: You will find a baby wrapped in cloths and lying in a manger."Good news of great joy.  Ever receive a joyous announcement?ILL.- What do you have with three of a kind and four of a kind?  A full hospital.   Dec. 6, 2007.  NEW ORLEANS ? The newborn intensive care unit at one area hospital got a sudden infusion of infants: triplet boys and quadruplet girls delivered within 24 hours of each other.  The boys were delivered at 33 weeks and two days, and the girls at 32 weeks.Whatever they were eating, I don?t want it!  When most families have a baby, it?s good news!  It?s time to spread the good news!  It?s exciting!  It?s amazing!  It?s a miracle of God!The gospel of Jesus Christ is also good news.  It?s the best news there is.  Why then would we ever fear the announcement of that good news?  Possibly, there are two reasons.  1- we must respond to that good news 2- we must spread that good news.1- We must respond to that good news.Acts 2:36-41 "36"Therefore let all Israel be assured of this: God has made this Jesus, whom you crucified, both Lord and Christ." 37When the people heard this, they were cut to the heart and said to Peter and the other apostles, "Brothers, what shall we do?" 38Peter replied, "Repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins. And you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. 39The promise is for you and your children and for all who are far off?for all whom the Lord our God will call." 40With many other words he warned them; and he pleaded with them, "Save yourselves from this corrupt generation." 41Those who accepted his message were baptized, and about three thousand were added to their number that day."Over three thousand heard the message of Jesus on the day of Pentecost.  They were convinced of this truth, that Jesus was who He claimed to be and He could save them from their sins.  They were convicted of their sin.  Now it was time for a decision.  Do I do as Peter said or do I turn away?  Do I confess Christ, repent and be baptized or do I not?Many people are afraid of that decision.  They are just not sure they want to follow Christ and live a Christian life.  They fear making that decision because they are not sure what it will mean in life and where it will take them.Of course, a part of the problem may be that they are not convinced that there is life beyond the grave and that the only way to find eternal life is through Jesus Christ.  Plus they may be fairly content with life as it is, but as we all know, life can end abruptly.  No one knows for sure that they will live to be 80 or 90. They may only live to be 30 or 40 or 50.  SOME FEAR THE GOOD NEWS OF CHRIST BECAUSE THEY KNOW THEY MUST DO SOMETHING ABOUT IT.2- Some may fear the announcement of the good news of Christ because they know they are responsible to spread that good news.  They may figure: "If I don?t respond to it then I?m not responsible for sharing it with others."Most of you here today, if not all of you, have already responded to Christ.  You have confessed Him, turned from your sins as best you could, you have been baptized as Jesus asked, BUT HAVE YOU SHARED THE GOOD NEWS WITH OTHERS?  Have you EVER shared the good news with others?  This is what the great commission is all about!ILL.- Again, the words of Robert Speer ring true this time of the year:  "Any man who has a religion is bound to do one of two things with it: change it or spread it.  If it isn?t true, he must give it up.  If it is true, he must give it away."Please do not fear giving away the good news of Christ.  It?s true.  It?s real.  It?s powerful!  It?s eternal!   As you give it away you just might be amazed at how powerful it really is!  People will come to faith.  They will believe.  They will surrender.  CONCLUSION---------------------------This Christmas there may be some things to fear: loneliness, lots of traffic while traveling, overeating while celebrating, and bills to pay from those credit card purchases.But there is one thing we must never fear!  We must never fear the truth of the gospel of Jesus Christ!  We?ve heard it a thousand times:  JESUS IS THE REASON FOR THE SEASON!He is the son of the living God.  He is the savior of the world.  He is our savior.  WE MUST LIVE FOR HIM!  WE MUST SPREAD THE GOOD NEWS!