REACHING OUTPsalm 126:6INTRO.- ILL.- A man once prayed like this:Lord, bless me and my wifeMy son John and his wifeUs four and no more.A childless couple prayed:Lord, bless us two,And that will do.An old bachelor prayed:Lord, bless only me,That?s as far as I can see.Brethren, many people can only see as far as the end of their nose: me, me, and me.  And me, me, me is all they think about and live for.ILL.- A Sunday School teacher, after teaching the lesson of the Good Samaritan, asked the class what they had learned.  One little boy piped up and said, ?I learned that whenever I get into trouble somebody better help me out.?ILL.- The preacher was called to hear the reading of the will of a wealthy member of his church who had died.  The preacher and the man?s family members were all very disappointed to hear the will which read, ?BEING OF SOUND MIND AND BODY, I SPENT ALL MY MONEY ON MYSELF.?ILL.- A man and his wife went to a fair.  The man was fascinated by the airplane rides, but he balked at the price of the tickets which were $20 each.   ?Let?s make a deal,? said the pilot, ?If you and your wife can ride without making a single sound, I won?t charge you anything.  Otherwise, you pay the full price.??Good deal,? said the man.  So they went for a plane ride.  And when they got back the pilot said, ?If I hadn?t been there I never would have believed it.  YOU NEVER MADE A SOUND.??It wasn?t easy either,? said the man, ?I ALMOST YELLED WHEN MY WIFE FELL OUT OF THE PLANE.?That man was more concerned about saving his money than saving his wife.Brethren, the biggest problem that most of us face in life is selfishness or self-centeredness!  We may not want to admit that, but it?s the truth.We?re generally more concerned about our likes and dislikes and our wants more than anybody else?s.  Even more than that of our mate and our family members and often, MORE THAN THE LORD!Yes!  We generally choose our will over the Lord?s will!  I?m not saying that we are totally selfish people.  We will have our good days when we are think more of others than ourselves.  But overall, we are pretty self-centered creatures!ILL.- Oscar Wilde, the famous poet/playwright who died in 1900, said, ?Come over here and sit next to me.  I?m dying to tell you all about myself.?  And guess what?  He died at the tender age of only 46!  Wonder if he reaped what he sowed?!ILL.- G. Gordon Liddy of the infamous Watergate Affair said, ?I have found within myself all I need and all I ever shall need.  I am a man of great faith, but my faith is in G. Gordon Liddy.  I have never failed me.?Some day G. Gordon Liddy will fail himself, because no one who is totally self-centered is going to get in the door of heaven!ILL.- I noticed an article on the internet the other day entitled, ?9 WAYS TO GET YOUR WAY MORE OFTEN.?  What is that?  It?s nothing but teaching people to be self-centered!Brethren, while selfishness is the way of the world and the way most people think and live, IT SHOULD NOT BE FOR THE CHRISTIAN!Jesus didn?t live for self, for himself!  He lived for others!  His whole life revolved around ministering to others!Peter characterized Jesus in Acts 10:38 as one who ?went around doing good and healing all who were under the power of the devil.?Matt. 20:28 Jesus said of himself, ?The son of man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.?Today, I want us to think about others!  I want us to think about reaching out to others and ministering to them.  What is the greatest thing we can do for others?I believe it is to give them the gospel of Jesus Christ.  Because if they come to believe in Jesus as the Christ and trust Him and surrender to Him they will someday go to heaven.  AND THAT?S THE GREATEST GIFT WE COULD GIVE TO ANYBODY!  Or the greatest thing we could do for anybody.PROP.- Our text in Ps. 126:6 tells the story about what it takes to share Christ with others.1- The going of the servant2- The flowing of the tears3- The sowing of the seed4- The mowing of the harvestI. THE GOING OF THE SERVANT?He who goes out...?  The ?going? is the starting place for the work of sharing Christ with others.Matt. 28:19 Jesus said, ?Go ye therefore and make  disciples...?Mark 16:15  ?Go into all the world...?Luke 19:10 ?For the Son of man is come to seek and to save the lost.?  The ?seeking? has to come before the ?saving.?ILL.- Preacher John Wesley once said, ?The church must go to the lost or go to oblivion.?ILL.- Someone else put it this way: ?Any church which is satisfied to hold her own is on the way to the cemetery.?ILL.- I worked as the Asst. Manager for the Silk Tree Factory in Cape G., MO, for about 3 years.  Last year the manager said to me, ?I?m not looking forward to next year because we have some big sales to beat.?  AND GUESS WHAT?  They?re not beating them this year!Why?  It?s all because I?m not there, of course!  Ha!  I wish!  No, it?s because of a variety of reasons.  But the manager is worried.  Why?  Because stores that don?t continue to increase in business generally go out of business.  AND THE SAME IS TRUE OF CHURCHES.Many churches across the US are dying because they are not reaching out to anyone!ILL.- P. H. Welshimer preached at the First Christian Church of Canton, Ohio, for about 56 years.  And at one time, they had one of the largest Sunday Schools in the world.  Yes, one of the largest! That was a long time ago, of course.Brother Welshimer said, ?If we don?t go, we?re goners.  If we want them coming down the aisle, we?ve got to go down the street.  They will not seek.  They must be sought.?Brother Welshimer was right!  We?ve got to go if we?re gonna grow!ILL.- Dr. Kermit Long said, ?With all our education, our fine buildings, our image of the church, we are doing less to win people to Christ than our unschooled forefathers did.  We?re no longer fishers of men, but keepers of the aquarium, and we spend most of our time swiping fish or swapping fish from each other?s bowl.?I?m not against someone coming to our church from another church, but we never be in the business of stealing sheep from other churches!That?s not why God put us here.  He put us here to seek the lost and present Christ to them in some form or another!ILL.- A certain preacher called his leaders together and said he was about to resign his ministry at that church because he hadn?t seen anybody won to Christ for a considerable period of time.They begged him to stay, saying that they were greatly edified by his preaching.He said, ?Edified for what purpose??  Turning to one leader, he asked him if he had ever won a soul to Christ.  ?No,? was the answer.  And the question was put to the next leader and the next and the next.  And they all answered that they had led no one to Christ.Finally, the preacher got all the leaders to promise that they also would resign with him, if within a short period of time they personally led no one to Christ.  By Monday morning one leader had led a fellow worker to Christ and to be baptized.  And by thenext Sunday a total of 11 people had been led to Christ and to the baptistry!Brethren, if we want to see the church grow then we must ?go? in some form or another!That ?going? could be door-to-door calling or it could be witnessing at work, or it could be inviting a neighbor or a good friend to come to church.  BUT SOME KIND OF ?GOING? MUST TAKE PLACE IF WE TRULY CARE ABOUT OTHERS LIKE OUR LORD DID!ILL.- In Oceanview, Delaware, Brother Harvey Bream, former President of Cin. Bible College, held a revival many years ago.  A 75-year-old man who attended the meeting indicated that he was not a Christian but wanted someone to call on him.  Harvey and the local preacher called on the old gentleman on Monday morning.  Harvey had three Bible studies with the man that week.  After the third Bible study, Harvey had prayer with the man.  After prayer, he looked up and tears were streaming down the old man?s cheeks.  He said, ?Mr. Bream, I?ve gone to a lot of churches in 75 years and heard a lot of preacher?s preach, but you are the first two men to take the time to come into my home and show me from the Bible what I must do to be saved.?  AND THEY BAPTIZED THAT MAN THAT DAY.And listen to this: That old gentleman had lived for almost all of his 75 years just 8 houses from that church building!  That?s somewhat shocking and embarrassing.I wonder how many people live within 8 houses from our church but have never been called on by us!Sinners are not commanded to go to church on Sunday, BUT THE CHURCH IS COMMANDED TO GO TO SINNERS!The going of the servant.  We need to be ?goers? in some form or another.II. THE FLOWING OF THE TEARS?He who goes out weeping....?ILL.- A husband said to his wife, ?Why do you sniffle and cry over a TV program and the imaginary woes of people you have never met??She replied, ?For the same reason you scream and yell when a man you don?t know makes a touchdown.?Brethren, most of us have cried over something or somebody, real or not, and whether we?ve known them or not.ILL.- When I was just 18 years old I lost my job at the Foodtown grocery store in Webb City, MO and I went outside to my car and cried my heart out.  And less than two weeks later I had another job at Safeway.  I felt that my tears were justified at that time.  They were, but they were also not lasting nor devastating!We have cried over the loss of money, the loss of material things, the loss of a job, etc.  BUT HAVE WE EVER CRIED OVER PEOPLE?!ILL.- It has been said, ?The reason we have so many dry baptistries is because we have so many dry eyes!?  Ouch!Could it be true?  Yes, indeed.  Someone else said, ?We have piety without pity!  Passion without compassion!?Matt. 9:35-36 ?Jesus went through all the towns and villages, teaching in their synagogues, preaching the good news of the kingdom and healing every disease and sickness.  When he saw the crowds, he had compassion on them....?Whenever Jesus saw hurting, helpless people he had compassion on them!  WHAT ABOUT US?  Have you seen any hurting, helpless people lately?  Did you really look at them?   And if so, how did you feel about them?  Did you look with compassion?  Did you pray for them?  Did you speak to them?  Did you offer to help in any way?ILL.- I read in the newspaper the other day where that young mother 8-year-old twins was killed at the bagel factory here in Mattoon.  NOW THERE?S SOMETHING TO CRY ABOUT!  Have you wept over those 8-year-old children?  How can we not feel compassion for them?  How can we not hurt for them?You know that God?s heart is breaking for them!  And to some degree, ours should be too!  There is something with your heart if you don?t feel something for them.ILL.- When a couple of struggling Salvation Army officers wrote to William Booth, telling him they had tried everything to get people to come to Christ and failed, he sent back this reply, ?TRY TEARS!?  They did and they had a revival.Of course, our tears must be natural.  They must come forth naturally out of a heart of compassion for hurting, lost people.HAVE YOU NO TEARS FOR THE LOST?  The hurting?  The helpless?  The lonely?  The divorced?  The widows and widowers?  The homeless?  The harlots?  The children? etc.ILL.- It was said of John Welch, a famous Scottish preacher, that he kept a blanket to wrap himself when he got up at night to pray.   His wife would complain when she found lying on the floor weeping.He would reply, ?Woman, I have the souls of three thousand to answer for and I know not how it is with many of them.?  Wow!  John Welch who sincerely wept over a lot of people.Have you wept over any souls lately?  If ever.ILL.- On Friday night, Dec. 10, 1982, around 9 p.m. my mom called me and said that dad was in the hospital because of a heart attack.  I told her I would get there just as soon as I could and I lived about 200 miles away.  Well, I didn?t leave night and the next morning about 5 a.m. the phone rang. I wondered, ?Who in the world is calling at this time of the morning??  It was mom and she said, ?Daddy?s gone.?  I never had anything strike me as hard as that.  At least, at that time.  And at Dad?s funeral I wept and wept.  I wept louder and longer and harder than anyone.  You see, my dad was not a Christian and that thought just tore me apart.Brethren, what it?s going to take to get us to weeping over the souls of men and women and boys and girls?  Will it take the death of another lost loved one?  Somehow, we need to get the compassion of Jesus.  We need the heart of Jesus for people that will cause us to go and perhaps cause the tears to flow.1- The going of the servant2- The flowing of the tearsIII. THE SOWING OF THE SEED?He who goes out weeping, CARRYING SEED TO SOW...?Farmers who don?t sow any seed don?t get any crop!  And we won?t get a crop of souls without sowing some gospel seed!ILL.- In New England, the long-standing custom is for a visiting preacher to stay with a family in the church.  One Sunday, the lady of the house who was hosting the preacher prepared a great breakfast of bacon, eggs, hashbrowns, toast and even some delicious waffles.The preacher apologized, saying, ?I?m sorry, but I never eat the morning I preach.?The mother and her 8-year-old son went to church that morning and after the service was over his mother asked him, ?How did you like the preacher?s sermon?? The little boy said, ?He should have et.?Brethren, good or bad, we must sow some gospel seeds if we expect to reap a harvest of souls!  And surprisingly, God can sometimes use the worst of sermons or the worst of witnessing to lead people to Christ.Matt. 10:7  Jesus told the twelve disciples, ?As you go, preach the message....?Acts 8:4 ?Those who had been scattered preached the word wherever they went.?As the people went, they preached the Word!  Wherever they went, they preached the Word!  They sowed gospel seed everywhere they went: at work, at Wal-marts, K-mart, the grocery store, the pizza place, Cowdy?s, Steak ?n Shake, at the ball park, on the golf course, at the lake, while shopping, etc.ILL.- Preacher Bob Russell of the large Southeast Christian Church wrote an article for the Christian Standard one time entitled, ?When you share your faith.?He said, ?Some people say, ?I?m not very vocal about my faith.  I just let my light shine before men.  I win them by my life-style which speaks for itself.??Russell said, ?That sounds good and never offends anyone, but the problem is it seldom works.  When was the last time someone came to you and said, ?I?ve been observing your life and I?m so impressed.  Can you tell me how to become a Christian???Brethren, Bob Russell is not putting down the idea of living a good, faithful and honest Christian life.   We all know that people are turned off by Christians who act ?holier than thou? or perhaps act like they are better than other people.  Or they speak to you in the church house but not outside.Russell is just saying that people become Christians by hearing the gospel message!Rom. 10:17 ?Faith comes by hearing and hearing by the word of Christ.?  Faith comes by hearing the message, by hearing the Bible, the Word, the gospel!We need to live the faith but at the same time we need to witness whenever we are given the opportunity.  And if we?re serious about witnessing God will give us the opportunity.Here?s an example of what I?m talking about.ILL.- A man said to a friend of his, ?Come and have a round of golf with me on Sunday morning.?  ?Oh, I couldn?t do that, I have to go to church.??Well,? replied the friend, ?I don?t know what kind of church you attend, but you can keep it to yourself.  I have asked you to play golf with me a dozen times but you have never invited me to your church.?  Could it be that some people are just waiting for an invitation?  Here?s another example of sowing gospel seed.ILL.- A businessman landed in the Dallas airport and realized that he had an hour and 20 minutes before his next flight.  He thought, ?How can I be used for the Lord during this time??  He had a supply of gospel tracts with him.  So he inserted one of his business cards inside each gospel tract.  Then he gave them to the people who were waiting for their flights.But he didn?t just pass them out and say nothing.  Instead, he said to each person, ?Pardon me.  I have a little booklet here that explains how a person can become a Christian.  Inside is my business card.  I would like for you to read this tract and if you have any questions, I will be sitting over there waiting for my flight.  I have some time and I?d be glad to talk to you.  Or if you would like to write me, my address is on the card.?At the end of that hour and 20 minutes people were standing in line to ask questions about how to become a Christian.  And for weeks afterward, that Christian businessman received letters from interested people.COULD IT BE, BRETHREN, THAT PEOPLE ARE THAT STARVED FOR THE TRUTH  OF THE GOSPEL OF CHRIST?I believe that many people are.  They are just waiting for some compassionate, caring Christian to offer a witness to them.  AND WE NEED TO DO IT!We need to look for ways to witness to people.  Be bold.  Be like Paul who said in Romans 1:16, ?For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, it is the power of God to salvation to everyone who believes....?The gospel is both dynamic and dynamite!  It has the power to penetrate people?s hearts and mind, and blow sin right out of their lives!  But it won?t work unless we spread it around!If the gospel of Jesus Christ is true we must give it away!1- The going of the servant2- The flowing of the tears3- The sowing of the seedIV. THE MOWING OF THE HARVEST?He who goes out weeping, carrying seed to sow, will return with songs of joy, CARRYING HIS SHEAVES WITH HIM.?  That?s the mowing of the harvest.If we have gone and gone with compassionate hearts, and if we have sown the gospel seed, there will be a harvest of souls!  There will be a mowing of the harvest!ILL.- One church sent in its annual statistics to its denominational headquarters.  Here is what they reported.Number of members added by baptism - 0Number of members added by letter - 0Number of members dismissed by letter - 5Number of members who have died - 3Amount of money raised for home missions - 0Amount of money raised for foreign missions - 0At the bottom of the report they wrote, ?PRAY FOR US, BRETHREN, THAT WE CONTINUE FAITHFUL TO THE END.?  Huh?  Faithful to the end.  That?s not what I call ?faithfulness.?They experienced no growth in any shape or form and that?s because they hadn?t done their homework!  BUT GROWTH IS POSSIBLE!  A HARVEST IS POSSIBLE!Matthew 9:37-38  Jesus said, ?The harvest is plentiful but the workers are few.  Ask the Lord of the harvest, therefore, to send out workers into his harvest field.?  The harvest is plentiful!  And everywhere!ILL.- Southeast Christian Church, Louisville, KY.  Bob Russell went there to be their preacher in 1966 and at that time they had an average attendance of 176.  The church has relocated several times and they now worship in a building that seats 9,000 people.  They have 12,000 members and probably average that many people in attendance every Sunday.  Since 1987 they?ve had over a 1,000 additions every year!  How?s that for a plentiful harvest?!  But it?s not just happening in large cities or bigger communities.  It?s happening in many places, both large and small.ILL.- Tyro, Kansas, is a small town of only about 200 people but the Christian Church there runs over 500!  Amazing!  PTL!ILL.- Iberia, MO, population 852 has six churches in town.  I went to be their preacher in 1974 and by 1980, which was our best year, we averaged 170 in a building which seated only 180.  Wow!  You bet!The harvest is plentiful or it can be!  AND IT CAN BE IN MATTOON AS WELL!  But we have to be faithful in living the life and sowing the seed!ILL.- Preacher Bob Russell tells the story about a women who attended their church.  He said, ?Following a women?s Bible study group a woman asked to see me.  She told of a sordid past of four marriages and sinful complications although she was only in her early 30?s.  She asked, ?Can I come forward and be baptized this Sunday?  I?m so thankful for what I?m learning from studying the Bible here.  If only I?d known about these principles earlier in life.  They could have saved me from a lot of hurt.  But thank you for teaching me the Bible.  This is changing my whole life!?Brethren, she was a thirsty woman!  She was thirsting for the truth of the gospel and God?s Word!  And when she found it, heard it and allowed it to sink into the depths of her soul, she responded to it.THE HARVEST IS PLENTIFUL!  I believe there are many people in our world and community who are just like that woman.  And they will respond to Christ if we do our part in reaching them with the gospel message.CONCLUSION-----------------------------------------Lord, help me to live from day to day	In such a self-forgetful wayThat even when I kneel to pray	My prayer shall be for ... others.Help me in all the work I do	To ever be sincere and trueAnd know that all I?d do for you	Must needs be done for ... others.Let ?self? be crucified and slain	And buried deep and all in vainMay efforts be to rise again	Unless to live for ... others.And when my work on earth is done	And my new work in heaven?s begunMay I forget the crown I?ve won	While thinking still of ... others.Others, Lord, yes, others	Let this my motto be,Help me to live for others	That I may live like Thee.When we live for others we will go and our tears will flow and the seed will be sown and there will bea mowing of the harvest.Commit your life to live for others, just like Jesus.