INTRO.- God bless America!  That?s not just an expression used by politicians and presidents!  It?s an expression that we, too, should use.  Why?  BECAUSE WE BELIEVE THAT GOD HAS BLESSED AMERICA AND WE STILL WANT HIM TO BLESS AMERICA!ILL.- Lee Hufstettler wrote in Reader?s Digest, ? It was a beautiful Sunday afternoon in Georgia.  After an early dinner, I asked my uncle if he would like to go for a walk and look at a few garage sales down the street.  He said a walk would be fine, but that he didn?t much care for garage sales.  I asked why not, and he answered, "Because if they don?t want it, I don?t want it either!" We have so much in America that we have garage sales to practically give it away!  In fact, I think our church ought to have one big garage sale in order to give stuff away.  Everyone in the church could contribute their stuff and help to staff the church for the big day.  We could advertise it in the paper and in the radio.  Have it early some Saturday morning for just a couple of hours.  We would have hoards of people come by our church.  WHAT A GREAT WAY TO ADVERTIZE!  ILL.- Some years ago Richard DeVos, co-founder of the Amway Corporation, made a comparison of America and what was then the Soviet Union.  He told what America would have to do to equal Russia.  We would have to rip up 13 of every 14 miles of our paved highways.  We?d have to scrap 19 of every 20 cars and trucks and destroy over 2000 colleges.  We?d have to destroy 7 out of every 10 single-family houses and cut our living standard by 2/3?s!  Hmm, cut our living standard by 2/3?s.  Doesn?t sound very good to me.Any takers?  I don?t think any of us would want to do these things.  AMERICA IS THE LAND OF PLENTY!  ILL.- B. J. and Nelda?s son and daughter-in-law, Rick and Sherry Simpkins, just got back from a trip to Spain.  Nelda told me they said it was nice but the food wasn?t very good and they don?t want to go back.Doesn?t this tell you something about America?  How blessed we are with good food/restaurants, pleasant surroundings, comfort, luxury, etc.?ILL.- When I was just a young man starting out in the working world in 1959-60 there were not many restaurants.  I think maybe Dairy Queen, McDonald?s and I don?t remember what else.  BUT LOOK AT WHAT WE HAVE TODAY?  We have more eating places in Jonesboro than you could count!  And it?s not just food.  We have everything in America!  Why do you think people in other countries are so envious of Americans?  ILL.- When we were children we had no AC in our homes, just screen doors and most of them had holes in them to let the flies in.  And some doors had no screens at all!  BUT look at what we live in now?  There?s hardly anyone I know who doesn?t have AC and a nice house to live in.God has blessed both America and us!  But it doesn?t just stop with material blessings.  He has also blessed America spiritually.  Look at the churches across America, the Christian TV programs, the Christian books and the gospel music, etc. that are available to us in America.Our church buildings are far more comfortable than they used to be: AC comfort, padded pews, etc.  And in some cases, the music is better, the preaching is better, etc.  At least, in the sense of not so much ?hell-fire and brimstone.?  Preaching is more geared to meet the needs of people today in this fast-paced, stressed out society.  This is not to say that we still don?t preach against sin, because we do.  Just not the same way.We are blessed in America!  God has blessed America.  Now it?s our turn.PROP.- Let?s think about some ways that we as Americans and American Christians can bless America.1- Respect the government2- Pray for the authorities3- Live the lifeI. RESPECT THE GOVERNMENTI Pet. 2:13-14 ?Submit yourselves for the Lord?s sake to every authority instituted among men: whether to the king, as the supreme authority, or to governors (for us, police officers), who are sent by him to punish those who do wrong and to commend those who do right.?ILL.- A policeman said to a woman, ?Here is your parking ticket, maam.?  The woman said, ?And just what you do you do when you catch a real criminal??  The police officer replied, ?I don?t know.  All I ever catch are the innocent ones.?Many times when people get ticketed by the police for speeding or whatever, they don?t think they deserve the ticket so they try to argue their way out of it.  I have found that doesn?t work. Sometimes it just means a bigger ticket.  RESPECT AND SUBMISSION ARE BEST.ILL.- In the mid-60?s when I was a student at Ozark Bible College I had a new Pontiac Firebird with a 400 CI engine.  Talk about fast!  That car would move, consequently you had to keep your eye on the speedometer.  One afternoon I was cruising down 4th street in Joplin, MO, not paying attention to my speed.  It was a 25 mph speed limit but I was not doing 25 mph.  Suddenly, I looked into my rearview mirror and saw those flashing lights.  I immediately pulled over.  I got out of the car (which is a ?no, no? these days) and went back to the officer.  He said, ?Do you realize you were going 45 mph in a 25 mph zone??  I said, ?No sir, but if you said it, I believe it.?How?s that for respect and submission?  I?ll tell you one thing, it paid off.  He was very nice since I was nice to him.  He spoke pleasantly to me and even more importantly, he demonstrated grace.  He did give me a speeding ticket, but he only made it for 35 mph in a 25 zone instead of 45 mph.  It cost me $20 instead of $40.  Cheap by today?s standards, of course.It pays to show respect to governmental authorities, police and otherwise.  Rom. 13:6-7 ?This is also why you pay taxes, for the authorities are God?s servants, who give their full time to governing.  Give everyone what you owe him: If you owe taxes, pay taxes; if revenue, then revenue; if respect, then respect; if honor, then honor.?Pay your taxes.  Ugh!  Don?t you just hate to pay taxes?  Only two certainties in life: death and taxes.  Nearly every April 15th I pray that the Lord will come back so I won?t have to pay anymore taxes.ILL.- Many years ago I thought I would be smart and get out of paying into social security.  I wasn?t trying to disobey the law.  I just thought I could use my money in a better way than what the government was doing with it.  There was a waiver or exemption that a preacher could sign and get out of paying social security.  One of my deacons in the church was an accountant and did my taxes for me.  I asked him about it and he said, ?We?ll try it.?  So I made out my taxes, signed that waiver, sent in my money but not enough money to cover social security.  AND THEN I WAITED AND WAITED TO HEAR FROM IRS. I never heard from them whether I was approved or not.  So I wrote them a letter.  Still, I didn?t hear from them.  I even called them on the phone, but couldn?t get any answer from them.  Finally, two years later they wrote me a letter saying, ?You can?t do that.  You don?t qualify.  You owe us plus interest.?Come to find out, I was not qualified for that exemption after all.  It was an exemption available to ministers who first started their ministry.  Anyway, I?m still paying.  Good thing, too, because someday I hope to draw some social security.  I HOPE TO!ILL.- Gardel was an 88 year-old poor widow living in France.  She received a tax bill that needed immediate payment.  Counting up her money, she found she had only enough to pay the bill.  Accordingly, she set out to walk 14 miles to the nearest tax office to pay the bill.  She said, ?We need to take care of our government financially so that it stays democratic.  I don?t have a checking account, and can?t afford the bus fare.  I thought of hitch-hiking, but it isn?t proper for a lady.?  Tax officials arranged to give her a ride home.How?s that for respecting governmental authorities?  We can learn from her attitude and actions.II. PRAY FOR THE AUTHORITIESI Tim. 2:1-4  ?I urge, then, first of all, that requests, prayers, intercession and thanksgiving be made for everyone? for kings and all those in authority, that we may live peaceful and quiet lives in all godliness and holiness.  This is good, and pleases God our Savior, who wants all men to be saved and to come to a knowledge of the truth.?We need to pray for our leaders in authority.  Pray for peace.  Pray for salvation.ILL.- One man said, ?A friend of mine took his small son with him to town one day to run some errands.  When lunchtime came, they went to McDonalds and the father said, ?Son, we?ll just have a silent prayer.??Dad got through praying first and waited for the boy to finish his prayer, but he just sat with his head bowed for an unusually long time.  When he finally looked up, his father asked him, ?What in the world were you praying about all that time??  He replied, ?How do I know?  It was a silent prayer.??Brothers and sisters, I hope we know what we are praying for, no matter what kind of prayer it is, silent or otherwise.One thing is sure:  WE SHOULD BE PRAYING!  These days we should be praying much of the time!  Praying for America and praying for all kinds of people, leaders, etc.ILL.- Samuel Chadwick said, "The one concern of the devil is to keep Christians from praying.  He fears nothing from prayerless studies, prayerless work and prayerless religion.  He laughs at our toil, mocks at our wisdom, but he trembles when we pray." ILL.- E.M. Bounds said, ?What the church needs today is not more machinery or better, not new organizations or more and novel methods, but men whom the Holy Spirit can use - men mighty in prayer.  The Holy Spirit does not flow through methods, but through men of prayer.?  And we might add, through women of prayer.We must be a people of prayer if we are going to see any good come to America and our own lives.ILL.- In 1872 the famous American preacher, Dwight L. Moody, went to England, not to preach, but to listen to others preach.  One Sunday morning he was asked to preach in a London pulpit, but somehow the right spiritual atmosphere was not there.  He confessed afterwards that he never had such a hard time preaching.  Everything seemed dead.  He said to himself. ?What a fool I was to consent to preach.  I came here to listen and here I am preaching.?Then the awful thought came to him that he had to preach again that night, and only the fact that he had given his promise to do so kept him faithful to the engagement.  But when Moody stepped into the pulpit that night and faced the congregation, he was conscious of a new atmosphere.  He said, ?The powers of an unseen world seemed to have fallen on the audience.?  As he concluded his message and offered the invitation, he said, ?If there is a man or woman here tonight who will accept Jesus Christ, please stand up.?   AND ABOUT 500 PEOPLE STOOD UP!  Now for the rest of the story!  When Dwight L. Moody preached at that morning service there was a woman in the congregation who had an invalid sister at home.  When she returned home she told her invalid sister that the preacher had been Mr. Moody from Chicago.  ?What!? she exclaimed, ?Mr. Moody from Chicago!  ?I read about him some time ago in an American newspaper, and I have been praying for God to send him to London, to preach in our church.  If I had known he was going to preach this morning I would have eaten no breakfast.  I would have spent the whole time in prayer.  Now, sister, go out of the room, lock the door, send me no dinner.  And no matter who comes, don?t let them see me. I am going to spend the whole afternoon and evening in prayer.?  And so it was that Sunday night when Dwight L. Moody preached that there was a completely different atmosphere and 500 people said they wanted to accept Jesus as their Savior.DOES IT DO ANY GOOD TO PRAY FOR PEOPLE?  What do you think?  We must pray!  If we pray long enough, hard enough, fervent enough, and faithful enough God will change some things for the better! We must pray for the leaders of our country.  We must pray that God will enable us to live peaceful and quiet lives.  We must pray for people to be saved in Christ.  We must pray daily for people in order for God to bless America.III. LIVE THE LIFETitus 2:9-10  ?Teach slaves (or workers) to be subject to their masters in everything, to try to please them, not to talk back to them, and not to steal from them, but to show that they can be fully trusted, so that in every way they will make the teaching about God our Savior attractive.?3:1-2  ?Remind the people to be subject to rulers and authorities, to be obedient, to be ready to do whatever is good, to slander no one, to be peaceable and considerate, and to show true humility toward all men.?ILL.- The sign in the store window read: NO HELP WANTED. As two men passed by, one said to the other, "You should apply - you?d be great." Brothers and sisters, some people don?t want to work.  They don?t want to work when they get to work.  But the scripture teaches:  Obey your boss.  Work hard.  Don?t talk back.  Don?t steal.  Be peaceable, considerate, humble, etc.  I Thess. 4:11 ?Make it your ambition to lead a quiet life, to mind your own business and to work with your hands??  We are admonished in Scripture to work and to work hard at our work; whatever we do for a living.ILL.- I remember working nights (10 p.m. to 7 a.m.) at Safeway in Joplin, MO, in the 1960?s.  There were 5 or 6 guys who worked at night to stock the shelves.  The manager would lock us in the store and then let us out in the morning.  I remember one particular night that soon after we got to work an employee unfolded a lawn chair that we sold and went to sleep.  I think he slept something like 4 hours that night.  He worked very little.  HE WAS NOT A GOOD EMPLOYEE AND DIDN?T LAST LONG.  His actions did little to bless America.  And I saw other employees do similar things that were not a blessing to their job or America, such as: take an extra long breaks, hide in the backroom, steal from the company, show up to work late or leave early, call in sick when they weren?t sick at all, etc.  THESE KINDS OF ACTIONS DO NOT BLESS AMERICA!  They say that somebody is selfish, lazy, and a thief.ILL.- Larry Burkett (passed away 2003) was a nationally known Christian lecturer who conducted seminars on how to manage your money.  He received a letter from a non-Christian woman who owned a small business one time.  She wrote, ?I?ve had trouble with my employees for years.  They will not do an honest day?s work. They are lazy and rebellious.  I heard your radio program and decided to hire all Christians.  I did, but I have never had a more complaining, griping group of people.  They were always mumbling about something.  I?ve now replaced them with refugees.  The refugees are so grateful to work; they?ll do everything I ask. They don?t grumble and complain.  I think American Christians need to wake up.?Brothers and sisters, I don?t believe what she said is true for all Christian people, but it is apparently true for some.  To bless America we must be good, honest, hard-working people.Also, to bless America, we must be peaceable and considerate and show true humility toward all men. ILL.- In the old comic strip, THE WIZARD OF ID, one day, Rodney, one of the warriors, came in from battle.  He was bruised and battered, and his horse was crippled.  The king said to him, ?Where have you been??  Rodney the warrior said, ?Out fighting your enemies on the west.  I?ve pillaged, and I?ve burned, and I?ve killed your enemies on the west.?  The king replied, ?But I don?t have any enemies on the west.?  Rodney said, ?YOU DO NOW!?It seems like some people are always looking for trouble, always looking for a fight. But the Christian is supposed to be peaceable, gentle, kind, considerate of others.Heb. 12:14 ?Make every effort to live in peace with all men...?In other words, don?t go around stirring up people or trouble. Don?t be threatening your neighbor every time he or she does something you don?t like or anybody else for that matter.  Don?t go throwing your weight around.  Don?t go out of your way to cause trouble or make enemies.  Don?t argue all the time with people, thinking you are always right or you are always defending some righteous cause.Brothers and sisters, we should be thoughtful and considerate of others.  We should be different from most people of the world.  Be a shining example of kindness and of selflessness. Always be looking for opportunities to do good to others; to open doors for others, to smile, to speak a word of cheer or show kindness to others, etc.CONCLUSION----------------------------------------ILL.- An old Persian legend once pictured four angels watching God create the world.  One said, ?Why did God make it?? Another said, ?How did God make it??  A third said, ?Can I have it??  And the fourth said, ?CAN I HELP TO MAKE IT BETTER??1st - philosophical attitude - why?2nd - scientific attitude - how?3rd - selfish attitude - can I have it?4th - Christian attitude - Can I help to make it better?The United States of America is not what she should be.  And far too many have the wrong attitude about America.  Some question why she is becoming so corrupted.  Others ask, ?how did America get this way??  And others just want all they can get out of America, not thinking of others.  But the Christian person should be asking, ?How can I help to make America better??  ?How can I bless America??