INTRO.- ILL.- A man asked the preacher, ?How many active members do you have in your church??  The preacher said, ?They?re all active.  Half of them are working with me and half of them are working against me.?  AND THIS DOES HAPPEN IN SOME CHURCHES.  What?s a preacher to do in a situation like that?  Don?t answer that!ILL.- The following question was asked: ?When you have fifty people all of different opinions, what do you have??  Someone replied, ?A BAPTIST CHURCH.?  No, it could be any church but that would very sad.Hopefully, some unity of the Spirit exists in all churches that follow Christ. ILL.- One Sunday afternoon as a farmer was making hay the preacher stopped by to see him.  The preacher asked the farmer why he hadn?t been to church and the farmer replied, "To tell the truth, I would rather work in the hay field and think about the church than sit in the church and think about hay."While that may sound accurate to some people, I don?t believe that argument holds water.  Most folks who miss church because they are doing something else, are not thinking about church!ILL.- An usher went up to a man who had on his hat in church and asked him to remove it.  The man said, "Thank goodness, I thought that would do it.  I?ve been coming to this church for months and you are the first person to speak to me."I don?t think anyone would have to wear a hat in this church in order to be greeted or spoken to.  And it shouldn?t happen in any church.ILL.- The preacher?s sermon went on and on and on.  Finally, the preacher said, "What more can I say?"  From the back of the church someone said, "Say Amen."  Meaning, it?s time to go home.  You?ve preached long enough.  ILL.- A preacher got carried away in his sermon and preached for two hours with no signs of ending.  Finally, one of the members got up to leave and the preacher said, "Brother, where are you going?"  He said, "I?m going to get a haircut."  The preacher said, "Why, didn?t you get one before you came to church?"  The man replied, "I didn?t need one then."How do you deal with people?  Hopefully, you deal with all people with as much graciousness as possible.Gal. 5:13 "You, my brothers, were called to be free. But do not use your freedom to indulge the sinful nature; rather, serve one another in love." Serve one another in love.  That?s the main way how we are to deal with one another church.PROP.- Our text gives us some specific insight into how to deal with people IN the church or how to treat them.1- Respect your leaders 2- Live peacefully with all3- Warn some, encourage others  4- Never seek vengeanceI. RESPECT YOUR LEADERS12Now we ask you, brothers, to respect those who work hard among you, who are over you in the Lord and who admonish you. 13Hold them in the highest regard in love because of their work.ILL.- Rodney Dangerfield said, "I get no respect."- "When I was born... the doctor came out to the waiting room and said to my father... I?m very sorry. We did everything we could... but he pulled through."- "When I played in the sandbox the cat kept covering me up."- "I could tell that my parents hated me. My bath toys were a toaster and a radio."- "With my father I got no respect.  I asked him, "How can I get my kite in the air?"  He told me to run off a cliff."All of us go through times when we get "no respect" or it may seem that way.  ILL.- Preacher Henry Ward Beecher once received a letter with one word written on it.  It read: "Fool."  The next Sunday he read the note in the pulpit and said, "I have received many letters from people who forgot to sign their names, but this is the first time I received a letter from someone who signed his name but forgot to write the letter."ILL.- After receiving a nasty letter the preacher sent it back to one of his members with this note attached: "The enclosed letter arrived on my desk just a few days ago.  I am sending it back to you because I think you should know that some idiot is sending out letters with your signature on it."ILL.- A local preacher joined a community service club and the members thought they would have some fun with him.  Under his name on the badge they gave him was printed "Hog Caller" as his occupation.  Everyone made a big deal as the badge was presented to him.  The preacher replied by saying, "I am usually called the ?shepherd of the sheep,? but you know your people better than I do."12Now we ask you, brothers, to respect those who work hard among you, who are over you in the Lord and who admonish you.We should always show respect to anyone who works hard and especially those work hard in order to bless others.  We often do this outside the church and should even more in the church.  It seems to me that many times we show greater respect for people in the world because of their wealth and fame than we do people who unselfishly serve Christ by serving others.ILL.- The actor Paul Newman recently passed away from cancer at the age of 83.  Multitudes of people raved about Newman as an actor and a man who gave away over $200 million to charity.And that?s all well and good, but what about the humble servant of Christ who serves Christ his or her entire life?  Doesn?t this person deserve some respect and honor?  MOST CERTAINLY but often it?s not given until that person goes to heaven.All church leaders who do a good job in serving the church deserve a certain amount of respect and honor.  How so?  Pat them on the back.  Give them a word of encouragement.II. LIVE PEACEFULLY WITH ALLLive in peace with each other.ILL.- A wise old gentleman retired and purchased a modest home near a junior high school.  He spent the first few weeks of his retirement in peace and contentment.  Then a new school year began.  The very next afternoon three young boys, full of youthful, after-school enthusiasm, came down his street, beating merrily on every trash can they encountered.  The crashing percussion continued day after day, until finally the wise old man decided it was time to take some action.The next afternoon, he walked out to meet the young percussionists as they banged their way down the street. Stopping them, he said, "You kids are a lot of fun.  I like to see you express your exuberance like that. In fact, I used to do the same thing when I was your age.  Will you do me a favor? "I?ll give you each a dollar if you?ll promise to come around every day and do your thing."  The kids were elated and continued to do a bang-up job on the trash cans.After a few days, the old-timer greeted the kids again, but this time he had a sad smile on his face.  "This recession?s really putting a big dent in my income," he told them. "From now on, I?ll only be able to pay you 50 cents to beat on the cans."The noisemakers were obviously displeased, but they did accept his offer and continued their afternoon ruckus. A few days later, the wily retiree approached them again as they drummed their way down the street.  "Look," he said, "I haven?t received my Social Security check yet, so I?m not going to be able to give you more than 25 cents. Will that be okay?""A lousy quarter?" the drum leader exclaimed. "If you think we?re going to waste our time, beating these cans around for a quarter, you?re nuts! No way, mister.  We quit!"  And the old man enjoyed peace.What?s it going to take to enjoy peace in this world?  More importantly, what about peace in the church?  ILL.- Aesop tells a fable about the dog who was crossing a bridge with a bone in his mouth.  Seeing the reflection in the water, he reached to snatch the bone that he saw in the water; and he dropped the one he already had, ending up with nothing.Any time we are selfish in life, in the world, in the church, there will be little peace.  One of the biggest struggles in life is with "self."  Self must not, cannot rule, if progress is to be made personally and congregationally.Rom. 12:18 ?If it is possible, as far as it depends on you, live at peace with everyone.?Rom. 14:19 ?Let us therefore make every effort to do what leads to peace and to mutual edification.?We must humble ourselves.  Be a listener, a helper.  Be supportive of one another.  Extend grace to one another.  Don?t be quick to judge others or criticize them.  III. WARN SOME, ENCOURAGE OTHERSILL.- According to an old legend, a man became lost in his travels and wandered into a bed of quicksand.- Confucius saw the man?s predicament and said, ?It is evident that men should stay out of places such as this.?- Next, Buddha observed the situation and said, ?Let that man?s plight be a lesson to the rest of the world.?- Then Mohammed came by and said to the sinking man, ?Alas, it is the Will of God.?- Finally Jesus appeared.  ?Take my hand, brother,? He said, ?and I will save you.?  Just like Jesus, we must be quick to help others, not put them down. 14And we urge you, brothers, warn those who are idle, encourage the timid, help the weak, be patient with everyone. ILL.- Warn the idle.  I heard about a young preacher who could never be found by his church members.  They often wondered where he was.  A preacher friend of mine said, "I?ll tell you where he was.  He was at the local swimming pool, sunning himself."  That young preacher needed to be warned, as in, "you?re here to serve, not to serve yourself."ILL.- An elderly woman from Brooklyn decided to prepare her will and make her final requests.  She told her rabbi she had two final requests.  First, she wanted to be cremated, and second, she wanted her ashes scattered over Bloomingdales."Bloomingdales!" the rabbi exclaimed.  "Why Bloomingdales?"  "Then I?ll be sure my daughters visit me twice a week." When children are not doing their duty to mom and dad or to others, they need to be warned or told about it.  When some church members get unruly, out of order or they are just plain lazy, they need to be warned.  ILL.- A preacher visited a family who had not attended church for some time.  He asked them why they hadn?t attended recently and the man said, "Well, preacher, I have been out of work, all the kids have been sick, and it has rained a lot.""But," the preacher said, "It?s always dry in the church!"  The husband said, "Well, that?s another reason we haven?t been there."  That delinquent family needed to be warned.  ILL.- I went to visit a family one time who had just lost the grandfather.  His son said, "Come on in, we?re all backsliders here."  Backsliders need to be warned.Encourage the timid.  I remember sitting a Sunday School class where a young deacon taught his first Sunday School lesson.  He was both timid and nervous.  But he did an excellent job and he needed to be encouraged by others.When someone is timid and/or weak in the faith, we need to get behind them, support them, encourage them and be patient with them.  NO ONE GROWS TO ADULTHOOD OVER NIGHT.14And we urge you, brothers, warn those who are idle, encourage the timid, help the weak, be patient with everyone. IV. NEVER SEEK VENGEANCE15Make sure that nobody pays back wrong for wrong, but always try to be kind to each other and to everyone else.ILL.- A college professor answered his telephone at 3:00 A.M. ?This is your neighbor, Mr. Smith,? said the voice.  ?Your dog is barking and keeping me awake.?  The professor thanked him kindly and hung up.  The next morning Mr. Smith?s telephone rang at exactly 3 A.M. ?This is the professor,? said the caller.  ?I just wanted you to know that I don?t have a dog!?What?s the problem with trying to get vengeance?  Nobody wins!ILL.- The front door of the Murphy?s house was badly warped, causing the door to jam now and then.  To pry it open they kept a hatchet handy.One day the doorbell rang.  Mr. Murphy peeked out through the curtains and then shouted in a voice that could be heard through three doors, "Quick, Tommy, it?s the preacher.  Go get the hatchet!"ILL.- A lady got into an argument with the preacher.  And he thought he would never see her again, however, she showed up that Sunday evening.  He said, "I thought you were leaving the church."  She said, "Pastor, I?m going to be loyal to my church even if the devil is in the pulpit."Romans 12:17-21 "17Do not repay anyone evil for evil. Be careful to do what is right in the eyes of everybody. 18If it is possible, as far as it depends on you, live at peace with everyone. 19Do not take revenge, my friends, but leave room for God?s wrath, for it is written: "It is mine to avenge; I will repay," says the Lord. 20On the contrary: "If your enemy is hungry, feed him; if he is thirsty, give him something to drink.  In doing this, you will heap burning coals on his head." 21Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good."CONCLUSION-----------------------ILL.- A.W. Tozer  in The Pursuit of God  said, ?Has it ever occurred to you that one hundred pianos all tuned to the same fork are automatically tuned to each other?  They are of one accord by being tuned, not to each other, but to another standard to which each one must individually bow.  So one hundred worshipers [meeting] together, each one looking to Christ, are in heart nearer to each other than they could possibly be?? Christ is our only hope for salvation, for forgiveness, for winning the lost, and He is also our only hope of being united to one another in the church.  