INTRO. - ILL.- The story is told of a politician who, after receiving the proofs of a portrait, was very angry with the photographer.  He stormed back to the photographer and said these angry words: "This picture does not do me justice!"  The photographer replied, "Sir, with a face like yours, you don?t need justice, you need mercy!"Let me say that with a HEART like ours, we all need mercy!   Why would I say this?  Because of this scripture.Isaiah 29:13 The Lord says: "These people come near to me with their mouth and honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me."Sometimes our hearts betray us.  We are not as faithful and committed to the Lord as we say we are.  And this is why I say we all need mercy!  We need the Lord?s mercy!And some days more than others.  It depends on how much we blow it.  But we all do need God?s mercy. ILL.- One night in 1935, Fiorello H. La Guardia, mayor of New York, showed up at a night court in the poorest ward of the city. He dismissed the judge for the evening and took over the bench. One case involved an elderly woman who was caught stealing bread to feed her grandchildren.  La Guardia said, "I?ve got to punish you.  Ten dollars or ten days in jail."As he spoke, he threw $10 into his hat.  He then fined everyone in the courtroom 50 cents for living in a city "where a person has to steal bread so that her grandchildren can eat."  The hat was passed around, and the woman left the courtroom with her fine paid and an additional $47.50. I don?t know if this story is true but if it is, then praise the Lord for that mayor who had the good hearted sense to demonstrate mercy on that poor lady.  He did even more than demonstrate mercy.  HE DEMONSTRATED KINDNESS BY GIVING TO HER AND ASKING OTHERS TO GIVE.Wouldn?t it be great if we saw more of this demonstrated in our world?  And in America where greed is so prevalent?We all need mercy and we all need to demonstrate mercy.  But here?s a modern example of no mercy.ILL.- Dec. 19, 2008.   A 49-year-old Florida woman says her former church is threatening to reveal her sins to its congregation after learning that she is in a "sexually immoral relationship."Rebecca Hancock told FOXNews.com that Grace Community Church, a non-denominational church in Jacksonville, Fla., was against her relationship with boyfriend Frank Young because the two were sexually active but not married.When she wasn?t willing to obey the church?s orders to leave him, she decided to leave the church instead, allowing her two children to remain active members.Now, she says, church elders have given her the worst ultimatum yet: In a Dec. 8 letter, they told her she either has to meet with them and end her "immoral" relationship or she will face public humiliation.?Bottom line, on January 4th they are going to the church publicly with my sins, and my children will be sitting in church at the time,? Hancock told FOXNews.com.While we don?t condone her actions, nor do we condone the actions of her former church.  I know what the church is trying to do but I?m not sure that?s what Jesus would have done.What did Jesus do when the Pharisees brought the woman to Him who had been caught in the act of adultery?  What did Jesus say to the Pharisees?  And what did He say to the woman?  (John 8:1-11)Mercy or no mercy?  What rules in our world?  I would like to say that mercy rules but I don?t believe it?s true. ILL.- John R. Stott said, "The Gospel is good news of mercy to the undeserving.  The symbol of the religion of Jesus is the cross, not the scales."PROP.- Let?s consider what our text has to say about the mercy of God demonstrated to us.1- In His mercy He has given us new birth2- In His mercy He has given us an inheritance3- In His mercy He has given us protectionI. IN HIS MERCY HE HAS GIVEN US NEW BIRTH3Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! In his great mercy he has given us new birth into a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.ILL.- Deep In the back woods of Tennessee, a hillbilly?s wife went into labor in the middle of the night, and the doctor was called out to assist in the delivery.  Since there was no electricity, the doctor handed the father-to-be a lantern and said, "Here.  You hold this high so I can see what I am doing."  Soon, a baby boy was brought into the world.Whoa there, said the doctor, "Don?t be in such a rush to put that lantern down.  I think there?s another one coming."  Sure enough, within minutes he had delivered a baby girl.  "Hold that lantern up, don?t set it down there?s another one!" said the doctor.Within a few minutes he had delivered a third baby. "No, don?t be in a hurry to put down that lantern, it seems there?s yet another one coming!" cried the doctor.  The redneck scratched his head in bewilderment, and asked the doctor, "You reckon it might be the light that?s attractin? ?em?In His mercy he has given us new birth.  What?s wrong with our first birth?  In my case, plenty.ILL.- I was born as a twin and my sister got most of the attention.  She was born weighing over 5 lbs. and I was born first but weighed just a little over 4 lbs.  I didn?t get to go home until I weighed at least 5 lbs. so I was in the hospital for a month.Nobody paid any attention to me.  When mom was in the nursing home in 2001 and 2002 I reminded her that she left me in that hospital to die!  I said, "You didn?t want me, did you??  She said, "Oh, Steven, I did too want you.  I went down to the telephone booth on the corner every day to call the hospital to check on you."Also, my sister got all the brains and where did that leave me?  It left me sleeping through the first grade and barely making the grade from then on.  My sister graduated in the top 10 of our class and I was below 50.  That?s something else that was wrong with my first birth.  I got left out on many things.Also, my sister now weighs 115 lbs., which is what she weighed when we graduated from high school in 1962 and I probably weigh 40 lbs. more than what I weighed at our graduation.  THAT?S NOT FAIR!  My first birth has caused me nothing but heartache and trouble in life!!!  Oh come on now, it?s not that bad!  No, it?s not that bad but I?m trying to make a point.It is true that by our first birth we are born into a world of sin and suffering and many things do go wrong.  But by our second birth we are born into a world of grace, mercy, love, forgiveness, and blessing!  Amen? By means of our second birth, we come into the kingdom of God, which eventually will lead us to eternal life.  By our first birth, we are destined to die!  By our second birth we are destined to live forever!3Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! In his great mercy he has given us new birth into a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.In mercy, God has given us to the ability to be born again, to experience a new birth, a new life and one that offers hope through the resurrection of Jesus.  God didn?t have to do this.  He could have just allowed us all to go to hell, but IN HIS MERCY (that?s the key) He opened the door to a new and better life.  An eternal life.II. IN HIS MERCY HE HAS GIVEN US AN INHERITANCE4And into an inheritance that can never perish, spoil or fade?kept in heaven for you, 5who through faith are shielded by God?s power until the coming of the salvation that is ready to be revealed in the last time. ILL.- Two friends meet in the street.  One looked forlorn and almost on the verge of tears.  The other man said, "Hey, how come you look like the whole world caved in?"The sad fellow said, "Let me tell you.  Three weeks ago, an uncle died and left me forty thousand dollars."  "That?s not bad.""Hold on, I?m just getting started.  Two weeks ago, a cousin I never knew kicked the bucket and left me eighty-five thousand free and clear."  "I?d like that.""Last week my grandfather passed away.  I inherited almost a quarter of a million."  "Then how come you look so glum?"  "This week I got nothing!"What inheritance?  That?s what most people would say.  Most people have no inheritance or will receive no inheritance because their family members (mom and dad, etc.) have nothing or had nothing.  That?s the way ball bounces with most people.  But I admit I am blessed in many ways.  I am blessed materially.ILL.- Mom passed away on June 30, 2002 and bless her sweet soul, she left me her house in Webb City, MO, which I sold in a matter of months and without the use of a realtor.  And I sold it for a bit more than it appraised for.  What a nice inheritance!And God bless you if you ever received any kind of inheritance at all!  But there?s a greater inheritance that we all have received!  4An inheritance that can never perish, spoil or fade?kept in heaven for you.  It can never perish, spoil or fade.  Sounds pretty incredible, doesn?t it?  ILL.- A man said:  I belong to a black church in Philadelphia and there was a funeral service for a friend of mine.  I?ll never forget the service.  Black funerals are great.  They?re the only funerals you come away from feeling good. The old preacher got up and first addressed the congregation for half an hour.  Then he turned to the corpse.  Opening the lid of the coffin, he started talking to my deceased friend!  In that soft soulful tone, he said:  ?Clarence, there?s a lot of things I should have told you that I never told you.  I?m gonna tell you now.?  That man preached so eloquently to that corpse. Finally, he grabbed the lid of the coffin, looked down into the motionless face and said, ?Clarence, goodnight!?  Then he slammed down the coffin lid.  He gave us a few seconds to recover and then turned toward us. At first he looked really mean.  Then he smiled a deep joyful smile and said with great conviction, ?And I know that the Lord?s gonna give him a good-morning!?  ILL.- Just ThinkOf stepping on shore,And finding it heaven;Of taking hold of a hand.And finding it God?s hand;Of breathing new air,And finding it heavenly air;Of feeling invigorated,And finding it immortality;Of passing from storm andTempest to an unbroken calm;Of waking up?And finding it HOME!III. IN HIS MERCY HE HAS GIVEN US PROTECTION4and into an inheritance that can never perish, spoil or fade?kept in heaven for you, 5who through faith are shielded by God?s power until the coming of the salvation that is ready to be revealed in the last time. Shielded by God?s power.  That sounds like protection to me.  In His mercy He has protected us in this life.  I don?t know much about a shield or being shielded but I know about protection.ILL.- A woman, worried about crime, started to carry a hand-gun. Five months after she?d begun carrying her gun she came out to her car in a dark parking lot and found it occupied by four men. She ordered them out.  They refused to move; she pulled her gun. Instantly four doors popped open and her car?s occupants fled into the night.  Then, as she started to load her groceries into the car, she noticed her car (same make and model) parked three spots away.Some people don?t feel safe in this world without some kind of protection; a gun, a bodyguard, etc.ILL.- My sister-in-law said that when her boy was 3 years old (and that was probably 45 years ago - 1963) that she could let him run loose in the mall in Joplin, MO.  A person sure couldn?t do that today.  I?m not sure that was the best thing to do back then but she didn?t fear that some person would kidnap him.  When I was a little tyke I never feared much because I had a mom and dad who loved me and were there to protect me in life.  I didn?t always help them in that department but they did the best they could to protect me.ILL.- I remember one time when there some concrete tile laying in the ditch across the street from our house.  I guess the street department was getting ready to use them for drainage purposes.  But i remember thinking they must be there for my play and pleasure.  One day I went running from one tile to the next and then suddenly, I slipped and went flying headfirst into one of those tiles.  And my skull got a good whack and crack and started to bleed profusely.  I went running back to the house with blood streaming down my face.And what did Mama do?  Well, I don?t remember if dad was home or not, but somehow mom got me to the doctor (mom didn?t drive) and he went to work on my head.  Mom held my hand while the doctor stitched my head back together before my brains fell out!Thank God for loving parents who are/were protective, helpful, soothing, caring, loving.  And thank God that we have a loving Heavenly Father who often protects us even without our knowledge.Remember that near accident you almost had?  Remember those times when perhaps a dozen bad things could have happened to you but didn?t?  Who in the world do you think protected you or shielded you from harm during those times?  I?LL GIVE YOU TWO GUESSES AND THE FIRST ONE DOESN?T COUNT!And then as adults and as Christians there were times that perhaps when temptation was very strong but somehow, strangely enough you did not yield or maybe you didn?t yield as badly as you could have.  WHO WAS YOUR PROTECTOR DURING THOSE TIMES?In His mercy He has shielded us with His power until the coming salvation, that is, probably grand finale of salvation.  In His mercy He often protects us from things that could hurt us spiritually.II Thessalonians 3:3 "But the Lord is faithful, and he will strengthen and protect you from the evil one."CONCLUSION-----------------------ILL.- Long ago, a poor woman from the slums of London was invited to go with a group of people for a holiday at the ocean. She had never seen the ocean before, and when she saw it, she burst into tears.  Those around her thought it was strange that she should cry when such a lovely holiday had been given her. "Why in the world are you crying?" they asked.  Pointing to the ocean she answered, "This is the only thing I have ever seen that there was enough of." When we think of the ocean how can we not think of the ocean of God?s love and mercy?  HE IS RICH IN MERCY!  (Eph. 2:4)  He has oceans of mercy for us!  And He demonstrates His mercy in many ways: a new birth, heaven, protection and many other ways.  Because He is rich in mercy we must praise Him and praise Him always! 