INTRO.- ILL.- Since 1710, the skyline of London has been dominated by the soaring dome of St. Paul?s Cathedral.  On the top of the dome is a cross.  So it is fair to say that for nearly 300 years there has been a cross on the roof of London!  That is one way to say that Christ is above all!ILL.- When peace was made between Argentina and Chile, they melted down the cannons of war and made a statue of Christ holding high a cross.  They mounted it on the high-ranging mountains of the Andes that separate the two countries.  The Christ of the Andes.  In a sense, there is a cross on the roof of South America.  It says that Christ is above all even though some of them don?t believe it.ILL.- When Sir Edmund Hillary became the first person to scale Mt. Everest, he took with him to the world?s highest mountain a crucifix.  He left it there among the clouds of that snowy peak.  In a sense, there is a cross on the roof of the world!  That is a symbolic way of saying that Christ is above all!ILL.- I have read that the Pittsburgh, PA, airport is a very busy place and one of the best equipped in the nation.  Two seconds in flying time from the airport and in direct line with one of its busiest runways is the steeple of Union Church.The minister of that church said, ?Ever since the terminal opened planes have buzzed the belfry like bees after honey.  It got so bad that low-flying jets turned our Sunday evening services into sudden prayer meetings.?The church was reluctant to have their steeple carried away by some careless pilot.  So what did they do?  THE CHURCH TOPPED THEIR STEEPLE WITH AN EIGHT-FOOT, NEON-LIGHTED CROSS.The church is on the highest point near the airport and the lighted cross can be seen at night by planes all the way from the Ohio border.  One of the pilots made this interesting comment regarding the lighted cross, ?MOST OF US ARE USING IT AS A GUIDE TO THE FIELD.?Brothers and sisters, the cross of Christ is also a guide for all who seek to know God.  We have to go by way of the cross if we are going to find God, know God and have a relationship with Him.  The way of the cross leads to God and to our eternal home in heaven.John 14:6 ?I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me.?Acts 4:12 ?Salvation is found in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given to men by which we must be saved.?  What name?  The name of Jesus.  Jesus Christ is above all.  His name is above all.  His way is above all.  His forgiveness is above all.  His peace is above all.  His salvation is above all.  His salvation is eternal. ILL.- Someone wrote these pertinent words about Christ.  ?Not one recognized religious leader?as Moses, Buddha, Confucius, Mohammed?ever claimed to be God.  Jesus is the only person who has ever convinced a great portion of the world that He is God. ?This claim can either be true or false.  If false, Jesus either knew His claims were false and He lied, or He was deluded and a lunatic. ?If Jesus knowingly lied, he was the world?s greatest hypocrite and a charlatan of the worse kind.  He would also be the greatest fool, for what person would die for a lie? ?If Jesus was deluded, how could His precepts help so many people for so long a time?  His critics and enemies had nothing but the highest accolades on His character. ?There is no other choice.  Either Jesus is a liar, a lunatic, or He is Lord of lords.?  Brothers and sisters, Jesus is the Christ, the son of the living God.  He is the only Savior of the world.  He is the Lord of lords.PROP.- Now let us consider several more thoughts about the cross of Christ.1- The offense of the cross2- The preaching of the cross3- The priority of the crossI. THE OFFENSE OF THE CROSSGal. 5:11 ?Brothers, if I am still preaching circumcision, why am I still being persecuted?  In that case the offense of the cross has been abolished.?When Paul preached Christ and Him crucified he offended the Jewish population.  In fact, he probably offended many other people since they did not believe in Christ nor were inclined to believe in Him.  THE SAME IS TRUE TODAY.  Even in so-called ?Christian? America.  ILL.- Some years ago I was a member of the River to River Running club of southern Illinois.  Every year in January they had an annual banquet to honor certain runners in the club.  The meal was the first thing on the program, however.  The club was made up of all kinds of people in regard to faith: Jews, Christians of various denominations (Catholic and protestant), Baptist, Lutheran, Christian Church, etc. and some who didn?t believe in anything.  Nevertheless the board agreed to have a prayer before the meal.  One time they asked me to have the prayer.  The president of the club pulled me aside and whispered in my ear, ?Make it generic and make it short.?  I just laughed, went on and offered my short prayer, BUT IT WAS NOT GENERIC.  I closed in ?Jesus? name? and I heard a number of people say, ?Amen.?Brothers and sisters, the world prefers a generic religion to suit all and to soothe all.  The gospel of Jesus Christ will always be offensive.ILL.- Mel Gibson?s new movie, THE PASSION OF THE CHRIST, has brought a ton of criticism, flack and whatever else you want to call it to Mel Gibson and the crucifixion of Christ.  I SAY, SO WHAT?  While we may not like this criticism and opposition, we must realize that it will happen.  TRUTH WILL ALWAYS BE OPPOSED BY PEOPLE OF THE WORLD!Why?  Because there is evil in this world.  There is a spiritual force of evil that is fighting against God and Christ every step of the way.  The devil is real.  He is opposed to Christ and offended by Christ because he wants his own way.  He wants to be god.  He wants to hog all the glory of mankind, which is why Christianity will always be offensive and have opposition in this world.  ILL.- Mel Gibson said, ?Critics who have a problem with me don?t really have a problem with me in this film.  They have a problem with the four Gospels.  That?s where their problem is."  The death of Christ will always be offensive to some people.  It?s a fact.How should we respond to this opposition and those who are offended?  First, we should keep on preaching the truth of Christ, but do it in love.  II Tim. 2:24-26 ?And the Lord?s servant must not quarrel; instead, he must be kind to everyone, able to teach, not resentful.  Those who oppose him he must gently instruct, in the hope that God will grant them repentance leading them to a knowledge of the truth, and that they will come to their senses and escape from the trap of the devil, who has taken them captive to do his will.?I Pet. 3:15 ?But in your hearts set apart Christ as Lord. Always be prepared to give an answer to everyone who asks you to give the reason for the hope that you have. But do this with gentleness and respect.?We must gently witness, instruct and preach the gospel.  Even then we will incur some opposition and offense.ILL.-  A Christian man, an elder in the church, built up in his community a fine business.  Among his employees was a young lad of eighteen, only saved a few months. One day a large order came from a rich but godless man for goods to be shipped in a hurry.  The business man said to his youthful employee, ?I?m awfully sorry, Rob, but this means we will have to work next Sunday.? ?Mr. A,? said the lad, ?I heard you tell in church that you never let the Lord down to please your customers.?  ?But what am I going to do?? asked the man.  ?I can?t afford to offend this wealthy customer.? And that boy, saved only a few months, said to the mature Christian: ?Well, sir, I?m sorry I can?t work next Sunday.  I can?t afford to offend the Lord.?We will either offend the Lord or offend the world.  If our faith is what it should be we will offend the world.  If it is not, we will offend the Lord.  I prefer to offend the world.I John 2:17 ?The world and its desires pass away, but the man who does the will of God lives forever.?II. THE PREACHING OF THE CROSSI Cor. 1:18 ?For the message of the cross is foolishness to those who are perishing, but to us who are being saved it is the power of God.?Rom. 1:16 ?I am not ashamed of the gospel, because it is the power of God for the salvation of everyone who believes: first for the Jew, then for the Gentile.?John 12:32 ?But I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all men to myself." Christ needs to be lifted up to the world through preaching.  Some will consider it foolish and oppose it.  Others will rejoice and be saved through it.  Christ WILL draw people to Himself because He is God and His way is truth.  It is eternal truth.ILL.- When interviewing Dr. A. J. Gordon as a prospective pastor of a Boston church, the pulpit committee asked: ?If you are called to the pastorate of our church will you preach against the cards, the theater, and dancing??  ?I will,? solemnly affirmed Dr. Gordon.  He was called.Months passed and he didn?t say a word against the cards, the theater, and dancing.  The official board of the church said, ?Almost a year has gone by and you have said nothing against cards, the theater, and dancing. We wonder why.? Dr. Gordon replied essentially as follows: ?Gentlemen, it is true that I have said nothing against these things, but I have preached Christ who is the only Savior from all evils.  When He comes into one?s heart all evil things vanish from the life like the mist before the hot breath of the noonday sun.?ILL.- It is said that Thomas Chalmers preached for twelve years at Kilmany, Scotland before he moved to Glasgow and to fame.  He said that during the first eight years of that ministry he preached on honor, truth, and integrity, but noticed no improvement in the lives of his people.  Then he changed and began to preach Christ.  He said that at once he began to notice a change in their lives.When Henry Ward Beecher began his ministry, he saw little response and few results.  He turned to the New Testament to find out what the apostles preached and why they succeeded.  The rest is history.  ILL.- James S. Stewart wrote, ?If we are not determined that in every sermon Christ is to be preached; it were better that we should resign our commission forthwith and seek some other vocation.?ILL.- Hugh Thompson Kerr said, ?We are sent not to preach sociology, but salvation.  Not economics, but evangelism.  Not reform, but redemption.  Not culture, but conversion.  Not progress, but pardon.  Not the social order but the new birth.  Not an organization, but a new creation.  Not democracy, but the gospel.  Not civilization, but Christ.?ILL.- One time many years ago an article appeared in the Joplin Globe newspaper, Joplin, MO.  It was entitled, ?American Movement Spreading Christianity Without Christ.?  The article went on to read: ?An American movement that believes it can spread Christianity without mentioning God, Jesus Christ or any of the old religious vocabulary made its debut on the European continent.  ?The Rev. Frederick Buss was in a charge.  Buss organized a two-day ?laboratory course? called LENS ? Living effectively in the new society.  There was no talk of sin or baptism or conversion or salvation??  Buss said, ?I believe that we?re delivering the thrust of the Christian message??DO WHAT?  The thrust of the Christian message is Christ and His death on the cross!  There is no way that Christianity can be spread without the preaching of Christ on the cross!  ILL.- I remember a cute story about a man watching TV at one o? clock in the morning.  A mouse ran underneath the TV set.  He ran immediately to get a mousetrap and then to the frig to get some cheese.  But there was no cheese.  So he did what he thought was the next best thing.  He got a LIFE MAGAZINE that had colorful ads in it.  He cut out a picture of cheese and put it in the mousetrap.  He then went to bed.  When he woke the next morning he immediately checked the mousetrap and found a picture of a mouse in the trap!If you want to catch the real thing, you?ve got to put out the real thing!John 12:32 ?But I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all men to myself." We must preach and present the Lord Jesus Christ if we intend to get real converts!  Jesus is the real deal who saves, seals and delivers.  He alone forgives sin and opens the door to eternal life.  WE MUST PREACH HIM!III. THE PRIORITY OF THE CROSSILL.- Ever heard of the BALD KNOB CROSS?   It is located in southern Illinois at Alto Pass, IL.  The Cross stands 111 ft tall and when illuminated at night, it can be seen over on area of 7,500 square miles.  The cross was completed in 1963.  Easter Sunrise Services are held annually at the cross.  Bald Knob is the most prominent elevation in Southern Illinois.  Brothers and sisters, the cross of Christ should be the most prominent elevation in our lives as well.  ILL.- The story is told of a prosperous, young investment banker who was driving a new BMW sedan on a mountain road during a snowstorm.  As he veered around one sharp turn, he lost control and began sliding off the road toward a steep cliff. At the last moment he unbuckled his seat belt, flung open his door, and leaped from the car, which then plummeted to the bottom of the ravine and burst into a ball of flames.  Although he had escaped with his life, the man suffered a terrible injury. Somehow his arm had been caught near the hinge of the door as he jumped and had been torn off at the shoulder.  A passing trucker saw the accident in his rearview mirror, pulled his rig to a halt and ran back to see if he could help.  When he arrived at the scene, he found the banker standing at the roadside, looking down at the BMW burning in the ravine below. Incredibly the banker was oblivious to his injury and moaned, ?My BMW! My new BMW!?  The trucker pointed at the banker?s shoulder and said, ?You?ve got bigger problems than that car. We?ve got to find your arm.  Maybe the surgeons can sew it back on!?` The banker looked where his arm had been, paused a moment, and groaned, ?Oh no! My Rolex!  My new Rolex!? Brothers and sisters, that man?s priorities were all mixed up!  He should have been concerned about saving his arm and his life, but instead, he was only concerned about his car and his watch. What if God were so dumb?  What if God?s priorities were so mixed up?  What if He were more concerned with planet earth than people?   We?d all be in a heap of trouble!  But bless His name!  God knew what He was doing right from the beginning of time.  And He knew exactly what He was doing when He sent Jesus into the world.  And His priority was the salvation of mankind through the cross of Christ!Is. 53:10 ?Yet it was the Lord?s will to crush him and cause him to suffer...?  Isaiah was talking about the suffering of our Savior on the cross.  He was saying, ?It was God?s will (or priority) to allow Christ to suffer for us.?II Cor. 5:21 ?God made him who had no sin to be sin for us, so that in him we might become the righteousness of God.?God made Jesus to become sin for us on the cross.  God?s priority was to allow Jesus to suffer on the cross for us so that we could be saved. God?s will or priority has been accomplished in regard to Jesus, BUT WHAT ABOUT US?  Is the Christ and His cross a priority in our lives?  Or are we more concerned about our cars and our watches?  Are we more concerned about material things than serving Christ and getting to heaven?ILL.- Damon Thames, a senior shortstop at Rice University [in 1999], turned down an offer from the world champion New York Yankees so he could return for his final year of college. In June [of 1998], he was drafted in the tenth round by the Yankees after a season in which he batted .426, had 115 RBIs, and was named College Player of the Year. However Thames decided to stay at Rice and finish getting his degree in economics. "It was a tough decision, because I?ve wanted to play pro baseball all my life," he says. "But I really prayed about it, and I felt that God wanted me to stay where I was. I had seen guys jump to the big leagues after their junior year, and they struggled in the minors. I just wasn?t ready to make that jump." Thames says there?s one verse that kept coming to his mind during that time. "Matthew 6:33 ?Seek first the kingdom of God...? really helped me a lot.  I?ve realized that all the money and all the wealth that I?ll ever need is at the cross of Christ.  Regardless of whether I ever sign a pro contract, that is enough for me." Brethren, there was a young man who had his priorities right. The kingdom, the cross, and the Christ were most important in his life.  WHAT ABOUT YOU?The cross of Christ should always be a priority in our lives!  Think about it.  Think how you can make some changes in your own life to give Christ top billing! Top-priority!CONCLUSION-----------------------------------------ILL.- D.M. Stearns was preaching in Philadelphia.  At the close of the service a stranger came up to him and said, "I don?t like the way you spoke about the cross.  I think that instead of emphasizing the death of Christ, it would be far better to preach Jesus, the teacher and example."Stearns replied, "If I presented Christ in that way, would you be willing to follow Him?"  "I certainly would," said the stranger without hesitation.  "All right then," said the preacher, "let?s take the first step.  He did no sin.  Can you claim that for yourself?"  The man looked confused and somewhat surprised.  "Why, no," he said.  "I acknowledge that I do sin."  Stearns replied, "Then your greatest need is to have a Savior, not an example!" Brothers and sisters, the world?s greatest need is for a savior.  Man has sinned.  All sin separates man from God.  And Christ is the Savior, the bridge to bring man back to God.  Let?s follow Him, preach Him, live for Him.  Christ is above all!