INTRO.- ILL.- What do you think of my mustache?  I haven?t always worn a mustache.  I grew it for a fun program that we had at our last church and Elaine liked it so much that I just kept it.  BESIDES, DON?T YOU THINK I LOOK AN AWFUL LOT LIKE TOM SELLECK OF MAGNUM PI FAME?  Don?t answer that!It?s more like ?awful? than ?look alike.?  Besides the mustache, Tom Selleck and I have at least one other similarity.  We are about the same age.  He is one year younger than I am, but that?s where the similarities end.  He is 6? 4? and I?m lucky if I?m 5? 8?.Brothers and sisters, we may never look like some famous movie star, but we may find ourselves wanting to look like them, or be like them, or have what they have.  The ?lifestyles of the rich and famous? are very appealing to many people.  That?s why we have TV shows like ?The American Idol? where the Ruben Studdards and the Clay Aikens line up as hopeful wannabes.  They want to become famous.  Prov. 27:17 ?As iron sharpens iron, so one man sharpens another.?We do have an effect on one another, good or bad.  We either sharpen one another or dull one another.  We either have a positive influence on one another or a negative influence.  We either build one another or tear one another down.Generally, we all look up to certain people in life and want to be like them in looks and personality.ILL.- As a kid, I thought Roy Rogers was it and wanted to be like him.  Did you ever have any childhood idols?Perhaps most of us had childhood idols that we admired and/or wanted to be like.  Hopefully, as adults we have matured somewhat.  Our desires are higher and holier.  Our idols are more gracious and spiritual.ILL.- In my Bible college days I looked up to many of my preacher/professors.  They were great preachers.  I wanted to be like them in the sense of being able to preach the Word.  In some ways, I wanted to EXACTLY like them.  Without realizing it, some of us young preacher boys would mimic those preachers.ILL.- I remember one student in particular, brother Joe Garman, of American Rehabilitation Ministries, Prison Outreach, Joplin, MO.  Whenever Joe preached he sounded like one of his idols, Cecil Todd.  And that wasn?t all bad, because in those days Cecil was a very good preacher.We do sharpen one another.  We do rub off on one another.Acts 4:13 ?When they saw the courage of Peter and John and realized that they were unschooled, ordinary men, they were astonished and THEY TOOK NOTE THAT THESE MEN HAD BEEN WITH JESUS.?  The character of Christ had rubbed off and changed Peter and John.  ILL.- Henry Drummond wrote, ?A few, raw unspiritual men were admitted to the inner circle of His friendship.  The change began at once.  Day by day we can almost see the first disciples grow?  Occasionally, they do a thing or say a thing that they could not have done or said had they not been living there.  Slowly the spell of His life deepens?their manner softens, their words become more gentle, their conduct more unselfish.  ?They do not know how it is, but they are different men.  One day they find themselves like their Master, going about and doing good.  They were not told to do, it came to them to do it.  But the people who watch them know well how to account for it, ?THEY HAVE BEEN,? they whisper, ?WITH JESUS.??The life of Christ had rubbed off.  Peter and John were changed men.  And just as Christ?s life rubbed off on the disciples, so our lives rub off on others.  Why do you think junior often acts just like his daddy?  Or daughter Suzy acts like mommy?  Or vice versa.I Cor. 11:1 ?Follow my example, as I follow the example of Christ.?We may not be able to say, ?follow my example,? because we don?t always do everything right.  We all have our days, our down days, our bad days and during those times we wouldn?t want anyone to be like us.But we all can say with Paul, ?Follow my example, as I follow the example of Christ.?  Imitate me in the ways that I imitate Christ.  Follow my Christ likeness.  The rest you can leave behind.When I am lovely and loving, imitate me.  When I am cantankerous or whatever, forget it.PROP.- In our text, Paul?s Christ-likeness was evident in several areas of his life:1-	Christ-like attitude2-	Christ-like affection3-	Christ-like prayerI. CHRIST-LIKE ATTITUDE  V. 7 ?It is right for me to feel this way about all of you, since I have you in my heart; for whether I am in chains or defending and confirming the gospel, ALL OF YOU SHARE IN GOD?S GRACE WITH ME.?ILL.- In front of an Atlanta restaurant featuring fried chicken was the sign reading, ?If the Colonel Had Our Chicken Recipe He?d Be a General.?Would you say that?s being prideful or just being self-confident?Could be either/or.  Everybody needs a certain amount of self-confidence in order to accomplish things in life, but thinking you are it when you are not, is not good!ILL.- G. Gordon Liddy, Watergate conspirator, said one time, "I have found within myself all I need and all I ever shall need.  I am a man of great faith, but my faith is in G. Gordon Liddy.  I have never failed me." I would say that G. Gordon Liddy has an attitude problem.  He thinks he it.  He is a god to himself.  I think it?s all right to believe in yourself, but not too much.  We have all a share in God?s grace and we need to recognize that grace in others.ILL.- One of my former high school classmates (class of 1962) called me last Saturday evening and said, ?You don?t know who this is, do you??  I said, ?I sure don?t.?  He proceeded to tell me who he was and where he lives.  His name is Larry Roberts and he lives on Doniphan, MO, only an hour from Jonesboro.  He and his wife were coming to see their dentist this last week and wanted to have lunch with me.  We met at O?Charley?s and started reminiscing.  Larry retired in 1992 at the age of only 48 after 30 years with General Motors.  He also told me about the many houses he had built during evenings and weekend, about 19.  He lives on a large farm and takes care of 70 head of cows.  Otherwise, he does odd jobs for his family members.I got the distinct impression that he has done fairly well in life, financially speaking.  I mean, anyone who can retire at 48 isn?t doing too badly.  More than likely, Larry is doing better than I am financially and always has, but he never once made me feel like I was inferior to him or lower than he was.  I was quite humbled that he called me and wanted to visit and meet for lunch.That?s the Christ-like attitude that we are supposed to have toward others!Rom. 12:3 ?For by the grace given to me I say to every one of you: Do not think of yourself more highly than you ought, but rather think of yourself with sober judgment, in accordance with the measure of faith God has given you.?God wants us to have a humble opinion of ourselves, which will help us to have a Christ-like attitude toward others.ILL.- For example, Bob Russell, Sr. Minister of the large Southeast Christian Church, Louisville, KY, that now has 20,000 people.  I think it would be very easy for Bob to think more highly of himself that he should, saying, ?Hey, I?m one of the best preachers in America!?  But I seriously doubt that he feels that way.  I think he recognizes that he is the recipient of God?s grace.  He knows that any preaching ability he has is the gift of God?s grace.He also doesn?t see himself as being responsible for their tremendous growth over the last 37 years.  He knows that it has happened as a result of God?s grace in the lives others!  That?s the Christ-like attitude that we all need to have!  If it?s good, it?s from God.  If it?s good in your life and mine, it?s from God!Phil. 2:3-5 ?Do nothing out of selfish ambition or vain conceit, but in humility consider others better than yourselves.  Each of you should look not only to your own interests, but also to the interests of others.  Your attitude should be the same as that of Christ Jesus.?In humility consider others better than yourselves?your attitude should be the same as that of Christ.A Christ-like attitude recognizes the grace of God in the lives of others and gives thanks for that grace.  We commend that grace.  ?Hey, I noticed what you did.  Bless your heart.  That was certainly gracious of you??A gracious, Christ-like attitude like that will lead people to Christ and build a church.  But the attitude of ?I?m better? or know more or have more will do nothing but tear down churches and people.Now the other side of the coin is this.  Don?t ever feel slighted or insignificant.  You are important to God and He has graced you in certain ways.  Everyone is gifted by God?s grace in some form or another.  You may not see the evidence of God?s grace in your life, but others do!ILL.- I was in heaven Wednesday evening.  I ate some of Bonnie Reed?s carrot cake.  Talk about heavenly!  Rich but heavenly!  Whether Bonnie realizes it or not, her cooking/baking ability is the result of God?s grace.  Jim knows very well.  Jim is the recipient of God?s grace in her life. All of us are gifted by God?s grace or graciousness.  When we recognize this, we must give Him thanks and praise.  ?Thank you, Lord, for giving to me?for using me?for enabling me, etc.?II. CHRIST-LIKE AFFECTION   V. 8 ?God can testify how I long for all of you with the affection of Christ Jesus.?A second Christ-like virtue that Paul had and we need is a Christ-like affection.ILL.- A lady said, ?There is one couple I shall always remember from my days as a hospital admitting clerk.  The husband, a heart-attack victim, was immediately whisked away by the staff. Hours passed, though, before his wife was allowed to see him. She was dismayed to find him hooked up to elaborate machines that blipped, hissed and beeped.  She tiptoed toward his bed and, bending over him, whispered, ?George, I?m here.??Then she kissed him.  Suddenly there was a blippety-blip-blip from the equipment.  ?He was okay,? she later explained.  ?But after forty-seven years of marriage it?s nice to know that I can still make his heart skip when I kiss him.??  Cute story.Kissing is certainly one form of affection and should be a part of every marriage.  Affection in some form should be a part of every marriage.ILL.- It?s like the wife who said to her husband, ?When we were younger, you used to nibble on my ear.?  Her husband got up and started to leave the room.  She said to him, ?Where are you going??  He replied, ?TO GET MY TEETH!?Rom. 16:16 ?Greet one another with a holy kiss.  All the churches of Christ send greetings.?I Thess. 5:26  ?Greet all the brothers with a holy kiss.?I Peter 5:14  ?Greet one another with a kiss of love. Peace to all of you who are in Christ.?Anybody in favor of reinstating ?the holy kiss??  Originally, it was a kiss on the cheek or the forehead.  In certain cases, it?s a good practice and a lovely form of affection.What adult hasn?t kissed a child that way?  Or an aging parent?  Or some other elderly person?  Or some family member?  It?s affection.  Very good and often very appropriate.ILL.- Whenever mom was alive and I?d go visit her in the nursing home I would always kiss her coming and going and sometimes in between.  She loved it, deserved it and needed it.  ILL.- When I see my little granddaughter Hope if she doesn?t let me kiss her on the lips I?d feel offended, hurt, etc.  But she?s a sweet little kisser and a good little hugger.  We are building up one another by these forms of affection.  Of course, I always add, ?I love you!?But what about affection in the church, among the Lord?s people?  The apostle Paul had a strong affection for his people.  He said in V. 7  ?I have you in my heart.?  Many people like to translate the ?holy kiss? into the ?holy hug? and certainly there is nothing wrong with that.  Everyone needs some affection, some Christ-like affection.ILL.- Dr. Virginia Satir wrote, ?Hugging can be vital for your emotional well-being.  Everybody feels skin hunger throughout their lives, and unless that hunger is satisfied by touching, there?s a vital void in the emotional make-up that?s going to cause deep unhappiness.  We all know that babies thrive on frequent stroking.  Well, adults are no different. ?When they are not patted on the hand, embraced around the shoulder or hugged, they withdraw into themselves.  I prescribe four hugs a day for survival, eight for maintenance and twelve for growth.?  I realize that not everyone is a ?hugger,? but I think it?s a good practice.  And the church is a very good place to practice it.V. 8 ?God can testify how I long for all of you with the affection of Christ Jesus.?I think the affection of Christ can be seen or witnessed in something else we do.  It?s called listening.  I prefer to think that good listening is a form of affection.ILL.- Two psychiatrists met at their 20th college reunion.  One was vibrant, while the other looked withered and worried.  "So what?s your secret?" the older looking psychiatrist asked.  "Listening to other people?s problems every day, all day long, for years on end, has made an old man of me."  "So," replied the younger looking one, "who listens?" Brothers and sisters, that?s been one of our problems.  We are not good listeners.  We don?t focus on people and show that we really care by our listening.ILL.- Teenage prostitutes, during interviews in a San Francisco study, were asked: "Is there anything you needed most and couldn?t get?"  Their response, invariably preceded by sadness and tears was unanimous: "What I needed most was someone to listen to me.  Someone who cared enough to listen to me." In the future, we all need to talk less and listen more.  We need to look, behold one another with our eyes and heart, and listen.  It?s a part of Christ-like affection and it will minister to people in ways we never thought possible.III. CHRIST-LIKE PRAYERVs. 9-11 ?And this is my prayer; that your love may abound more and more in knowledge and depth of insight, so that you may be able to discern what is best and may be pure and blameless until the day of Christ, filled with the fruit of righteousness that comes through Jesus Christ ? to the glory and praise of God.?Another Christ-like virtue that Paul had was prayer, people-centered prayer.ILL.- The little eight-year boy had misbehaved and his daddy spanked him.  His daddy, ?Now before you go to bed you need to say your prayers.?The little boy went to his room and prayed, ?I?m sorry, God, that I was bad.  Bless mommy.  Bless sister and brother.  And don?t forget to bless grandma and grandpa.?Still hurting from his spanking, the little boy turned to his father and said, ?I SUPPOSE YOU NOTICED YOU WASN?T IN MY PRAYER.?Even though we are told in scripture to pray for others, it?s hard to pray for some people.  Instead of judging one another or criticizing one another, we should pray for one another.We?re all in the same boat.  Consequently, we need to be supportive of one another and one way is through prayer.Christ-like prayer is people-centered prayer.  Even Christ Himself prayed for people.  In John chapter 17 we have what many call the true ?Lord?s prayer.?  In that text, Jesus prayed for His disciples and He prayed for all believers.How do we pray for one another?ILL.- A lady said, ?Attending church in Kentucky, we watched an especially verbal and boisterous child being hurried out, slung under his irate father?s arm.  No one in the congregation so much as raised an eyebrow -- until the child captured everyone?s attention by crying out in a charming Southern accent, ?Ya?ll pray for me now!??Certain emergencies in life call for immediate prayer.  ILL.- Our own BJ Simpkins had a bike accident last week.  As soon as we heard about it, we immediately sent out a call for prayers.  This is important and as it should be.  There are many situations like this one that require our immediate prayers.Christ-like prayer means we are quick to pray for one another regardless of the need or situation.  We are told to pray for the sick in James 5:14-15 and for the spiritually sick, James 5:16.In our text, Paul?s Christ-like prayer centered on the spiritual growth of his brothers and sisters.  He prayed for several specific matters.  1-	He prayed that their love would grow and abound.2-	He prayed that they would be discerning in life.3-	He prayed that they would be pure and blameless.4-	He prayed that they would be filled with good fruit that comes from Christ and the Holy Spirit.It?s easy for us to pray that God will comfort someone, take care of someone, provide for someone, but how often do we pray for their spiritual growth?I really want to encourage you to do this.  We all know of family members and people in the church who need to grow stronger in the faith and we can help them by praying for them.For example, ?Brother so and so is really downhearted.  Please lift his spirit.  Calm his spirit.  Fill Him with your spirit.  Strengthen him by the power of your Spirit to help him endure what he is facing.  Bring the right people into his life??ILL.- J. Wilbur Chapman was called to Bethany Presbyterian Church of Philadelphia in January, 1890.  It boasted the largest Sunday School of the world with the church seating capacity of 4,820. This was the church of John Wanamaker, the wealthy Christian layman.One of the leaders said to Chapman, "You are not a very strong preacher,  but a few of us have decided to gather and pray every Sunday morning for you."  That prayer meeting grew to 1,000 men before it was over.  DID IT DO ANY GOOD?  And does it do any good to pray for the spiritual growth of people?Chapman conducted his own revival soon after assuming the job as pastor and some 400 new members were brought into the church, the majority of them making professions of faith.  He built the church into a strong spiritual, educational and social center that attracted hundreds, with as many as 300 joining at one given time.  As the church became nationally known, requests for his evangelistic services multiplied.Christ-like prayer will make a difference in people?s lives!CONCLUSION-------------------------------------ILL.- In 1972 I won the Iowa State weightlifting championship in the light heavyweight division.  At one time I wanted to go to the Olympics and compete for America.  Obviously, I never made it.What has been your great ambition in life?  Did you achieve it?  Probably not.  All of us have certain goals or ambitions in life, most of which we never reach.ILL.- Henry Drummond said, ?To become Christ-like is the only thing in the whole world worth caring for; the thing before which every ambition of man is folly and all lower achievement vain.?Being Christ-like is the greatest goal or ambition that any of us could have.  We all should strive for a Christ-like attitude, a Christ-like affection and a Christ-like prayer life.  These are goals worth caring, worth striving for, worth dying for.