INTRO.- ILL.- Herb Forst in Cross River, NY, in Reader?s Digest: What not to Buy Your Wife: 1. Don?t buy anything that plugs in.  Anything that requires electricity is seen as too practical.2. Don?t buy clothing that involves sizes.  The chances are one in seven thousand that you will get her size right, and your wife will be offended the other 6999 times.  "Do I look like a size 16?" she?ll say.  Too small a size doesn?t cut it either: "I haven?t worn a size 8 in 20 years!"3. Avoid all things useful.  The new silver polish advertised to save hundreds of hours is not going to win you any brownie points.  WHO USES SILVER ANYWAY?4. Don?t buy anything that involves weight loss or self-improvement.  I WON?T TOUCH THAT ONE!5. Don?t buy jewelry.  The jewelry your wife wants, you can?t afford.  And the jewelry you can afford, she doesn?t want.6. And, guys, do not fall into the traditional trap of buying her frilly underwear.  Your idea of the kind your wife should wear and what she actually wears are light years apart.7. Finally, don?t spend too much.  "How do you think we?re going to afford that?" she?ll ask.  But don?t spend too little.  She won?t say anything, but she?ll think, "Is that all I?m worth?"We could get into trouble over this.  I COULD GET INTO BIG TROUBLE OVER THIS ARTICLE!Brothers and sisters, when it comes to buying gifts for one another we seldom hit a home run or buy the right gift.  The only way I can do well for Elaine is when she tells me what to buy.Of course, I give my kids money because they?re grown and I don?t have to buy them toys any more.  And money always seems to do the trick!  However, giving money isn?t as thoughtful probably as buying a gift, which you think they would like.ILL.- An American Express survey about Christmas gifts found that the fruitcake was chosen most often (31%) from a list of "worst" holiday gifts.  It even finished ahead of "no gift at all." When asked how to dispose of a bad gift, 30% would hide it in the closet, 21% would return it, and 19% would give it away. This suggests that the Christmas fruitcake might get recycled as a gift for the host of New Year?s party.Anyone for a fruit cake?  I doubt it.God does better.  God always does better.  He gives us every good and perfect gift.  James 1:17.  Not all of life is good, but God does give us good stuff.  PROP.- Since we?re thinking about Christmas I think we should think about the gifts we?ve been given by God.  This is just a simple reminder of how blessed we are.I. PHYSICAL GIFTSII Cor. 4:7 ?But we have this treasure in jars of clay to show that this all-surpassing power is from God and not from us.?Did you know that you were a jar of clay?  Basically, made from dirt?  ILL.- Little Girl: ?Mother, we learned in Sunday school today that we came from dust and that we are going back to dust. Is that true??  Mother: ?Yes, darling, that?s true.? Little Girl: ?Well, I just looked under the bed and someone is either coming or going.?Genesis 2:7 ?The LORD God formed the man from the dust of the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living being.?ILL.- In a school examination paper appeared the question, ?Give an account of the creation of man.? One little girl answer: ?First, God created Adam.  He looked at him and said, ?I think if I tried again I could do better.?  Then He created Eve.?Anyway you look at it, the human body is pretty incredible.  It can take a licking and keep right on ticking!  We are sometimes very abusive to the body God gave us, but it just keeps right on moving.  Maybe not the best, but somewhat.Psalm 139:13-14 ?For you created my inmost being; you knit me together in my mother?s womb.  I praise you because I am fearfully and wonderfully made; your works are wonderful, I know that full well.?As we age, we don?t feel wonderfully and fearfully made, however, we are!  And we need to do our best to take care of these bodies that God has given us so we can serve Him!What about your family?  Are you thankful?  ILL.- Our Louise Smith is 92 years old and is now living in the South Wind Heights.  She calls me quite often and wants me to come and visit her.  Why?  I think she?s lonely.  Her husband, Tom, passed about 5 years ago and she has little family left.Are we thankful for our families?Proverbs 18:22 ?He who finds a wife finds what is good and receives favor from the LORD.?Recently, I taught the adult SS classes in the fellowship hall from the book of Proverbs and Faye Cunningham mentioned this verse.  She didn?t want me to pass up this verse.Billy Jack Simpkins countered with this verse from Eccl. 7:28  ?While I was still searching but not finding? I found one upright man among a thousand, but not one upright woman among them all.?What can I say?  Are you thankful for your mate?  And what would life be like without him or her?  Probably very miserable and lonely.Proverbs 17:6 ?Children?s children are a crown to the aged, and parents are the pride of their children.?ILL.- I don?t like the fact that my grandchildren (Hope, Caleb and Hayden) live 900 miles from me.  I was raised near my grandparents and they were an important part of my life as a children.  And I would love to be a part of the lives of my grandchildren.  BUT I?M STILL THANKFUL, EVEN THOUGH SEPARATED FROM THEM. This is the time of the year when we need to be thankful for our families.  II. MATERIAL GIFTSMatthew 6:25-26 "Therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life, what you will eat or drink; or about your body, what you will wear. Is not life more important than food, and the body more important than clothes?  Look at the birds of the air; they do not sow or reap or store away in barns, and yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not much more valuable than they??Food, clothing and shelter.  Don?t you think God has been pretty good to you?  ILL.- A British Embassy official in Washington, preparing to receive Winston Churchill for a visit, told the old story of an Embassy aide who was once asked about Mr. Churchill?s preferences in food and drink.?Mr. Churchhill?s tastes are very simple,? the aide replied quickly. ?He is easily pleased with the best of everything.?We have the best of everything when it comes to food and drink.  While many in the world starve, we gorge.  In fact, I have read that we Americans waste about a pound of food every day for every person in our family.  THAT?S A HUMBLING THOUGHT!I?ve never gone without a meal, unless it was by choice.  However, there are some people here today who didn?t have food at times and I know they are now quite thankful for the good food they have.  We have it pretty good, wouldn?t you say?  I can eat whatever I want and I can afford to buy it but I try to be somewhat conservative, considering the starving people around the world.  I have often wondered if God will judge us in regard to our waste?  And what about clothing?ILL.- What do you instantly know about a well-dressed man?  His wife is good at picking out clothes.  If I?m well-dressed you know why!When it comes to clothing, we are blessed.  Perhaps not well-dressed or brand name, but decent.  Wrangler jeans are a treasure in some countries.  Here, they are cheap!  ILL.- A man named Irving Barr took his wife to divorce court for her ?excessive and ridiculous? clothes-buying habits.  His wife?s wardrobe included: 106 blouses, 92 pairs of slacks, 87 necklaces, 81 pairs of shoes, 62 pant suits, 31 evening dresses, 60 purses, 23 robes, 23 nightgowns, 55 body shirts, 47 slip-overs, 39 sweaters, 36 bracelets, 27 vests, 25 halter tops and 10 watches.We are blessed.  Have you looked in your closet and counted lately?And what do you have that you didn?t have as a child?ILL.- I don?t remember the first house I was raised in, which was a small apartment near main street in Webb City, MO, but I do remember the house that we lived in at 302 Forest St. in Webb City and it wasn?t much, but it was home.  Whenever I go back to Joplin and Webb City I will often drive by that old house for the memories and to remind me of how blessed I am right now, because I have it a whole lot better now than then!  ARE YOU NOT BLESSED WITH A DECENT HOME/HOUSE?  Are you not living better than ever?  With many luxuries?  Remote control with living color, LCD, HD TV, AC, comfortable recliners, couch, beds, etc.?What do you consider your greatest material blessing?  We all have something that we enjoy or treasure.  Could you live without it?  We are blessed with an abundance of material gifts and we need to be reminded this time of the year.III. SPIRITUAL GIFTSTHE BIBLE.ILL.- When the preacher?s car broke down on a country road, he walked to a nearby roadhouse to use the phone.  After calling for a tow truck, he spotted his old friend, Frank, drunk and shabbily dressed at the bar.  "What happened to you, Frank?" asked the good reverend.  "You used to be rich."  Frank told a sad tale of bad investments that had led to his downfall.  "Go home," the preacher said.  "Open your Bible at random, stick your finger on the page and there will be God?s answer."Some time later, the preacher bumped into Frank, who was wearing a Gucci suit, sporting a Rolex watch and had just stepped our of a Mercedes.  "Frank." said the preacher, "I am glad to see things really turned around for you."  "Yes, preacher, and I owe it all to you," said Frank.  "I opened my Bible, put my finger down on the page and there was the answer -- Chapter 11."  God?s Word is right about everything, but we need to get the right message.ILL. - Preacher Charles Spurgeon said, ?I would recommend you either believe God to the hilt, or else not believe at all. Believe this book of God, every letter of it, or else reject it.?And where would we be without the Word of God?  No revelation from God.  No word from God.  And no knowledge of God!Psalm 119:11 ?I have hidden your word in my heart that I might not sin against you.?  Someone said, ?The Bible will keep you from sin or sin will keep you from the Bible.?Psalm 119:31 ?I hold fast to your statutes, O LORD; do not let me be put to shame.?  If we hold fast to the Word of God we will not be put to shame in life.  Personally speaking, I enjoy studying scripture.  The study of scripture has been my salvation in so many ways.  It makes me want to serve more.  It helps me to know God better.  It strengthens me for daily living and for preaching.  Without it, I cannot preach.  My sermons would not be sermons.  They would merely be speeches and there is a difference! Psalm 119:81 ?My soul faints with longing for your salvation, but I have put my hope in your word.? 92 If your law had not been my delight,       I would have perished in my affliction.  93 I will never forget your precepts,       for by them you have preserved my life.  98 Your commands make me wiser than my enemies,       for they are ever with me. 99 I have more insight than all my teachers,       for I meditate on your statutes. 100 I have more understanding than the elders,       for I obey your precepts.  105 Your word is a lamp to my feet       and a light for my path. THE CHURCH.  ILL.- A preacher said:  I was a supply preacher for a small town Texas Church, coming in early Sunday, preaching a sermon to the congregation, and then leaving after lunch.  Arriving early one Sunday I sat down at a local donut shop, opened my Bible and went over my sermon notes.  A man was sitting down the counter from me and he said, "You a preacher or something?" I replied, "Yes I preach at the Christian Church here in town." He got excited and said, "Hey, I?m a member of that church." The church was small and I knew all the regulars so I said, "I?ve been preaching there for about three months and I?ve never seen you there." He looked at me kind of strange and said, "I said I was a member of that church.  I never said that I was fanatical about it!"Brothers and sisters, many people don?t get too fanatical about the church but they should!  The church is a divine blessing from God.  And can you imagine life without the fellowship, the comfort, the joy of the church?  CONCLUSION-------------The Sunday School Times told the story of a young man who needed money while he was preparing for Christian service. He asked the Lord to help him.  The following day he received a large check that enabled him to continue his studies.  Naturally he was very happy, but when he looked at the date on the letter and saw that it had been written several days before his prayer, he was shocked. He found the scripture Isaiah 65:24, ?And it shall come to pass that, before they call, I will answer.?  He then realized that his Heavenly Father had made provision even before he had asked for it.  AMAZING. It?s called amazing grace from a very amazing God!  We are blessed and often before we realize it. ?Tis the season to remember and give thanks!