INTRO.- ILL.- An elderly man visited a doctor for a thorough exam.  After the exam, the doctor said, ?You?re as fit as a fiddle.  You?ll live to be eighty.?  The man said, ?But I am eighty!?  The doctor replied, ?See, what did I tell you??Most of us don?t mind growing older as long as we can stay somewhat fit and be able to do things.  There is a renewed emphasis on better health today.  More people than ever are going to health clubs and YMCA?s in order to work out, get fit or stay fit.  And even more than getting fit, there is the ?extreme makeover? craze.  Have you ever watched that TV show?  I have found it to be quite interesting.ILL.- One of the last shows I saw featured a girl named Kim whose teeth were horrible, to say the least.  Some of her teeth were missing and others stuck nearly straight out from her gums and were jagged.  Kim never went to the dentist to get her teeth corrected, and hoped that, for the first time in her life, she would not be afraid to kiss and smile.Kim received a nose job, lower eyelid lift, upper lip reduction, breast augmentation, liposuction of abdomen and inner thighs, PRK eye surgery, laser hair removal, extraction of 6 front teeth and 4 lower teeth, lip and gum repositioning, crown lengthening, 2 crowns, upper and lower bridges, partial dentures and 5 da Vinci porcelain veneers.It was amazing what they did for Kim!  And in many ways, by changing her physical appearance, they also changed how she felt about herself.  HER EXTREME MAKEOVER APPEARED TO BE A POSITIVE CHANGE IN HER LIFE.  I am glad for what they did for her and others.  There is no doubt about it.  When we feel like we look good, we also feel good about ourselves and have more confidence in life.  But there are several downsides to these ?extreme makeovers.?  Few people can afford them.  Most of them cost somewhere in the area of $60,000.  Or more.  Of course, the people who are chosen for that TV show have their ?extreme makeover? paid for them.Another downside is that eventually, the physical will still fade, bag and sag.  There is only so much that doctors can do for us.  We can prolong aging and its effect only so long.Believe me, I don?t like this any more than anyone else.  I would love to keep a certain amount of my youthfulness and youthful energy and ability.However, the idea of getting a renewed body is something of a fairy tale.  It sounds good, but for most of us, it?s not possible.  Yes, we need to take care of ourselves, of the bodies that God has given to us.  They belong to Him.  We need to stay as fit as possible in order to live a better, more energetic life and be able to serve the Lord more effectively.  God did put us here primarily to love and serve Him.The greatest change than can take place in any of us and needs to take place in us, is a spiritual change.  We all need an ?extreme makeover? in that area.  Rom. 3:11-12  ?There is no one who understands, no one who seeks God.  All have turned away, they have together become worthless; there is no one who does good, not even one."A spiritual renewal is needed for us all!  Is it possible?  Where can we get it?  We know the answer to these questions.  II Cor. 5:17 ?Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation??When people come to believe, accept, trust, and surrender to the Lord Jesus Christ He makes a change in their lives.  For some, it?s a dramatic change or renewal.  For others, it?s a bit slower, but nevertheless a change.  But what about down the road?  Is it possible to experience even more renewal?  Yes!  Rom. 12:2 ?Do not conform any longer to the pattern of this world, BUT BE TRANSFORMED BY THE RENEWING OF THE MIND.?  The mind is the key.  II Cor. 3:18 ?And we, who with unveiled faces all reflect the Lord?s glory, are being transformed into his likeness with ever-increasing glory, which comes from the Lord, who is the Spirit.?  The Holy Spirit is the keyAs we put the mind on the things of God, the Holy Spirit who lives within us will renew us.  Spiritual renewal is something that we all should desire.  ILL.- Henry Drummond, the Scottish-born preacher and writer, once wrote, ?To become like Christ is the only thing in the whole world worth caring for?? Drummond is saying that spiritual renewal which enables us to become more like Christ is the most important thing in the world.  Our greatest goals in life should be spiritual, spiritual renewal.  I see some of this renewal in our Phil. 4:10-13 text.  PROP.- In our text, Paul lists three areas of renewal that we all need.1- A renewal of concern2- A renewal of contentment3- A renewal of strengthI. A RENEWAL OF CONCERN FOR SHARINGV. 10 ?I rejoice greatly in the Lord that at last you have renewed your concern for me?.?  A genuine concern for others is always good.ILL.- Dwight Morrow, the father of Anne Morrow Lindbergh, once held a dinner party to which Calvin Coolidge had been invited.  After Coolidge left, Morrow told the remaining guests that Coolidge would make a good president.  The others disagreed.  They felt Coolidge was too quiet, that he lacked color and personality.  No one would like him, they said. Anne, then age six, spoke up: "I like him," she said. Then she displayed a finger with a small bandage around it.  "He was the only one at the party who asked about my sore finger." "And that?s why he would make a good president," added Morrow.  Concern for others in a presidential candidate would make for a good president.  We want someone in the White House who is concerned about the American people and not just their own policies and politics.Concern for others is a great quality in all people.  Christ had it.  Christ came to seek and to save the lost.  He went about doing good and healing all who were oppressed by the devil.  Christ healed the sick and infirm.  Christ ministered to the broken-hearted and sinner.  Christ blessed the children and pointed all people to a better life in Him.  CHRIST DEMONSTRATED CONCERN FOR OTHERS!ILL.- President McKinley was considering the appointment of a minister to a foreign country.  There were two candidates, their qualifications almost equal.  Which one did he appoint?  The President related a story of an incident that had decided his choice.Years before, when he was a Representative, he boarded a streetcar one night and took the last vacant seat.  Shortly afterward, an old washwoman entered carrying a heavy basket.  She walked the length of the car and stood in the aisle, no one offering her a seat.One of the men, whom the President was to consider later, was sitting in a seat opposite where she was standing.  He shifted the paper so as not to see her.  Mr. McKinley walked down the aisle, picked up her basket of washing, and gave her his seat.  The candidate never knew that this little act of selfishness had deprived him of perhaps the crowning honor of a lifetime.Brothers and sisters, we all miss out on some things because of our selfishness in life.  We miss out on the joy of giving, sharing and serving.  We miss out on the gain of spiritual growth from concern for others.  THOSE WHO GROW MOST SEEM TO SERVE MOST.  Those who become more like Christ seem to be those who care the most for others.We all need a renewal of concern for others.  The Philippians had a renewal of concern for Paul, which resulted in sharing with him materially or financially.When we are concerned about others we will share with them in their time of need.  DO YOU KNOW OF ANYONE HAS A NEED THAT YOU CAN HELP FULFILL?  Are you concerned?II. A RENEWAL OF CONTENTMENT FOR LIVINGV. 11-12 ?I have learned to be content whatever the circumstances.  I know what it is to be in need, and I know what it is to have plenty??Contentment is a tough call in our world today, that is, in America where we have anything available and tend to want everything.ILL.- Philip Parham tells the story of a rich industrialist who was disturbed to find a fisherman sitting lazily beside his boat.  "Why aren?t you out there fishing?" he asked.  "Because I?ve caught enough fish for today," said the fisherman.  "Why don?t you catch more fish than you need?? the rich man asked.  "What would I do with them?" "You could earn more money," came the impatient reply, "and buy a better boat so you could go deeper and catch more fish.  You could purchase nylon nets, catch even more fish, and make more money.  Soon you?d have a fleet of boats and be rich like me." The fisherman asked, "Then what would I do?"  "You could sit down and enjoy life," said the industrialist.  "What do you think I?m doing now?" the fisherman replied. ILL.- Leaning on his fence one day, a devout Quaker was watching a new neighbor move in next door.  After all kinds of modern appliances, electronic gadgets, plush furniture, and costly wall hangings had been carried in, the onlooker called over, "If you find you?re lacking anything, neighbor, let me know and I?ll show you how to live without it." Most of us don?t know how to live without it.  Once we have acquired certain luxuries we don?t know how to live without them and we don?t want to live without them.ILL.- I started writing sermons out by hand.  Next I went to an old manual typewriter.  Next came a Sears portable electric typewriter and I thought I was in ?hog heaven.?  Next came an office Remington Electric typewriter.  Talk about slick, it was that.  Next came an IBM selectric typewriter.  It was one of those typewriters with a little ball so you could change the font or type style quickly.  Next came a Canon inkjet word processor and I just knew I was in ?hog heaven? as far as writing was concerned, because I could change my notes and store them on a disk without printing them out until the final copy was done.  Finally, along came the computer with practically everything available.  Now we have the computer with internet assistance in order to research, find stories, etc.  AND I ADMIT IT; I DON?T WANT TO GO BACK!  I don?t want to go back to writing out sermons and lessons by hand.  My handwriting is poor at best and my hand and fingers couldn?t take it anyway.  They cramp easily.We don?t want to go back.  We don?t want to do without our luxuries: cars, computers, cell phones, etc.  And the problem is: we are often discontented with what we now have!  ILL.- Ben Franklin, said "Content makes poor men rich; discontent makes rich men poor."  Paul said, ?I have learned to be content whatever the circumstances.?  Have we?Discontent in the physical is not good, but discontent in the spiritual realm is very good.  We all should strive for greater material contentment, but never in the spiritual realm.The greater we grow in Christ, however, the less discontented we will become in this world and with the things of this world.  CHRIST IS THE ANSWER TO DISCONTENT.  Heb. 13:5 ?Keep your lives free from the love of money and be content with what you have, because God has said, ?never will I leave you; never will I forsake you.??III. A RENEWAL OF STRENGTH FOR SERVINGV. 13 ?I can do everything through Him who gives me strength.?ILL.- Three guys were talking in the local bar.  The manager was so sure that its bouncer was the strongest man around that it offered a standing $1,000 bet that no could beat him.  The challenge was that the landlord would squeeze a lemon until all the juice ran out into a beer glass, then hand the lemon to the customer.  Anyone who could squeeze even one more drop out of the lemon would win the money.Over the years many people had tried this, truck drivers, weightlifters, karate masters, and all had failed.  Then one day this geeky little fella with heavy black-rimmed glasses came into the bar and asked if he could try the challenge.After the laughter had subsided the landlord said that it was only fair that the man be given a chance at the bet, so he picked up a lemon and started squeezing.  Once he was done he handed the remains to the little man who promptly squeezed out 4 more drops of juice onto the bar!Everyone looked on in amazement as the landlord handed over the prize and asked, "What do you do for a living that has given you such strength?  Are you a lumberjack, weightlifter, what?" "No" the man replied, "I work for the IRS."The biggest guy is not always the strongest.  David was not big and strong compared to Goliath.I have always been fascinated by human strength.  I guess that?s a ?guy thing.?  Even as a child I was oohed and awed by the Charles Atlas ads I saw.  Most young boys didn?t want to be a 95-weakling.  They wanted to be a strong, muscular man like Charles Atlas.  Today, it might be the desire for an Arnold Schwarzenegger body or a Sylvester Stallone body.But spiritual strength is greater still, is it not?  Arnold Schwarzenegger?s greatest strength may be seen in what he can do for the people of California, i.e., how well he serves.ILL.- Robert was physically handicapped.  He was a spastic and confined to a wheelchair because his muscle movements could not be controlled.  His speech was so slurred that he was hard to understand.  Many might think, ?poor guy.?  Listen further.Robert was a student in a university.  He couldn?t write so he would carry carbon paper with him to class and ask the student next to him to take notes for him.  If that student took good notes, Robert had good notes.  If not, Robert had poor notes too.He couldn?t push himself forward in his wheelchair.  If no one were around to push him, he would push himself backwards with his feet, looking over his shoulder to see where he was going.One day Robert came too close to the edge of some stairs in the administration building.  So Robert, his books, wheelchair and all went tumbling and crashing down the stairs.  Robert ended up sprawled on the floor but unhurt.  Several students came running to help him.  From his rather undignified position, Robert looked up, laughed out loud and said, ?LET ME TEACH YOU HOW TO DANCE!?Robert was a Christian and wanted to preach Christ.  One Sunday night at a church he was given the chance to speak.  He sat in his wheelchair, Bible in hand and spoke.  His speech was so slurred that few people understand what he said, but they could not resist the love in his heart.  There were few dry eyes in that audience.  Robert eventually realized his dream and went with some missionaries overseas.  He had them put posters on his wheelchair and park him in a busy downtown street corner.  He handed out gospel tracts all day long.  While overseas he met and married a lovely young woman named Rosa.  Sometime later they had a girl named Minnie.  THE MILLION-DOLLAR QUESTION IS THIS:  How was Robert who was so physically handicapped able to complete college, preach, get married, have a baby and actually live?  The answer is the same as Paul?s?I CAN DO ALL THINGS THROUGH CHRIST WHO STRENGTHENS ME!Our greatest strength in life comes from the Lord.  It matters not who we are, how we are or what we are.  The Lord can strength and empower us for all of life.  All we have to do is ask, seek and knock.  He will hear.  He will answer.  He will open the door.  He will strengthen our weak spirit by His powerful Holy Spirit.  CONCLUSION----------------------------ILL.- When Rufus Choate, the distinguished American statesman went to England in search of health, a friend said to him, ?I feel sure that your health will be restored and that you will be living and at your work ten years from now.?  ?Living ten years from now!? said the great lawyer.  ?I shall be living a thousand years from now.?Some day life will cease as we know it, but the spirit lives on.  In the process of living, our greatest concern must be for spiritual renewal since that is where we are going to spend forever.II Cor. 4:16-17 ?Therefore we do not lose heart.  Though outwardly we are wasting away, yet inwardly we are being renewed day by day.  For our light and momentary troubles are achieving for us an eternal glory that far outweighs them all.?  We must not lose heart.  We must continue to seek renewal in Christ.  It?s the only way to live and the only way to die.