INTRO.- How do you say ?goodbye? when you exit someone?s presence?  - ?Gotta go.  Bye.?  -  ?It?s been fun.  Take it easy.?  - ?Adios Amigo.?  - ?After while, crocodile.?  - ?Later gator.? - ?So long.  Catch you later.?  - ?Toodle-oo.?  (that?s an old one)- ?Goodbye and God bless you.?  - Perhaps Paul Harvey?s ?good day.?  - ?Have a good day? or ?have a good one? or ?have a great day.?  ILL.- Tom Emmerson, a friend, told me his mother always parted by saying, ?I love you but Jesus loves you more.?  How sweet, loving and true!In our text, the apostle Paul made a graceful exit by giving a pointed farewell message to the elders at Ephesus.Acts 20:17-18 ?From Miletus, Paul sent to Ephesus for the elders of the church.  When they arrived, he said to them: ?You know how I lived the whole time I was with you, from the first day I came into the province of Asia.??  Down through the years many people have made a farewell address.  ILL.- Feb. 11, 1861 When A. Lincoln left Springfield, IL, to start his inaugural journey to Washington, D.C., he paid an unforgettable tribute to his friends and neighbors in what is known today as the Farewell Address.  ?My friends, no one, not in my situation, can appreciate my feeling of sadness at this parting.  To this place, and the kindness of these people, I owe everything.  Here I have lived a quarter of a century, and have passed from a young to an old man.  Here my children have been born, and one is buried.  I now leave, not knowing when, or whether ever, I may return, with a task before me greater than that which rested upon Washington.  Without the assistance of the Divine Being who ever attended him, I cannot succeed.  With that assistance I cannot fail.  Trusting in Him who can go with me, and remain with you, and be everywhere for good, let us confidently hope that all will yet be well.  To His care commending you, as I hope in your prayers you will commend me, I bid you an affectionate farewell.?Lincoln?s farewell address was brief (perhaps a minute) but very thoughtful.  And spiritual, which is something that is often missing in our farewells today.  As Christians we should always part company as best we can and as blessed as we can.  I realize that words can be expressed and not meant, but I personally don?t think we can say enough good words to one another.  IF YOU MEAN IT AND IT?S GOOD, SAY IT!  EXPRESS IT!  Life is too short not to spread good around.What if you were to give a farewell today, what would you say?  What would be your final words?  To the church?  To your family?  To all people?  Would you make a graceful exit?  It?s very possible that your last words could be your most important and memorable.  PROP.-  In Paul?s farewell address he spoke of the past, present and future to make them realize the importance of their faith in Christ.1- His past work (18-21)2- His present commitment  (22-24)3- His future concern (28-31)I. HIS PAST WORKActs 20:18-21 ?When they arrived, he said to them: "You know how I lived the whole time I was with you, from the first day I came into the province of Asia.  I served the Lord with great humility and with tears, although I was severely tested by the plots of the Jews. You know that I have not hesitated to preach anything that would be helpful to you but have taught you publicly and from house to house.  I have declared to both Jews and Greeks that they must turn to God in repentance and have faith in our Lord Jesus. ?  ?You know how I lived.?  HE WAS LOOKING BACK.ILL.- One man said to his friend: "Say, you look depressed.  What are you thinking about?"  "My future," was the quick answer.  "What makes it look so hopeless?"  "My past."Some people have such a bad past that they don?t want to think about their future.  Be assured of this: most people have something in their past that they don?t like or are not proud of you.  Yes, some worse than others.  Now on the other hand, some of you may have a very good past or a better past than your present.  Or at least, you think that way.  ILL.- Preacher Warren Weirsbe said, ?Do not say, ?Why were the former days better than these??  You do not move ahead by constantly looking in a rear view mirror.  The past is a rudder to guide you, not an anchor to drag you.  We must learn from the past but not live in the past.?If you have a bad past, don?t dwell there long.  Let it humble you, but don?t stay there.  It will only get you down and then you will be of no use to anybody, especially the Lord.If you have a good past, like Paul?s, then thank God that He blessed you and used you.  Give God the glory and get on with your business.  Paul?s past work included several things.1- He served the Lord with humility and tears2- He was severely tested3- He did not hesitate to preach anything that was helpfulWe all need to serve the Lord in some form and with humility, realizing that He enables and empowers us to serve.The number one complaint I hear from other preachers is this: ?I can?t get people to serve.?  They can?t get people to work with the youth, the music department, calling, etc. I have come to believe that most people do what they want to do and if they don?t want to do something, they won?t.  Most people need some kind of motivation to get them to do things they might not otherwise do.What will it take to get you to serve the Lord either in the church or outside the church?  What about the fact of death?  What if you knew you were going to die in a week?  Would that motivate you to do something for the Lord?  Or what about the Lord?s love for you?  Does His love motivate you to serve?  It should.  II Cor. 5:14 ?For Christ?s love compels us?? ILL.- After many people saw the movie THE PASSION OF THE CHRIST they were moved to dedicate themselves more fully to Christ and Christian service.  Praise God!  Something needs to move us all!  It?s a shame that it takes a movie to move some people.  GOD WANTS US ALL TO SERVE!Paul?s past work included being severely tested.  He was tested by the Jews and no doubt, in many ways.  We tend to think because he was an apostle and he had no family obligations like a wife and children that he had no problems.  I DON?T BELIEVE IT.  Everyone in the flesh is going to have problems and every Christian in the flesh is going to be tested.ILL.- My son Shane works for BG?s restaurant in Cape Girardeau, MO.  He washes dishes, bakes potatoes and delivers meals with the hope of getting some decent tips.  One day recently while changing clothes he found a $100 bill in his back pocket.  He immediately thought, ?I?m $100 richer? and then he realized that money must belong to the restaurant.  Occasionally, people will call in and say they will need change for a $100 bill.  That $100 bill had been in Shane?s back pocket for probably a week.  He took it back to the restaurant and turned it in.  The owner was so grateful that he bought Shane?s lunch that day.The temptation to take $100 is not a big temptation or a big test to some people, but to others it is.  A few years ago Shane might have taken that money and thought nothing of it.  But he couldn?t do it now.  Naturally, I was proud of him for passing that test.Brothers and sisters, we ALL will be tested in some ways and some of us may be severely tested.  It may come from a friend, a family member or some foe, but it will come.  And it will come in various ways at various times.Paul?s past also included not hesitating to preach anything that helpful to people.  Or we could say that Paul was not hesitant to serve and preach.  Hesitation is good for some things, but not for everything.ILL.- I have known of some people to make quite a bit of money playing the stock market.  On the other hand, I have known of many people to lose a lot of money.  Consequently, I am very hesitant to put any money in any stock at any time!  It pays to be hesitant about certain things of which we are not sure or have little faith in.  On other hand, we must not hesitate about other things.ILL.-  There was once this soft-spoken man who was a commuter on the Long Island Railroad?on the five o?clock local.  Every evening, after the train had left the subway, he would begin a journey through the car from front to back.  At each seat he would stop and say, ?Excuse me.  But if any of your friends are blind, tell them to consult Dr. Garl.  He restored my sight.?Because our sight has been restored, we must not hesitate to tell others, to speak to others about Dr. Jesus.  II. HIS PRESENT COMMITMENTActs 20:22-24 ?"And now, compelled by the Spirit, I am going to Jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me there.  I only know that in every city the Holy Spirit warns me that prison and hardships are facing me. However, I consider my life worth nothing to me, if only I may finish the race and complete the task the Lord Jesus has given me--the task of testifying to the gospel of God?s grace.?  ?And now, compelled by the Spirit.?  PAUL WAS LOOKING AT HIS PRESENT LIFE.ILL.- A college man walked into a photography studio with a framed picture of his girlfriend.  He wanted the picture duplicated.  This involved removing it from the frame.  In doing this, the studio owner noticed the inscription on the back of the photograph:  ?My dearest Tom, I love you with all my heart. I love you more and more each day.  I will love you forever and ever. I am yours for all eternity.?  It was signed "Helen,? and it contained a P.S.:  ?If we ever break up, I want this picture back.?THAT IS NOT COMMITMENT, which is something we often see in America and in American churches.ILL.- According to the Barna Research Group church attendance levels are higher in the ?Bible belt? areas ? the South and Midwest ? than in the Northeast and West.  48% of those in the South and 47% of those in the Midwest attend church in a typical week, compared to 41% of those in the West and 35% of those in the Northeast. (2004)  And 60% of born again Christians attended church in the last week, compared to 43% of all adults. (2004)While we may take a little pride in the fact that we mid-southerners are better in our church attendance, we must still realize that only 47 or 48% of the people attend church and only 60% of those who claim Christ.  That means 40% don?t attend church on any given Sunday!  THAT IS A LACK OF COMMITMENT!If our commitment is lacking when it comes to church attendance, what about the commitment to testify for Christ?ILL.- It is said that the body of David Livingstone was buried in England where he was born, but his heart was buried in the Africa he loved.  At the foot of a tall tree in a small African village the natives dug a hole and placed in it the heart of this man whom they loved and respected.If your heart were to be buried in the place you loved most during life, where would it be?  David Livingstone was committed to Christ and to the people of Africa.ILL.- Ben Wilson is the son of Seth Wilson, who for many years was the academic dean of Ozark Christian College.  Ben Wilson preached for several years at the First Christian Church of Carterville, IL.  He told of one man in his church who was suffering terribly from emphysema.  The man had to live on oxygen, day and night.  Whenever Ben wanted to go calling this man was more than willing to go with him.  Even though he could barely make it to and from the car, he would go.  Going to church was a struggle as well, but he was always there no matter how difficult his breathing was.  THAT?S COMMITMENT!  I don?t have a breathing problem, do you?  I don?t have a walking problem, do you?Paul?s present commitment to Christ was tremendous.  He considered his life worth nothing unless he could testify for Christ!  TESTIFYING FOR CHRIST WAS HIS PASSION!  Mel Gibson?s passion for Christ made him millions of dollars.  Paul?s passion for Christ ultimately won millions of souls to Christ.  Paul lived and breathed for people to come to Christ.  Otherwise, he didn?t care to live one minute more.  HIS PASSION WAS PEPOPLE!ILL.- The Atlanta Journal Constitution, May 17, 1987, carried this story.  A rock hound named Rob Cutshaw owned a little roadside shop outside Andrews, North Carolina.  Like many in the trade, he hunted for rocks, then sold them to collectors or jewelry makers.  He knew enough about rocks to decide which to pick up and sell, but he was no expert.  He left the appraising of his rocks to other people. As much as he enjoyed the work, it didn?t always pay the bills. He occasionally moonlighted, cutting wood to help put bread on the table.While on a dig twenty years ago, Rob found a rock he described as ?purdy and big.?  He tried unsuccessfully to sell the specimen, and according to the Constitution, kept the rock under his bed or in his closet.  He guessed the blue chunk could bring as much as $500 dollars, but he would have taken less if something urgent came up like paying his power bill.That?s how close Rob came to hawking for a few hundred dollars what turned out to be the largest, most valuable sapphire ever found.  The blue rock that Rob had abandoned to the darkness of a closet two decades ago?now known as ?The Star of David? sapphire?weighs nearly a pound, and could easily sell for $2.75 million.  Brothers and sisters, many people don?t realize the treasure that they already have.  Of course, I?m talking about the greatest treasure, which is Christ.  We may not realize it now, but when we leave this world it will hit us in the face like a ton bricks that Christ was our greatest treasure of all and should have been our greatest passion of all!III. HIS FUTURE CONCERNActs 20:28-31 ?Keep watch over yourselves and all the flock of which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers. Be shepherds of the church of God, which he bought with his own blood.  I know that after I leave, savage wolves will come in among you and will not spare the flock.  Even from your own number men will arise and distort the truth in order to draw away disciples after them.  So be on your guard!  Remember that for three years I never stopped warning each of you night and day with tears.?  ?Keep watch.?  HE WAS TALKING ABOUT THEIR FUTURE.ILL.- A fortuneteller, gazing into a crystal ball, said to a frog: ?You are going to meet a beautiful young woman.  From the moment she sets her eyes on you she will have an insatiable desire to know all about you.  She will be compelled to get close to you--you?ll fascinate her."  The frog asked, "Where am I?  At a singles club?"  The fortuneteller said, ?No, biology class." That frog suddenly had some serious concerns about his future!  What?s your greatest concern in life?  Family, fun, retirement, play and pleasure, Christ, the church?  What?When I was raising my children it was my children.  My greatest concern was that both of them might some day accept Christ as their Savior.  Hopefully, you have that concern as a parent.  I would think that would be one of our greatest concerns, because if we can?t take our children with us to heaven what do we have that?s more important?ILL.- Long ago a family sat eagerly before their television set, waiting to see the pictures of the first U.S. moon rocket firing. They heard the rockets hissing roar and saw it begin to lift off toward the moon.  Suddenly the tension was interrupted by the voice of a child who had just entered the room.  ?I want to see Howdy Doody!?  The family laughed.  ?Howdy Doody? was on another channel.  But to the little girl, ?Howdy-Doody? was more important than man?s dream of the centuries.  Often in life we are concerned about ?Howdy Doody? matters rather than in God?s dream of the century, and that is, seeking and saving the lost and building people in the faith.ILL.- George Mueller said in 1844 that five people were laid on his heart.  He began to pray for them to come to Christ.  Eighteen months passed before one of them was converted.  He prayed for five years more, and another was converted.  At the end of twelve-and-a-half years, a third was converted.  And forty years later he was still praying for the other two, but they were not converted at that time.  He felt encouraged, however, to continue in prayer.  He was sure of receiving an answer.That?s commitment to Christ.  DO YOU HAVE THAT KIND OF COMMITMENT?  The kind of commitment that continues to work and pray regardless of how long it takes to see people come to Christ?Paul?s future concern was for the church.  He was concerned about false teachers invading the church.  I am concerned about that too, but not nearly as concerned about that as I am church growth.  I think our greatest future concern should be for people to come to Christ and for people to grow in Christ.  ILL.- Someone put it ike this.  This is old news, but it?s pertinent news.  WHICH DISTURBS YOU THE MOST?- A soul lost in Hell...or a scratch on your new car?- Missing the worship service...or missing a day?s work?- A church not growing...or your garden not growing?- Your Bible unopened...or your newspaper unread?- The church work being neglected...or housework neglected?- Your children late for Sunday school...or late for public school?- A person cleansed from sin?or the church building cleaned?Paul?s concern was for the Lord?s church.  If the church is ever to be built up, we must a lasting and strong concern as well.CONCLUSION-----------------------------------------Acts 20:36-38 ?When he had said this, he knelt down with all of them and prayed.  They all wept as they embraced him and kissed him.  What grieved them most was his statement that they would never see his face again.  Then they accompanied him to the ship.?Paul shared his heart and bared his soul.  What a farewell parting!  They prayed, they wept, they embraced, they kissed and they grieved.  What an emotional but graceful exit!  I don?t like farewells like that, but they happen.  When you love someone very much the parting causes a certain amount of grieving.  It?s just happens, but it?s tough.Whenever you say ?goodbye? make it a good one!  Make it graceful.  Make it grace full, full of God?s grace or graciousness. In that way, your life and parting will make an impact for Christ!