INTRO.- Well meaning but wrong.  Ever happen to you?ILL.- A young preacher said, ?I was completing my first funeral service in my first congregation on the plains of Kansas.  The words of committal for a dear, aged mother had been spoken and a prayer following concluded the graveside service. ?Unexpectedly, one of the sons of the family approached me and asked me to thank those who had been of help to the family during their bereavement.  As a nervous and frustrated young preacher, I announced, ?In the name of the mourning family I want to thank all the neighbors and friends who have made this funeral possible.??That young preacher meant well, but said the wrong words.  Did you ever do something like that?  Your motive was good but your method was poor?ILL.- It?s kind of like the American Idol wannabe?s.  That most popular TV show started again on Jan. 16 and 17th.  They had two hours each evening and yes, I watched them.  And I heard some of the most miserable singing in the world.  Some of those young people couldn?t carry a tune in a bucket.  Some were horrible and of course, Simon Cowell told them so.  They were well meaning but sadly and badly mistaken.Brothers and sisters, we are not much different.  We may mean well in what we do but sometimes we?re sadly mistaken.ILL.- For example, I have often looked back and thought about some of my previous ministries, particularly when I was a young man and I made some bad mistakes.  I remember at times chewing out my people in sermons when it was totally uncalled for.  I regret that now. And I am thankful they were willing to bear with a young preacher.  I meant well but I didn?t do well.  We all do things like this.  It may be in our work or in dealings with family members or other people.  ILL.- I remember working at Safeway in Joplin, MO, over 40 years ago.  I was a new Christian and eager to evangelize or witness to everybody.  We had another employee who was a Mormon boy and I thought he was wrong about some things.  We discussed the Bible many times, but one day while we were in the backroom he made me so mad over his belief that I wanted to hit him in the mouth.  I meant well in wanting to witness but to argue and/or fight was totally wrong.PROP.- In our text, we see some well meaning people who made some mistakes and how Jesus responded.1- The mother?s request2- The Savior?s comeback3- The disciples? reaction 4- The Savior?s exampleI. THE MOTHER?S REQUESTMatt. 20:20-21 ?Then the mother of Zebedee?s sons came to Jesus with her sons and, kneeling down, asked a favor of him.  "What is it you want?" he asked.  She said, "Grant that one of these two sons of mine may sit at your right and the other at your left in your kingdom."Isn?t this just like a mother to ask on behalf of her children?  Mothers do look out for their children.  They are quick to defend them, help them, encourage them, and sometimes even ask on their behalf.ILL.- Preacher G. Campbell Morgan had 4 sons and they were all preachers.  Someone once came into the room when all the family was there.  They thought they would see what Howard, one of the sons, was made of so they asked him this question: "Howard, who is the greatest preacher in your family?" Howard had a great admiration for his father and he looked straight across at him and then without any hesitation he answered, "Mother."  Most of us had preaching mothers.ILL.- When Thomas Edison was a young boy his teacher sent him home with a note which read, ?Your child is dumb.  We can?t do anything for him.?  Mrs. Edison wrote back, ?You do not understand my boy.  I will teach him myself.?  And she did, with results that are well known.  He became a great inventor and businessman.  Thank God for supportive, loving mothers.In our text, the mother of Zebedee?s sons meant well, but she didn?t realize what she was asking.  This might be like some mother asking the President of the US, ?Please let my son be your vice president!?  It wasn?t going to happen.She wanted something good for her sons.  She was asking the right person but asked the wrong question.  She was asking for something that was completely out of the question.And sometimes we may well ask for some ridiculous things from the Lord.  Like, ?Lord, please help me win the lottery or if not that, then the Publisher?s Clearing House sweepstake.?  Or ?Lord, I?d sure like to have that new car.  Could you work that out for me??  And we may know that it is actually nonsense or ridiculous.  ILL.- I?ve received email from well-meaning people in other states that read: ?Send this email to 7 people and you?ll receive a miracle tomorrow.?  And I think, ?Get real.?  It?s completely right to believe in the Lord and trust Him but some things make no sense.  It pays to be both humble and sensible in our asking.II. THE SAVIOR?S COMEBACKMatt. 20:22-23 "You don?t know what you are asking," Jesus said to them. "Can you drink the cup I am going to drink?" "We can," they answered.  Jesus said to them, "You will indeed drink from my cup, but to sit at my right or left is not for me to grant.  These places belong to those for whom they have been prepared by my Father."ILL.- William Jennings Bryan, Secretary of State in Woodrow Wilson?s Cabinet, was interviewing a man who was seeking a diplomatic post in China.  Bryan warned the applicant that it was necessary to qualify as a linguist.  "Can you speak the Chinese language?" he asked.  The man was equal to the occasion.  Looking Bryan squarely in the eye, he replied, "Try me.  Ask me something in Chinese."  Very good comeback.I love a great comeback.  That is, I love it when I can give a great comeback, a great response.  Not everyone, however, is a quick thinker.  Jesus was the best at this.  The request of Zebedees? wife was: "Grant that one of these two sons of mine may sit at your right and the other at your left in your kingdom."  And Jesus came back with these words, "You don?t know what you are asking.  Can you drink the cup I am going to drink?"  Jesus was saying, ?Can you do what I do or what I am going to do??Matt. 20:17-19 ?Now as Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve disciples aside and said to them, We are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be betrayed to the chief priests and the teachers of the law. ?They will condemn him to death and will turn him over to the Gentiles to be mocked and flogged and crucified. On the third day he will be raised to life!"Jesus had just talked about being crucified and here they were interested in honor. They were interested in a crown but Jesus spoke about enduring the cross!ILL.- Thomas A Kempis, the German scholar, said, ?Jesus hath many lovers of His kingdom, but few bearers of His cross.  All desire to rejoice with Him; few are willing to suffer sorrow for his sake.  Many follow Jesus unto the breaking of bread, but few to the drinking of his bitter cup.?I guess its human nature to want the good without experiencing the bad.  We want to go to the promised land without going through the wilderness.  We would like to go to heaven but we don?t want to die to get there.  We would like to be honored without being dishonored first.I Pet. 2:21 ?To this you were called, because Christ suffered for you, leaving you an example, that you should follow in his steps.?Brothers and sisters, if nothing else, we will experience a certain amount of trouble in this life simply because we are human and humans make mistakes.  Also, there may be times when we suffer because we are followers of Christ.  There may be some people at work who won?t like you because you claim to be a Christian.  Some people will cheat you, lie to you and may even harm you.ILL.- A lady in one church told me that her husband was going to be baptized into Christ at a certain time of day.  She asked her boss if she could take off work for his baptism.  He wouldn?t let her so she quit her job.  She considered her husband?s baptism far more important.  That?s a form of suffering.I Pet. 4:12-13 ?Dear friends, do not be surprised at the painful trial you are suffering, as though something strange were happening to you.  But rejoice that you participate in the sufferings of Christ, so that you may be overjoyed when his glory is revealed.?  III. THE DISCIPLES? REACTION Matt. 20:24 ?When the ten heard about this, they were indignant with the two brothers.?The disciples were ticked off, so to speak.  Of course, we don?t know how indignant they were.What do these statements sound like?- ?It?s not fair that Carl gets more vacation time off from work than I do.?- ?Kelly?s children are so well behaved.  I wish mine would be that good so I?d look like a better parent.?- ?Derek just got a new SUV.  I wish I could be him!?- ?Meredith got that promotion at work when I deserved it!?- ?Darla looks so good and trim.  I?m going to work out and diet until I look just like her.?Have you been there and thought that way?  ILL.- Here?s one person?s fight with jealousy.  A woman said, ?I had been working at the same business for several years and was used to people coming to me with computer questions.  I didn?t exactly enjoy the interruptions, but I did my best to be helpful.  Then Kelly joined my department.  I really enjoyed Kelly?s company and thought she was a good addition to our office staff.  Before long, I noticed people started flocking to Kelly with their computer questions.  At first I was relieved to be rid of the interruptions.  But then it hit me.  No one needs me anymore.  I?m just another office staff.  I did not like that!  ?Jealous thoughts raged through my head.  Why is she suddenly the expert?  What makes her better than me?  I can answer their questions better than her!?ILL.- Preacher F. B. Meyer told the following experience to a few personal friends.  He said, ?It was easy to pray for the success of G. Campbell Morgan when he was in America. But when he came back to England and took a church near to mine, it was something different.  The old Adam in me was inclined to jealousy??I Cor. 3:2-3 ?I gave you milk, not solid food, for you were not yet ready for it.  Indeed, you are still not ready.  You are still worldly.  For since there is jealousy and quarreling among you, are you not worldly?  Are you not acting like mere men??What?s the answer to jealousy?  How can it be overcome?  The Lord is the only person who can cure our hearts of any problem.  We lean on Him and we learn to be content with who we are and what we have, knowing that He will take care of us.Heb. 13:5 ?Keep your lives free from the love of money and be content with what you have, because God has said, "Never will I leave you; never will I forsake you.?Of course, it?s very hard to be content in abundant America where our neighbor?s keep buying things that we think we need.There will always be someone who is better than you are.  Someone who is more talented, someone who has more, etc.  But we all need to treasure what God has given us, make the best of it, and use it to His glory.  If we focus more on Him and how to glorify Him, the less jealous we will be.IV. THE SAVIOR?S EXAMPLEMatt. 20:25-28 ?Jesus said, "You know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their high officials exercise authority over them.  Not so with you.  Instead, whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant, and whoever wants to be first must be your slave? just as the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many."WHO SAID THESE WORDS?- I am the astronaut of boxing.  Joe Louis and Dempsey were just jet pilots.  I?m in a world of my own. - I?m so fast that last night I turned off the light switch in my hotel room and was in bed before the room was dark.- If you even dream of beating me you?d better wake up and apologize.- I am the greatest.  I said that even before I knew I was.ILL.- One time Muhammad Ali was boarding a plane.  The stewardess told him to fasten his seatbelt for takeoff.  Ali replied, ?Superman don?t need no seatbelt.?  To which the stewardess replied, ?SUPERMAN DON?T NEED NO AIRPLAINE EITHER.  Now fasten your seatbelt.?Muhammad Ali, formerly Cassius Clay, considered himself to be the greatest boxer of all time.  But now he?s 65 years old and has been humbled by a form of Parkinson Disease.This world is temporary and human greatness is only temporary. True greatness in the eyes of God is not matter of fame and fortune.  True greatness in the eyes of God is being a servant to others.  If we ever do anything that others considers to be great, then to God be the glory!   He is author of good things in our lives.  He alone is great.We all should strive, however, to be servants.  God wants us to serve one another in love.  If Jesus was not too proud to serve, or too proud the wash the feet of the disciples, then what should we do?  How should we live?  What should be our attitude?ILL.- During the American Revolution a man in civilian clothes rode past a group of soldiers repairing a small defensive barrier. Their leader was shouting instructions, but making no attempt to help them.  Asked why he was not helping, he responded, "Sir, I am a corporal!"  The stranger apologized, dismounted, and proceeded to help the exhausted soldiers.  After the job was done, he turned to the corporal and said, "Mr. Corporal, next time you have a job like this and not enough men to do it, go to your commander-in-chief, and I will come and help you again."  It was none other than George Washington.ILL.- John Wesley provides the best idea about being a true servant: ?Do all the good you can, by all the means you can, in all the ways you can, in all the places you can, at all the times you can, to all the people you can, as long as you can.?CONCLUSIOIN---------------------I WAS WRONG.  That?s the title of the book that Jim Bakker, former PTL leader, wrote after he got out of prison.  He said, ?I was wrong.  Wrong in my lifestyle, certainly, but even more fundamentally, wrong in my understanding of the Bible?s true message.  Not only was I wrong, but I was teaching the opposite of what Jesus had said."Did you ever tell God that you were wrong?  And when was the last time that you confessed your wrong?  Our wrongdoing is not the end of the story.  Thank God!  Here should be the end to our wrong.Heb. 4:15-16 ?For we do not have a high priest who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses, but we have one who has been tempted in every way, just as we are?yet was without sin.  Let us then approach the throne of grace with confidence, so that we may receive mercy and find grace to help us in our time of need.?