INTRO.- Often, our priorities in life are mixed up.  I recently saw a carton on the internet, showing a woman crawling on her hands and knees in the desert.  The sun was broiling her.  There were two roads.  One turned to the right, stating, ?Fresh water only ¼ mile.?  The road to the left had a sign, stating, ?One-half price sale only 2 and ¼ miles.?  GUESS WHICH ROAD SHE TOOK??Our first priority and commitment in life is to the Lord who created us, sustains us and saves us.  Without Him we would not be here!  Simply put.  Strongly meant.  There is no life apart from God.  He is the giver of life!When we leave this world and step into eternity we all will be shocked and probably embarrassed over our lack of commitment to the Lord while we lived in this world.  Only when we face our living, loving, gracious Creator will we truly understand where we failed in this life.  But our shame and humiliation will be erased by His grace.Our second priority and commitment in life is to people.  ?Love your neighbor as yourself.?  Or ?love your neighbor like you would love yourself.?  Take care of your neighbor, etc.ILL.- POINT REYES, Calif. ? Did you hear about that husband-and-wife team that reached the Pacific Ocean on Saturday, Oct. 15th, after a 4,900-mile cross-country hike, becoming the first to backpack the transcontinental American Discovery Trail in one continuous trek.?Marcia and Ken Powers started Feb. 27 at Cape Henlopen in Delaware.  Nearly eight months later, they looked out over the Pacific Ocean at Point Reyes.  ?We feel great.  We?re done,? Marcia Powers said after reaching the ocean late Saturday afternoon, a day ahead of schedule.  ?We are a little bit sad that a great adventure is over.  It was a fantastic adventure.?The couple from Pleasanton, Calif., traversed cities, desert, mountains and farmland as they crossed 13 states while averaging 22 miles a day and taking only four days off.Brothers and sisters, I?m glad that Marcia and Ken Powers enjoyed their 4,900 mile-walk and set a record.  But I thought to myself:  life is not just about us!  It is not just about what we do in life or what we accomplish in life.  LIFE IS ABOUT MINISTERING TO OTHERS!Look at the life of Jesus!  Around what did He focus His life?  Ministering to people!  His first priority was pleasing His heavenly Father, which He did.  His second focus in life was ministering to people, seeking and saving the lost, etc.  AND SO SHOULD OURS BE.PROP.- Let?s think about our commitment to people and what we can do to minister to one another.  We can and must support one another in various ways. 1- Prayer support  2- Physical support  3- Emotional supportI. PRAYER SUPPORTILL.- HURRICANE, W.Va. ? With $340 million up for grabs it was the second-biggest lottery jackpot in U.S. history, people trekked to a small-town West Virginia convenience store to buy their tickets Tuesday, Oct. 18th in the apparent belief that lightning can strike twice in the same place. Nearly three years ago, it was the C&L Super Serve in Hurricane that sold the ticket that made West Virginia contractor Jack Whittaker the winner of the nation?s biggest undivided jackpot: $314.9 million in the multi-state Powerball lottery.Twenty-seven states offer Powerball, along with the District of Columbia and the U.S. Virgin Islands.  Edward Jarvis, a 39-year-old real estate agent, drove from New York?s Long Island to Greenwich, Conn., to buy $120 worth of tickets."That?s worth an hour or two out of your day," he said.  "It?s cheaper than going to Atlantic City for a heck of a lot better return if you win."  BETTER RETURN FOR YOUR MONEY.  I thought, ?gambling never gives you a better return for your money.?  Few there are who win.  By the way, that man didn?t get a better return for his money after all.  The winning ticket was not sold in Conn, but rather in Oregon.  He just lost $120 and several hours of driving with expensive gas.Brothers and sisters, I?ll tell you where you can get a better return for your money than betting on the lottery!  It?s when we invest ourselves in people through prayer!II Cor. 1:10-11 ?He (the Lord ) has delivered us from such a deadly peril, and he will deliver us.  On him we have set our hope that he will continue to deliver us, as you help us by your prayers.  Then many will give thanks on our behalf for the gracious favor granted us in answer to the prayers of many.? Whenever we help one another in prayer we get ?more bang for our buck.?  Praying for one another is probably one of the best things we can do for one another or one of the most beneficial!  The advice that we give one another may not always be the best advice but when we pray unselfishly for one another, asking God to bless and direct someone, they get the best from us and God!  ILL.- For example, if one of you came to me asking advice, say about your children, I might not tell you what is best for your child.  I could tell you about my experience with my children, but it might not be the same for you.  If your child has a different makeup or temperament, what I say might not help you.  But on the other hand, if I listen to what you have to say and then pray for God to direct you, give you wisdom and grace, I couldn?t miss and you couldn?t miss.ILL.- I remember well when I was going to Ozark Christian College that I had what I thought was a serious problem.  I think it involved my work at Safeway.  I didn?t know what to do so I went to see professor Don DeWelt.  I called and went to see him at his home.  After telling him what my problem was and expecting some wise counsel, he simply said, ?Let?s pray about this.?  We both got down on our knees and Brother Don DeWelt prayed very specifically about the problem and asked the Lord to direct me.But you know what?  I came away feeling a lot better and somehow or other, that problem was solved.  IT PAYS TO PRAY!  More bang for your buck!  More wisdom from the all-wise one!  More grace from the gracious one!  More strength from the all-powerful one!Eph. 6:18 ?And pray in the Spirit on all occasions with all kinds of prayers and requests.  With this in mind, be alert and always keep on praying for all the saints.?PRAY IN THE SPIRIT.  Some people take this scripture to mean that perhaps they should speak in tongues to God.  However, I think this way.  Praying in the spirit is spiritual praying and what is the most spiritual kind of praying we can do?  Probably praying for others, because it is the most unselfish kind of praying that we can do.Brothers and sisters, let?s be quick and quicker to help one another in prayer.  Daily we should be praying for one another and especially, those who are in the midst of some trial or trouble.But when you pray, don?t just pray.  DO YOU KNOW WHAT YOU SHOULD DO?  Be sure to tell your brother or sister that you are helping them in prayer!  You will be amazed and they will be amazed at the difference and the help your prayers will make.II. PHYSICAL SUPPORTActs 20:34-35 ?You yourselves know that these hands of mine have supplied my own needs and the needs of my companions.  In everything I did, I showed you that by this kind of hard work we must help the weak, remembering the words the Lord Jesus himself said: ?It is more blessed to give than to receive.?"  Paul worked hard to help others.ILL.- I read the other day where actor/director Mel Gibson of the Passion fame donated $1 million dollars to help Mexico?s hurricane relief in the aftermath of Tropical Storm Stan.  That is definitely a form of physical support.  It would be nice if all of us could be so generous to people, but obviously we can?t.  If we can give money to help anybody, we should, but most people are not quick to do that kind of thing.  We tend to think we?ll run out of money so we just keep it for ourselves.  But giving money is a good way to help people and God will bless those who give from a heart of love.ILL.- The other day our neighbor lady who is in her 70?s had a snake problem.  Apparently, a snake started popping up out of her water meter hole.  I quickly ran over there with my trusty hoe to see if I could get it for her.  Elaine just laughed at me.  Frankly, I?m not too fearful of snakes so I thought I could help.  But sad to say, I could find no snake.  And I was really hoping to find a snake.Another time, just after we moved here, that lady was trying to pull vines down from around her back fence.  I went over and offered to help, which she let me do.  And I?ve offered to help at other times.  It?s the least a neighbor could do.Acts 6:1-4 ?In those days when the number of disciples was increasing, the Grecian Jews among them complained against the Hebraic Jews because their widows were being overlooked in the daily distribution of food. So the Twelve gathered all the disciples together and said, "It would not be right for us to neglect the ministry of the word of God in order to wait on tables.  Brothers, choose seven men from among you who are known to be full of the Spirit and wisdom. We will turn this responsibility over to them and will give our attention to prayer and the ministry of the word."The first church selected what we could call ?deacons? today to serve food to the widow ladies who were being neglected.  Seldom do deacons today do this kind of work, but they could do other kinds of work that widows need.Gal. 6:9-10  ?Let us not become weary in doing good, for at the proper time we will reap a harvest if we do not give up. Therefore, as we have opportunity, let us do good to all people, especially to those who belong to the family of believers.?Down through the years I have known of church leaders and other church members to do all kinds of things for other people:  scoop snow from driveways (no worry here, however), give rides to the doctors and stores, clean houses, bake food or prepare meals, rake leaves, mow grass, paint houses, move furniture, move people in and out of houses, take care of sick people, loan cars, baby sit children, and a whole lot more.ILL.- I remember probably a year or so before my mother passed away that her grandson in Arlington, TX, (my sister?s boy) was graduating from college with his PhD.  Mom wanted to go to his graduation.  She talked to a preacher who lived across the street who was willing to take her to the Tulsa, OK, airport, which was over 100 miles away.  He graciously took her and picked up her when she returned.  THAT WAS NOT AN EASY TASK BECAUSE OF MOTHER?S PARKINSON DISEASE.  But he did it simply because he was gracious!  And I never forgot it either!  After mother passed away I reminded him of that deed and even gave him some money, which I felt was needed.ILL.- I remember while living in Iberia, MO, that one of our ladies ran a dry goods store in town.  A young lady who worked for her contracted cancer and needed rides to Columbia, MO, (80 miles one way) for chemotherapy treatments.  Not only did the lady from our church take her for those treatments but also went to her house, did her laundry and cooked meals for the lady and her family. Brothers and sisters, that is doing what Jesus would do!  Peter characterized Jesus in Acts 10:38 as one who went about doing good.  Whenever you have an opportunity to do good to anybody, neighbor, widow lady, young mother, etc. you should do it.ILL.- I forget who said it, but it?s been said:  ?I shall pass through this world but once.  Any good therefore that I can do or any kindness that I can show to any human being, let me do it now.  Let me not deter or neglect it, for I shall not pass this way again.?III. EMOTIONAL SUPPORTILL.- The story is told of a preacher who was full of energy and enthusiasm for the Lord.  One day he went to the hospital to visit one of his church members who was critically ill.  The preacher entered the room and saw the man lying in bed with a whole host of tubes and wires attached to his body.  Without any delay the preacher went to his bedside and began to encourage him to hang in there.  He was rattling away, quoting Scriptures. Soon the man started to wave his arms, which the preacher didn?t seem to understand.  Finally the preacher ended with a rather lengthy prayer.  At the final "Amen" the preacher opened his eyes just in time to see the man reach for a pad of paper and a pencil.  Quickly he wrote something and handed it to the minister. Then the man turned his head and became unconscious.  The preacher was deeply moved to think that his visit to this man had occurred in the nick of time.  ?I must be such an encouragement to him,? he thought.Then he looked at the pad and read these words: "You are standing on my oxygen tube."Brothers and sisters, that is not a good way to give emotional support to someone.  That is not paying attention.  How do you give someone emotional support?  Be aware of someone?s presence.  Listen.  Listen with your eyes and your heart.  Listen more than you talk.  Hug someone or hold their hand or put your arm around their shoulder.  Pray with them.  Encourage with the right words, etc.Rom. 12:15 ?Rejoice with those who rejoice; mourn with those who mourn.?Rom. 15:1-2  ?We who are strong ought to bear with the failings of the weak and not to please ourselves.  Each of us should please his neighbor for his good, to build him up.?Gal. 6:2 ?Bear one another?s burdens and so fulfill the law of Christ.?ILL.- I?ll never forget when my dad passed away on Dec. 11, 1982.  That was a Saturday morning.  I called one of our elders to tell him and then said, ?I?m going to drive to Webb City, MO, to be with mom today and help her make arrangements.  I?ll be back tonight and preach tomorrow morning.?  By Sunday morning everybody in the church knew that my dad had passed away.  I made it through the service fairly well and everyone was filled with sympathy.  I?ll never forget one man in the church who was old enough to be my father.  As he left the church he simply said, ?Steve, I?m sorry.?  What got me and told me that he truly cared was that tears filled his eyes.  He had been where I was.  He understood and he hurt with me.  That?s giving true emotional support.  ILL.- I?ll give you another example when mom passed away.  Several of the ladies from the nursing home where mom resided came to her funeral.  As the service was over and the people started to file by her casket all of those ladies from the nursing home hugged me.  And one of the first ladies I?d met in that home hugged me and said, ?I love you.?  That?s true emotional support.You may think this strange but I?ve even had a few people in churches to say to me as they walked out of the services, ?Steve, I love you.?  Again, that?s true emotional support especially when you know it?s genuine.  Of course, I?ve had a few to say some other words that I can?t repeat!  You might not say ?I love you? to someone but you could say, ?I?m here for you.  What can I do for you??  Or ?I believe in you.?  Or ?God bless you.?  All these words and more are a form of emotional support to people.CONCLUSION--------------------------------------ILL.- "Dear Ann (Landers), I?m a 46-year-old woman, divorced, with 3 grown children.  After several months of chemotherapy following a mastectomy for breast cancer, I was starting to put my life back together when my doctor called with the results of my last checkup.  They had found more cancer and I was devastated."My relatives had not been supportive.  I was the first person in the family to have cancer and they didn?t know how to behave toward me.  ?They tried to be kind, but I had the feeling they were afraid that it was contagious.  They called on the phone to see how I was doing, but kept their distance.  And that really hurt."Last Saturday I headed for the laundromat.  You see the same people there almost every week.  We exchange greetings, and make small talk.  So I pulled into the parking lot, determined not to look depressed, but my spirits were really low. "While taking my laundry out of the car, I looked up and saw a man, one of the regulars, leaving with his bundle.  He smiled and said, ?Good morning.  How are you today??  Suddenly I lost control of myself and blurted out, ?This is the worst day of my life! I have more cancer!?  Then I began to cry."He put his arms around me and just let me sob.  Then he said, ?I understand. My wife has been through it, too.?  After a few minutes I felt better, stammered out my thanks, and proceeded on with my laundry."About 15 minutes later, here he came back with his wife. Without saying a word, she walked over and hugged me.  Then she said, ?I?ve been there, too.  Feel free to talk to me.  I know what you?re going through.?"Ann, I can?t tell you how much that meant to me.  Here was this total stranger, taking her time to give me emotional support and courage to face the future at a time when I was ready to give up.?Brothers and sisters, we need one another.  We need to support one another in prayer, physically and emotionally.  Others, Lord, yes others, let this my motto be.  Help me to live for others that I may live like Thee.