INTRODUCTION: ILL.- Two men met up on the street.One asked the other:  "Hi, how are you?"The other one replied:  "I?m fine, thanks.""And how?s your son?  Is he still unemployed?""Yes, he is.  But he is meditating now.""Meditating?  What?s that?""I don?t know.  But it?s better than sitting around and doing nothing!"ILL.- What did the Yogi say when he walked into the Pizza Parlor?  "Make me one with everything."  When the Yogi got the pizza, he gave the proprietor a $20 bill. The proprietor pocketed the bill.  The Yogi said, "Don?t I get change?"  The proprietor said, "Change must come from within.? Brothers and sisters, I don?t mind joking about Transcendental Meditation, Yoga, etc. BECAUSE I THINK THEY?RE A JOKE!There are many people involved in meditation, TM, Yoga, etc.  But this meditation is not prayer!  One is thinking and one is talking, communicating.  This TM kind of meditation is nothing but some kind of self-hypnosis.  It focuses on self, not God.Meditation in itself is not bad.  It all depends on the object of meditation.  If we meditate about God and Christ, that?s great!  Even then that meditation must be centered or based on the Word of God, because this is where we learn about God.  But if we just sit and meditate about ourselves, we?ll become greatly depressed.  Our world is already self-obsessed enough without adding any more to it.Psalm 1:2 ?But his delight is in the law of the LORD, and on his law he meditates day and night.?Psalm 77:12 ?I will meditate on all your works and consider all your mighty deeds.?  Psalm 119:15 ?I meditate on your precepts and consider your ways.?Psalm 119:99 ?I have more insight than all my teachers, for I meditate on your statutes.?  Meditating on the Word of God will make you smarter than the average bear and perhaps even smarter than those who have taught you in life!If you are focusing on the Lord and His Word, meditation will come naturally.  It will be a natural response to the awesomeness, holiness and graciousness of God.  We will want to think of Him and consider His ways and words.In Luke 11:1 Jesus? disciples came to him, and said, ?Lord, teach us to pray.?  Jesus never taught His disciples to meditate or chant.  He taught them to pray!  And learning to pray is one of our great needs!ILL.- One preacher wrote, ?I don?t understand prayer, but I believe it works.  There are a lot of other things that I don?t understand.  I don?t understand how I can push a button in my car and my garage door opens before I even get there.  But I use it.   I don?t understand how a cordless phone works.  I don?t know how your voice can travel through the air, through a transmitter and amplifier and then someone can hear you clearly across town or across the nation or around the world.  I don?t know how.  But it works.?I don?t understand how prayer works, but it works.  So I pray in faith to my unseen God and He promises that He will hear.?Matthew 7:7-8 ?Ask and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and the door will be opened to you. For everyone who asks receives; he who seeks finds; and to him who knocks, the door will be opened.? Billy Graham once said, ?Heaven is full of answers to prayers which no one ever bothered to ask.?PROP.-  The Lord has given us some guidelines in this text for prayer.1- When you pray, don?t put on a show2- When you pray, get away from people3- When you pray, don?t babble on and on4- When you pray, forgive othersI. WHEN YOU PRAY, DON?T PUT ON A SHOWMatthew 6:5 ?And when you pray, do not be like the hypocrites, for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and on the street corners to be seen by men??ILL.- When Lyndon Johnson was President, he had several guests in for a meal at the family room of the White House.  LBJ had given the honor of giving grace to journalist Bill Moyers (an ex-Baptist minister).  As Moyers began to softly say grace, LBJ - who couldn?t understand what was being said, interrupted Moyers, "Speak up man."  Without looking up and barely stopping in mid-sentence, Bill Moyers replied, "I wasn?t talking to you."ILL.- Preacher D. L. Moody said, ?A man who prays much in private will make short prayers in public.?Brothers and sisters, there is nothing wrong with praying in public but we must not be too quick to offer a public prayer.  Meaning:  Why do we want to lead in public prayer?  Is it to communicate with God and ask on the behalf of others?  Or is it because we want to appear ?religious? to others?ILL.- Many years ago I was a member of the southern Illinois running club called ?River to River Runners.?  Every year in January they held an annual banquet to recognize certain runners for their accomplishments, give out awards, eat a good meal and generally, have a good time of fellowship.  And every year, we started our banquet with prayer.  Why?  Personally, I think it was a matter of tradition and/or formality.  I?m not sure many of those in the club were that interested in prayer.  But pray we did.  And I was asked several times to lead in prayer.  I remember one time before I approached the microphone, the President of the Club, who was a school principal, whispered in my ear, ?Make it generic and make it short.?  I laughed to myself.I made it short because I believe in short public prayers.  I remembered what Jesus said about being seen of men and I didn?t want to make a show of it.  But I did not make it generic.  I closed my prayer in ?Jesus? name? as I had always done because I believe in Jesus as the only Savior and our mediator; our only approach to God the Father.Brothers and sisters, never fear praying in public when you are asked, that is, unless you just don?t do that kind of thing.  I know of people who won?t because it makes them nervous to know that someone would be listening to them pray.  Don?t do it if you don?t want to.  Pleasantly decline.  Private prayer is the most important kind of prayer anyway.  If you are asked to pray in public, just remember that we are not in the ?show business.?  We are in the God business of trying to honor and please Him.  Any time you pray you are talking to the Lord, not to people.II. WHEN YOU PRAY, GET AWAY FROM PEOPLEMatthew 5:6 ?But when you pray, go into your room, close the door and pray to your Father, who is unseen.  Then your Father, who sees what is done in secret, will reward you.?Mark 1:35 ?Very early in the morning, while it was still dark, Jesus got up, left the house and went off to a solitary place, where he prayed.?Luke 6:12 ?One of those days Jesus went out to a mountainside to pray, and spent the night praying to God.?ILL.- Here?s a story about a ?Red Light Special!?  You?ve heard of the ?blue light specials.?  The two men were in a car when they had to stop at a red signal light.  The man at the wheel did not say anything.  The other man by his side, fretting and fuming, said, "The time we waste at these red lights - why, a man could write a book!" The driver still said nothing.  Finally the man beside him said, "Didn?t you hear what I said?" "No." "How come?" "I was talking." "Who were you talking to?" "I was talking to God," he said.  "I?ve been making it a practice every time I get to a red light to pray for one of my friends.  It is wonderful how many folks I have on my prayer list and how many I have time to pray for in this way." Brothers and sisters, I don?t necessarily recommend this kind of ?red light special,? but it?s not bad.  It?s better than not praying at all.  And it?s better than not getting away by yourself to pray. I got up early one morningAnd rushed right into the day;I had so much to accomplishI didn?t have time to pray.Troubles just tumbled about meAnd heavier came each task.Why doesn?t God help me, I wondered,He answered, ?You didn?t ask.?I tried to come into God?s presence,I used all my keys at the lock.God gently and lovingly chided,?Why child, you didn?t knock.?I wanted to see joy and beauty,But the day toiled on gray and bleak,I called on the Lord for the reason?He said ?You didn?t seek.?I woke up early this morningAnd paused before entering the day.I had so much to accomplishThat I had to take time to pray.We all need a private time for prayer.  We need this both for ourselves and for the sake of others, for those on our prayer list.Jesus recommended that we go off by ourselves, in our room, etc.  Your private prayer place could be anywhere.  It could be your car while driving to work; that is, if you can pray and drive at the same time.ILL.- Some years ago when mother was alive and we lived 420 miles from her; I treasured those drives to Joplin, MO, because they gave me lots of prayer time.  That is, when I was alone.There were times when I prayed most of those 420 miles and what a time of refreshing they were!  I NEVER FELT SO GOOD AND REFRESHED AFTER A LONG SEASON OF PRAYER!Getting away by yourself for prayer, no matter where that place is, can be a time of refreshing!  It can be a time of worship, praise, thanksgiving, and intercession on behalf of others.  But it can?t be done effectively unless you have your own ?getaway? spot.Jesus would get up early in the morning and leave the house where he was staying so He could talk with His Father.  Or at times He would spend all night in prayer.  WE ALL NEED THIS TIME, FOR OUR SAKE, FOR THE LORD?S SAKE AND FOR THE SAKE OF OTHERS!III. WHEN YOU PRAY, DON?T BABBLE ON AND ONMatthew 5:7 ?And when you pray, do not keep on babbling like pagans, for they think they will be heard because of their many words.?ILL.- A young boy was observed by a minister in church praying very fervently; but much to the preacher?s surprise, he was also heard to say from time to time:  "Tokyo, Tokyo, Tokyo."So preacher approached the boy after he had finished his prayer and said, "Son, I was very pleased to see you praying so devoutly, but tell me, why did you keep saying ?Tokyo, Tokyo, Tokyo?"The boy replied, "Well, you see sir, I just finished taking my geography test in school, and I have been praying for the Lord to make Tokyo the Capital of France."ILL.- The preacher who told this story, wrote, ?Sometimes I wonder if we do any better in the church today.  I wonder if we are on parade with our praying.  We work on saying the right phrases.  We pray with great enthusiasm.  We pray with a holy pitch.  And we pray with holy language, a language that we don?t use anywhere else.  And I wonder if it is not just all babbling to God.?He may well have a point.  We have all heard some of those so-called long, pious prayers.ILL.- I remember many years ago (30 or more) hearing two elders pray around the Lord?s Table.  They were father and son elders in this particular church.  One prayed, then the other and it sounded very much like some sort of a contest as to who could pray the longest, the best and with the right phrases.ILL.- Another time I attended a funeral and was told that the preacher would pray longer than I preached.  I thought, ?Oh no!?  That preacher did pray long, probably 10 minutes in public (not longer than I preached, however), but it was still longer than he should have.I have heard of number of prayers offered over the years, and mostly by preachers, who did more preaching in their praying than talking to God.ILL.- A little boy was afraid of the dentist.  So his father decided to set the example and have his teeth examined, too.  The dentist looked inside the father?s mouth and said, "Oh, there?s a tooth there that has to be pulled."The father asked, "How much will it cost?"  The dentist answered, "We charge $35 a tooth."  Then the father asked, "How long will it take to pull the tooth?"  The dentist answered, "About a minute."The father protested, "I get paid by the hour and when I think of paying $35 for a minute?s work, that is a terribly high hourly wage.""Well," the dentist said, "I can pull the tooth more slowly if you like."Sometimes we think that we get more for our money the slower we go.  Or perhaps the longer we pray, we think the more spiritual we are.  Jesus said: ?When you pray, do not keep on babbling like pagans, for they think they will be heard because of their many words.?IV. WHEN YOU PRAY, FORGIVE OTHERSMatthew 6:14-15 ?For if you forgive men when they sin against you, your heavenly Father will also forgive you.  But if you do not forgive men their sins your Father will not forgive your sins.?ILL.- Charles Colson in his book titled ?The Body? tells the story of a Priest, Father Jerzy in Poland.  Soon after the birth of Solidarity, Father Jerzy preached among the striking workers in Warsaw?s huge steel works.  He showed them how alcohol contributed to their oppression: If their drinking caused absenteeism or mistakes at work, it could be used to blackmail them.  After that, alcoholism dropped dramatically.Not long after martial law was imposed and Father Jerzy instituted a monthly ?Mass for the Homeland,? dedicated to all victims of the repressive regime.  Eventually thousands, then tens of thousands, attended these services at St. Stanislaw Kostka, with Father Jerzy ministering from the balcony and the people fanning out in the courtyard and streets below.Father Jerzy?s influence did not escape the notice of the authorities.  He was far too popular, far too independent, and far too threatening to the regime?s control.  He must be silenced.The secret police followed Father Jerzy everywhere.  He received unsigned death threat letters.  On the first anniversary of martial law, a pipe bomb sailed through the front window of his small flat, exploding in his sitting room.Then, on October 19, 1984, while driving back to Warsaw from Bydgoszcz where he had celebrated a special mass and delivered a message called ?Overcome Evil with Good,? Father Jerzy disappeared.On the last Sunday of October, as fifty thousand people filled St. Stanislaw Kostka in an emotional Mass for the Homeland and listened in tears to a tape of Father Jerzy?s final sermon. The announcement was made on public television that Father Jerzy?s body had been found in the Fistula River.  When the people heard the report about Father Jerzy they went down on their knees, crying out and shouting; what they had feared the most had happened.Then the crying crowd repeated after the presiding priest three times in unison: ?And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us.?  It was a Christian answer to the unchristian deed of the murders.On November 2nd, the day after Father Jerzy?s funeral the people marched in the streets past the secret police headquarters bearing banners reading, ?We forgive.?Charles Colson makes the comment: ?Regardless of their expertise in murdering the body, the executioners could not kill the soul.  Father Jerzy had taught his people well.?One of the hardest things that we have to do in life is to forgive others when they offend us or sin against us.  It?s almost unspeakable some of the things that people can do to others and even some who claim to follow Christ, BUT FORGIVE WE MUST.  If we want God?s forgiveness, we too, must somehow learn to forgive.  Jesus did it best and did it on Calvary when He prayed for those who crucified Him, ?Father, forgive them for they know not??  When you pray, forgive others.CONCLUSION--------------------------------ILL.- E. M. Bounds in his book on prayer said that Stonewall Jackson was a man of prayer.  Jackson said, ?I have so fixed the habit of prayer in my mind that I never raise a glass of water to my lips without asking God?s blessing, never seal a letter without putting a word of prayer under the seal, never take a letter from the post (office) without a brief sending of my thoughts heavenward, never change my classes in the lecture-room without a minute?s petition for the cadets who go out and for those who come in.?That?s the kind of praying we need!   We need to be in constant prayer, praise and petition!As William Carey once said, ?Prayer is my real business!  Cobbling shoes is a sideline; it just helps to pay expenses.?Brothers and sisters, prayer is our real business.  Since we?re in business with God we need to be in constant communication with Him.  He is our God and even more.  He is our loving Heavenly Father who wants time and fellowship with us.  PRAYER IS OUR REAL BUSINESS.?Lord, teach us to pray!?