INTRO.- ILL.- J.E.  Bedenbaugh said, ?My grandmother, a staunch Southern Baptist, had marched me off to Sunday school and church regularly.  So when I switched to the Episcopal church after marriage, she challenged me: "What?s wrong with the Baptist Church, son?"  "Well," I explained, "Carole and I flipped a coin to see if we would go to her church or mine, and I lost."  "Serves you right," said my grandmother.  "Good Baptists don?t gamble." I would say that everybody gambles in some form or another, even good Baptists.ILL.- On August 14, 1851 in Griffin, Georgia, John Henry Holliday was born to Henry Burroughs and Alice Jane Holliday. Otherwise known as ?Doc Holiday.?  Church records state: "John Henry, infant son of Henry B. and Alice J. Holliday, received the ordinance of baptism on Sunday, March 21, 1852, at the First Presbyterian Church in Griffin."  What does this mean?  It means that Doc Holiday?s parents believed the Lord Jesus and that they had their infant son sprinkled as an indication of their faith, not his.  So we assume that Doc Holiday had something of a Christian upbringing.  BUT SOMETHING HAPPENED ALONG THE ROAD OF LIFE.Because of his family status, John Henry had to choose some sort of profession and he chose dentistry.  John was a good dentist, but shortly after starting his practice, he discovered that he had contracted tuberculosis.  Although he consulted a number of doctors, the consensus of all was that he had only months to live.  However, they all concurred that he might add a few months to his life if he moved to a dry climate. Following this advice, Doc packed up and headed West.  His first stop was in Dallas, Texas.  The date was October 1873, and Doc soon found a suitable position as an associate of Dr. John A. Seegar.  He hung out his shingle and prepared for business, but his terrible illness was not through with him.  Coughing spells wracked his thin frame and often occurred at the most embarrassing times, such as in the midst of filling a tooth or making an extraction.  As a result, his dental business gradually declined.  John soon had to find other means of earning a livelihood.  AND I THINK WE ALL KNOW WHAT THAT LIVING WAS: gambling.It became apparent that he possessed a natural ability for gambling and this quickly became his sole means of support.  In those days, a gambler in the west had to be able to protect himself.  Doc was well aware of this and faithfully practiced with six-gun and knife.  On January 2, 1875, Doc and a local saloonkeeper, named Austin, had a disagreement that flared into violence.  Each man went for his pistol.  Several shots were fired, but not one struck its intended target.  According to the Dallas Weekly Herald, both shooters were arrested.  Most of the local citizens thought such a gunfight highly amusing, but changed their minds a few days later when Doc put two large holes through a prominent citizen, leaving him very dead.  Feelings ran high over this killing and Doc was forced to flee Dallas a short distance in front of a posse.  Bat Masterson said of him: "Doc Holliday was afraid of nothing on earth.?  Doc could be described as a fatalist.  He knew that he was already condemned to a slow, painful death.  If his death was quick and painless, who was he to object!  Actually, he expected a quick demise because of the violent life he lived.There is no accurate count of how many people Doc Holiday killed, but I counted eight more deaths from his hand.  Doc Holliday claimed he almost lost his own life a total of nine times.  Four attempts were made to hang him and he was shot at in a gunfight or from ambush five times.  In May, 1887, Doc went to Glenwood Springs to try the sulfur vapors, as his health was steadily growing worse, but he was too far-gone.  He spent his last fifty-seven days in bed and was delirious fourteen of them.  On November 8, 1887, he awoke clear-eyed and asked for a glass of whiskey.  It was given to him and he drank it down with enjoyment.  Then he said, "This is funny", and died.  Doc Holidy was dead at the age of 35.Doc Holiday was a gambler but of the wrong variety.  He gambled with his life in many ways, except in living for Christ.  What caused him to go so wrong after being raised by Christian parents?  I would say it was the temptation of the world, the flesh and the devil.  Probably all three got him.  And I suspect that after he said his last words, ?This is funny? and then went into the presence of God, he wasn?t laughing.  What a bad and sad commentary on one man?s life.As someone said, ?Life with Christ is an endless hope, but without Him, it?s a hopeless end.?  Life is something of a gamble, but it?s a very good gamble if you?re living for Christ.PROP.- In our text, we have the story of two gamblers, that is, two men who gambled their lives on Christ and won.1- Timothy2- EpaphroditusI. TIMOTHYVs. 19-24  In what ways did Timothy gamble his life on Christ?- Timothy had a genuine concern for the welfare of others.  And in our world today that?s not normal!  The norm is live for self, take care of you, because nobody else will!V. 20 ?I have no one else like him, who takes a genuine interest in your welfare.?ILL.- A small boy and his sister were riding on the back of a new wooden horse, which was given them.  Suddenly, the boy turned to his sister and said, ?If one of us would get off there would be more room for me.?  Self often rules our lives.  ILL.- This is why it is very dangerous to go shopping early in the morning the day after Thanksgiving!  It?s every shopper for themselves and you?d better not get in some people?s way!  You just might get tromped on!How are you at shopping?  Or how are you at parking in an already crammed parking lot?  Or how do you do when heading for the checkout counter when they are lined up 10 deep and some cashier calls out, ?Opening lane five for service??  ILL.- Have you seen that Staples office supply TV commercial where those two men are headed for the checkout and they go racing down the aisle to beat the other person to the counter?  That?s a reality for some people.  We?ve heard of ?road rage? and now there is ?Shopping cart rage.?Even though ?self? rules the world, it must not rule us.  We must always be quick to give and give in.  That?s a sign of the graciousness of Christ in us.Phil. 2:3-4 ?Do nothing out of selfish ambition or vain conceit, but in humility consider others better than yourselves.  Each of you should look not only to your own interests, but also to the interests of others.?- Timothy was concerned about living for Christ.V. 21 ?For everyone looks out for his own interests, NOT THOSE OF JESUS CHRIST!?Apparently, Timothy lived for the interest of Christ.  If you are going to gamble your life on someone then you must live for them!ILL.- An Aunt Dinah once said, ?Some people have just enough religion to make them happy at dances and sad at prayer meeting.?  What does that mean?  It means that some of us, if not all of us, straddle the fence at times.ILL.- Preacher John Wesley said it this way, ?Some people have just enough religion to make them uncomfortable.?Or as someone else put it: ?Some people endure religion; others enjoy salvation.?  For some people, Christianity is a matter of ?putting up with it,? or having to endure it.  But for others, it?s a joy to live!  It all depends on our commitment and surrender.ILL.- I used to run marathons and had many friends who also ran marathons.  I had one marathon friend who taught at one of our faithful Bible colleges.  One time I was somewhat disheartened and discouraged when I found out that he had run the Chicago marathon.  WHY WAS I DISHEARTENED AND DISCOURAGED?  The Chicago marathon is always run on Sunday morning and I figured he missed church to run.  Please understand.  I?ve done far worse than miss church for an athletic event, however, in this particular instance it disturbed me because this man is a great preacher and is considered to be a man of great faith.  I personally just couldn?t imagine him missing church to run a marathon.But aren?t we all guilty?  Aren?t we all guilty of failing to worship and serve Christ when we can and should?  Of course.  However, gambling on lives on Christ means that we will commit ourselves to Him in worship and service and as best we can!  Whenever and wherever!Matt. 16:24 Jesus said, ?If anyone would come after me, he must deny himself and take up his cross and follow me.?- Timothy was also concerned about his brother Paul.  That?s a part of gambling one?s life on Christ.  WE CARE ABOUT OUR BROTHERS AND SISTERS IN CHRIST!V. 22 Paul said of Timothy, ?He has served with me in the work of the gospel.?We all are serving together, with one another, for the cause of Christ.  WITH ONE ANOTHER.ILL.- I remember serving in church camp one time.  One of our faculty members was an area youth minister.  Occasionally this youth minister would get to preach for the morning service at his church.  He would always say to me, ?The people always like my preaching better than the Senior minister?s preaching.?  What does that sound like to you?  Jealousy.  And any time you have that kind of spirit in a church people will not work together very well for the cause of Christ.  WHAT A SHAME! Apparently, Paul and Timothy worked together quite well.  At least, at this time.  Occasionally, there will be conflict with some people, but we must always ?give in? to one another for the sake of Christ and His church.  We don?t always have to get our way or be in the limelight, etc.  The important thing is that Christ is pleased with our service and that we work together in serving Him.  We should be quick to assist one another, help one another, but not contend with one another or be jealous of one another.  ILL.- I can?t imagine the large Southeast Christian Church in Louisville, KY, growing to its present size of around 16,000 to 18,000 members with the ministers fighting and quarreling with one another.  I don?t know how many ministers they have serving in various areas, but I know that three different preachers do the preaching for the main services.  Both numerical and spiritual growth comes when people labor with one another, not against one another.Timothy gambled his life on Christ and won.  The same was true of Epaphroditus.II. EPAPHRODITUSVs. 25-30  In what ways did Epapthroditus gamble his life on Christ?- Epaphroditus was a faithful brother, worker, soldier, and messenger for Christ.  V. 25  THAT?S A QUITE A LIST!  He had a good resume or credentials.  Perhaps Epaphroditus acted like a brother, labored like a hard worker and fought like a soldier.The church certainly needs those who treat one another like brothers, work hard at their faith and fight for the faith of the gospel.ILL.- Some twenty years ago I tried out for preacher?s position at the Bedford Christian Church, Bedford, TX.  Bedford is near Ft. Worth.  I don?t remember the sermon I preached and I don?t remember the name of one particular elder, BUT I REMEMBER WHAT HE DID.  Before and after the sermon he gave me a big hug.  He made me feel good.  He made me feel like a brother!That?s the spirit that needs to be in the Lord?s church!  Brotherly and sisterly affection and attention.  Epaphroditus was that kind of man.Who are the hardest workers in America?  I realize that?s a debatable question.  ILL.- In the early 1970?s I went to work for some farmers in central Iowa and also worked the local grain elevator company.  I soon discovered that I never hurt so badly in all my life!  My back ached, my hands hurt and my jeans stunk to high heaven with the smell of rotten soybeans.  I made hay (the old square bails ? red clover hay), shelled corn, scooped corn, scooped rotten soybeans, and held pigs while my friend cut them.  THIS CITY BOY GOT AN EDUCATION.I don?t know if Epaphroditus was a farmer or not, but he was a hard worker for Christ.  The church can always use hard workers for Christ.ILL.- It was said that preacher John Wesley traveled two hundred and fifty thousand miles on horseback, averaging twenty miles a day for forty years.  He preached 40,000 sermons (and probably not 20 minute sermons either), produced 400 books, and knew ten different languages.  At the age of 83 he was annoyed that he could not write more than fifteen hours a day without hurting his eyes, and at 86 years he was ashamed he could not preach more than twice a day.  He complained in his diary that there was an increasing tendency to lie in bed until 5:30 in the morning.  It matters not whether we?ve been raised on a farm or in the city, we all need to labor hard for the cause of Christ with our various talents and abilities.POLEMICS.  Do you know what it is?  Basically, it is the idea of arguing against error and for the truth.  Jude 3 ?Dear friends, although I was very eager to write to you about the salvation we share, I felt I had to write and urge you to contend for the faith once for all entrusted to the saints.?  We must be ?contenders for the faith.?  We need to take a stand for our faith.  We must not be afraid to let people know where we stand and what we stand for, but we must do it in gentleness and kindness.I Pet. 3:15 ?But in your hearts set apart Christ as Lord. Always be prepared to give an answer to everyone who asks you to give the reason for the hope that you have.  But do this with gentleness and respect.?ILL.- On September 20, 2001, President George W. Bush said, ?Whether we bring our enemies to justice, or bring justice to our enemies, justice will be done. ... Our enemy is a radical network of terrorists, and every government that supports them. ... Either you are with us, or you are with the terrorists."That?s the spirit of polemics.  That?s defending the freedom of America.ILL.- The spirit of polemics was evident when a black woman was interviewed after the LA riots in 1992 after the Rodney King beating trial.  She said rather strongly, ?What?s the matter with all these crazy people, don?t they believe in Jesus?? Epaphroditus was man who stood for the faith of Christ and fought for the faith.  And so must we.  - Epaphroditus was caretaker of the apostle Paul.  Phil. 2:25 ??whom you sent to take care of my needs.?Everyone has needs and occasionally we need others to help us with those needs.ILL.- After Elaine and I moved into our new home on 405 Hunter?s Ridge we discovered that we had no ceiling fan in our bedroom.  We felt that we NEEDED a fan in our bedroom.  What did we do?  I called our ace electrician for help.  Jim Reed helped me install a ceiling fan one evening.  Without his assistance I would never have been able to do the job.We all have needs at times and we need to assist one another if and when we can.  Even the apostles needed help occasionally.- Epaphroditus cared for others in the midst of his own distress.  How admirable!Phil. 2:26-27 ?He was distressed because you heard he was ill.  Indeed, he was ill, and almost died.  But God had mercy on him??V. 20 ?He almost died for the work of Christ?.?ILL.- A Sunday school teacher asked her class of youngsters, ?What does the story of the Good Samaritan teach you??  One little boy said, ?That when I?m in trouble, someone help me?When we?re hurting or in trouble we tend to think that someone should help us.  Hopefully, someone will help us, but have we ever thought about helping others in the midst of our own trials and burdens?  Epaphroditus was that kind of man.  Even though he was quite ill, he was thinking of others!ILL.- I?ve gone to the hospital before to pray with someone who was quite ill, in fact dying, and they ended up praying for me!  How like Christ that is!  We all need to be concerned about others even in the midst of our own suffering.Epaphroditus was man who gambled his life on Christ.  He believed in Christ, lived for Christ, served like Christ and his gamble paid off.CONCLUSION--------------------------------ILL.- There?s an old story about a man walking down the street wearing a sign on his chest, reading, ?I?m a fool for Christ.?  On his back was another sign, which read, ?WHOSE FOOL ARE YOU??In a sense, everyone is a fool for somebody or for something.  Timothy and Epaphroditus were fools for Christ.  Paul was a fool for Christ.  If we are going to be foolish about someone, let it be Christ!