 INTRO.-  ILL.- HAPPILY EVER AFTER?  Paul Thigpen wrote an article for CHRISTIANITY TODAY entitled, ?Happily Ever After??  He wrote, ?Down in Georgia they have a saying: ?If Mama ain?t happy, ain?t nobody happy.?  It?s a reminder that one person?s moods affect the entire household, but indirectly it points to a larger problem.  The truth is, Mama never can stay completely happy, and neither can Daddy.  In short, ain?t nobody happy for long.?  He further said, ?We find joy in the sense of delight that comes from being in the presence of someone or something we love.  It?s based on our encounter with something. Happiness possesses; joy appreciates.  Happiness grasps; joy beholds.?ARE YOU HAPPY?  Chances are, you?re not happy.  At best, only a little happy.ILL.- Dennis Wholey, author of "Are You Happy?" reports that according to expert opinion, only 20 percent of Americans are happy.One prominent psychiatrist said, "Happiness is an imaginary condition, formerly attributed by the living to the dead, now usually attributed by adults to children and by children to adults."  In other words, happiness is something that we think someone else has.  We think or say, "He must be happy.  Look at his job.  Look at the car he drives, the house he lives in, the money he has, etc."IS A CERTAIN AMOUNT OF HAPPINESS POSSIBLE IN THIS LIFE?  Yes, I think it is.  But it is not found where most people are looking for it. ILL.- Someone said, ?It is wrong to assume that men of immense wealth are always happy.?  Martha Stewart is not a happy woman.  She has been worth a billion dollars, but not now.  However, she?s got far money than most of us could ever dream of having.  But she?s not happy now and has never appeared to be a happy woman. We tend to equate happiness with great wealth or material possessions, but that isn?t true.There is nothing wrong with enjoying the good things that God has created.  But if our emphasis is merely on material things and doing things, life will not provide much joy.  If our lives are centered on the gift rather than the giver, we will miss the greatest gift of all.I Timothy 6:17 "Command those who are rich in this present world not to be arrogant nor to put their hope in wealth, which is so uncertain, but to put their hope in God, who richly provides us with everything for our enjoyment."God does provide good things for our enjoyment in this life, but our greatest enjoyment should come from knowing Him! Without Him there would be no wealth, no material gifts, no jobs, no hobbies, no sports, no enjoyment at all.ILL.- T. M. Moore in "Encounter with God" wrote, ?When I was a kid, a favorite pastime was to take in the Saturday matinee.  It didn?t matter much what was on.  I?d head to the snack bar and plunk down my nickel for a Holloway?s All-Day Sucker.  Now I was set.  This caramel delight would last me through the entire movie, all the way home, into the evening, and I?d still have some left for the next day." Brothers and sisters, wouldn?t it be great if we could experience all day delight like that of an all-day sucker?  Is lasting joy a possibility?  Is all day delight possible?Psalm 16 is a Psalm of delight.  David uses the words "delight," "pleasant," "glad," and "joy" in this Psalm.  There are no trials or tribulations mentioned here.  David simply delights in his life. What is his secret? PROP.- Let?s think about where David found his delight in order for us to acquire all day delight.1- He delighted in the Lord?s person2- He delighted in the Lord?s people3- He delighted in the Lord?s portion4- He delighted in the Lord?s principlesI. HE DELIGHTED IN THE LORD?S PERSONV. 2 "Apart from you I have no good thing." I like the way David said it.  Apart from the Lord I have no good thing. How true for us all!  All good gifts come from the Lord.ILL.- Someone said, ?The thing that counts the most in the pursuit of happiness is choosing the right traveling companion.?  And that traveling companion must be the Lord.  If we have no one else, our companion must be the Lord.  And even if we have someone else, we still need the Lord!  HE MUST BECOME OUR GREATEST TRAVELING COMPANION IN LIFE!Ps. 16:2 ?Apart from you I have no good thing.?James 1:17 "Every good and perfect gift is from above..."ILL.- I lost my pocketknife some time ago. You know about a boy and his pocket knife, don?t you?  It?s a very important possession.  Mine wasn?t much as far as size is concerned.  It was a Gerber knife, a micro knife, a small knife, but just the right size for me.  I used it for cleaning my finger nails (a trait which I got from my dad) and I used it for opening mail. Other than those two things, it wasn?t used for much else.  BUT I LOST IT A YEAR AGO OR TWO, AND I REALLY MISSED IT.I bought it at Wal-Mart originally, but they don?t carry that knife anymore.  Finally, I decided to check it out on the internet and sure enough, I found it on the Gerber knife site.  I ordered it for more bucks than the Wal-mart price, but I got it, and now I?m a happy boy with my pocketknife! If it?s good, it?s from God.  Apart from God we have no good thing.  What do you consider good in your life?  Your house? Your car?  Your clothes?  Your material possessions?  Or better yet, your family?  Your friends?  Your church?  They all come from the Lord.  APART FROM GOD WE HAVE NO GOOD THING.ILL.- Dr. S. D. Gordon tells of an old Christian woman whose age began to tell on her memory.  She had once known much of the Bible by heart.  Eventually only one precious bit of Scripture stayed with her.  "I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I committed unto him against that day." II Tim. 1:12.As time went on, she lost even more of that verse.  She would quietly repeat, "That which I have committed unto him."  At last, as she hovered on the borderline between this and the spirit world, her loved ones noticed her lips moving.  They bent down to see if she needed anything.  She was repeating over and over again to herself the one word of the text, "Him, Him, Him."  She had lost the whole Bible, but one word.  But she had the whole Bible in that one word.Brothers and sisters, when we come to the end of life?s road all that will matter is Him.  Material things won?t mean a thing. Sports won?t mean a thing.  All that matters will be Him.  We begin with Him and we end with Him.   Our ultimate delight must always be in the Lord no matter what we have or do not have.  The only way to find true delight in life on a daily basis is to find it in Him.II. HE DELIGHTED IN THE LORD?S PEOPLEV. 3 "The saints...in whom is all my delight."ILL.- Someone said, ?The heart is happiest when it beats for others.?  Happiness never comes to the self-centered person.ILL.- Thomas Monaghan was the founder, president, and chief executive officer of Domino?s Pizza from 1970 to 1985.  Domino?s grew from a small debt-ridden chain to the second largest pizza company in America.When asked to account for the phenomenal growth of the company, Monaghan explained, ?I programmed everything for growth.?  And how did he plan for growth?  ?Every day we develop people?the key to growth is developing people.  Not special cheese, not a tasty crust, not fast delivery schedules, but people!?Brothers and sisters, this is the biggest holiday shopping time of the year.  Most retailers consider making money as their business.  But the truth is this: if retailers don?t focus on people, they won?t have any business.  All business should be the people business!If anything, we too, are in the people business. Our lives should revolve around people.  People should mean more to us than anything else in life.  We should delight in people and especially, the Lord?s people.Gal. 6:9-10 "Let us not become weary in doing good, for at the proper time we will reap a harvest if we do not give up. Therefore, as we have opportunity, let us do good to all people, especially to those who belong to the family of believers."  The emphasis of Scripture is on people.  Thinking about people.  Serving people.  Delighting in people.  Delighting in the Lord?s people.ILL.- When I look back over my past ministries in Iowa, Missouri, and Illinois, my greatest delight has not been in good attendances at any service.  My greatest delight has not been in special programs that have blessed the church.  My greatest delight has not been in sermons I have preached.  My greatest delight has not been in anything I have accomplished.  My greatest delight has been people.People are the most valuable thing on planet earth?the highest of God?s creation?that for which God gave His Son and yes, His very life!  It is people who bring the greatest delight to the heart of God and should to ours.ILL.- I remember Otto and Elsie Murphy of Bayard, Iowa.  A small town and small church, but big-hearted people.  That was back in 1969 to 1974.  Otto and Elsie were in their upper 70?s at that time and they were the most faithful people in the church.  Every time the door was open, they were there: church, Sunday School, Bible study group, music concert, calling night, you name it.  When their grown children would come to visit them on a weekend, they would say, ?We?re going to church.  You can go with us if you want, otherwise, we?ll be home when church is over.?  Their children knew that mom and dad were committed to Christ and His church.  That commitment was clear and strong.Otto died on a Sunday morning while picking up a blind man for church.  Otto died thinking of people, serving people, loving people.  We, too, should think of people, live for people, love people and delight in them.Someone said it this way: "Those who bring sunshine into the lives of others cannot keep it from themselves."III. HE DELIGHTED IN THE LORD?S PORTIONVs. 5-6 "You have assigned my portion and my cup..."ILL.- Sign on a New York City car: "Happiness is Five Green Lights in a Row."What is your lot in life?  Are you happy with it?  Personally, I can?t imagine living in New York City.  Never been there and I don?t want to go there.  What is your lot, your cup in life?  Are you happy with it?  ILL.- My friend Ruben Casas preaches in East Los Angeles, CA. One time he wrote, "We need a lot prayer these days.  LA is under siege.  More than 600 people have been murdered this year??Brother Ruben Casas has written to me about all kinds of violent happenings: drive by shootings, abuse, rape, etc.  He is ministering in a tough area where they have a fence around the church and bars on the windows; however, he has reminded me that it?s still better than where he came from.  HE IS THANKFUL FOR HIS PORTION OR HIS LOT IN LIFE.ILL.- A lady named Leslie Vernick said, ?Several years ago my husband surprised me with a beautiful pearl necklace I had admired.  I felt really happy?for about three days?until I began longing for some earrings to go with it.  We all search for something to fulfill us and make us happy, whether it is people, objects, or positions of status.  When we get what we desire, we feel a certain emotion we call happiness.  This feeling, however, is always short-lived??While on a trip to Walt Disney World, I was struck by the number of cranky youngsters and frustrated parents.  My children, like many others, were caught up in the excitement and wanted everything they saw.  They felt elated whenever they got what they wanted but their happiness didn?t last.  When the next thing they desired was denied, the thrill they felt just minutes before quickly deteriorated and they became miserable.?Soon after my Disney experience, I traveled overseas to do some speaking and teaching in the Philippines.  I observed barefoot children merrily swinging on old tires, living in houses constructed from cardboard boxes.  These children didn?t need lots of stuff to make them happy.  Though maybe just for the moment, they were enjoying what they had.?Many of us feel dissatisfied in life because we are not content with what God has given us.  We want more.?Heb. 13:5 "Keep your lives free from the love of money and be content with what you have, because God has said, ?Never will I leave you; never will I forsake you.?"ILL.- Leaning on his fence one day, a devout Quaker was watching a new neighbor move in next door.  After all kinds of modern appliances, electronic gadgets, plush furniture, and costly wall hangings had been carried in, the onlooker called over, "If you find you?re lacking anything, neighbor, let me know and I?ll show you how to live without it." Somehow we must learn to delight in the portion that God has given us.  Sometimes He gives us more, sometimes less. Regardless of our cup, our portion, we must be thankful and learn to delight in it.IV. HE DELIGHTED IN THE LORD?S PRINCIPLESV. 7 "I will praise the Lord, who counsels me..."How does the Lord counsel us?  Generally, through His Word.  We either hear the word preached or taught or else we read it for ourselves.  The Word of God counsels us, gives us direction in life, etc.Psalm 119:105 "Your word is a lamp to my feet and a light for my path."ILL.- When the missionaries in Nanking gave New Testaments to the Japanese soldiers, one Japanese official came to the missionaries and said, "Please don?t give our men any more New Testaments, for when they read this book, it takes the fight out of them."ILL.- A man came upon an African native who was reading a Bible.  The man sarcastically said, "That book is out of date in my country."  The native replied, "If it had been out of date here, you?d have been eaten a long time ago."The Word of God is powerful.  It penetrates hearts and changes people.  What a treasure!ILL.- John Wanamaker lived from 1838 to 1922.  His Philadelphia and New York department stores pioneered fixed prices and money-back guarantees with honest, consistent ad support.  He was a Christian man who refused to advertise on Sundays.  Wanamaker also reformed the U.S. postal system while serving as Postmaster General (1889-93) in the administration of President Benjamin Harrison and was president of the YMCA from 1870-1883. He said, "I have of course made large purchases of property in my lifetime...and the buildings and grounds in which we are now meeting represent a value of approximately twenty billion dollars.  But it was as a boy in the country, at eleven years of age, that I made my biggest purchase.  In a little mission Sunday school, I bought from my teacher a small, red letter Bible.  ?That Bible cost me $2.75-which I paid in small installments as I saved.  That was my greatest purchase, for that Bible made me what I am today."The Word of God has blessed us far more than we realize.  We need to learn to delight in God?s Word!CONCLUSION------------------------------------ILL.- When Lloyd Douglas, author of THE ROBE, attended college, he lived in a boardinghouse.  A retired, wheelchair-bound music professor lived on the first floor.  Each morning Douglas would stick his head in the door of the teacher?s apartment and ask the same question, "Well, what?s the good news?"  The old man would pick up his tuning fork, tap it on the side of his wheelchair and say, "That?s middle C! It was middle C yesterday; it will be middle C tomorrow; it will be middle C a thousand years from now.  The piano across the hall is out of tune.  The tenor upstairs sings flat. But, my friend, that is middle C."We all need a middle C.  Life changes.  Health changes. Relationships change.  But God never changes.  Jesus is still the Christ, the Son of the living God!  The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want! Some say, "The Lord is my shepherd, and He is all I want!"  Our delight must be found in Him.