MAKING THE BEST OUT OF LIFEINTRO.- ILL.- After a doctor checked his patient over, he asked him, "Have you been living a normal life?"  "Yes, doctor," replied the patient.  The doctor said, "Well, you?ll have to cut it out for awhile."Normalcy is not always the best, depending on what a person considers as being normal.  The "normal" of the world is not always the best way to live.  It doesn?t always produce the best life.ILL.- It?s like the old fellow who lived to be 90 years old.  He said, "If I?d known I was going to live this long I would have taken better care of myself."Most of us could well say somewhere down the road of life, "If I had know what know now, I would have lived differently.  I would have done things differently in order to have a better life."John 10:10 Jesus said, "I have come that they may have life, and have it to the full."  (or have life more abundantly)Most people don?t experience life to the fullest.  Most people don?t enjoy the abundant life.  And don?t we all wish for a better life?  Jesus promised us a better life and I believe that a part of that better life is available here and now.  How do most people try to make the best out of life?  There are three basic ways: 1- Fame 2- Fortune 3- Fun.1- FameSome people want attention and/or recognition in life.  Some people actually want to become famous in life.ILL.- At the Cal Ripken Jr. world series several of us Mattoon Christian Church people were sitting together, namely Rick Boyer, Wayne Moran, Terry Kovacik and me.  We were talking about Harmon Killebrew being there to sign autographs.  I told Rick and the boys that when I was a youngster my grandmother Alma Jones took me to a wrestling match in Joplin, MO, to see the famous wrestler Gorgeous George.Rick said, "Never heard of him!"  I was impressed that he was not impressed.  I thought everyone had heard of Gorgeous Geroge.  I also thought Rick surely would have wanted my autograph.There are famous people in every generation and some never seem to fade with the passing of time, like Elvis Presley.ILL.- Recently, Americans just celebrated the 25th anniversary of Elvis Presley?s death.  We heard that his estate still receives $34 million a year, which is probably more money than Elvis made per year while he was living.Elvis Presley and many others have sought after a better life through the avenue of fame, but where are they now?ILL.- Ex-heavyweight boxing champ of the world, Muhammed Ali, said not too many years ago, "I had the world, and it wasn?t nothin?."   Fame is not the answer to making the best out of life.2- FortuneHoward Hughes.  Ted Turner.  Martha Stewart.  Bill Gates.  Ever heard of those people?  Sure, you have.  And you know what they have which most people don?t have.  Lots of money.ILL.- While vacationing in Nashville, TN, last week we took a bus tour and saw some of the homes/houses of the rich and famous: Trisha Yearwood, Little Jimmy Dickens, Dolly Pardon, one of the Brooks and Dunn?s guys whom Elaine had never heard of and me neither.  All these people lived in what is called the Brentwood district where all the houses start at $500,000.  Of course, some of those homes were probably worth over a million dollars.When I saw those homes all I could see was dollar signs!  I could not imagine owning and living in one of those homes.  And I certainly couldn?t imagine cleaning one of those homes!  No man could!  It?s hard for most of us to think in terms of a million-dollar home. Money sounds good and a certain amount of it is desirable, but it is not the answer to making the best out of life.  If this were true then why did Elvis, Marilyn Monroe and Judy Garland overdose?ILL.- Someone said, "Money will buy a bed but not sleep; books but not brains; food but not appetite; a house but not a home; medicine but not health; luxuries but not culture; amusements but not happiness; religion but not salvation; and a passport to everywhere but heaven."Jesus said it best in Matthew 16:26 "What good will it be for a man if he gains the whole world, yet forfeits his soul?  Or what can a man give in exchange for his soul?"  The answer is: CERTAINLY NOT MONEY!  3- FUN OR FUN TIMESILL.- In a sermon in Southern Illinois one Sunday I mentioned that I had done a variety of things in life: lifted weights in competition, fished in bass tournaments, raced cars at the drag strip, and ran fourteen marathons.  After that sermon, one church member asked me, "Steve, what are you going to do next?"  I?m not sure if he meant that question inquiringly or sarcastically!  He may well have meant it like: When are you going to quit fooling around and go to work!  It was a very humbling question.There is nothing wrong with doing things or having fun times in life as long as we don?t exclude the Lord from them which is what many people do.I Cor. 10:31 "So whether you eat or drink or whatever you do, do it all for the glory of God."Do we seek to honor the Lord in our fun times?  Do we go to church in midst of our fun times, vacations, etc.?  Do we try to offer a witness for Christ wherever we go?  Do we honestly try to spread the aroma of Christ in the midst of our fun and games?Most people only think of themselves and what they can get out of their fun times and not what they can do for others or how they can honor Christ.  I have found it amazing what can happen when you try to witness for Christ or talk to people out of genuine interest.ILL.- For example, while staying in a motel in Nashville, TN, we met another couple from Mt. Carmel, IL.  They now attend a Baptist church, but many years ago they attended a small Christian Church.  In fact, Bill Stark who preached at the Broadway Christian church for about 30 years was their minister at that time. It seems that Bill was just starting his ministry in this particular church and still had a lot to learn.  He knew he needed to learn how to baptize people so he asked this man, Don Belessee, if he could practice on him.  Don said they went to a dirty old farm pond for six nights in a row and Bill baptized him about 4 times each night.  Don laughed and said something like, "If I don?t make it to heaven it sure won?t be because I haven?t been baptized."While vacationing in Nashville we also met a pleasant couple from Ireland (Kieran and Grace Mooney) and we are going to keep in contact by email.  We met another couple from Germany named Frank.  Rosemary couldn?t speak much English but she could sure laugh.  Her husband didn?t like American food but he loved his German beer.  Brothers and sisters, if we don?t speak to people and show interest in people in the midst of our fun times, how can we ever witness for Christ?  Fun without Christ is not the answer to making the best out of life.  Fun fades, but when Christ is included, it can be exciting and almost enchanting.Fame, fortune and fun.  If these are not the ways to a better life, then how is it to be found?  In the past few weeks I shared these points.  Here is how to make the best out of life.1- Walk by faith2- Focus on people3- See the positive4- Always be thankfulPROP.- I want to share a couple more ways to make the best out of life.1- Work at peace2- Watch your speechI. WORK AT PEACEILL.- A man said to another man, "You?re a minister, huh?"  "Yes, I am."  "What church?"  "Baptist."  "Oh, you?re the narrow-minded bunch that believes only their group is going to make it to heaven."  The minister replied, "I?m even more narrow minded than that.  I don?t think all of our group are going to make it!"Brothers and sisters, this is nothing but the attitude and action of legalism.  Legalism is basically when we take God?s law and will into our own hands.  It is when we think we have the right to "call the shots."It is when we think we have all the answers and do all the right things.  It is this kind of attitude and action that causes arguments, dissension, fighting, separation, and a failure to lead people to Christ.Brothers and sisters, we are not to separate ourselves from one another through disagreement and arguments.  We are supposed to draw ourselves to one another with the attitude and action of love!  How can we ever hope to help others and lead others to a better relationship to Christ if we don?t seek peace and build on what we have?!Rom. 12:18 "If it is possible (and it generally is), as far as it depends on you, live at peace with everyone."Heb. 12:14 "Make every effort to live in peace with all men..."Some versions read: "Strive for peace with all men."  We often strive, but it?s not for peace.  It?s for priority over people.ILL.- I was sitting in the barber?s chair getting my hair cut one time in Missouri when a local Baptist minister came in and attacked me.  He didn?t literally attack me, but he did attack me verbally.  He asked me a question with the idea of starting a fight.  And I came out of that chair with my gun?s blazing.  I WAS MUCH YOUNGER THEN AND MORE READY FOR A FIGHT! But it was very sad.  Instead of trying to better our relationship he came at me with the idea of bettering me in regard to Scripture, etc.  ILL.- Another time I attended a local ministerial alliance meeting.  There was a Nazarene preacher, as Assembly of God minister, and I think a Baptist minister.  The Assembly of God minister came well prepared, but not to edify or build, only to tear down.  He knew what every church in town believed and he also knew what was wrong doctrinally with each church.  At least, from his viewpoint.  He came to set us straight.I left that meeting because he got into an argument with the Nazarene preacher.  He attacked that preacher with a ?put down? attitude.  It was awful.The apostle Paul said in II Cor. 13:10 that God gave him authority "for building, not for tearing down."If God gives you any authority at all (in the home, business, the church, etc.), it is for building up people, not for tearing them down!  We must be in the building business, the construction business, the blessing business, the healing business, the enhancing business, the loving business, not the abusing business.ILL.- Paul Tucker attended much of the Cal Ripken world series.  He visited several times with an Australian lady and found her quite interesting.  Once, while Paul was visiting with that lady, I entered the picture.  In the midst of the conversation Paul asked the lady if she went to church.  She quickly said, "No, but I believe."  She didn?t say what she believed, however.That would have been a great opportunity to do a kangaroo number on that lady.  What?s that?  JUMP DOWN HER THROAT ABOUT CHRIST AND CHRISTIANITY.Paul often plays the role of devil?s advocate.  That?s what I have said, anyway.  I don?t think that is really true, but I like to keep him on his toes.  Paul really shined in that situation.  What did he do that was so good?  He just continued to show genuine interest by listening and by conversing with pleasantness.  He kept the door open and demonstrated loving concern.I Pet. 3:10, 11 "Whoever would love life and see good days...must seek peace and pursue it."Matt. 5:9 "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called sons of God."It is very God-like to work at peace with all people.  Separation, dissension, arguing, criticism, and fighting are not what God desires.  God wants us to work at being peaceable people.  Where there is peace, we can build and bless others.  Working at peace will help us to have a better life.  It will help us to make the best out of life.II. WATCH YOUR SPEECHWhat?s one of the most religious things you can do?  ILL.- One time a lady came to an old Puritan preacher in London and told him that the bands which he wore with his pulpit gown were entirely too long.  They annoyed her greatly and asked permission to shorten them.  Being confident of her request, she came armed with her scissors.  The minister handed over the offending bands and she cut them off to her desired length.  She handed them back and then the minister said, "Now, my good woman, there is something about you that is altogether too long and has annoyed me greatly, and since one good turn desires another, I would like permission to shorten it."The woman said, "Certainly, you have my permission to do so and here are the scissors."  The minister said, "Very well, madam, stick out your tongue!"Let me ask that question again.  What?s one of the most religious things you can?James 1:26 "If anyone considers himself religious and yet does not keep a tight rein on his tongue, he deceives himself and his religion is worthless." That?s powerful!  One of the most religious things we can do is to control our tongues!  But most of us have trouble doing this.  Sometimes are tongues are entirely too long or too sarcastic or too sharp or too forked or too fast and furious for the good of others.ILL.- At one Mother/Daughter we had in southern Illinois several of our men were asked to speak about their mothers.  For the most part, it was great, tender and emotional.  One man, however, when it was his turn, read from Prov. 21:9 "Better to live on a corner of the roof than share a house with a quarrelsome wife."He then proceeded to talk about marriage at this mother/daughter banquet.  I could hardly believe what I was hearing!  I thought, "Dumb, dumb, dumb."  His words certainly didn?t bless and edify.Generally, people don?t make verbal mistakes in a prepared speech, or at least, not as many.  But we are very susceptible to verbal mistakes in our every day conversations with people.ILL.- I remember when Jack Fancher was dying with cancer at the Lake of the Ozarks hospital in Missouri.  I walked in, took one look at Jack and said, "Jack, you look bad!"  How dumb!  He did look bad.  He looked terrible.  He was dying.  Why did I say those words?  I think I was shock and those words just came flying out of my mouth.Jack didn?t seem to be bothered by my words, but how could he not have been bothered by them?  He knew he was dying, but he sure didn?t need for me to tell how badly he looked.  I said those words because I didn?t think first!  And we all are guilty.  When I left the hospital that day I broke down in tears and for several reasons.  I was broken over my good Christian brother who was dying and perhaps I was somewhat broken over my lack of love and consideration.ILL.- Bernice Cook and her husband, Olas, had been involved in a terrible car wreck.  They were coming to church on Wednesday night and didn?t see the semi in front of them.  They ran under that truck.  Olas survived without extensive injuries.  Bernice was not so fortunate.  She only lived a month.While visiting her in the St. Francis? Hospital in Cape Girardeau, Mo, I was broken with compassion and sorrow.  Bernice knew she was dying.  The doctors had done all they could for her.  She couldn?t speak, only nod her head.  I prayed with Bernce and said, "I love you."  Not long after that she passed on to be with the Lord.  Brothers and sisters, watch your speech!  When people are dying they need to know they are loved.  They need to hear those words.  ALL PEOPLE NEED TO HEAR THOSE WORDS: "I love you." Simply put, strongly meant, and supremely powerful.Instead of "hoof and mouth" implantation, it needs to be heartfelt love implementation.  Our words need to be full of love, blessing, building, enhancing, complimenting, etc.Prov. 10:19 "When words are many, sin is not absent, but he who holds his tongue is wise."Prov. 10:32 "The lips of the righteous know what is fitting..."Prov. 11:12 "A man who lacks judgment derides his neighbor..."Prov. 12:18 "Reckless words pierce like a sword, but the tongue of the wise brings healing."Prov. 12:25 "An anxious heart weighs a man down, but a kind word cheers him up."Eph. 4:29 "Do not let any unwholesome talk come out of your mouths, but only what is helpful for building others up..."Do you want a better life?  Do you want to make the best out of life?  Watch your speech.CONCLUSION-------------------------------------ILL.- While on vacation we traveled from Nashville, TN, to Branson, MO, and there is no good way to get there.  We drove back to Paducah, KY, then on to Sikeston, MO, where we linked with highway 60 which leads to Springfield, MO.  We stopped around 6 p.m. at Willow Springs, MO, at what is called Hillbilly Junction restaurant for our evening meal.Our young waitress was a homespun, born and raised, Willow Springs girl named Keisha.  And she was probably one of the nicest, friendliest, and gracious waitresses I?ve ever met.  We couldn?t get over how friendly she was.  When we returned home I found the phone number of that restaurant and called to commend that young waitress to the owner/manager.  I wanted them to know how good she was.   That young lady will go far in life because of her peaceable ways, and her thoughtful speaking.A 19 year-old girl just taught me another great lesson about life.  Bless her heart.  Bless her life.I Pet. 3:10-11 "Whoever would love life and see good days, must keep his tongue from evil...he must seek peace and pursue it."Do you want a better life?  Do you want to make the best out of life?  Work at making peace and watch your speech. 