INTRO.- ILL.- As far back as anyone could remember, Kris knew where he was going.  He was clean-cut boy, bright and well behaved.  The kind of kid any parent would be proud to call their son.His father was a major general in the Air Force and immensely proud of his son when Kris announced his intention to join the military.  Kris was only ten years old at that time but he knew what he must do.  His first concern was making good grades.  While Kris was in high school in Brownsville, TX, his dad transferred to San Mateo, CA.  There were the usual family adjustments and if ever a boy had the excuse to fail, it was then.  Kris, instead, excelled!To his classmates, he was a square.  When others stayed out at night, Kris stayed home and studied.  After high school he attended a private college in Claremont, CA.  Again, he excelled in academics and athletics.  He did not just play football, he became a football hero.  And a Golden Gloves boxer.  And a sports writer for the student paper.  And a ROTC commander.He eventually received the ultimate prestigious academic recognition; a Rhodes scholarship and on to Oxford.  But there was no hesitation and no resting on his laurels.  By the time Kris had reached Oxford he had written one novel and was beginning a second.  Book publishers were clamoring for his manuscripts, but Kris had something else in mind.  After achieving as much as any young man could achieve, Kris joined the Army, to his father?s delight.He went through jump school.  He went through Ranger school.  He went through flight school. He became a pilot, a Captain, was stationed in Germany and came back to the US to become a major, and an instructor at West Point.Some people just seem to know from early on in life where they?re headed.  What life expects of them.  So it seemed for Kris.  A boy from the beginning of elementary school with grades instead of grumbling.  A boy from the start who was called a square, but didn?t care.  A football hero, a Golden Gloves boxer, a novelist, a Rhodes scholar, a young man that could go anywhere, could do anything, in or out of the military.  And so Kris became a person you know.  He became a number one recording artist of country classics and ballads.  He was and is Kris Kristofferson.  And now you know the rest of the story.Brothers and sisters, the thing that grabs me the most about Kris Kristofferson is the fact that he seemed to know from early on where he was going and he allowed nothing to deter him.  That sounds so much like our Savior who probably knew early on life where He was headed; to Calvary (born to die), the resurrection, the great commission, and then to glory to be with His Father.Now for the rest of the story.  There is generally a story that follows a story.  Or else there is some kind of conclusion to the story or a moral to the story.  PROP.- Our text follows the story after Jesus? resurrection from the dead.  What happened?  In our text we will see these things unfold:1- The lie that was told2- The vision that was spiritual3- The command that was established 4- The promise that was certainI. THE LIE THAT WAS TOLDMatt. 28:11-15 ?While the women were on their way, some of the guards went into the city and reported to the chief priests everything that had happened.  When the chief priests had met with the elders and devised a plan, they gave the soldiers a large sum of money, telling them, "You are to say, ?His disciples came during the night and stole him away while we were asleep.?  If this report gets to the governor, we will satisfy him and keep you out of trouble."  So the soldiers took the money and did as they were instructed.  And this story has been widely circulated among the Jews to this very day.?  ILL.- Famous American Fibs (Americans lie)- The check is in the mail.- I?ll start my diet tomorrow.- We service what we sell.- Give me your number and the doctor will call you right back.- Money cheerfully refunded.- One size fits all.- Your luggage isn?t lost, it?s only misplaced.- Leave your resume and we?ll keep it on file.- This hurts me more than it hurts you.- Your table will be ready in a few minutes.- Open wide, it won?t hurt a bit.Americans may lie in these ways, but the worst lie of all is one that leads people away from God.  After the resurrection of Jesus the lie that was told was this:  His disciples came and stole the body of Jesus.  Why would the chief priests and elders say that?  Simply because they didn?t believe in the resurrection.  And they wanted to discredit Christ and Christianity.From a human perspective, the resurrection was not possible and they chose not to believe.  The disciples stole the body of Jesus.  But that?s not the only lie that the world spreads about Christ and Christianity.  The world and worldly people have told all kinds of lies about Christ and Christianity in order to discredit Christ.Here are some that we have heard:- Christ isn?t the only way to God.- The Bible isn?t the only book of God.  Or it?s just an old book but has no meaning for the present life.- Christ was just a good person in history.  He was not divine.- There is no heaven and hell.  Heaven and hell are only what we experience in this life.- There is no god.  Otherwise, he wouldn?t let people suffer.- Christians are just a bunch of hypocrites.  - Christianity and the church are boring and irrelevant.There are probably many other lies that are told about Christ and Christianity.  What can we do?  We can stand firm in our faith!Phil. 1:27-29 ?Whatever happens, conduct yourselves in a manner worthy of the gospel of Christ.  Then, whether I come and see you or only hear about you in my absence, I will know that you stand firm in one spirit, contending as one man for the faith of the gospel without being frightened in any way by those who oppose you. This is a sign to them that they will be destroyed, but that you will be saved?and that by God.  For it has been granted to you on behalf of Christ not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for him.?We must conduct ourselves properly in this world and stand firm in our faith and this will counter the lies that are spread about Christ and Christianity.  When we live right and are bold in our witness we will refute the lies that are told and also defeat the evil one who is behind them all!  Truth conquers!ILL.- When people are faithful to Christ like Billy Graham has been and Mother Teresa was, it will go a long way to refute the evil lies in this world.II. THE VISION THAT WAS SPIRITUALMatt. 28:16-17 ?Then the eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had told them to go.  When they saw him, they worshiped him; but some doubted.? ILL.- An eighty-year-old man?s golf game was hampered by his poor eyesight.  He could hit the ball well but he couldn?t see where it went.  So his doctor teamed him up with a ninety-year-old man who had perfect eyesight and was willing to go along to serve as a spotter.The eighty-year-old man hit the first ball and asked his companion if he saw where it landed.  "Yep," said the ninety-year-old.  "Where did it go?" the eighty-year-old demanded. The ninety-year old replied, "I don?t remember."It?s one thing to be able to see and yet have a forgetful memory.  And you?re in really bad shape if you can?t see and can?t remember!We?re all aging and that means our eyesight may be fading a bit, cataracts and all.  But the worse eyesight of all is not being able to see Jesus!When they saw him, they worshiped him but some doubted.  The same holds true today.  When we see Him through the eyes of faith how can we not want to worship Him?  And yet, some who see him, still doubt.  I guess they doubt, because they sure don?t go to church.Rom. 10:17 ?Faith comes by hearing and hearing by the Word.?  When we hear what the Word of God says about Jesus, how can we not believe and want to worship Him?  We all need to see Jesus through the eyes of faith.ILL.- When the fall of the Confederacy was at hand, General Grant invited Lincoln to come down to visit him at his headquarters at City Point on the James River.  As they sat that night about the campfire, Lincoln related some of his characteristic anecdotes, and then sat in silence, looking into the fire.  Grant looked up and said to him, ?Mr. President, did you at any time doubt the final success of the cause?? Straightening himself up in his camp chair, and leaning forward and lifting his hand by way of emphasis, Lincoln answered with the greatest solemnity, ?Never, for a moment did I doubt!?That?s the kind of faith we need to have in our living Savior.  Never for a moment should we doubt Him!  And if we don?t doubt Him, then we should always worship Him, privately and publicly.  At home and at church.  HOW IS YOUR VISION?III. THE COMMAND THAT WAS ESTABLISHEDMatt. 28:18-20 ?Then Jesus came to them and said, "All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me.  Therefore go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, and teaching them to obey everything I have commanded you.?ILL.- The young Army recruit turned up his nose at the Army stew and complained to the sergeant, ?Don?t I have any choice here??  The sergeant replied, ?Certainly!  Take it or leave it!?For the most part, we have freedom of choice here in the US, maybe not, however, in the Armed services.The one with ALL authority in heaven and on earth said, ?Go and make disciples? and we really don?t have any choice in the matter.  Fortunately, for us, he?s not Army sergeant or a general who barks out orders and expects them carried out immediately.  Our Lord is gracious and patient.  And He is also patient toward all mankind, not wanting any to perish but all to come to repentance and accept Him by faith.  However, most people will not come to know Christ as Savior unless we do something about it.  Jesus said to go, make disciples, baptize them and continue to teach them.ILL.- In the 1700?s a little man in England, a cobbler by trade, who kept a map of the world on a wall of his workshop so that he could pray for the nations of the world, became burdened for a definite missionary outreach.  When he shared his burden at a meeting of ministers, he was told by one of the senior men of God: ?Young man, sit down.  When God wants to convert the heathen, He will do it without your help or mine.? But William Carey did not let his enthusiasm be dampened by such a response, and eventually he left the shores of England for those of India, where he engaged in pioneer missionary work for the Lord.I think perhaps that many Christians are like that senior man of God, thinking that God will convert non-Christian people without us.  WRONG.  God uses people to reach people!  And it appears that we are not getting the job or we may not even be doing the work!  ILL.- On April 7, 2007, just one day before Easter, American cartoonist, Johnny Hart, passed away while at his drawing  board where he created the comic strip BC.  He was also the co-creator of the Wizard of Id.  Hart was 76 years old and died of a stroke.  His funeral was scheduled for Friday at Nineveh Presbyterian Church in Endicott, NY.  If you read his cartoons then you know that he often presented a witness for God and Christ in them.  Hart said told the Dallas Morning News in 1999, ?I get incredible response on the positive side.  I don?t know if it?s the liberalization of this country or whatever [that] has taken prayer out of schools and pulled the Ten Commandments off the walls of courts, and we?ve become a nation of heathens.?"The Christians are still out there, but they?re hiding," he said. "They?re afraid because every time somebody tries to make a move, somebody steps on them and pushes them back or locks them out.  So they think that I?m a hero, and I?m not. . . . That?s probably the most pathetic thing of all, that they admire me and think that I?m courageous and brave to mention God?s name."The great commission was established and we need to do something about it.  We must not be afraid to witness for Christ.  Go and make disciples.IV. THE PROMISE THAT WAS CERTAINMatt. 28:20  ?And surely I am with you always, to the very end of the age."  I am with you always, to the end.  What a great promise!ILL.- Do you know the legend of the Cherokee Indian youth?s rite of passage?  I didn?t but I assume this is accurate.  His father takes him into the forest, blindfolds him and leaves him alone.  He is required to sit on a stump the whole night and not remove the blindfold until the rays of the morning sun shine through it.  He cannot cry out for help to anyone.  Once he survives the night, he is a MAN.  He cannot tell the other boys of this experience, because each lad must come into manhood on his own. The boy is naturally somewhat terrified.  He can hear all kinds of noises.  Wild beasts must surely be all around him.  Maybe even some human might do him harm.  The wind blew the grass and earth, and shook his stump, but he sat stoically, never removing the blindfold.  It would be the only way he could become a man! Finally, after a horrific night the sun appeared and he removed his blindfold.  It was then that he discovered his father sitting on the stump next to him.  He had been at watch the entire night, protecting his son from harm. We, too, are never alone in this world.  Even when we may not know it, our Heavenly Father is watching over us, sitting on the stump beside us.  When trouble comes, all we have to do is reach out to Him.  Beautiful story and a beautiful truth.  Again, Jesus said, ?I am with you always, to the end.?   And no matter how that end comes.And yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; for thou art with me.CONCLUSION-----------------------------Someone has well said that history is HIS STORY.  Not all history is His story, but what is eternally important is HIS story.  And in the end all that matters is HIS STORY and if we have accepted His story, His truth and His person then the rest of the story will be our story.In other words, here is the rest of the story after the resurrection: will we believe Him, trust Him, worship Him and do His work?  If so, we who are in Christ will write the rest of the story for Him.