INTRO.- ILL.- Did you hear about one man?s quest to visit 1,000 bars in a year?  Dan Freeman (retired computer consultant and Brooklynite) set out Jan. 1 to visit 1,000 bars in a single year.  Barely five months later, the Don Quixote of drink is halfway to completing his boozy impossible dream.  Why 1,000 bars??There wasn?t any grand scheme,? explained Freeman.  ?I just wanted to see how many bars you could hit in a year, and 1,000 seemed reasonable.?  (He aims to make 4 or 5 bars a day).  One fan offered these words, ?Congrats to you and your liver.?Given his current pace, Freeman hopes to finish his work early. Freeman said, ??If you don?t have a dream, how can you make a dream come true???  SOME DREAM, HUH?Prov. 20:1 ?Wine is a mocker and beer a brawler; whoever is lead astray by them is not wise.?Brothers and sisters, I think it?s pretty sad when a person?s dream in life revolves around drinking.  I am sure there are plenty of other people whose only ambition is to live for drinking.  Isn?t there more to life than drinking and partying? Isn?t there more to life than what most people find or what they are looking for?I tend to think that many people are looking for the meaning of life in all of the wrong places: play, pleasure or fame, fortune, and fun.ILL.- Last Sunday afternoon, Elaine and I (along with my sister and brother-in-law) went to visit Graceland in Memphis.  In some ways, I found the name to be somewhat ironic in nature: Graceland and yet, to me, there was little grace in that land to be found.Now don?t get me wrong, I liked Elvis Presley.  I think he was/is probably one of the greatest singers of all time.  In fact, it was said that he has probably sold more albums than any other singer in history: over a billion.  In the midst of the all the memorabilia I saw both greatness and great sadness coming from Graceland and the life of Elvis.  It is said in his biography that his musical influences were the pop and country music of the time and the gospel music he heard in church and at the all-night gospel sings he frequently attended.Here is where the sadness comes in: Elvis started out his musical life in an Assembly of God church that preached Christ as the Savior and yet he searched all of his short 42 years for something else and never found it.  What was he searching for?  Why were his gospel roots not enough?  Was something missing from his home life and church life?  His daughter, Lisa Marie, said that he was always reading books, underlining statements, making notes, etc.  As we went through Graceland they showed his desk in one room where there was a Bible that apparently Elvis read, but that wasn?t the only book that he read.  There were other books about spirituality, which had nothing to do with Christ and Christianity.  I thought, ?How sad that he was looking for the meaning of life in places other than the Word of God.?Apparently, Elvis never found spiritual joy or satisfaction in his church background.  Why?  I do not know, but something was lacking.  And this just proves that even though some people are raised in something of a Christian background they may never find the true meaning of life if they don?t pursue it strongly enough.It?s just my opinion, but I think Elvis didn?t pursue Christianity as strongly as he did other things in life.  Consequently, he continued to search and his life ended abruptly because of an overdose of prescription drugs.  So very sad.  Such a well-loved and talented man.What about you?  Are you still confused as to the meaning of life?  Why we are here?  What we?re supposed to do and where we are headed?  I believe that the Scriptures, which are God-breathed, God-inspired, answers these questions.Most of us know the 23rd Psalm, but do we know the 24th Psalm?PROP.- Let?s think about God?s message in Ps. 24 with the idea of understanding more about the meaning of life.  This Psalm tells us about who God is and His desire for us in life.I have three thoughts to consider:1- God owns everything2- God allows entrance3- God blesses seekersI. GOD OWNS EVERYTHINGVss. 1-2 ?The earth is the LORD?s, and everything in it, the world, and all who live in it; for he founded it upon the seas and established it upon the waters.? ILL.- Question:  What do you call cheese that doesn?t belong to you?  A: Nacho cheese!  And there are many things in life that are NACHO?S (not yours)!Brothers and sisters, the truth is we own nothing.  We think we do but in reality, in the eyes of God, we own nothing.  Everything belongs to God because He created it.  He only allows us to live on planet earth and use what He created.We all need to be reminded that every good thing we have is a gift of God.James 1:17 ?Every good and perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of the heavenly lights??ILL.- My mother had what is called a ?beneficiaries will? on her house and my name was on it.  At her death, I immediately became the owner of that house on 321 S. Ball Street in Webb City, MO.Even though Mother left me her house, I never really thought of it as being my house.  I always thought of it as being mother?s house because that?s where she lived for about 16 years.  It was hers.  She loved it.  She decorated it.  She lived in it.  She treasured it.In a sense, I was a ?Johnny-come-lately.?  I was only privileged to stay in it and eventually inherit it by virtue of the fact that I was her child.  But I never thought of it as being mine.And this is something of how we should feel about everything we possess in life.  My house is not mine.  It?s my Father?s house, but He allows me to live in it, and what a fine house it is.  ILL.- It?s like what preacher Ed Bousman from VA said many years ago, ?I drive the Lord?s car.  I live in the Lord?s house.  I sleep in the Lord?s bed.  I eat the Lord?s food, etc.?This is true for us all.  It?s only by God?s graciousness that we have anything at all and have been born in America.When we get this into our thick heads that everything belongs to God we?ll be a lot more thankful to Him, a lot quicker to praise and worship Him and probably a lot more gracious to others.  Grateful people seem to be more gracious people.GET IT STRAIGHT:  God owns everything you have in your possession.  HE EVEN OWNS YOU!  Why does He own everything?  Because He is God!  He is the Creator!  ILL.- On the first day of creation, God created the dog.- On the second day, God created man to serve the dog.- On the third day, God created all the animals of the earth to serve as potential food for the dog.- On the fourth day, God created honest toil so that man could labor for the good of the dog.- On the fifth day, God created the tennis ball so that the dog might or might not retrieve it.- On the sixth day, God created veterinary science to keep the dog healthy and the man broke.- On the seventh day, God tried to rest, but He had to walk the dog.Brothers and sisters, we do believe that God created the heavens and the earth, dogs and all.  We believe that He created everything good in the world and in the universe.  How can this be?  How could God create something out of nothing?ILL.- My brother-in-law works for Lockheed Martin Aeronautics in Ft. Worth, TX.  They are in the process of building a new fighter jet for the US, which has taken them five years.  It?s called the X-35C.  It will take off like a regular jet plane but it can land on a dime, sort of like a helicopter.  The big thing is that this plane is completely radar undetectable.  Elaine asked Mike, ?How did they do this??  Mike said, ?It?s a secret.?  But it?s not a secret to God.  Nothing is a secret to God.  He knows everything because He created everything!  We believe and trust in the God who knows everything and is not baffled or befuddled by anything.  This should give us some encouragement in life and confidence for living, because He is on our side!II. GOD ALLOWS ENTRANCEVss. 3-4 ?Who may ascend the hill of the LORD?  Who may stand in his holy place?  He who has clean hands and a pure heart, who does not lift up his soul to an idol or swear by what is false.?WHO MAY ASCEND THE HILL OF THE LORD?  That is not our decision.  God alone decides who may come into His presence and into His holy place.ILL.- Elaine and I may go to Las Vegas someday.  At least, we?ve talked about going.  I hear that just seeing the sights is worth the trip and I am a people-watcher as well.  I love to watch people.  You can learn a lot from watching people.  I also would like to go to Vegas to see the entertainer/singer, Celine Dion.  I think she is a fabulous singer.  Elaine said she would even buy me a front-row ticket (if possible).  In fact, I think Elaine is going to arrange a special, private meeting for me with Celine.  And perhaps she?ll even sing for me!  YEAH, RIGHT!  I would like to meet Celine Dion in person.  I think she is not only a fabulous singer, but also a very pleasant lady, a very gracious lady, and very personable.  BUT GUESS WHAT?  Neither Elaine nor I have control over me coming into her presence.  Nor do any of us have any control when it comes to God?s heaven!  We don?t make the rules, although many people think they do.There are multitudes of people who have set the standard or made their own rules when it comes to heaven.  They have all kinds of ideas and philosophies, the most famous being:  JUST BE A DECENT, GOOD PERSON AND YOU?LL GO TO HEAVEN!That sounds good and certainly God wants us to be good people, but that?s not the standard He has set for entrance into His heaven!Let?s ask that question again: Who may ascend the hill of the LORD?  God then answers His own question in verse 4, ?He who has clean hands and a pure heart, who does not lift up his soul to an idol or swear by what is false.?Pretty powerful or potent, wouldn?t you say?  Strong admission rules.  Few there are who have clean hands and a pure heart.  In fact, I know of no one like this.  If it is true that we?re all impure and unclean then how are we going to ascend to God?s holy hill?Thank God He is far more gracious and thoughtful than we are.  Cleanliness and purity can only come from Him is clean and pure.  We take on His righteousness by faith.II Cor. 5:21 ?God made him who had no sin to be sin for us, so that in him we might become the righteousness of God.?Heb. 4:15 ?For we do not have a high priest who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses, but we have one who has been tempted in every way, just as we are?yet was without sin.?I Pet. 2:22 ?He committed no sin, and no deceit was found in his mouth."There is only one way to ascend to God?s holy hill and that is through the Savior!John 14:6 ?Jesus answered, "I am the way and the truth and the life.  No one comes to the Father except through me.?Acts 4:12 ?Salvation is found in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given to men by which we must be saved."What should this mean to us?  We should be thankful for our own salvation.  And be thankful that someone taught us the truth of God?s Word and brought us to church and to Christ?family or otherwise.  Secondly, this should mean that we must spread the message! If we really believe in the message we should spread it.  We should invite people to church.  Encourage people to believe in Christ and follow Him,to be baptized, etc.And this should also give us more confidence in life.  We should live confidently and positively, knowing that we will ascend to the Lord?s holy hill!ILL.- I suppose you heard about those two Japanese men in their 80?s who surfaced in the Philippines last week, claiming they are soldiers and have lived in the jungle since the end of WW II?  If this is true, then they have lived in fear for a very long time!  Fear that they would be court-martialed by the Japanese government.Brothers and sisters, the government is God is far greater and far more gracious than any human government!  If you have accepted Christ and are trying to follow Him, even though you fail occasionally, please don?t live in fear of Him!  Your sins are covered by the blood of the Lamb.  You wear the righteousness of Christ!  Live like citizens of the heavenly kingdom!  Live like people who are going to heaven!III. GOD BLESSES SEEKERSVss. 5-6 ?He will receive blessing from the LORD and vindication from God his Savior.  Such is the generation of those who seek him, who seek your face, O God of Jacob.?ALL people are seekers!  All people are looking for something life: fame, fortune, fun, peace, forgiveness, joy, etc.  And many seekers are looking for it on Oprah.  Her TV show is the most watched daytime syndicated ?talk? show.  Dr. Phil is second.  People are looking for answers.  They are looking for something, thinking Oprah and Dr. Phil can deliver.  And while they may deliver some of the goods, they can?t deliver it all or the best!Matthew 11:28-29 ?Come to me, all you who are weary and burdened, and I will give you rest.  Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for your souls.?God has told us very clearly in Scripture that Jesus can deliver the goods!  He can bring peace into our weary and burdened lives.  Jesus blesses those who seek Him.Matthew 6:33 Jesus said, ?Seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness and all these things will be given to you as well.?  What things?  Material things.  Material provision.  God has promised that when we seek Him first in life He will provide for our material needs.  And this is one thing that most people want: food, clothing, shelter and even more.We should be satisfied with food, shelter and clothing, but we often want more.  And God often gives us more.  If you don?t believe me, look at us!  WE HAVE MORE!  We have far more of the world?s wealth (correction: God?s wealth) than we deserve.  Still, we often want more and some get even more.ILL.- A Boise, Idaho, man in his thirties who had been playing the same numbers the past four years has come forward with the $220.3 million winning Powerball ticket, a record jackpot for the state and the 10th highest lottery prize ever, according to officials. Idaho Lottery Commission Director Roger Simmons said officials were withholding the man?s name until he can hire an attorney and financial adviser to help him decide whether to take the jackpot in 30 annual installments of $7.4 million or as a one-time payout of $125.3 million before taxes. Lottery officials estimate that after taxes, the unmarried Boise man would pocket approximately $84 million if he selects the payout option. "I?m trying to give him some space and let him sort everything out," Simmons said.  "He was relatively calm by the time I met with him, even though he had only known for about an hour that he had won."  I wouldn?t be calm if I?d just won $220 million!Brothers and sisters, it would be interesting to know if this young man is a Christian or not, because occasionally, very occasionally, you will hear of some Christian winning a sum of money in the lottery.  I have to laugh, because God doesn?t normally provide for His people through lotteries, although I don?t want to limit God!  Playing the lottery is not exactly what God had in mind when He said He would provide for us.I do believe that God blesses seekers in all kinds of ways: material provision, peace, forgiveness, guidance in life, assurance of better days and assurance of eternal life.  Our God is a giver of good gifts!  Count your blessings and see if He is not good to you!  I would say He?s been more attentive to us than we have been to Him!  He?s been better to us than we have been to Him!  God does bless seekers.CONCLUSION---------------------------------------ILL.- I saw on the TV news last Wednesday, June 1st, that they had landslides in Laguna Beach, CA, again.  Seventeen multimillion-dollar houses were lost of those landslides.  And About 1,000 people in 350 other homes in the Blue Bird Canyon area were evacuated as a precaution.Brothers and sisters, one of the things that the news reported was that these people had no insurance for these homes.  They were not insurable!  I thought, ?Some people have more money than they do good sense.  Why would anyone buy a house in an area where there is a good chance of it being destroyed and then not be able to buy insurance for it??This is like life.  We are not getting out of this life alive and some people have no insurance at all!  They have no eternity insurance!  They have no insurance or assurance that they will live when they die!  Why?  Because they have not believed in the Lord Jesus Christ and put their trust in Him!  And this is what life is all about!  We?re not here on planet earth forever, but there is a forever and it is only available in its blissful, heavenly form through the Lord Jesus Christ!