INTRO.- Memorial day weekend means ?fun day? to most people!  Play, pleasure, cookouts, etc.ILL.- If you want to go to Garden Grove, CA, here is what you can do on Memorial Day weekend.  Garden Grove Strawberry Festival:  Four day festival celebrating everything to do with the humble strawberry.  Carnival rides, pageants, Strawberry Idol karaoke contest, Red-Head Roundup Contest, Berry Beautiful Baby Pageant, and, of course, a strawberry-themed parade on Saturday.   Or if you prefer Miami, FL, for your Memorial Day weekend, here?s the testimony of one young man from Wisconsin who was there last year.ILL.- Ola Awosika, 23, Milwaukee , WI , Urban Beach Weekend Miami , FL.  ?I arrived on the sandy beach of Miami , FL on Thursday May 21, 2009!  As soon as our cab pulled up to the hotel I knew I was in for a good time!  There were beautiful people everywhere!!!!!!  I mean the streets were packed from dawn until dusk!  The weather was perfect 85 and sunny!  It rained off and on all weekend but the weather did not damper the party in the streets. ?Ladies, if you want to see FINE men with the ripped abs, then Miami is the place to be!  The girls and I partied the nights away. We danced on the club poles in the middle of the dance floor. We turned the city out and truly represented for the Midwest !!!! Over all I enjoyed myself and would go back again!"  SOUNDS WILD TO ME!ILL.- Or how about Sin City, Las Vegas?  Here is how some are advertising Memorial Day weekend packed with major entertainment, pool parties, the hottest DJs at local clubs and even some Shakespeare.A long weekend in Vegas wouldn?t be complete without taking in a show and some of the Strip?s biggest headliners will be in town entertaining the masses over Memorial Day weekend.  Catch Barry Manilow at the Las Vegas Hilton, David Copperfield at MGM Grand and Cher at Caesars Palace. What?s your Memorial Day weekend thing?  Jonesboro Christian Church and perhaps a family gathering?  A Church gathering and a family gathering?  Maybe a cemetery visit?PROP.- Let me suggest to you that we observe or do Memorial day from the past to the present and on to the future.I. MEMORIAL DAY - THE PASTILL.- At a commuter train station a policeman noticed a woman driver with her head bowed over the steering wheel in obvious discomfort.  The police officer asked her, "Is there anything wrong?"Half crying and half laughing, she said, "For ten years I have been driving my husband to this station every morning to catch this train.  THIS MORNING I FORGOT HIM!"Brothers and sisters, the worst forgetfulness of all is to forget people!  One of the biggest lessons that we need to learn is that God didn?t put us here for us!  God put us here for others!- We remember our deceased loved ones.  We look back and remember.I Thessalonians 4:13-14 ?Brothers, we do not want you to be ignorant about those who fall asleep, or to grieve like the rest of men, who have no hope. We believe that Jesus died and rose again and so we believe that God will bring with Jesus those who have fallen asleep in him.?Those who have fallen asleep are Christians who have passed on to the next life.  And to be absent from the body is to be at home with the Lord!  THAT?S OUR HOPE!  THAT?S OUR PROMISE!Paul doesn?t refer to these people as having died, but rather as ?fallen asleep.?  They are not dead.  They are only gone from this life to a better life.Obviously, when our loved ones believed in Christ and were in Him, it gives us hope that some day we?ll see them again. Consequently, on Memorial Day weekend we remember our loved ones who have gone before us. And we don?t grieve over people like those who have no hope, because our hope is in Jesus!  We may shed some tears but it?s not the same as those who have no hope.  (Those who don?t have Christ)We all have lost loved ones death and we hurt.  Some more than others.  The closer they are, the stronger the hurt.  And it doesn?t get better with age, we just learn to deal with it better.  Hopefully, with age also comes spiritual maturity and this makes a difference.ILL.- There are many answers posed to the question of Job: ?If a man dies, shall he live again??  (Job 14:14)	l	Science says, ?He may live again.?	l	Philosophy says, ?He hopes to live again.?	l	Ethics says, ?He ought to live again.?	l	Atheism says, ?He will never live again.?	l	Jesus says, ?He shall live again.? - We also remember our deceased war veterans.   Originally, Memorial day started with the remembrance of those who died in war.  If you have any deceased veterans in your family, it?s time to remember them!ILL.- Listen to what one person said he/she would do:  ?This weekend I am going to do something different.  I am going to buy some carnations each day and go to one of the nearby cemetaries and walk through the sections for soldiers.  When I find a grave that has no flowers, I?ll leave one and say a prayer for the family of that person, who for some reason could not bring their soldier flowers.  I will pray for our country and all who serve or have served.  And for their families, who also serve by losing precious days, weeks and months spent with their loved ones who are off serving, preserving peace and the freedom we have in this country.  I?ll pray for the families who paid the ultimate price, who?s loved ones died, or were taken captive and never returned.  I?ll pray for anyone who may still be held in captivity and thinks perhaps they are forgotten.  I DO NOT FORGET.? HOW GREAT IS THIS?  Someone said, "Say goodbye to me, but not to the thought of me."  Remember your loved ones who have gone before you. Remember and appreciate them.  Remember and rejoice in their good.  Remember and pray.II. MEMORIAL DAY - THE PRESENT- We remember people every dayILL.- Mark Schultz of Bremerton, Washington, is a fatherless twelve-year-old who likes to fish but who had no adult to take him fishing.  When Mark submitted a want ad, asking for adult volunteers to take him fishing, he received twenty phone calls.Brothers and sisters, we need to remember people in life.  We need to remember them in any form that shows we care about them, taking them fishing or some other good thing.Matthew 20:28 "The Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many."  If He came to serve, what must we do?ILL.- ?I gave a little party this afternoon at three??Twas very smallThree guests in allJust I, Myself, and MeMyself ate up the sandwichesWhile I drank up the teaAnd it was IWho ate the pieAnd passed the cake to Me.?This is the way it is with most folks, but because we?re in Christ and Christ is in us, we?re supposed to think about others!  Matthew 9:35-36 "Jesus went through all the towns and villages, teaching in their synagogues, preaching the good news of the kingdom and healing every disease and sickness.  When he saw the crowds, he had compassion on them, because they were harassed and helpless, like sheep without a shepherd."When we truly see the multitudes of people pass by, how can we not look on them with compassion?  When you go to a large mall and or a professional ball game, how can you not think with compassion toward others?Phil. 2:4 "Each of you should look not only to your own interests, but also to the interests of others."Galatians 5:13 ?You, my brothers, were called to be free. But do not use your freedom to indulge the sinful nature; rather, serve one another in love.? Galatians 6:2 ?Bear one another?s burdens and so fulfill the law of Christ.?Galatians 6:9-10 ?Let us not become weary in doing good, for at the proper time we will reap a harvest if we do not give up. Therefore, as we have opportunity, let us do good to all people, especially to those who belong to the family of believers.?- We also remember the Lord daily, hourly.  We dare not forget the Lord on Memorial Day or any time!Genesis 5.  Enoch walked with God.  I assume he walked and talked with God all day long and every night.  He made God his constant companion.  WHY CAN?T WE DO THE SAME?Many people have trouble remembering the Lord on the Lord?s Day.  By that, I mean they have trouble remembering Him by going to church and singing praise to Him!  But if we were to walk with Him daily, remembering Him daily, then remembering Him on the Lord?s day would be no trouble at all!III. MEMORIAL DAY - THE FUTURE- We build memories for the future.II Timothy 1:5 ?I have been reminded of your sincere faith, which first lived in your grandmother Lois and in your mother Eunice and, I am persuaded, now lives in you also.?Timothy must have inherited his faith from his mother and his grandmother!  Who influenced you for Christ and the church?  What great memories Timothy must have had of his mother and grandmother!All of us have memories of our deceased relatives: parents, grandparents, etc. whether they are good, bad or otherwise.  But why not make the best memories possible for your children and grandchildren?ILL.- Let me give you some examples.  I had two grandmothers and only one grandfather.  My grandfather on my father?s side passed away before I was born.  I never knew him and what I know about him is what my mother told me, which is very little.My one grandfather was called Papa George.  His name was George McAda.  He was my mother?s father.  All I remember is that he smoked cigars, which I never cared for.  I thought they made a big stink.  He seemed friendly enough but didn?t come around to see us very often.  He was apparently more interested in his own life than ours.My grandmother Sadie Shepherd seemed old from the first time I remembered her being my grandmother.  She was born in the 1800?s and she was definitely old fashioned.  She had very long gray hair that she kept tied in a bun.I remember that grandmother Shepherd seemed quiet and grumpy, however, that could have been due to the fact that she lost her husband and one son the same year.  Her husband, James Alvin Shepherd, died January 15, 1940 because of appendicitis.  Their son, Raymond Charles died September 15, 1940 in a truck accident.  He was only 35 and married but no children.  Losing both a husband and a son the same year would certainly sour a wife and mother.Grandma Shepherd, however, could bake some great homemade rolls!  She was a good cook but in the days gone by that?s what mothers did!  But I don?t ever remember grandma Shepherd going to church.  Maybe she did and I just didn?t know about it, but I don?t remember the faith of Christ being spoken of or the Bible being talked about.Brothers and sisters, All I?m saying is that we are building memories for our children and our grandchildren.  WHAT WILL THEY REMEMBER US FOR?  Will it be our faith?  Our love?  Our kindness?  Or something negative?  And what will others remember us for?  CONCLUSION----------------------ILL.- Years ago, the Salvation Army was holding an international convention and their founder, Gen. William Booth, could not attend because of physical weakness. He cabled his convention message to them.  It was one word: "OTHERS."Lord, help me to live from day to dayIn such a self-forgetful wayThat even when I kneel to prayMy prayer shall be for others.Help me in all the work I doTo ever be sincere and trueAnd know that all I?d do for youMust needs be done for others.Let "self" be crucified and slainAnd buried deep, and all in vainMay efforts be to rise againUnless to live for others.And when my work on earth is doneAnd my new work in heaven?s begunMay I forget the crown I?ve wonWhile thinking still of others.Others, Lord, yes, othersLet this my motto be,Help me to live for othersThat I may live like Thee.