INTRO.- ILL.- During a board meeting in a small mountain church one of the deacons said, "Preacher, I think we need a chandelier in this church.""No, I?m against it," said another deacon.  The preacher asked, "Well, why don?t you think we need a chandelier in this church?"The deacon said, "First, nobody in this church can spell it.  Second, nobody in this church can play it.  And third, what this church needs above all else is more light."Don?t be ignorant.  We?re all ignorant about some things.  I don?t know how to wire a house, but I know how to prepare a Bible lesson or sermon.  We all have knowledge of some things, but what about spiritual ignorance?  Our world and country live in ignorance of God and His will for their lives.    The worst ignorance of all is to be ignorant of the message of God?s Word.  And of course, God?s supreme message in His Word is that Jesus is the Messiah and the only Savior of the world.  Above all, people need to understand that message and accept that Christ in order to be saved eternally.  But there are other things in God?s Word that we should know.  We all should have a basic knowledge of scripture.  Should we take a quiz?  It depends on the quiz or the subject.  - In what language was the Old Testament written?Answer: Hebrew- In what language was the New Testament written?Answer: Greek- Where was Jesus Born?Answer: Bethlehem (Matthew 2:1) - Who laid their head on Jesus chest at the last supper?Answer: John (John 13:22-25)- Who was caught in the belly of a fish for 3 days?Answer: Jonah (Jonah 1:17)- Who was taken from this life without experiencing death?Answer: Enoch (Hebrews 11:5)- Who was used by God to divide the Red Sea?Answer: Moses (Exodus 15:22)- Who did God test that was willing to sacrifice their child?Answer: Abraham (Genesis 22:2-3) - Who did Jesus speak to on the road to Damascus?Answer: Saul (Act 9:3-4, Act 13:9)- How long did Jesus fast in the desert?Answer: 40 Days and Nights- In what book does Jesus say he has the keys to death and hades?  Answer: Revelation (Rev 1:18)- Who felt the holes in Jesus? hands from the nails after His resurrection? Answer: Thomas (John 20:24-28)- Who was bit by a venomous snake and unharmed?Answer: Paul (Act 28:3-5)Our text tells us what we should not be ignorant.  And these are very important matters.PROP.- What is it that we are not to be ignorant about?1- Don?t be ignorant about the deceased2- Don?t be ignorant about the resurrection3- Don?t be ignorant about the return of ChristI. DON?T BE IGNORANT ABOUT THE DECEASED13Brothers, we do not want you to be ignorant about those who fall asleep, or to grieve like the rest of men, who have no hope.ILL.- A man died and went to The Judgment.  St. Peter met him at the Gates of Heaven and said, "Before you meet with God, I thought I should tell you -- we?ve looked at your life, and your really didn?t do anything particularly good or bad. We?re not at all sure what to do with you.  Can you tell us anything you did that can help us make a decision?"The newly arrived soul thought for a moment and replied, "Yeah, once I was driving along and came upon a woman who was being harassed by a group of bikers.  So I pulled over, got out my tire iron, and went up to the leader of the bikers.  He was a big, muscular, hairy guy with tattoos all over his body and a ring pierced through his nose.  Well, I tore the nose ring out of his nose, and told him he and his gang had better stop bothering the woman or they would have to deal with me!""I?m impressed," St. Peter responded, "When did this happen?"  "About two minutes ago," came the reply.We must not be ignorant about death and about what could cause an early death!  Don?t do dumb things that could lead you to an early grave.  Some people do, which astounds me.  Bungee Jumping and other such crazy stuff.Now to the matter of death itself, what?s the biggest ignorance that people have?  Simply this.  THAT DEATH ENDS ALL!  Of course, if you don?t believe in the existence of Almighty God, creation, the Bible, Jesus, etc. then you will believe that death ends all.  And what?s wrong with that kind of thinking?  WE KNOW IT?S WRONG.  And there?s a judgment coming and people need to be warned.  They need to come to faith in God and Christ.  And having faith in God alone is not enough! 13Brothers, we do not want you to be ignorant about those who fall asleep, or to grieve like the rest of men, who have no hope.This verse is talking about those who fall asleep in Jesus.  Why the words "fall asleep"?  Because in reality those who die in Christ have only fallen asleep in regard to this world.  They are not dead.  Don?t be ignorant about this.John 3:16 "For God so loved the world that he gave...Romans 6:23 "For the wages of sin is death but the...Acts 7:59-60 "While they were stoning him, Stephen prayed, "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit."  Then he fell on his knees and cried out, "Lord, do not hold this sin against them." When he had said this, he fell asleep."Romans 8:38-39 "For I am convinced that neither death nor life, neither angels nor demons, neither the present nor the future, nor any powers, neither height nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able to separate us from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus our Lord."We believe the Word of God!  There is life beyond the grave!  And we trust in our eternal salvation because we believe in Jesus Christ and trust Him for our salvation!  We have responded to Him in faith and obedience.  We believe and we have hope of a future life!  Don?t be ignorant!II. DON?T BE IGNORANT ABOUT THE RESURRECTION14We believe that Jesus died and rose again and so we believe that God will bring with Jesus those who have fallen asleep in him.Acts 17:31 "For he has set a day when he will judge the world with justice by the man he has appointed. He has given proof of this to all men by raising him from the dead."ILL.- Near Hornet, MO, which is south of Joplin, MO, is a place where the spook light resides.  It has been seen along this road since 1866 and has created such a mystery that even the Army Corps of Engineers officially concluded that it was a "mysterious light of unknown origin".  It has gone by many names as it has made it?s appearances here in a place called the "Devil?s Promenade", but it?s most commonly known as the Hornet Spook Light.This light has appeared seemingly as a ball of fire for almost 140 years, varying in size from a basketball to larger.  It spins down the center of this gravel road at great speed, rises up high, bobs and weaves to the right and left.  It appears to be a large lantern, but there is never anyone carrying it. From your viewpoint, the spook light is nothing but a spoof of someone?s imagination.  However, take it from me I?ve seen the light!  And I have seen the spook light of Hornet, MO.I Cor. 15:3-8 "3For what I received I passed on to you as of first importance: that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, 4that he was buried, that he was raised on the third day according to the Scriptures, 5and that he appeared to Peter, and then to the Twelve. 6After that, he appeared to more than five hundred of the brothers at the same time, most of whom are still living, though some have fallen asleep. 7Then he appeared to James, then to all the apostles, 8and last of all he appeared to me also, as to one abnormally born."The resurrection wouldn?t mean nearly as much to us who believe if we didn?t have the record of those people who saw Christ after He rose from the dead.  ILL.- This is like some other things in our world.  You know who Mel Gibson is.  He?s the famous actor and of course, producer of the great movie, "THE PASSION OF THE CHRIST."  Did you see it?  Powerful movie.  Humbling.  Convicting.  Reassuring of our salvation.Mel?s father is 90 year old Hutton Gibson and do you know what he?s famous for?  He doesn?t believe in the Holocaust.  He denies that the Holocaust ever happened.  And personally, I don?t know how he can deny considering those who were in it and were eyewitnesses of the horror.  And SO WITH THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST.  We have recorded in this text a group of honest witnesses who saw our Lord after He rose from the grave.ILL.- The Empty Tomb had a message for the disciples as it has for us.  It says to science and philosophy, ?Explain this event.?  It says to history, ?Repeat this event.?  It says to time, ?Blot out this event.?  It says to faith, ?Believe this event.?Don?t be ignorant.  Believe this life-changing miraculous event!III. DON?T BE IGNORANT ABOUT THE RETURN OF CHRIST15According to the Lord?s own word, we tell you that we who are still alive, who are left till the coming of the Lord, will certainly not precede those who have fallen asleep. 16For the Lord himself will come down from heaven, with a loud command, with the voice of the archangel and with the trumpet call of God, and the dead in Christ will rise first. 17After that, we who are still alive and are left will be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air. And so we will be with the Lord forever. 18Therefore encourage each other with these words.ILL.- Billy Graham says: ?One of the best ways to get rid of discouragement is to remember that Christ is coming again.  The most thrilling, glorious truth in all the world is the Second Coming of Jesus Christ.  When we look around and see pessimism on every side, we should remember the Bible is the only Book in the world that predicts the future.  The Bible is more modern than tomorrow morning?s newspaper. ?The Bible accurately foretells the future, and it says that the consummation of all things shall be the coming again of Jesus Christ to this earth.  If your life is dismal, depressed, and gloomy today, Christ can turn those dark clouds inside out."  ILL.- Descriptions Of Second Coming- Personally?1 Thess. 4:16.- Literally and visibly?Acts 1:11; 1 John 3:2; Rev. 1:7.- In Glory?Matthew 16:27; Matthew 24:30; Matthew 25:31.- In Power?Matthew 24:30.- With Angels?Matthew 25:31; Rev. 5:11.- Come Quickly?Rev. 22:7, 12, 20; Matthew 28:7-8.- Unexpectedly?Matthew 24:50; Luke 21:34-3We must not be ignorant of the fact that Christ will return some day.  I realize, however, there is a great difference in opinion in the Christian world as to whether His return will signal the end to this world as we know it or something else.  I prefer to believe that when Jesus return this world will be over and be received by the Lord and be with Him forever.Now if God does something differently than I think or you think or anybody else, then that?s His business.  He rules.  We don?t get any vote in how He is going to do things or run things.ILL.- Earl Kelly, pastor of the First Baptist Church of Holly Springs, Mississippi, was preaching on the second coming of Christ.  He had just quoted Matthew 24:27, ?For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west; so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be.?  At this point, a large light bulb fell from its socket in the ceiling and shattered on the floor in front of the pulpit.As reported by Baptist Press, Kelly was equal to the occasion. He told the startled worshipers, ?His coming will be just as sudden, and unexpected, and devastating to the dreams that are not Christ-centered.?The important thing about the coming is to be ready!  How do we get ready?  We give our lives to Christ.  We have a daily relationship to Him.  We walk with Him, talk with Him, and do His business in this world as best we can!Be not ignorant of the Lord?s coming.  It could happen at any time!  PERHAPS TODAY!  And perhaps, since we know the Lord, we should be praying, "Come Lord Jesus!"CONCLUSION---------------------------
There is basically only one answer for ignorance.  It?s education and the greatest education that any of us can receive is a Christian education.ILL.- Dr. William Lyon Phelps, one of Yale University?s most distinguished professors, said, ?I would rather have a thorough knowledge of the Scriptures than a college education.?   His knowledge of Scripture enhanced his view of God and thus influenced his life.  WE MUST NOT BE IGNORANT OF GOD NOR OF HIS WORD NOR OF HIS WILL FOR OUR LIVES!  Study to show yourself approved to God and by God.  And for that, you?ll never be sorry.  