INTRO.- ILL.- Someone asked: How do you know when a politician is telling the truth?  When he pulls his ear, he is telling the truth.  When he rubs his nose, he is telling the truth, but when he opens his mouth, he is lying.  I?m sure that?s how many people feel about most politicians.ILL.- They say that when Columbus  started out he didn?t know where he was going.  When he got there, he didn?t know where he was.  When he got back, he didn?t know where he had been.  And he did it all on other people?s money.  Someone remarked, "What a politician Columbus would have been."ILL.- William Penn Adair Rogers (November 4, 1879 ? August 15, 1935) was an American comedian, humorist, commentator, vaudeville performer, and actor.  Known as Oklahoma?s favorite son, Rogers was born to a prominent Indian Territory family and learned to ride horses and use a lariat so well that he was listed in the Guinness Book of World Records for throwing three ropes at once?one around the neck of a horse, another around the horse?s rider, and a third around all four legs of the horse.  He ultimately traveled around the world three times, made 71 movies (50 silent films and 21 "talkies"), wrote more than 4,000 nationally-syndicated newspaper columns, and became a world-famous figure.Rogers once said, "People?s minds are changed through observation and not through argument."He was right and I think he was the kind of guy who would have made a good President.  He had lots of humor but also lots of good common sense.  And it seems to me that many politicians lack common sense.  I don?t think Will Rogers would ever have run for President even if he had lived longer, but I would have voted for him!  He only lived to be 55 years old and died in 1935.  I guess I wouldn?t have voted for him.  I wasn?t born yet.When we think about leadership we often think of politicians; perhaps not highly, but we do think of them.  We all would like to see the best of the best in all leadership positions in the good old USA!Let?s play follow the leader.  Who wants to be a leader?  Believe it or not, we?re all leaders whether we realize it or not.ILL.- Call my son on the phone and tell me that he?s not me!  Walk behind him and see if he doesn?t walk just like his daddy.  Now obviously, there are some ways that we are not alike, but in some things we are very similar.  Someone takes after you if you?re a parent.  If you have a child he or she is going to be like either mom and dad.  It may be the walk, the talk, the habits, the actions, the attitude, etc.  But there will be something that will distinguish your child as belonging to you, be it good or bad.Being a parent makes you a leader.  But we?re all leaders in some form or another.  Someone is watching you and learning from you.  It could be good and it could be bad but they are learning.Some people have such a strong personality or perhaps a strong charisma that they influence others in an uncanny way.ILL.- My one time preacher/professor Don DeWelt of Ozark Christian College was that kind of man.  He was such a powerful preacher that he greatly influenced many college boys to preach and often, to preach just like him.  He was so good that it seemed natural to imitate him.ILL.- Look at the many Elvis impersonators.  Elvis had such a charm and a tremendous voice that many people want to be just like him.II Pet. 2:21 "To this you were called, because Christ suffered for you, leaving you an example, that you should follow in his steps." We should follow in the steps of Jesus.  We should follow Him in the way that He served and in the spirit that He served others.  Jesus lived for others!  He came to seek and save the lost.  He came not to be served, but to serve!  And we all need to follow His leading in life.Barnabas was a leader in the early church.  His name actually meant "Son of encouragement."  (Acts 4:36)PROP.- Let?s consider from the life of Barnabas some marks of a good leader and how we can apply them to our lives. 1- Looks for God at work2- Encourages others3- Influences others for Christ I. A GOOD LEADER LOOKS FOR GOD AT WORK22News of this reached the ears of the church at Jerusalem, and they sent Barnabas to Antioch. 23When he arrived and saw the evidence of the grace of God, he was glad and encouraged them all to remain true to the Lord with all their hearts. ILL.- When you get up in the morning and look in the mirror, what is the first thing you see?  Messed up hair? Sleep in your eyes?  Bags under your eyes?  More than likely you see those things and more.  Why?  Because the negative often outshines the good.  And the same thing seems to be true when it comes to others.  We are quicker to see the negative or the nasty in others than we are the good.  One little flaw stands out above all other good features or so it seems.ILL.- For example, I saw an article on the internet recently entitled, "Hillary?s Cackle."  Some people think that Hillary Clinton?s laughing is cackling and they are picking at her.  Some like it but many think it?s silly and a way of avoiding certain questions.  Personally, I don?t know.  I do know, however, that laughter is good medicine, but the point is some people are picking at her laughing and calling it a cackle and some kind of flaw.  That?s what we do with people.  We see the flaws in them before we see anything good in them.  Of course, if you?re in the public eye people will be quick to pick at you.ILL.- Andrew Carnegie said, ?No man can become rich without himself enriching others.?  He went on to live this philosophy, as evidenced by the forty-three millionaires he had working for him. A reporter interviewing Mr. Carnegie asked how he was able to develop these men to become so valuable?  How was he able to pay them so much that they became millionaires?  Mr. Carnegie replied:  ?You develop people in the same way you mine for gold. When you mine for gold, you must literally move tons of dirt to find a single ounce of gold. However, you do not look for the dirt?you look for the gold.? Brothers and sisters, we need to look for the gold in others!  That is the good.ILL.- Here?s an example.  I saw that CNN news has a special on TV called "Heroes."  It?s dedicated to saluting ordinary people who do extraordinary things.  Even though I don?t subscribe to everything that CNN does, I like this idea.  Could it be that CNN got the idea that Americans are tired of hearing about all the bad news and that it?s time for some good news?  Could be.  And this is how we should live.  We should be looking for the good in people instead of the bad all of the time...the hero in others!ILL.- Someone made this interesting statement: People often ask me why is it that I rarely become angry at another person, or why I am always trying to find the good, even in the most evil and hateful people?  To that, I generally respond that, ?The same God who created me, created you. Therefore, when I look at you, I see, recognize and acknowledge that God in you?even if you refuse to see, recognize and acknowledge the God in you.?  That refusal, on your part, demonstrates your limitation, not mine.  Therefore, it is you who walk in the darkness ..not me!Someone said, ?It is better to light one candle than to curse the darkness.? Brother Barnabas was a good leader in the sense that he looked for God at work in others.  The text reads: When he arrived he saw the evidence of the grace of God.Are you looking for evidence of the grace of God in others?  What is that?  It?s anything good or godly in a person?s life.ILL.- Elaine has a good friend back in southern IL named Alma Osterholm.  Not only is she a good friend, she is a GOOD WOMAN!  She has only one grandson whom she runs after night and day.  But her goodness doesn?t stop there.  She runs for her other family members, aged or otherwise.  She also volunteers at the church she attends and she isn?t even a member!  THE GRACE OF GOD IS AT WORK IN HER LIFE WHETHER SHE REALIZES IT OR NOT!AND WE NEED TO START LOOKING FOR THE GRACE OF GOD AT WORK IN PEOPLE?S LIVES!  If it?s good in someone?s life, it?s because God is at work in them.  And a  good leader looks for that good and compliments it.II. A GOOD LEADER ENCOURAGES OTHERS22News of this reached the ears of the church at Jerusalem, and they sent Barnabas to Antioch. 23When he arrived and saw the evidence of the grace of God, he was glad and encouraged them all to remain true to the Lord with all their hearts.ILL.- Two Texas oilmen walked into a Cadillac dealer and priced a top model Caddy.  The salesman said, "That model sells for $75,000."  "I?ll take it," said the first Texan as he reached for his checkbook.  The other Texan grabbed his hand and said, "No, let me get it.  You bought lunch today."Now that?s what I call REAL encouragement!  But obviously, that?s not how most of us would or could give encouragement to someone.  BUT WE COULD DO IT IN OTHER WAYS!Many people do nothing but dish out bad stuff.  It?s time to change.  We need to start looking at the good in people?s lives and encourage that good!When he (Barnabas) arrived and saw the evidence of the grace of God, he was glad and encouraged them all.Whenever you see something good in a person?s life you need to encourage that person.ILL.- For example, whenever Wade Cunningham comes home we like for him to sing a solo.  Why?  It?s pretty obvious.  He?s very good.  And it?s also very easy to compliment him for that good and encourage him in it.  "Wow!  You are good.  You should do that more often.  What a blessing it is to others."ILL.- Recently, we had a visitor on Sunday night.  Ronnie Hoyer is a Paragould boy who went to Mid-South Bible College and is now doing mission work with White Fields Overseas Evangelism.  Ron goes to India, West Africa and Haiti to do mission work.  He, Reggie Thomas and others hold meetings.  They teach and preach with the idea of winning people to Christ and edifying the leaders in those countries.  And they are doing a great work.  Early last spring they went to India for 10 days and through their efforts over 5,000 people were baptized into Christ.  THEY NEED TO BE ENCOURAGED!  Verbally and financially.  But Ron Hoyer doesn?t just do good stuff overseas.  It?s evident that the grace of God is at work in his life in other ways.The first time I met Ron was at the Arkansas Christian Convention in Little Rock.  I didn?t know Ron at that time.  He walked up to me with his hand outstretched and said, "You are Steve Shepherd and I have preached some of your best sermons."  Wow!  What an encouraging thing to say to me.But that?s not all Ron has done to encourage me.  Recently, he wrote me and asked if I would write an article for his monthly White Fields Overseas Evangelism online newsletter.  He wrote, "I don?t know how you do it but you are good at what you do."  HOW?S THAT FOR ENCOURAGEMENT?And when Ron was here on that particular Sunday night I tried to encourage him as well.  I let him talk about his mission work and slipped a $100 bill in his hand.  Well, I did the first part, anyway!!!Brothers and sisters, we DO need to look for the good things in people?s lives (small and large) and encourage that good.  Ron Hoyer is doing a good work and I certainly want to encourage him.  WE ALL SHOULD.When you encourage others in their relationship to Christ you ARE encouraging them to remain true to the Lord.  "You are going a good work.  Keep it up...."  Let?s get on the bandwagon of encouragement!III. A GOOD LEADER INFLUENCES OTHERS FOR CHRIST24He was a good man, full of the Holy Spirit and faith, and a great number of people were brought to the Lord. 25Then Barnabas went to Tarsus to look for Saul, 26and when he found him, he brought him to Antioch. So for a whole year Barnabas and Saul met with the church and taught great numbers of people.  The disciples were called Christians first at Antioch.ILL.- Galena, KS, is a town of about 3,000. Recently, the two-story Green Parrot bar collapsed, and several other downtown buildings that sit upon abandoned lead and zinc mines.  The Green Parrot is being demolished.  NO, IT?S A DONE DEAL.  It?s already been demolished because it started to fall apart as a result the old mine below it.Galena, KS, is about 7 miles from my hometown of Joplin, MO, and it?s built on top of those old lead and zinc mines.  I recently saw a news item about this and the town officials are afraid the whole town is going to collapse into a sink holes some day so they are working to fill in every hole they discover.  I say, GOOD RIDDANCE TO THE GREEN PARROT BAR where I did some drinking in my younger days of 18 years of age.  That bar was a bad influence on people.  NO, NOT THE BAR ITSELF, BUT THE PEOPLE WHO ENTERED THAT BAR.  I Cor. 15:33 "Do not be misled: Bad company corrupts good character." The company we keep may well determine how we live.  And if we are led astray, then we, too, will lead others astray.Have you ever done anything that would cause someone else to do evil?  To drink?  Or to do something bad?  We?re all leaders of others, whether for good or evil.ILL.- Britney Spears did it again.  She is a leader and a teacher of what ?not to do.?  Now the judge ordered to have her kids taken away from her.  WHY?  BECAUSE OF HER BAD BEHAVIOR AND BAD EXAMPLE.  Because of bar hopping, partying and the fact that she doesn?t want to do anything anybody tells her.  She?s rebellious!  Rewind to last month.  L.A. County Commissioner Scott Gordon ordered Spears to do a number of things in order to maintain 50/50 custody.  Spears was ordered to meet with a drug counselor -- she didn?t do it.  Spears was ordered to submit to drug testing -- she didn?t do it.  Spears was ordered to enroll in parenting classes -- didn?t do it.  Spears was also required to sign the judge?s order -- again, she didn?t.And she is a bad example to her two little boys but also to millions of young girls.  And we hope that they learn from her what not to do in life.  Now here?s the other side of that coin.Prov. 27:17 "As iron sharpens iron, so one man sharpens another."Have you sharpened anybody lately?  Have you influenced anyone for good and the Lord?ILL.- Daniel Webster wrote, ??From the time that, at my mother?s feet, or on my father?s knee, I first learned to say verses from the sacred writings, they have been my daily study.  If there be any thing in my style or thoughts to be commended, the credit is due to my kind parents for instilling into my mind an early love of the Scriptures.?  God bless all parents who teach their children to love God, to love Christ, and learn the Bible!  And go to church.  What a great thing for parents to do.  What?s the greatest good that can happen to anybody? And what?s the greatest good that we can do for anybody in life?The greatest good that can happen to us would be to go to heaven.  Heaven being real and better than anything this world offers.  That is the greatest good that can happen to someone.So what is the greatest good we can do?  It is to lead someone to Christ so they can eventually go to heaven.  Brothers and sisters, we need to do all we can to influence others for Christ.  We need to point people to Christ and His church!  And we have an opportunity next Sunday with our Friend Day, but it should be done every day!  Barnabas influenced people for Christ.  WHAT ABOUT YOU?CONCLUSION-------------------------Someone once said, "Lead, follow or get out of the way."  For some, that may be true, but for us who are in Christ, we must lead the way.  We must lead people to Christ and in the way of Christ as best we can.  If we truly believe, we have no other option.