INTRO.- According to this text we must be devoted to loving others and our love must be sincere or genuine.ILL.- Two friends were discussing the possibility of love.  One said, "I thought I was in love three times.?  "How so?" his friend asked."Five years ago I deeply cared for a woman who wanted nothing to do with me."  "Was that not love?" his friend asked."No," he replied.  "That was obsession.  And then two years ago I deeply cared for an attractive woman who didn?t understand me."  "Was that not love?""No," he replied.  "That was lust.  And just last year I met a woman aboard a cruise ship to the Caribbean.  She was smart, funny, and a great conversationalist.  And everywhere I followed her on that boat, I would get this strange sensation in the pit of my stomach.""Was that not love?" his friend asked.  "No," he replied.  "That was motion sickness."ILL.- In a survey of 4-8 year olds, kids share their views on love. But what do little kids know about love?  Listen to what they said.- "Love is when a girl puts on perfume and a boy puts on shaving cologne and they go out and smell each other."- "Love is when you go out to eat and give somebody most of your French fries without making them give you any of theirs."- "Love is when someone hurts you.  And you get so mad but you don?t yell at him because you know it would hurt his feelings."- "Love is when my mommy makes coffee for my daddy and she takes a sip before giving it to him, to make sure the taste is OK."- "Love is when you tell a guy you like his shirt, then he wears it everyday."- "Love is if you hold hands and sit beside each other in the cafeteria.  That means you?re in love.  Otherwise, you can sit across from each other and be okay."- "Love is when mommy sees daddy smelly and sweaty and still says he is handsomer than Robert Redbird."- "I know my older sister loves me because she gives me all her old clothes and has to go out and buy new ones."- "When you love somebody, your eyelashes go up and down and little stars come out of you."Brothers and sisters, we all have our ideas about love but the best come from God.  And if love is anything at all it is a matter of doing something.ILL.- As someone once said: a bell is not a bell until you ring it.  A song is not a song until you sing it.  And love in your heart is not love until you give it away.Love is active or it is apparently, not love.  Love does something good for others and to others.  ILL.- For example, let me give two examples of what some people might consider to be love.  One guy I read about apparently ?loves? the Super bowl.  Mark Smithe of Chicago loves the Super Bowl so much that he shelled out $10,000 for a 65-inch high-definition, flat-panel, plasma TV and related gear the week before the game.  He admitted that was he was ?keeping up with the Joneses.?  ILL.- On the other hand, I know of a preacher named Ronnie Hoyer who lives and preaches in Webb City, MO. (originally from Paragould, AR)  He just spent some money ($2000 to $2500) and went on a mission trip to India with Reggie Thomas (78 years old) and five other guys in order to preach the gospel.  They visited 120 villages for 10 days.They endured 20 hours of flying and a 9-hour train ride in order to take the gospel to those people.  I think they were gone about two weeks and Ronnie preached in the mountains (8,000 ft. above sea level) and also, in the lowlands.  They had to use interpreters.  Ronnie saw 188 people confess Christ and be baptized into Christ.  All total 5021 people were baptized into Christ.  Now what do you think?  I would most certainly call that love!But buying a TV for my own pleasure, now that?s something else.PROP.- In this message, just before Valentine?s Day, I want us to think about various scriptures that show us the demonstration of love.I. LOVE IS KINDI Cor. 13:4-5 ?Love is patient, love is kind. It does not envy, it does not boast, it is not proud.  It is not rude, it is not self-seeking, it is not easily angered, it keeps no record of wrongs.?ILL.- A fellow opened a delicatessen in a block that boasted two other salami salons.  One promoted his line of bologna with this line of baloney: ?Finest in the world!?  The other delicatessen declared, ?Best in the Universe.?   The last fellow put up a sign: ?Nicest in the neighborhood!?We should be the nicest people in the neighborhood.  We should be the nicest person at our work place.  We should be the nicest customer at the bank and at Wal-Mart.  We should be nice, kind, friendly, etc. to everyone and everywhere we go.Love is kind.  Love does kind things for others.  Love is thoughtful of others.ILL.- Frederick W. Faber - ?Kindness has converted more sinners than zeal, eloquence or learning.?   Why does kindness do so much good in this world?  Because it?s a matter of action, not necessarily words.  And we?ve always heard it said that actions speak louder than words.  Actions speak louder than many things.ILL.- The Chicago Bears coach, Lovie Smith, said, ?God is the center of my life.  It controls all that I do.  I hope I don?t have to spend my time telling my players I?m a Christian.  I hope they see it in my life every day."  The same was apparently true with the Colts? coach, Tony Dungy.ILL.- Someone said, ?The smallest deed is better than the greatest intention!?ILL.- Sinclair Lewis (author) told about the time, crossing the Atlantic, when he saw an elderly lady on deck reading his latest book, about which there had been some hot discussion.  By the number of pages she had read, he judged that she was approaching the shocking passage, which had caused the most trouble; and he kept an eye on her, to see how it would affect her.  Presently the lady got up, walked to the rail and threw the book far into the ocean.Her actions told the story that she didn?t like his story.  I?ll bet he never said anything to her!  The same principle holds true for doing good.  If we are moved to do good, we will move and do good. ILL.- When preacher Dwight L. Moody was in New York one time, he was helped considerably by R. K. Remington.  When Moody was leaving on the train, he grasped his friend by the hand and said: ?If you ever come to Chicago, call on me; and I will try to return your kindness.?  Mr. Remington replied to Moody: ?Don?t wait for me; do it to the first man that comes along.?One good turn deserves another but we can?t always return the favor.  But we can always do good to others whether they?ve done something good to us or not. Titus 3:1-2 ?Remind the people to be subject to rulers and authorities, to be obedient, to be ready to do whatever is good, to slander no one, to be peaceable and considerate, and to show true humility toward all men.?I Thess. 5:15 ?Make sure that nobody pays back wrong for wrong, but always try to be kind to each other and to everyone else.?  LOVE IS KIND.II. LOVE IS GIVINGII Cor. 8:6-8 ?So we urged Titus, since he had earlier made a beginning, to bring also to completion this act of grace on your part.  But just as you excel in everything?in faith, in speech, in knowledge, in complete earnestness and in your love for us?see that you also excel in this grace of giving.  I am not commanding you, but I want to test the sincerity of your love by comparing it with the earnestness of others.?Paul said that the Corinthians had excelled in many things, including love.  He wanted them to also excel in their giving, which is the demonstration of love.He is literally talking about giving money or financial assistance. And we are often hesitant to do this.  Why?  Personally, I think it?s because we are either selfish or afraid or both.  We are selfish in the sense that we don?t want to share with anybody.  We may think, ?This is my money and I will use it for me, etc.?  Or we may be afraid, thinking, ?But if I give how will I live??  But we all need to remember this very important phrase:  FOR GOD SO LOVED THE WORLD THAT HE GAVE.  He is the motivation for our giving.  And it appears that if we love, we too will give.  If we love the Lord (who gives us everything) we will give back to Him or to His work.  But some people who claim to believe in the Lord never give back to Him or His work.  TO ME, THAT DOESN?T FIGURE!  And if we love people, we will give when we can in order to help them.  And sometimes it?s the little stuff we do that can make a difference.  Here is one lady?s story.ILL.- She said, ?I would like to share an act of kindness, which I practice regularly and which gives me great joy.  I always carry at least $3 in my car and also in my pocket.  I save it for the first person who asks if I can "spare some change.?  Smiling and maintaining eye contact, I always respond very cheerfully with a comment like, "Yes, I would love to" or "It would be my pleasure.?  And I give them the $3.  I then replace it with my next $3 for the next person.  I never spend this money myself.  I honor that it is the possession of the next person who asks for it. Three dollars is a small amount, yet it means a lot to the person who expected 25 cents, especially, when delivered with joy and respect to them.?I also have taken to carrying items that I think the needy may be able to use.  I carry hats and socks and gloves and an umbrella.  Recently I put together some care packages for the homeless.  It occurred to me that things like band-aids, toothpaste, aspirin, combs, as well as food would be of use.  I imagined that they would need things to be non-breakable, so I chose plastic or paper containers.  The folks who received them were delighted.  I am glad to also give a hug and a smile, with the money.  And I always remember it is they who bless me with an opportunity to be kind.  What a joy!?  One woman?s testimony about giving.ILL.- A father once gave his little boy a dollar and told him he might do with it as he pleased.  Later when he asked about it, the little fellow told him that he had lent it.  ?Did you get good security?? he asked.  ?Yes, sir!? said the boy.  ?I gave it to a poor beggar who looked hungry!?  ?Oh, how foolish you are.  You will never get it back!? said the father.  ?But, father, I have the best security; for the Bible says: he who is kind to the poor lends to the Lord and he will reward him for what he has done.? (Proverbs 19:17)Brothers and sisters, sometimes it?s not how much we give but the fact that we do give something to help someone, anyone.III. LOVE IS FORGIVING Gal. 6:1-2 ?Brothers, if someone is caught in a sin, you who are spiritual should restore him gently.  But watch yourself, or you also may be tempted.  Carry each other?s burdens, and in this way you will fulfill the law of Christ.?I Cor. 8:1 ?Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.? Love is a builder of people.  Genuine doesn?t seek to hurt people or tear them down.  It builds up people who are hurting.Do you know what the world thinks of the church and Christians in general?  Do you know what their criticism is in regard to Christians?  That we are too rigid, too judgmental, too legalistic, too harsh, too critical, etc.  That?s astounding!ILL.- One preacher said that a recent pastors? conference that today the church of Jesus Christ is becoming known as merely another political party.  He said, ?We as Christians are known more for what we are against - than what we are for - and we spend so much time commenting and complaining about things that have nothing to do with the gospel that people are getting confused about just what it means to be a Christian in today?s society.?ILL.- Larry Burkett was (passed away 2003) a nationally known Christian lecturer who conducted seminars on how to manage your money.  He received a letter from a non-Christian woman who owned a small business one time.  She wrote, ?I?ve had trouble with my employees for years.  They will not do an honest day?s work.  They are lazy and rebellious.  I heard your radio program and decided to hire all Christians.  I did, but I have never had a more complaining, griping group of people.  They were always mumbling about something. I?ve now replaced them with refugees.  The refugees are so grateful to work; they?ll do everything I ask.  They don?t grumble and complain.  I think American Christians need to wake up.?I don?t believe that woman was right about all Christians.  Not all Christians are chronic complainers and gripers, but we often appear this way to the world as a whole.  And if so, this is bad!Here is what we are supposed to be known by:  John 13:35 "By this all men will know that you are my disciples, if you love one another."Brothers and sisters, the world should witness our love for one another.  Instead of holding grudges and criticizing one another, we should be loving one another, encouraging one another, forgiving one another, and trying to build up one another.When people see this kind action and behavior in the church and in us when we are out in the world working THEY WILL BE DRAWN TO CHRIST!ILL.- I recently was contacted by email by one of my Ozark Christian College professors, Bob Stacy.  He was my English teacher in college and was well liked.  Bob and Nell had twins, Roger and Rhonda, and Rhonda died of a brain tumor about 15 years ago.  She was 30 years old, married and the mother of three.  She had just given birth five months earlier.  They put her in the hospital and she died two days later.When Bob heard that Elaine had lost her son, Brad, he immediately sent her a book that he had written of his experience with losing a child, entitled, ?A Father?s Tears.?Also, I wrote Bob about a fellow Ozark student who has cancer.  Bob wanted his email address so he could write him.  Also, Bob asked me about two other former Ozark students who passed away.  He wanted information from me about their death and their wives, because he wanted to write them.Why is he doing this kind of thing?  Because that?s the spirit of Christ in him!  That?s the spirit of love that ministers to others in their pain and hurt.  AND THAT IS WHAT WE SHOULD BE KNOWN FOR!  The world needs this Christ-like kind of love!CONCLUSION-----------------------------------Romans 5:8 ?But God demonstrates his own love for us in this: While we were still sinners, Christ died for us.?God demonstrates His love for us.  He did and He always will.  ILL.- Someone wrote:  Among the first glimpses we get of our God is that of a Seeker: ?Adam...Where art thou?? (Genesis 3:9).  In commenting upon this question to his Bible class, a teacher said, ?You can never be a preacher if you read it as though God were a policeman.  Read it as though God were a brokenhearted Father looking for a lost child!?God is our Father.  He is compassionate and gracious, slow to anger, abounding in love.  He loves us in spite of our failures and faults.  And He needs to be in us so that we will demonstrate that same love to others.