INTRO.- Everyone serves someone or something and of course, it should be the Lord.  Not money and not some other person.ILL.- When Irving S. Olds was chairman of the U.S. Steel Corporation (1940-52), he arrived for a stockholders? meeting and was confronted by a woman who asked, "Exactly who are you and what do you do?" Without batting an eye, Olds replied, "I am your chairman.  Of course, you know the duties of a chairman--that?s someone who is roughly the equivalent of parsley on a platter of fish." What is parsley used for on a platter of any food?  Garnish or decoration mainly.  Most people don?t eat the parsley on the plate.  In this sense, parsley is useless.  And it may be that some Chairman or CEOs are exactly that: USELESS!But this message is about you and me.  Are we useless or useful in this world?  And useful to whom?  Obviously, we should desire to be useful to God in this world.  ILL.- Recently, quadraplegic, Joni Eareckson had a devotion about this thought.  She wrote: ?When it comes to the Christian life, the stakes are high.  Things like heaven, hell, and eternal reward.  You and I get only one chance on earth to live a life pleasing to our Master.  No starting over and no reincarnation. We have been given life and breath to prove our faith and demonstrate what we believe.  It?s why I sometimes wake up at night, wondering: Am I doing this thing called "the Christian life" right?  Am I making the most of the moments God gives me??I found a calming, reassuring answer the other day in Mark 14. When the woman poured expensive perfume on Jesus? head, some people at the banquet thought she did a stupid thing.  But Jesus rebuked them harshly and said, "Leave her alone... she did what she could do... and I think it?s beautiful." I identified with the woman.  I feel like I have often done stupid things in my service to the Lord.  Am I doing this right?  Is this pleasing to God?  But like the woman in Mark 14, I did what I could. And that?s all God asks.  We can only do what we are able to do; but inspired by the Spirit, it?s always a beautiful thing in Jesus? sight.?"She did what she could... Mark 14" is written on the tombstone of Fanny Crosby, the blind composer of over 4,000 hymns.  Don?t have anxious thoughts about the high stakes involved in Christian service.  Just ask for the Spirit?s help and do what you are able to do.?  Have you done what you could?  Or could you do more in the realm of Christian service?  I think we all could do more.  I don?t there is a single person who is doing his or her all for Christ on earth.What kinds of things can we do to serve the Lord? Basically, our service is divided into two different parts or two different areas: in the church and outside the church.Inside the church: we can teach a SS class, play a musical instrument, sing a solo, give a testimony, serve communion, give a meditation, read a scripture, preach a sermon, help with physical stuff around the church like replace light bulbs, cut down trees, repair plumbing, vacuum the carpets, sweep the floors, etc.  Can you do any of these things for the Lord?Outside the church:  we can witness for Christ in order to lead someone to Christ and be saved.  We can minister to the poor and needy through giving to the Salvation Army.  We can minister to the neglected and lonely like widows in a nursing home.  James 1:27 ?Religion that God our Father accepts as pure and faultless is this: to look after orphans and widows in their distress and to keep oneself from being polluted by the world.?I found this scripture to be quite convicting.  I don?t know of any orphans that I could look after but I do know of many widows in nursing homes who are distressed or depressed for one reason or another.  WHY WOULD THEY BE DISTRESSED OR DEPREESED?  Because many of them are alone and lonely and they are a captive audience.God put us on earth to be used by Him in service!  We can?t do everything but we can do something and we all need to figure what that something is.I think most of know what we should do or what we can do to be of service to the Lord.  It seems that motivation is what we need.  We need something to kick us into gear to get going.ILL.- It?s like the old farmer who was encouraged to go to Agriculture school.  He replied, "What for?  Already I ain?t farmin as good as I know how."  MOST OF US KNOW HOW.  We just need motivation to get going and do the work.PROP.- Why are we suppose to serve the Lord?  Here is some motivation for us.1- We serve because it?s what Jesus did2- We serve because it demonstrates love3- We serve because it pleases GodI. WE SERVE BECAUSE IT?S WHAT JESUS DIDMatthew 20:26-28 ?Not so with you. Instead, whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant, and whoever wants to be first must be your slave? just as the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.?  If Jesus did it, it must be right.  I Peter 2:21 ?To this you were called, because Christ suffered for you, leaving you an example, that you should follow in his steps.?  We should follow in His steps. Acts 10:38  ?God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Spirit and power, and how he went around doing good and healing all who were under the power of the devil, because God was with him.?ILL.- In Birmingham, Alabama, many years ago, lived a Presbyterian pastor, James Bryan.  Throughout the city he was known as ?Brother Bryan.?  There were many preachers stronger in pulpit oratory, but none preached better sermons than he did with his life.  Like Jesus, he went about doing good. It was a common thing for him to come home on a cold day without his overcoat.  He had given it to some poor man who had none. One spring day he was driving a horse and buggy through the countryside.  He saw a farmer standing dejectedly in the field.  It was time for his spring plowing, but his only horse lay dead. Brother Bryan unhitched his horse and gave it to the man.  Then he walked home. It was fitting that when his biography was written it was called A Sermon in Shoes.  Of all the commentaries on the Scriptures, good examples are still the best.No matter how good any human being is, and there are plenty of good examples for us to follow, the greatest of all is Jesus. We will never go wrong if we follow His example of humble service. He knew how to live better than anybody and it wasn?t a life of luxury.  It was a life of service.Luke 22:27 ?For who is greater, the one who is at the table or the one who serves? Is it not the one who is at the table? But I am among you as one who serves.?We should be involved in serving others in some form because we are commanded to do it and because Jesus did it.II. WE SERVE BECAUSE IT DEMONSTRATES LOVEGalatians 5:13-14 ?You, my brothers, were called to be free. But do not use your freedom to indulge the sinful nature; rather, serve one another in love.  The entire law is summed up in a single command: ?Love your neighbor as yourself.?  What are the two great commandments that Jesus gave?  To love the Lord God with all your heart, soul and mind and to love your neighbor as yourself.  We are suppose to love God and love mankind.  And we love people by being a servant.ILL.- Someone wrote: - A lot of people are like a wheel barrow?not good unless pushed.- Some are like canoes?they have to be paddled.- Some are like kites?If you don?t keep them on a string they fly away.- Some are like footballs?you can?t tell which way they?ll bounce next.- Some are like balloons?full of wind and ready to blow up.- Some are like trailers?they have to be pulled.- Some are like a good watch?open face, pure gold, quietly busy and full of good works.What type of person are you?  Are you quick to work, serve and wait on others?  Or do you have to be pushed and prodded?  Or do you prefer for others to wait on you?All Christians should serve one another in love!  That?s what love does.  Love serves others.  Love doesn?t sit around, waiting to be served or waiting for others to do the job.  THEY JUST DO IT!ILL.- Every Sunday morning I make the bed in our house and that?s because that?s the only morning I?m home.  I generally get up early every morning and leave the house while Elaine is still in bed.  But something happened on Thanksgiving morning.  I came home by 9 a.m. and the bed hadn?t been made yet and I didn?t make it.  Elaine said, ?There will be new rules around this house.  On Sundays and holidays you make the bed.?  A true servant is quick to demonstrate love by making the bed.  Or by cleaning up spills, carrying out the trash, sweeping, etc.ILL.- Not long ago I sent out several pictures that I took at the Craighead nursing home.  Two of those pictures were of Jack and Mary Robinett.  Mary is a resident at Craighead. She has alzheimer?s and doesn?t even know her 85 year old husband, Jack.  WHY?  I asked Jack one day, ?Why do you do this??  I already knew but I wanted to see what he would say.  He said, ?Because I love her!?Love serves others, and not just your own mate or even your own family members.  We serve others because our hearts have been touched by the love of God and we want to serve in love.ILL.- Lorene Fancher was a member of the church where I preached for about 11 years.  Lorene had a dry good, clothing store in town until she closed it.  A young wife and mother who worked there contracted cancer.  They did surgery but she needed chemotherapy treatments at the University of MO in Columbia.  Guess who took her for those treatments which was about 80 to 85 miles one way?  Lorene Fancher did.  Was Lorene related to her?  No, only in Christ.  Lorene had a heart of love and a willingness to serve in love and that?s why she did it.Romans 12:9-10 ?Love must be sincere. Hate what is evil; cling to what is good. Be devoted to one another in brotherly love. Honor one another above yourselves.?Romans 13:8 ?Let no debt remain outstanding, except the continuing debt to love one another, for he who loves his fellowman has fulfilled the law.?1 Corinthians 13:13 ?And now these three remain: faith, hope and love. But the greatest of these is love.?Ephesians 5:2 ?Live a life of love, just as Christ loved us and gave himself up for us as a fragrant offering and sacrifice to God.?III. WE SERVE BECAUSE IT PLEASES GODRomans 14:17-18 ?For the kingdom of God is not a matter of eating and drinking, but of righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit, because anyone who serves Christ in this way is pleasing to God and approved by men.?  Anyone who serves Christ in righteousness, joy and peace is pleasing to God!  Anyone who serves others is pleasing to God and righteousness, joy and peace make it even better!ILL.- When I started sacking groceries for the Foodtown grocery store in Webb City, MO, in 1960 I got 50 cents an hour.  I was tickled to death!  I never had a job before, other than some odds and ends stuff like scooping dad?s cattle trailer.  In time, I became a stock clerk at that grocery store and made even more money per house.  Probably not much more, however,In 1969 I left the grocery business to go preach at a small church in Bayard, IA.  I was working for Safeway at that time and as I recall, I was making something like $2.72 an hour.  I think my take-home pay was $75 or $80 a week.  I felt proud to make that money and consequently, I worked hard to please my boss.When you?re getting paid a good wage, you strive to please your boss.  Isn?t this the right thing to do?  Of course, some bosses are better than others which makes it easier to please.WHO IS YOUR BOSS?  And how much are you getting paid?Romans 6:23 ?For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.?2 Corinthians 9:15 ?Thanks be to God for his indescribable gift!?Ephesians 2:8-9 ?For it is by grace you have been saved, through faith?and this not from yourselves, it is the gift of God?  not by works, so that no one can boast.?James 1:17 ?Every good and perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of the heavenly lights, who does not change like shifting shadows.?1 Peter 4:10 ?Each one should use whatever gift he has received to serve others, faithfully administering God?s grace in its various forms.?We?re all gifted by God!  And the greatest gift of all, of course, is the promise of eternal life through the Lord Jesus!  I would say this is pretty good pay for no more than we do and since we are going to paid very well, we need to seek to please Him who gives to us!  And one very good way to please Him is by being a servant to others!  And please remember:  We don?t serve in order to be saved or get saved in heaven.  We serve because we ARE saved and headed to heaven.  We just want to please Him who gives to us!CONCLUSION-----------------ILL.- Nicolo Paganini (1782-1840) the great Italian violinist, willed his fine instrument to his home city of Genoa.  His bequest carried one condition.  The violin was never to be played; it would simply be placed on display.  But that?s not good for a finely crafted stringed instrument.  It needs to be used and handled regularly if its beauty and value are to be retained.  As a result of Paganini?s request, his marvelous violin has become nothing more than a decaying form.  It has wasted away as a museum piece.What about us?  Are we just wasting away, not being used by God in some form?  May it never be!  I Corinthians 6:19-20 ?Do you not know that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit, who is in you, whom you have received from God? You are not your own;  you were bought at a price. Therefore honor God with your body.?Since we?ve been bought and paid for, we owe it to God to honor with our lives in Christian service.Steve Shepherd, Jonesboro Christian Church, ARjonesborochristianchurch@suddenlink.net