Justice and Spirituality 
January 6, 2013 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini
  
Gathering, Welcoming, Centering, Kindling, Opening:
 We are here, 

in the winter of the New Year 

to consider our lives carefully, honestly, 

and to learn to look past the surface of life 

to the deeper places where our sense of justice 

and our spiritual lives breathe together as one. 
 
(so) 
Grounded in gratitude for the cosmos that is our ho
me, claiming 
deepening wisdom as our authority, and daring to en
gage joy, burden, loss 
and insight in a deliberate community of many ways 
and ages, the flame 
summons us to 
awaken
: to listen with our whole lives, to open, to serve
. 
 
Singing:      1010  O We Give Thanks. 

 
Ingathering:
  
Two Kinds of Justice, a story from 
            Greek Mythology 

 
Once there was a Greek wise man, a philosopher, who
 was walking down the road. In the 
distance he saw two women. But as they got closer, 
he noticed they were twice as tall as he was, 
and wearing elegant garments. "They must be goddess
es!" he said to himself. He was frightened, 
and so he leapt behind some bushes and hid.  

 
He saw a young fellow, however, quite fearlessly ru
n up to the huge goddesses as they were 
walking along and talk with them. Following him was
 his somewhat younger brother, who 
seemed to be laughing. The wise man listened from h
is hiding spot.  
 
"My brother just hit me, and now I have a bloody ea
r. You are the goddesses of Justice, I believe, 
and so I want Justice from you."   

 
"Ah," said one of the two goddesses. "Do you want m
y Justice, or my sister's Justice?"  
 
"What's the difference?" asked the boy? 

"Well, I," the first goddess said, "will ask your b
rother what was the cause of his action, and I 
will listen to his explanation. Then I will oblige 
him to protect your other ear with his life, and to
 
make you a beautiful helmet to cover your scar. He'
ll even serve as your ear when you need it." 
"I, for my part," said the other goddess, "will not
 let him go unpunished for his action. I will let 
you hit his ear just as hard as he hit you. Well, w
hat is your decision? Who do you want to apply 
justice for the offence?" 

The young man looked at the two goddesses. He felt 
pain in his ear, and saw his brother 
laughing. And so he addressed the second goddess fi
rmly: 
"I'd rather it was you who helps me. I love him, bu
t it would be unfair if my brother doesn't 
receive his punishment." 

And so, from his hiding place in the bushes, the ph
ilosopher saw the culprit get his 
comeuppance, and watched the older brother hit his 
younger brother in the ear to make sure his 
wound was just as bad as his.  The brother cried ou
t and covered his ear.  After a while the two 
brothers walked slowly away, not speaking to each o
ther.  
A while passed and the young men had left, both fee
ling pain in their ear, and the philosopher 
was still in hiding, when something surprising happ
ened. In front of his eyes, the second of the 
goddesses suddenly glowed, taking her true form. Sh
e wasn't a goddess at all, but the powerful 
Aries Nemesis, the god of war. Aries bid goodbye to
 his companion, with a mischievous smile: 
"I've done it again, dear Themis. Your friends, the
se human beings, can barely distinguish 
between your compassion and my revenge. Ha! But now
 I have to go. I hear a new war between 
brother nations is approaching ... ha, ha, ha, ha. 
I have to help both sides." 
When Aries had left and the wise man was trying to 
quietly sneak away, the goddess saw him 
and said:  "Tell me, good man, would you have known
 how to choose correctly? Did you know 
how to distinguish between the past and the future?
" 
And so they talked. And that's how, from the very h
and of the goddess of justice, the philosopher 
learned that true justice lies in improving the fut
ure, moving it away from past wrongs, while 
false justice and vengeance are incapable of forgiv
ing and forgetting past wrongs, and, in doing 
so, control the future, which ends up being just as
 bad as the past. 
Greeting:
     announcements 
 
Affirming:   
Spirituality does not mean finding some other realm
, but illumination in this 
one. Not to  believe in something else, but to see 
more clearly (and more brightly) what 
we have, and who we are. Sometimes we can join with
 what is only by resisting it. At such 
times we can transcend the falseness of our social 
world by performing acts of solidarity 
and resistance, transforming the spiritual meaning 
of our world.
                   
Roger S. Gottlieb 1999  
 
Singing:   1018 Come and Go With Me v. 1 + 3 

 
Communing: The Sequence and Naming 

 
In St. Petersburg Russia right now it™s 19 degrees 
F. and overcast. The priest at St. Elizabeth's 
Russian Orthodox Autonomous Church is setting up fo
r tonight's late Christmas Eve service. 
One of his neighbors chatted with him yesterday, an
d the priest was amused by what he said. "I 
am an atheist, like my parents before me, but I alm
ost want to believe in something when I see 
the beauty of the architecture of your church. The 
turret is so beautiful!" 

 
It™s sunny and 40 degrees F. right now in Baku, Aze
rbaijan, on the windy west coast of the 
Caspian Sea. Marco Antonio Lopez is visiting Housto
n's sister city with a delegation of 15 
others, including the Mayor. He is impressed with t
he dazzling Metro stations and the new Flame 
Towers which give Baku a far more futuristic skylin
e than Houston. He is 
very
 surprised by the 
sheer size of the Baku Jazz Center. Who would have 
guessed that jazz was such an important 
style of music in a 2000-year-old city? 

 
It's only 37 degrees F in Shanghai right now, and i
t™s just after midnight. Jiang Mai wraps a scarf 
around her head and neck and rushes through the win
ter wind blowing down from Siberia. She is 
on her way to meet a friend from her University of 
Seattle years who has just come in from 
Jerusalem to visit her grandfather who lives in the
 Jewish quarter, just down from the Ohel 
Moshe synagogue. He was born and raised here in Sha
nghai after his father fled from Germany 
in the days just before Kristalnacht.   

 
It's almost 36 degrees F in Columbus OH, where the 
congregation that meets at First Unitarian 
Universalist Church has gathered. Citizens of the w
orld, they are, citizens of history, but living 
on local streets in the present era, they enter now
 into a silence, a silence known from time to 
time by all other living creatures on the earth. A 
bell sound leads them into it. 
 
bellsound 

 
It™s a wide world, and we are only a small part of 
it.  Yet our lives are as important to us as those 
who live in St. Petersburg, in Baku, in Shanghai. T
hus we set aside some time to remember the 
important people in our own lives, those we love, f
ind more difficult to love, those we miss 
terribly, those for whom we mourn. We name them in 
our hearts, or softly aloud. 
 
naming 

 
It™s a wide world...people of many traditions, many
 religious and spiritual orientations, people 
who push away such traditions and faiths, people wh
o are caught in the middle, people who just 
don't know, and for whom such things are not import
ant. Yet from each population, those who 
say yes, and those who say no and those who say may
be... music rises up, formed by passion and 
culture. 

 
Reading:  
The First Reading is an excerpt from Obery Hendrick
s' masterful book, the Politics of 
Jesus. He is an ordained elder in the African Metho
dist Episcopal Church (AME) and teaches at 
New York Theological Seminary. 

 
Giving voice to the voiceless does not have to be d
ramatic. It might involve as little as publicly 
asking a challenging question, or making an outrage
d remark.  In 1950, Senator Joseph 
McCarthy of Wisconsin began a Senate inquiry into t
he presence of Communist Party members 
in the U.S. government.  In short order, McCarthy's
 investigation degenerated into a mean-
spirited witch-hunt that ruined the reputations, ca
reers, and lives of numerous American citizens. 
Many ordinary citizens were horrified by the ugline
ss of McCarthy's attacks but were afraid to 
challenge his campaign for fear of bringing his gaz
e upon themselves. 

 
On June 9, 1954, a blow was struck that signaled th
e beginning of the end of McCarthy's 
crusade. McCarthy had turned his ire on Frederick F
isher, a young lawyer at the firm of Joseph 
N. Welch, the Army counsel. McCarthy characterized 
Fisher as a Communist, even though he 
was a secretary of the Young Republicans League. 

 
Like many Americans, Welch had watched with disgust
 as McCarthy destroyed careers. But now 
he'd had enough. Rising to his feet in the Senate c
hamber, he addressed McCarthy in a voice 
filled with outrage and sorrow: "Until this moment,
 Senator, I think I never really gauged your 
cruelty or your recklessness. You've done enough. H
ave you no sense of decency, sir? At long 
last, have you left no sense of decency?" 

 
With this impassioned question, Welch gave voice to
 the outrage of countless Americans. That 
was all it took to discredit a powerful member of t
he United States Senate. Welch broke the 
silence surrounding Senator McCarthy's witch-hunts.
 In the aftermath of that hearing, 
McCarthy's popularity and power declined. The Senat
e censured him in December of 1954 for 
"behavior contrary to Senatorial traditions." Yet A
merica's eventual freedom from the shadow of 
McCarthyism began the moment Welch gave voice to th
e thoughts and feelings of those 
rendered voiceless by intimidation. 

 
The Second Reading
 this morning is from Grace Jantzen's essay, Disrupt
ing the Sacred. Before 
her death in 2006, she was a professor at Mancheste
r University in the UK, and a feminist 
theologian. 

 
In the early 14th century, Paris, under the jurisdi
ction of Philip the Fair, was one of the foremost 
cities in Western Europe. In the center of that cit
y, on June 1, 1310, Marguerite Porete was 
burned alive at the stake as a heretic. She was jud
ged to be a 
pseudo-mulier
, literally a "pseudo-
woman," as well as rebellious. 

 
Marguerite was a Beguine. Beguines were women who l
ived in clusters joining together for 
worship, mutual support, and to help those who were
 the homeless, poor, ill and the outcasts of 
society. They did not live in convents, or take vow
s.  Beguines were a multilayered threat to the 
powerful in society, especially to the ecclesiastic
al authorities. They were strong, independent 
women who were under the authority of neither husba
nd or priest, but rather banded together for 
mutual help. They developed writings and liturgies,
 subsequently suppressed, in which they 
spoke of God as Lady Love. 

 
She was burned as a heretic, but also as a "fake wo
man," who was not respectful and subservient 
as a "real woman" should be. She was an uppity woma
n for whom the personal Œ which was the 
religious Œ 
was
 the political, a woman who disrupted masculine sym
bols with the strategies of 
her imagination. 

 
The way of life of Beguines, and in particular Marg
uerite Porete, was a refusal of the religion 
modeled on the court and ecclesiastical stooges of 
Philip the Fair in favor of a religion they saw 
as patterned after the poor man of Galilee. Of cour
se Philip could win: he could enclose them, 
silence them, burn their books and even burn them. 
Yet Marguerite's book, the 
Mirror of Pour 

Souls
, persisted, recognized as a work of great insight.
  
Preaching:  
  It was the year 1986. A woman named Drusilla Cumm
ins, who chaired the UUA 
Nominating Committee, called me up, at home, and as
ked me if I was willing to serve as chair of 
the Hymnbook Commission (the very one which eventua
lly produced our gray book).  I refused 
when she first called. She called again. And I refu
sed again, and gave her my objections. Finally 
she called back, with answers to all my objections,
 and I accepted with only a few clear 
reservations. It was much later that I learned that
 no one was EVER able to say "no" once and for 
all to Drusilla Cummins, and that she always got he
r "yes." 
 
The six years I sat on the committee were some of t
he best years of my life. The work was so, so 
rich.  The music, the poetry, the people!  

 
But the work also 
taught
 me a lot. It taught me the arts of compromise. It 
taught me the power of 
cooperation, of people working together. And, it ta
ught me that everything my writing teachers 
over the years had taught me was entirely true.  

 
What had they taught me? 

 
Well, they taught me that while it is certainly ok,
 now and then, to use abstract words Œ love, 
peace, truth, joy and justice Œ it was always prefe
rable to 
describe 
those abstract concepts with 
illustrations, stories and vivid imagery. Instead o
f writing "tree," for example, they would say, 
write "poplar" or "maple" or "locust."  Instead of 
writing "She was a loving grandmother" write 
"My grandmother always used to meet me at the door 
with a hug and kiss on my cheek, and 
immediately set out a bowl of concord grapes and so
me tea as she asked, "So, tell me about 
school. What are you learning this week that really
 engages your mind?"  
 
Unfortunately, the hymnbook commission received man
y submissions of both song lyrics and 
worship readings which were 
totally
 abstract, and void of 
any 
imagery Œ just banal lists of 
pleasant abstractions, something like "We are a lov
ing community of justice and peace and joy." 
The words may feel cozy, but they don't tell much o
f the story. And in the first place, I'm not so 
sure that 
feeling cozy
 is as spiritually grounded as 
doing good
.  
 
So, sadly, we were not able to use 99% of them. And
 I am not just talking about us either. 
Because one day, by a strange good fortune, I was a
t a party with some Mennonite friends where 
I met Rebecca, the woman who happened to be chairin
g the Mennonite Hymnbook Commission. 
She and I shared a rare title. And the Mennonite ti
metable was close to ours. When we 
discovered each other, we were excited. She and I i
mmediately left the party, going off by 
ourselves to talk about our rare and privileged wor
k of chairing hymnbook commissions. And 
whoa! was it ever a redemptive conversation for bot
h of us! After all, she started off with, "Can 
you believe how no one is using imagery any more? A
ll we are getting are big lists of 
abstractions...you know, truth, love, peace and jus
tice." She and I were having the exact same 
experience, even though our theologies were distinc
t.  
 
Don't get me wrong. I still use words like truth an
d love and justice deliberately sometimes. I am 
using them today in the devotional sections of the 
service. I personally revere the ancient biblical 

Hebrew insight that it™s best not to name the Ideal
, the Ultimate, the Most Holy, if you will, but 
to consciously avoid doing so by substituting other
, more abstract words. And for 35 years, I 
have addressed my public devotions, when I use dire
ct address at all, to Love, or Truth. This is a 
practice I picked up from many poets, ranging from 
Wendell Berry to May Sarton. I do this 
because I want to leave room for the full diversity
 of religious and spiritual languages in this 
room, and abstractions are spacious enough to invit
e in most everyone.  But I do use them only 
sparingly. 

 
Which is why I offered you so many stories and imag
es this morning, images which deal with 
both justice and spirituality. And how they are ent
irely intertwined for most religious liberals I 
know.  After over 33 years of ordained ministry, an
d a thousand conversations and readings 
about spirituality, I've come to see that the word 
spirituality Œ however defined Œ always seems 
to refer to the aspects of our lives that surface w
hen we realize we really can't control much. I 
cannot control time and make myself immortal. I can
not make anyone love me. I cannot take 
control over the unfairness of the social order by 
waving a magic wand, or saying the right 
prayer. I cannot whisk illness away, yours or mine,
 or stop a flood or snowstorm or hurricane by 
snapping my fingers. I could not, as a child, stop 
adults from hurting me, nor as an adult, can I 
control any gossip about me, or multiply loaves and
 fishes to feed every homeless person selling 
the 
Street Speech
 newspaper on Columbus streets, or bring an end to 
a distant war that makes me 
sick to my stomach, by shaking my fist in its direc
tion. 
 
Nor can any of you.  

 
And so my life Œ indeed, most of our lives Œ are fi
lled with what I call spiritual practices, 
whether we use that phrase or not. Spiritual practi
ces are the often rhythmic actions we take to 
help us to deal with our very real lack of control.
  
Some spiritual practices are positive ways of deali
ng with our lack of control, others seem 
negative to me.  

 
Positively, we may meditate to gain balance, or wri
te letters to the editor every week critical of a 
social policy, or write or recite poetry that expre
sses outrage. We may sing in choir, paint 
paintings, or religiously watch football games on T
V every Sunday afternoon in the winter. We 
might engage in Wiccan rituals, faithfully attend a
 12 step program, taste communion bread, or 
bring home-cooked soup to the sick. We may join a c
ommunity that supports us through loss and 
grief, like this one, a community that works to sup
port those outside our circle as well.  We may 
make quilts or collages in small groups, sit in sil
ence here on Sunday, or Tuesday at a zendo, or 
Friday night at a synagogue. We can even just take 
a weekly walk mindfully down a forest path 
with silent friends. 

 
Some spiritual practices, however, seem like negati
ve exercises for dealing with our lack of 
control. These include compulsive gossip, or specul
ating about other people's lives, without any 
real data, hurting ourselves physically in a way we
 can control, like Thomas More wearing a 
hair-shirt under this clothes through most of his l
ife, passing strict rules that exclude whole 
categories of people, using intimidation (which was
 Senator McCarthy's daily practice). Or, we 
can insist that everything has to be done the way i
t used to be (whatever that means), or that the 

only subject for preaching is right doctrine and ve
ngeful judgment, instead of personal and free 
expression.   

 
Now I realize that these latter negative things are
 often associated with the abstract word 
religion,
 which is why some people, I suppose, assert they a
re "spiritual and 
not 
religious." But I 
have already let you know of my cautions concerning
 "abstract words," and religion, I'm afraid, 
is no different than words like peace, love, joy or
 justice. It doesn't convey any real information, 
since it completely embraces both a conservative Ru
ssian Orthodox bishop and a radical, leftist 
Quaker Lesbian. The word 
religion
 often serves as a projection screen on which peopl
e can find 
whatever supports their pre-formed conclusions. And
 that's why it™s not going to figure much in 
this sermon. 

 
A good example of what I am talking about is the st
ory of Marguerite Porete. She technically 
shared the same religion as Philip the Fair, yet Ph
ilip the Fair worked very, very hard indeed to 
burn her at the stake, after imprisoning her for tw
o years first, in a dungeon. 
 
Why? She was just a Beguine who helped lift up the 
downtrodden, feed the poor, all within the 
circle of a freely-entered community. She was, howe
ver, clear and forthright in her freedom of 
expression, in her acceptance of her own right to h
ave opinions about things contrary to the 
Prince. That was a challenge to Philip the Fair's n
eurotic need to control everything, including 
people's inner lives. So, as Grace Jantzen puts it 
in our second reading this morning: 
She was burned as a heretic, but also as a pseudo m
ulier, a "fake woman," who was not 
respectful and subservient as a "real woman" should
 be. She was an uppity woman for whom the 
personal Œ which was the religious Œ 
was
 the political... 
 
Jantzen points out that there was actually nothing 
in her book overtly heretical at all. She simply 
honored each person's own experience of the holy, n
o matter how personal and idiosyncratic it 
was. And she saw such personal experience of the ho
ly as being exactly the 
same thing
 as the 
political, that is, a potential agent of justice fo
r all people. Both Marguerite and Philip shared the
 
same religious culture, but not the same spiritual 
practice.  
 
Now
 justice
 is a word almost as tough to define as the word 
spirituality.
 The children's story 
makes that clear, I think. For some, justice is cle
arly an eye for an eye, balanced suffering. You 
punch my ear, I punch yours back just as hard. Veng
eance.  
 
For others, justice means fair and humane treatment
 for everyone, including the perpetrators of 
clear injustice Œ like real hurts and real wounds. 

 
The story of Mr. Welch, which Rev. Obery Hendricks 
tells, also reflects on the complexity of 
justice. For Senator McCarthy, justice was a form o
f objective purity. Anyone who had even 
heard of Karl Marx was simply not fit to be an Amer
ican.  Had he known that my grandfather 
Umberto had been a member of the Communist Party wh
en he was younger, as he indeed was, 
McCarthy would have destroyed his life. That, even 
though my grandfather had given up all 
party politics by that time, and simply knelt in hi
s garden grafting branches and picking weeds. 
Fortunately, my grandfather was not an important en
ough man to persecute. McCarthy used 
words and innuendos to destroy and intimidate peopl
e, especially important people. He wanted 

absolute control over his purist form of the Americ
an dream, and worked tirelessly to capture 
control of the whole works. He was supported by man
y people too. Until Mr. Welch simply 
named what he was really doing. Obery Hendricks quo
tes Welch's naming, and then interprets 
what effect the naming had: 
"Until this moment, Senator, I think I never really
 gauged your 
cruelty or your recklessness. You've done enough. H
ave you no sense of decency, sir? At long 
last, have you left no sense of decency??  
With this impassioned question, Welch gave voice to
 
the outrage of countless (rather silent and intimid
ated) Americans." 
 
Did McCarthy then just shrivel up? No. Positive jus
tice work is not very different from a positive 
spiritual life. Both move slowly. Both take their t
ime. No miracles, no magic. And both most 
often involve communities:  for example, Welch's qu
estions echoed outward to millions of 
Americans, validly expressing their 
communal
 disgust. In like manner, the medieval Beguines, 
including women like Marguerite Porete, worked 
in community
 to serve countless poor citizens 
of Europe, giving voice to their need by actually r
esponding to it, in public, not private. Philip 
the Fair, however, was not interested in community,
 but only in control. He lived in his palace 
without community, just stooges, Jantzen calls them
. People he could use as puppets. Attorney 
Welch's questions were publicly made and televised 
across the whole US community. And 
because they withdrew their support of him, little 
by little, the control grabbed by McCarthy 
ebbed away until he was censured, something that I 
assure you has happened only a handful of 
times in the entire history of the USA. McCarthy di
ed not many years later, sadly due to his life-
long alcoholism. 

Over the years I have heard folks who have visited 
our congregations tell me they are somewhat 
baffled by the fact that we don't have weekly scrip
ture readings, required prayers, or a shared 
theological agreement. They note that we often brin
g up issues about fairness, equality and 
justice in our celebrations.  But then, understanda
bly, they ask if that means we have no spiritual 
or religious life, and are just a secular political
 club of some sort. I always answer, no, issues of 
spirituality and justice are not distinct for us. T
hey are not two separate circles that refuse to 
overlap. They overlap a great deal. As I said, ther
e 
is 
much we can't control in this life.  But in 
community, we support each other and the larger com
munity of which we are a part, to alleviate 
as much suffering as we can Œ by combining our effo
rts and vision. And allowing ourselves to be 
transformed and grow in the process. If we break br
ead with each other, or bring food to 
someone who just suffered the pain of a hip replace
ment, or a deep and shocking grief, or stand 
with farm workers who are mistreated, or provide se
rvices to those who suffer the ravages of 
poverty or exclusion, its all pretty much the same.
 They are all positive spiritual and justice 
practices. And these practices are not an abstracti
on, but the true story, illustration or image of 
who we are. All of these actions, to quote the godd
ess Themis in the story this morning, are 
trying to improve the future, moving it away from p
ast wrongs and vengeance, so the future is 
free, not nailed down rigid, hammered brutally by t
he sharp spikes forged from past hurts. 
I pray that our lives might be more like the rich w
riting we ended up putting into the hymnbook,  
May we ourselves serve as images, illustrations, or
 stories that bring to life and light the 
abstractions 
love, truth and justice.   
Offering: 

 
Returning
:  A Living Prayer 
 
O Truth, I can only journey toward You, I can never
 embrace You once and for all. Yet I relish 
the glimpses I catch of You while I'm on the way. I
 note, for example, that I am breathing-in the 
same earthly atmosphere that people in Sumatra, peo
ple in Yemen, people in Ecuador, people in 
Somalia, people in Finland, people in Taiwan, and h
undreds of other nations are breathing-in. 
Right now. That reveals something of You to me. A f
ine sermon about justice itself, if you ask 
me. Like the very air, justice and the spirit are n
ot just for a few. 
 
I have given it some thought over my years, and I a
m convinced that everyone is mortal. Haven't 
found an exception yet. And that reveals something 
of You to me, namely, that we are all here on 
the same level playing field. Again, a little homil
y I can't resist: justice cannot apply only to the 
fortunate few, or be fenced off by privilege. 

   

I hurt when I see others humiliated or beaten down 
or pushed into poverty by unquestioned laws, 
isms, practices and cheap blame. I don't find any m
eaning or redemption in such hurt. And that 
reveals something of You, o Truth, to me, as well. 
Justice is not a gift from above, but a process 
we can live out. 

 
And thus, I know what I need to do. I want my life 
to be a prayer. I want my voice to be a voice 
for the voiceless. I want my eyes to focus in on a 
vision of equity for the future. I want my 
strength of spirit, body and mind to serve to empow
er, not disempower, people in days to come. 
 
O Truth, let my living be my prayer, and let my act
s born of whatever loving kindness I can 
muster, be my true Amen. 

 
Singing  86 Blessed Spirit of My Life 

 
Blessing 

 
 
 
