
  Once during this time, I was handcuffed to a bench in a police station, with
  my picture posted over me, and an article detailing my legal battle with
  the police department. Each officer who passed by was told not to forget
  who I was. Apparently they didn't, because during the next few years I was
  continually harassed-and arrested about sixty times.

  You ask me about forgiveness? Do I need to forgive the deputies who beat
  me, who made me believe-in the middle of the night-that they were driving
  me to my final destination? Do I need to forgive the officers who falsely
  arrested me and relentlessly pursued me, the district attorney who filed
  charges against me, the prosecutors who tried to put me away? Do I need to
  forgive the politicians who wouldn't touch me with a ten-foot pole when I
  pleaded with them for help, or the reporters who painted me as a criminal?
  And what about my own lawyer, who abandoned my case two days before trial?

  I realize that we cannot be fully human if we have hatred within us-if we
  are consumed by anger or harbor resentment. These emotions define our lives.
  Especially for someone who has been brutalized and dehumanized, getting rid
  of these debilitating emotions is fundamental to healing. But doing that
  also means searching for something else to fill the void: searching for what
  it actually means to be human.

  I began that search in 1998, on my birthday, when I sang for the first time
  in almost thirty years. A few months later, I started to paint, and then
  to write fiction. I had finally begun to regain my humanity.

  Though thousands of minorities suffer similar mistreatment, most are not
  so fortunate as Roberto. Most never see justice served. Should they too expect
  to forgive their oppressors? Roberto thinks they must, and not only for their
  own sake.

  Because these abuses continue year after year, there is a feeling of bitterness
  on America's streets, especially among those who have been brutalized and
  falsely imprisoned. Some are zombies. Some are walking time bombs, filled
  with hate and ready to explode. And they do explode. Look at what happened
  in Los Angeles after the Rodney King verdict. Tragically, such outrage usually
  hurts the very people it is supposed to avenge?family, friends and
  neighbors.

  All this is not personal tragedy, but a societal one. It is like an
  out-of-control disease. But those who have been dehumanized need to forgive,
  to heal on their own, without waiting for apologies.
  
