Shri Meher Baba and Healing 

BY COUNTESS NADINE TOLSTOY 

"Death is better for him that lives for himself; that man lives, who lives for others." "I am the Lord and the servant of men." 

Since I have met Shri Meher Baba, all my existence with all life 's common and uncommon interests and activities, joys and sorrows, has received a new perspective and significance. It became a fascinating fact in view of one sure end to achieve. 

The contact with the God-realized man became the source of all good and of a new pure and true vision of life. Standing as a perfect example to fol≠low, Shri Meher Baba guides men with supreme authority and knowledge. He does not make them follow patented courses, artificial and often dangerous practices; He does not promise easy ways for great outcomes. He awakens within men the immanent resources that gradually and naturally unfold in the disciple or devotee into a true stature of full Being. The grace of His love is a profound and pure experience which 

Shri Meher Baba 

convinces without words and sets the awakened soul on the Path. From duality and bondage of attachments, from 'many-ness ' and its illusion, the Master lifts men to Oneness and true Reality, which He Himself unceasingly enjoys. To make men free, He comes down to meet them on their level. His spiritual genius per-forms His life work as the Infinite One in all life's aspects; in His own subtle way He links all life experiences with their deeper spiritual connections and outcome, thus through ever growing purer expansion He helps the growth of new consciousness of the perfected man. 

In this ashram, the Meher Retreat of "Meherabad, " we witness a microcosm in full function, individually and collectively. Here we see all expres≠sions of human nature, all needs and inclinations, all 



varieties of works done. On the top of the hill, overlooking the wide horizon, in the centre of a vast circle of space, stands the new building, interesting in its symbolic simplicity of balance and unityóthe Meher Retreat. The high white tower in the centre bears the insignia of all spiritualityó "Mastery in Servitude". Being situated on a hill it gives a wonderful feeling of floating in vastness of pure sky and space; only the etherial line of distant mountains on the horizon gently breaks the fascinating monotony of landscape. Right beyond the wall, our Ashram has recently expanded into a few additional buildings to suit the extended activities planned by Shri Meher Baba for the group. In this simple unpretencious building is the Free Hospital for the poor, women and children; right next is the office of the new . 

    Baba has said: "There are thousands of hospitals in the world, I could have here thousands of nurses to work. If I have given this work in the hospital to you, it is because I want you to learn serving in real spirit, selfless service. "

 To the hospital, came mostly the poorest elements of the country wrap≠ped in their rags and wornout saris, emaciated and panting, they dragged up the hill. Others were called for in cars or were brought on a stretcher to the door of the hospital. Mostly unwashed and heads uncared for, which one could well see and smell, help-less in their ailments, they are the real destitute. Often they brought their children along, having no one to care for them at home. Patient and enduring, humble and childlike, one could not help loving them. These people we had to wash immediately, change into new clothes, put to bed and made them feel at home. 

I will always be grateful for the opportunity in contacting these simple people. Faith and devotion to our Beloved Baba always beautifully shines in their expressive eyes! When Baba used to come to the hospital, giving an embrace to one, a loving pat to another, touching with His healing hand the ailing body, how quick and sincere was the spontaneous response of the heart. Sick, they dragged their paining limbs to Baba's 



feet, with surrender, paying him the holy Darshana. When the medicines and injections given by the professional doctor could not bring its due relief, Baba's appearance and loving embrace acted as the `holy wine', reviving their hopes and giving them the lasting impetus of recovery. The joy of seeing Baba and the faith that He alone can really help, acted within their hearts as a sure remedy. This injection of new life and love, of real awakening within them was that miracle, that unseen cure which spared life and despair of many. In death, when it had to be so, as well as in birth, it is again Baba who was the consolation of the forsaken and the joy of the mother in relief of the new born. It is Baba who was always the source of their strength in supreme effort of life and hope. 

    The hospital presents a natural med≠ium of spiritual learningóserving the sick and suffering, one spontaneously is led to self-forgetfulness; the response to Baba's guidance becomes natural and easier. Yet, even the portion of unres-Ponse brings to greater evidence the failings of the ego, thus showing the results of the test. 

Baba's frequent visits to the hospital have been to all a source of great inspiration, of renewed inner efforts to be in order to do well. To be is to act quietly; to be is the impersonal aloof≠ness and detachment from results of action; to be is less self-consciousness in our outer and inner efforts equally ready to act in spontaneous response to the moment 's need. To be, that is what we are, and how in the spiritual pure sense, we do. It is this that counts as a spiritual act. 

The act of pure love freely given, disinterested in motive and result is a pure act; it obliges none and bears no mark of self-satisfaction. The Master 's guidance brings it out in the devotees as an in-ward urge, of its pure volition, constantly purified through His Infinite Being. 

    As Shri Meher Baba says: "Do not think that in serving others you put them under obligation to you; be happy that they have given you the oppor≠tunity to serve. " 