 1 2006-04-16
 Easter 
Mark Belletini 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

to celebrate life together 

in the splendid spring of the year. 

 
How fly the years! Another Easter is upon us! 

Once again the glad music of life! 

Once again the flowers and festivity! 

Once again the summons to be who we are! 

 
Mindful of the responsibility our freedom presses i
nto us, blest by the beauty of the world, 
and drawn by a vision of a community known for its 
honesty, generosity, depth, love, and 
justice-work, we focus our time together by the kin
dling of light. 
 
Exultet: 

 
Seed. Hard and round, like an eye. 

Root. Soft, pale, like a hair. 

Shoot. Sharp, elegant, like a finger. 

Stem. Proud, strong, like a muscle. 

Bud. Folded, rounded, like a fist. 

Blossom. Radiant, delightful, like a laugh. 

 
 
Exultate! Iubilate! Levate omnes in hoc dies. 

Exult and rejoice! Rise up all on this day. 

 
silence for a time 

 
Memory. Like a deep lake in which we float. 

Hope. Like wings that lift us in a dream. 

Sisters and brothers. Everyone. 

On this great day, we lift up the names  

of those who have gone before us who 

paved the road that led us to this moment. 

Making in our mouths the sound that is their name, 
or beating out, with the rhythm of our silent 
hearts, their presence within us, 

we bring them into this, our celebration of life. 

 
naming 

 
9 AM   

 
From seed to flower runs the course 

 2 of the earth. From tight bud to open and wild rose 
runs the hope of the world. Holy, holy, holy is 
blossoming of 

flowers and human hearts, 

sanctus, sanctus, sanctusñ
 is the rose that is opening onto the golden world. 

Hosanna, alleluia and amen. 

 
 
The First Reading
 is from the North American theologian Paul Van Bure
n. He wrote these 
words a long time ago, which is again to remind you
 that the things which the Jesus Seminar and 
others have been saying recently are only the newer
 and more substantiated forms of what was 
said decades ago. His book, The Secular Meaning of 
the Gospel, was a trail-blazer. 
 
We shall summarize our interpretation of the langua
ge of Easter.  Jesus of Nazareth was a 
remarkably free person in his own life, who attract
ed followers and created enemies in a manner 
comparable to the effect of other liberated persons
 in history.  He died as a result of the threat 
that such a free human being poses for the insecure
.  His disciples were left no less insecure and 
frightened.  Later, Peter, and then other disciples
, had an experience. They experienced a 
discerning situation in which Jesus, the free perso
n whom they had known, themselves, and 
indeed the whole world, were seen in quite a new wa
y.  From that moment, the disciples began 
to claim something of the freedom of Jesus.  His fr
eedom began to be ?contagious.?  For the 
disciples, therefore, the story of Jesus could not 
be told simply as the story of a free human being 
who had died.  Because of the new way in which the 
disciples saw him and because of what had 
happened to them, the story had to include the even
t of Easter.  
 
 
The Second Reading
 is a marvelous spring poem by the great New England
 poet, Mary Oliver. 
 
Mysteries, Four of the Simple Ones 

 
How does the seed-grain feel 

When it is just beginning to be wheat? 

 
And how does the catbird feel 

When the blue eggs break and become little catbirds
? 
 
Maybe on midsummer nightôs eve, 

And without fanfare? 

 
And how does the turtle feel as she covers her eggs
 with the sweep of her feet, Then leaves them 
for the world to take care of? 

Does she know her accomplishment? 

 
And when the blue heron, breaking his long breast f
eathers, 
Sees one feather fall, does he know I will find it?
 Will he see me holding it in my hand? 

 
As he opens his wings 

Softly and without a soundä 

 3 As he rises and floats over the water? 

 
And this is just any day at the edge of the pond, 

A black and leafy pond without a name 

Until I named it. 

 
And what else can we do when the mysteries present 
themselves but hope to pluck from the 
basket the brisk words that will applaud them, 

 
the heron, the turtle, the catbird, the seed-grain 

kneeling in the dark earth, its body 

opening into the golden world? 

 
 
Sermon 

 
Easter always prods family memories. There were the
 elaborate family dinners, certainly, at the 
scented homes of my beloved grandparents, the home-
made spinach ravioli and stuffed spring 
artichokes, the chocolate in the baskets, the sweet
 uplift of spring lilac in the air. But there was 
the religious part of Easter too, for me, and I am 
not talking about doctrines. Iôm talking about 
the mysterious Easter weekend rituals at the church
 of my youth, where instead of the usual 
Latin, we suddenly started chanting ancient Greek 
Agios Ischyros, Agios Athanatos eleison imas. 
The great Easter candle was brought out at Saturday
 midnight, studded with grains of incense, 
carved with red Greek letters, then, once kindled f
rom a new fire struck from flint, was plunged 
into a deep bowl of water as incense rose in the ca
ndlelit dark. It was the night of the 
resurrection. It was the night of transformation. I
t was about things not staying the same, but 
being transformed. It was very intense, and very, v
ery, very mysterious.  
 
Paul Van Buren, although he might certainly have en
joyed the mysterious rituals which used to 
accompany my childhood Easter, explains clearly tha
t the Easter event was not about something 
staying the sameñi.e. the same body coming back aft
er it died. No, he says, Easter is about 
something new, something different: a transformatio
n. The transformation of a human teacher, a 
remarkably free human being who died, into somethin
g elseña community of women and men 
and children trying also to be free.   

 
A ?contagious? transformation Van Buren calls it. C
ontagious, that is, unexpected by them, and 
out of their own conscious controlñor the control o
f others. 
 
Such transformations are far more mysterious and wo
ndrous to me than what Easter has been 
reduced to over the years by folks who confuse the 
religious life with magic, and the promise of 
their own personal salvation. 

 
Mary Oliver walks out to the pond near her house in
 Provincetown, and finds mysteries too. Not 
preserved from ancient times, but fresh as the morn
ing. No Greek, just sweet silent imagery.  
 
What does she find? The seed, transforming slowly i
nto a stalk of wheat, which looks nothing 
like a seed. The round blue egg giving way to a moi
st baby bird, which looks nothing like an 
egg. The turtle trustingly covering up her rubber-s
oft eggs, which resemble not in the least her 

 4 hard and crusted shell. The magnificent blue-feathe
red heron, aloft in heaven, great wings 
akimbo, looking nothing at all like the little furr
y chick it once was. 
I donôt think it was Easter morning at Blackwater P
ond, but the beautiful and thorough 
transformations Oliver paintsñthe four mysteries, a
s she calls them, do not strike me as  terribly 
different in metaphor than the ancient resurrection
 story. 
 
Indeed, the early Christians, who had not yet falle
n into catastrophic literalism in their religious 
lives, would have understood Mary Oliver to have wr
itten a most excellent Easter poem. After 
all, their catacombs in Rome, where they laid their
 own dead, were decorated on the walls with 
paintings of natural imagery, butterflies, roses.  

 
Because they understood that butterflies and roses 
speak of transformation, of things not staying 
the same. The undulating caterpillar and ovoid pupa
 look nothing like the spreading orange 
wings of a Monarch butterfly aloft in the air. The 
seed or cutting that produces a rose looks 
nothing like the whirling dervish of velvet petals 
and fragrance that is a rose. And, in the same 
way, the new world, which the students of Jesus saw
 some time after he died, looked nothing like 
the world looked on the day he died. All of this is
 transformation. All of this goes against 
expectations. And all of this transcends ordinary h
uman cunning and control. 
 
The powers of the world, according to the story, de
cided that the very human and remarkably 
free person, Jesus, was not to 
be
 Jesus anymore. He was to be as they wanted him to 
be. Under 
their thumb. Controlled by their unquestioned custo
m. Controlled by the systems of a violent 
society. Controlled by fear. Controlled by terror. 
Controlled by power and might. Controlled by 
shame. Controlled by threats to his identity, threa
ts to his security and peace. 
 
 
 
 
So when he 
continued
 to be himself even after all the warnings, they ki
lled him, the story goes. 
 
But, the point of Easter is this: they did not cont
rol him, even then. They did not confine him to 
being only a corpse rotting in the earth any more t
han the sheer power of growth and life in the 
natural world of which were part can confine the ro
se to the seed, or the butterfly to the pupa. 
Because itôs transformation and growth and becoming
 which are the central activities of the 
world, not changelessness. There is not changelessn
ess. Whenever something claims not to 
change, begin to be suspicious. Someone is trying t
o control something. 
 
What makes the Easter story a religious story to me
 is that the change goes in the direction of 
love, in the direction of health and wholeness, and
, in the direction of others. Van Buren calls the 
mystery of Easter a ?contagion.?  A word that impli
es that Easter is not an event that happened to 
an individual, but to a multitude. 

 
Now Paul Van Buren would be the first to note that 
such an Easter doesnôt necessarily have to do 
with Jesus, any more than Mary Oliverôs hatching bi
rds and rising seedling have to do with 
Jesus. Eastering, transforming, went on before Jesu
s even lived, and after Jesus died, and it 
happens without reference to Jesus at all. 

 
Let me give you an example from the lifetime of Jes
us, but not about him. Four years before 
Jesus even died; there was a clear example of what 
I am calling an Easter event, of a multitude of 

 5 people refusing to be controlled, bullied or ridicu
led. An event where courageñgreat 
courageñwas contagious. And where life triumphed. 

 
The new Roman prefect, Pontius Pilate, had arrived 
in the Province of Judea. He resided on the 
sea coast in the quite beautiful resort town of Cae
sarea, a city named after his boss, Tiberius 
Caesar. 

 
The Roman garrison in Jerusalem was small. But at c
ertain holiday times, the need for military 
control of the unruly populace was greater, by Roma
n calculation. Pilate seems to have arrived in 
time for such a holiday, and so sent a whole new tr
oop of cadets down to Jerusalem while he 
remained in Caesarea. 

 
Now Pilate was not known for his genteel politics. 
He was a ruffian, used to controlling his 
world. On being told that the Judean people were di
fferent from all of Romeôs other conquered 
people, he refused to go along with the program. In
stead, he insisted that conquered people 
remain conquered, and stop asking for special privi
leges. So, even though he was told that, for 
Judeans, it was an affront and insult to claim that
 any human being was God, so that the 
traditional Roman standards claiming that Caesar wa
s divine were not used in Jerusalem, Pilate 
nevertheless did send them into Jerusalem under cov
er of night, and had these votive shields set 
up on the wall of the Antonia garrison which overlo
oked the temple itself.   
 
As soon as the citizens of Jerusalem awoke, and fir
st light glinted off the profile of Caesar with 
the Latin word DIVI (of God) inscribed over him, a 
fierce anger rose within them. They took 
their beef to the commandant in the garrison, but h
e insisted that the governor, the Prefect 
himself, had ordered this.   

 
So literally thousands of Jerusalemites left home a
nd work, and marched the 120 kilometers up 
to Caesaria-on-the-Sea, a three-day trek. Their ups
et was contagious, and, as they walked, they 
gathered folks from all the towns along the way. So
on they arrived at Pilateôs palace in Caesaria, 
and they began to protest outside his door: ?Take t
he shields down. They are an insult. They are 
telling us not be ourselves anymore. They are telli
ng us we should be like you, worshipping a 
human being as godôs son. But we do not do that. We
 are not you. You have your ways. We have 
ours. Do not try to make your ways our ways. We wil
l not put up with it.?  Pilate refused to see 
them or listen to their appeal, even though he was 
apparently quite shocked by the sheer number 
that showed up.  After five days, he reached a very
 high level of frustration. He came out to 
speak with them. At a signal, he surrounded them al
l with his soldiers, who drew their swords. 
?All right,? he said, ?enough of this nonsense. I h
ave the army. I have the power. I have the 
money and I have the authority. Go home right now a
nd stop this stupid protest or I will have 
you all killed.? They all looked at each other, and
 conferred, then they threw themselves down to 
the ground, exposed their necks, and said together,
 ?You may kill us if you must, but you may 
not make fun of our way, our religious practices, o
r our culture.? 
 
Of course, even so controlling a man as Pilate was 
smart enough to know he could not begin his 
governorship by a wholesale slaughter of ten thousa
nd citizens. So, with grinding teeth and a red 
face, he ordered the shields to be taken down. Imme
diately, the Judean citizens went back home 
to their towns and cities. 

 
These people had been transformed, no less than a s
eed which becomes a rose. And their 
transformation was contagious. From citizens, not e
ager to rock the boat because of the threat of 

 6 control evidenced by the Roman Armyôs presence, to 
a courageous and non-violent community 
of identity and power, unafraid of death, threats o
r unelected authority, these citizens were 
transformed. Who would have expected it? It was a s
urprise. 
 
A beaten down people, a mere colony one moment, and
 then, first thing in the morning, a whole 
community of courage and strength. 

First thing in the morningña resurrection, a transf
ormation. Sounds like Easter to me. 
 
There is no evidence in this story that the Judeans
 wanted the Romans to become like them. If 
the Romans wanted to believe that a man like Caesar
 was Godôs son, or that Fate governed all 
things, fine. In their own homes. Their own cities.
 But there was no reason to trot out their 
religious convictions in other lands and to try to 
control other religious convictions. 
 
Sometimes people ask me if I wish that everyone wou
ld be a Unitarian Universalist. I say no, 
wishing for impossible things is a waste of my time
, and wishing that all people would become 
Unitarian Universalist is not much different than m
e asking to be spared death, or asking for a 
billion dollars in cash to rain from the sky, or wi
shing for world peace to break out tomorrow, by 
a miracle. I do not think such a thing is even poss
ibleñor even desirable. I am sure there will 
always be people who have different religious senti
ments than I do, who may choose to believe 
that a certain man is a God, or that the world was 
created in seven days, not in thirteen point five 
billion years.  Their friends love them, perhaps, j
ust as much as my friends love me. They are 
loved. And I am loved. But in order to make a world
 together, and to live side by side, no one 
group of people, whatever their religion or politic
s, and no matter how much their friends love 
and praise them, can claim control over all other g
roups of people. Any control. Control by fear. 
Control by terror. Control by lying. Control by inn
uendo. Control by ridicule. Control by 
swagger. Control by a sense of entitlement. Or cont
rol by violence. 
 
Easter for me is the proclamation that even when th
e Lords of Control try, quite literally, to nail 
down a teacher of love, the body may be killed, but
 the love cannot be stopped. The love will 
look different afterward, like a butterfly looks di
fferent from a pupa, or a bird looks different 
from an egg. Like an unexpected contagion, love wil
l strike unexpected, unforeseen. And like the 
perfect rose, or narcissus, or daffodil improbably 
rising from a hard and homely little bulb or 
seed, Easter itself blossoms, the seed totally tran
sformed. Easter, in short, names control for what 
it is, mere bullying, and calls for a life that tra
nscends such cruel nonsense, a life, an Easter life
, 
in fact, that nature demonstrates with almost embar
rassing extravagance each and every April. 
 
In many ways, my Easters have not changed much sinc
e when I was a child. My grandparents 
are gone, my parents are far away, but I will still
 gather loved ones around my table this 
afternoon. The feast will be Mexican, not Italian, 
but it will be equally memorable, I hope.  And 
the church rituals are different, but equally myste
rious, and certainly as beautiful as the ones I 
knew growing upñno meter-high candle, or ancient Gr
eek, but the Flower Ceremony is both 
mysterious and poignant.  Yes, poignant. After all,
 its creator, the Czech Unitarian Norbert 
Capek, was also courageous, even when the Nazis tol
d him to shut up, or die. Though he did die 
in Dachau in 1942, his love, his courage and wisdom
 may also prove contagious, I hope, to those 
of us who live in this hard modern age, when school
, court and legislature are now the 
battlegrounds where some peopleñeven religious peop
leñseek control over other people. I am 
telling you this because Easter is not just for Jes
us, you see, or the ancient Judeans, or for nature 
poets like Mary Oliver, or radical theologians like
 Van Buren, or for long dead Unitarians like 
Capek. Easter is for us too. The living. 

 7  
Everything is ready now. Therefore, let us keep the
 feast. 
 
Offering
  
As our children prepare to come back and join us, l
et us offer our pledges and gifts for the 
support of the life of this congregation, which so 
nourishes us day after day. Blest is this time 
of giving and receiving, another way to make 

small seeds of giving bloom at last. 

 
 
 
Flower Ceremony:  

Consecration of the Flowers 

The Capek Blessing and Hallowing of the Flowers 

One hand is extended over the flowers as each perso
n reads: 
 
Minister:   

In the name of the providence which implants into t
he heart of the seed the future of the flower, 
and which implants in our hearts that unrest which 
will not be quenched till people live lovingly 
with each other, we bless these flowers. 

 
East Voice 

In the name of the highest, in which we live and mo
ve and take our being, and in the name of the 
deepest, which makes father and mother, brother and
 sister, lover and loner who they are, we 
bless these flowers. 

 
South Voice 

In the name of the prophets and sages, who sacrific
ed their lives to hasten the coming of the age 
of mutual respect, we bless these flowers. 

 
West Voice 

Let us renew our resolution, sincerely, to be siste
rs and brothers, regardless of the barriers which 
estrange. 

 
North Voice 

May these flowers be for us the sign of the glory a
nd variety to which we aspire, knowing the 
whole while that we are one family, the family of s
pirit and nature. 
 
Together:   

In this holy resolve may we be strengthened by the 
spirit of love, that we ourselves may bloom, 
bloom in splendor of a joyful life, and endeavor to
 be ever more perfect in our days. 

