
Stories of the God-Man
    In June 1954 I returned to India after three years in 
England. I had saved up enough money to indulge in my 
childhood ambition of owning a car and, with the consent 
of other family members, we bought a second-hand 
machine. 
Beloved Baba and His Mandali were at Satara, India that year, and He also approved of the idea to purchase the car. He ordered us to have the car thoroughly over≠hauled as He would need it for His coming Mast tour. The car was taken to a service station in Poona where it soon developed that the machine needed a real going over. In India, things proceed at their own leisurely pace, and I found that I was spending a substantial part of my six months leave at the garage rather than with my dear ones. However, the day arrived when the car was ready. Beloved Baba ordered me to bring it to Satara, leave it there for His use, and return to Poona the same evening. 
During the drive from Poona to Satara the thought came to my mind that the car had been a real headache to me and now, thank God-Baba, it would soon be His problem including oil and gas. The driver and I reached Satara about ten A.M. and had Beloved Baba's Darshan. He was quite happy with the car; He had a short ride in it and appeared satisfied with its performance. 
That same afternoon when He returned to the men Mandali, Beloved Baba suddenly put His hands in the pockets of His pink jacket and turned them inside out. He told me, "You have brought the car for My use, but as you see, I have no money to run it. So, you had better hand over to Eruch whatever money you haveñenough for the driver, for my return to Poona, and enough to make sure that all future running expenses are met with." Then I remembered the mean thought that had come to me on my way to Satara. Thus Beloved Baba made me realize my mistake. 
Song of the New Life of Meher Baba and His Companions I Listen to the silent words of Meher Baba; The life-story of all lovers (of God) is based on the practice of these words. If you are serious about living this New Life, Then whole-heartedly renounce this ephemeral existence. 
II 
We have taken to this life in which we rely only on God: 
In this, our will (to do or die) is strengthened by the oath taken; We are merrily singing the song of hopelessness. We are inviting all calamities and difficulties. III 
We neither wail over lost hopes, nor complain about (broken) promises; We neither covet honour, nor shun disgrace; Back≠biting we know not, nor do we fear anyone; This is now the colour of our New Life. IV No confusion in the mind, now, nor any ties left; Pride, anger, lust and greed we know not. We have no religion, nor care for physical and mental fads. The Sheikh and the Brahminñtypifying all castes and creeds ñare now sailing in the same boat. V 
There is no small or great now for us all; 
The questions or discipleñMaster or Godhood, no longer arise; 
Brotherliness or fellow-feeling is the link that exists, And 
this contributes to our present enjoyment of suffering. 
VI This world or the next, hell or heaven, we no longer bother about. Shaktis and Siddhis, occultism and miracles, we no longer think of; All these false impressions (thoughts) for us have been purged from the mind. What has value and importance for us now is to live in the active present. VII Dear ones, take seriously the words of Baba when he says, 
Although now I am on the same level with you all, 
Yet all orders from me, good, bad, extraordinary, 
You should all carry out immediately, leaving the result to God. VIII 
Even if the heavens fall, 
Do not let go the hand of Truth. 
Let despair and disappointment ravage and destroy the 
garden (of your life), You beautify it once again by the seedlings of contentment and self-sufficiency. IX Even if your heart is cut to bits, let there be a smile on 
your lips. 
Here I divulge to you a point worth noting: 
Hidden in your penniless hands is treasure untold; Your 
beggarly life will be the envy of kings (of the world). X 
God exists indeed and true are the Prophets; 
Every Cycle has an Avatar and every moment has a Wali. 
For us, however, it is only hopelessness and helplessness. 
How else should I tell you what our New Life is! * 
This song was composed, with the help of Beloved Baba, by Dr. Abdul Ghani Munsiff and it was sung almost every day by the whole party of the New Life. 
Since Meher Baba was our companion, equal to all of us, we had accepted the ruling that He would sweep His own room and wash His own plates and utensils just as we had to do. We had to be genuinely honest, humble, considerate and kind and Baba was also bound by these instructions. Should He commit an infraction of the rules, we should immediately bring this to His attention. 
There was an incident which occurred not far from Meherazad during the last leg of our New Life. It was late at night and time to retire so we scouted around for a place to sleep. In the pitch dark and without any lamps or flashlights we stumbled upon a dilapidated buildingñthe ruins of an old temple. 
Dr. D. searched the building to make sure it was fit for Baba's use and found it was very dirty. Luckily I had a broom with me and I swept the place. I also spread out what little bedding I had, for Baba would sleep on the cold ground even as we did. 
After Baba was settled each of us found a place to lie for the nightñexcept for myself. I was given the duty of night watch. Sometime later, Baba clapped loudly. I hurriedly entered the room and struck a match in order to read Baba's gestures. Baba was vehement. "Why is it so noisy in here? It's very disturbing!" I stood quietly in the silence of the night and I heard a sound like the whirring of wings. Striking another match, I noticed doves nesting in a wall and I informed Baba of this news. Baba snapped, "Throw them out! Get rid of them. They're disturbing Me." 
As it's written in the Song of the New Life, we had to immediately carry out every one of Baba's ordersñgood, bad, or extraordinaryñleaving the result to God. This meant I should keep quiet, and follow His order. On the other hand, I knew very well Baba expected us to point out His slips. Stand up and sit down at the same timeñ that was our New Life. Just as I stepped forward to catch the birds, Baba clapped again and I turned. "It's you who have slipped. Why didn't you remind Me of the slip? Enough of this for tonight, but tomorrow will be judgement day for us all." 
The next morning we were lined up before Baba, and I was the culprit. Baba upbraided me, "Why didn't you remind me? That would have been unkindñto throw the birds out of their nests." I sheepishly answered, "Yes, Baba. I forgot to remind you for a moment, but then I didn't say anything because you didn't argue about it." Baba looked sternly at me. "There shouldn't be any argument about this or anything else." I bit my tongue and kept quiet. Baba continued, "The only thing that can rectify this slip of mine (remember that Baba said this as a New Life companion) is that there should be some punishment given Me." All I could say was, "As you wish, Baba." Baba removed His sadra and said, "Each of you remove your sandal and give Baba a hard slap with it." 
He was our companion, He was our friend, He was our God, He was our Beloved, He was everything to us, and yet we had to obey His command. Each of us took the stand and slapped Him onceñhardñand then Baba pinched His own ears. Finally, Baba reminded all of us that we should always remember to be kind. 
Baba took this punishment upon Himself, not for His own good, but to set an example for humanity. He lives amongst us in the world, during His various Advents, so that we can gauge our life with respect to the life He lived. We knew there were many things to be learned, but our impression-ridden mind pre≠vented us from carrying out what Baba wished us to perform. Nevertheless, after Manonash, ** the mind does not exist. There is only One Beloved, and you realize that you are what He is.*** 
