
  We are here
on a day much like this day a year ago,
  but when the same slant of sun we saw today 
fell on faces drawn tight with shock and horror.

  Though many days and weeks have past, 
and life has gone on,
  something still calls to us from that day.
  
And so we come to our house of worship,
  "where deep calls unto deep," and we can pray:
  
(together) may our reason and our passion
  keep us true to ourselves, true to each other
  and true to those shared visions of what we can together
  become?.

The Flag and the Step Stool

  September 11th is approaching. I get the flag out of the garage and put it
  up against the front of the house while standing on a shaky step stool. As
  I look up at the fluttering piece of cloth, my mind starts a conversation
  with Marinelle, a friend from college days that I have not seen for fifteen
  years.
  
  "Very nice," she says. "You move to the suburbs and fly a flag. Wouldn't
  it be more appropriate if you just slapped a banner across the house that
  says, 'I'm a sell-out'?"
  
  "Good to see you again, Marinelle. What are you angry about now?"
  
  "About you. Remember singing along with John Lennon on the radio, 'Imagine
  there's no countries, It isn't hard to do'? Apparently it is, for you. Remember
  talking about taking on the military-industrial complex? I'm sure now you're
  in favor of invading Iraq knowing that we have a thousand times as many weapons
  of mass destruction than they ever will. While you're crying about 9/11,
  do you have any tears for Native Americans who were hunted down like dogs
  for the sole crime of being the rightful owners of this land and the civilians
  of Rosewood, Hiroshima, and Mei Lei?"
  
  I fold up the step stool and set it down against the wall. "I'm fully aware
  that the US foreign policy is spineless, greedy, and two-faced, Marinelle.
  But my flag is not about the past but about the hope and dream that the US
  will one day stand up for secular democracy, environment, and human rights,
  including women's rights, and not compromise them for oil and friendship
  with this country or that dictator."
  
  "What democracy?" Marinelle rises like an angry cobra that my mother told
  me stories about when I was growing up. "You're such a hypocrite. You want
  other countries to have democracies like ours with a court-appointed president
  and a capitol building filled with white males who are corporate concubines?"
  
  She stops and stares at a sticker on the rear windshield of my car parked
  in the garage. "United we stand? Who's the we in there? Does it include the
  unarmed African Americans shot to death by white police officers, gays and
  lesbians who can't get the most basic protection from harassment, or millions
  of people like you who will always be second-class citizens because of your
  skin color?"
  
  I open up the step stool again and sit on it. "Let me know when you're done,
  Marinelle."
  
  "I'm done," she says. "I'm just disappointed that you of all people sold
  out."
  
  "Marinelle, did I ever tell you what the most basic quality of a human being
  is according to my mother and the Hindu tradition that she comes from?"
  
  "Nope."
  
  "Gratitude. I may sound like an Uncle Tom to you, but I'm grateful for what
  this country has given me. I think of my flag as a thank you note for a job,
  a diverse group of friends, a multi-racial family, and a nation that may
  fall short of its ideals but still has ideals that I can appeal to. Nations
  are like individuals, Marinelle. We all have our hypocrisies, but what helps
  us get out bed every morning is the hope that someday our conscience will
  be clear."
  
  "And until that day you will keep quiet about what's going on?"
  
  "No I will not, but I won't stop expressing my gratitude, either. We as a
  nation owe it to ourselves and to those that died on 9/11, to not only love
  this land but to help it keep its promises to people here and abroad."
  
  For the first time, Marinelle smiles. "You're still there. I was worried
  that you lost your soul along with your hair." She runs her fingers through
  the hair I have left. "Take care of yourself, kiddo."
  
  As she fizzles away in my mind, I look at my step stool and wonder how I
  can make it more stable.

  The sun falls upon us tonight at the precise
  angle it fell upon us last year.
  
  This year too the air is warm and lovely.
  This year too, the sky is the color of babies' eyes.
  
  Our bodily cells recognize the day.
  
  They remember the shaking and shock
  even when we are just eating dinner
  or calling a friend or driving to the store.
  
  There is a tissue of silence over this day, a lessening of traffic, some
  absences from work.
  
  There is perhaps less fire in our eyes,
  less spring in our step.
  
  For I tell you this is a day of bodily memory,
  of surreal silence and shallower breaths.
  
  Yet let us set aside this silence as a silence 
  of deep breath, of consciousness and awareness.
  Let us be here in this place, deliberately, opening
  ourselves to this silence, this air, these people,
  this evening light. Let us be at peace with each other in the silence?.
  
silence

  And now let those who knew someone who perished in the horrible acts last
  year speak their names aloud if they wish, or say who they were. Let those
  who knew folks who knew folks who died speak their names, if they wish, the
  circles are concentric, and reach out across the nation. This is a time of
  national remembrance, and all of us are part of that.
  
naming

  Let the silence give way to the music, and the 
  music to the spirit of wholeness, which transcends
  all we call this or that, night or day, up or down, sorrow or joy. Let hearts
  take hold of the thread
  of the flute music and follow it back to themselves.

  After each war
  somebody has to clean up,
  put things in order;
  by itself it won't happen.
  
  Somebody's got to push
  rubble to the highway shoulder
  making way
  for the carts filled up with corpses.
  
  Someone might trudge
  through muck and ashes,
  sofa springs,
  splintered glass
  and blood-soaked rugs.
  
  Somebody has to haul 
  beams for propping a wall,
  another put glass in a window
  and hang the door on hinges.
  
  This is not photogenic
  and takes years.
  All the cameras have left already
  for another war.
  
  Bridges are needed
  also new railroad stations.
  Tatters turn into sleeves
  for rolling up.
  
  Somebody, broom in hand,
  still recalls how it was.
  Someone whose head was not
  torn away listens nodding. 
  But nearby already
  begin to bustle those
  who'll need persuasion.
  
  Somebody still at times
  digs up from under the bushes
  some rusty quibble
  to add to burning refuse.
  
  Those who knew
  what this was all about
  must yield to those
  who know little
  or less than little
  essentially nothing.
  
  In the grass that has covered
  effects in causes
  somebody must recline,
  a stalk of rye in the teeth,
  ogling the clouds.

On That Day and What Happened Next 
  Mark Belletini
  
  I had been up very late on Monday night Sept. 10th, talking with a friend
  out west on the phone, so I slept in on Tuesday. The very first thing I was
  aware of on Tuesday morning was not my alarm, but my friend Jimmy. He had
  come into my place (I had left the door unlocked) and he was shaking me awake.
  
  "Wake up! Wake up! They're blowing up New York. Come and see!"
  
  "Blowing up New York? What? Who?" I said, not quite understanding. Jimmy
  half dragged me out of bed into the room with the television. So the very
  first thing my half-open eyes saw that morning was the first of the towers
  collapsing in a burst of dust. It was one of those sights which proved to
  me once again one of the main dictums of my life: "It's much easier to believe
  in things I cannot see or hear than it is to actually believe in things I
  can see and hear." And that day I had to struggle hard to believe what I
  was seeing, over and over again, in instant replay.
  
  All Jimmie and I could do was to say "O my God," over and over, except I
  don't think either of us was being particularly pious. But no other phrase
  seemed to work. I kept thinking of Carl Jung's haunting deathbed definition
  of the word God: "whatever it is that crosses your path, around which you
  cannot walk."
  
  After a while, Jimmie left and went home, stunned and wobbly. He wanted to
  get back to his familiar walls and hang on to them.
  
  I had a cold that day, and was feverish. And I was mad that I had a cold
  and a fever so early in September. I was mad I was sick and didn't think
  I could find the energy to respond. I just wanted to crawl into bed and conk
  out.
  
  But then I remembered that my heart suddenly opened, despite my fatigue.
  It went everywhere. It went out to you, wondering if anyone in this congregation
  had people they loved there in New York or Washington or on a plane. It went
  out to my parents, and what a shock this must be to them, after having already
  lived through so much war and tumult in their long lives. I called them but
  couldn't get through. Then my heart went out to my friends who have family
  in New York. I found out later that some of them lost relatives in those
  falling buildings.
  
  I knew I had to offer some opportunity at the church for people to come together,
  but I felt too sick to get anything done that day. Then my friend Kelly called.
  She asked if I could pick her up at the Josephinum, since her flight home
  to Lexington, Kentucky had been cancelled along with all other flights, and
  she was hitching a ride to Columbus from Pittsburgh via a priest who teaches
  at that seminary. I told her I would pick her up and spend the afternoon
  with her, although I warned her about the cold. She said Neil, her husband,
  would drive up from Kentucky to take her back home that night.
  
  I then drove over here to the church. I set up this Worship Center with candles
  and copies of readings from Muslim sources on a stand for anyone who wanted
  to come into the welcoming arms of this place. I called Myra to see if she
  could play for a service the next night, Wednesday, which I thought I could
  manage even with a fever.
  
  I then went to pick Kelly up at the Josephinum and waited with her and cried
  with her as we waited for Neil. I remember it was a beautiful, perfect, sunny
  day, the sun's warmth on my skin like a blessing. It was surreal that the
  sky could be so beautiful on a day when so many perished.
  
  But then, isn't that how it always is?
  
  Many did come to the church that night, putting together their own spontaneous
  service with the materials I had left.
  
  I went home and fell into a delirium from the fever. I thought about our
  future here in this nation. I knew that we would not know right away who
  did this and why it happened. I knew it would take time. I knew there would
  be horrible blame and innuendo and finger-pointing?that went without
  saying. I knew that this event would be perceived as some sort of turning
  point, and that it would elicit a national grief like I have rarely seen
  in my life?although President Kennedy's death did to mind. I knew there
  would be flags and patriotic songs, and I knew the people in New York would
  be amazing in their care and courage. And I knew that it was going to be
  hard to feel through to the center of the event, let alone understand it
  intellectually right away. And unfortunately, I knew that not too long from
  that day, someone somewhere would find some way to make tidy profits from
  all the shock. I wish I had been wrong but I wasn't.
  
  It was, in the title of Szymborska's poem, an end and a beginning both...the
  end of an era and the beginning of a new one...except I didn't know how to
  characterize either era with adjectives yet. I knew Szymborska had been uncannily
  right way back in 1993 "Those who knew what this was all about must yield
  to those who know little or less than little...essentially nothing." She
  was probably talking about me, without knowing it.
  
  I also know she was right about everything else too...she who, in Poland
  during the war there, had seen not three but three thousand buildings come
  down around her, millions dead.
  
  But then someone has to clean up, she wrote. It won't happen by itself. We
  have to roll our sleeves up. It is not photogenic. It takes years, she reminds
  us.
  
  It's only been a year, not the many years Szymborksa was talking about,
  remembering the far greater devastation to her beloved homeland. Yeah, the
  cleaning up, the hauling away of rubble has certainly happened in New York
  and Washington and Pennsylvania. But there is still some rubble in my heart
  that has not yet been hauled away. It was piled on top of rubble that was
  already there from Vietnam and the AIDS crisis, which both killed countless
  thousands more than those who died a year ago today, only in slow motion
  and without dust clouds.
  
  Ah, Ah! The idea that we human beings kill each other so easily?with
  planes, with bombs, with gas, with policies, with laws, with conviction,
  with silence, with neglect, with unbound hatred and with the knife of true
  belief, conscious or unconscious, sickens me to my core.
  
  And my own capacity for anger and blame and even, sometimes, hatred, worries
  me even more. It's terribly human to slip into such thoughts. So I am not
  as far away from these terrible events than I would like to think.
  
  I don't know about you, but most of my life has really not changed very much
  since last year. There are still friends and family and godchildren. There
  are still my Fellowship Committee meetings and plane flights...I flew within
  three weeks of the towers collapsing to many people's surprise. There are
  still my pastoral concerns at the church, the visiting of the sick, the writing
  and performing of memorials and weddings and baby-namings. There are still
  joys and disappointments, losses and conflicts. I still have transcendent
  moments before a sunset rosy as a watermelon. And I still suffer the ordinary
  stresses of bills and debt, electronic disruptions in the office, and the
  ordinary ups and downs of my heart.
  
  And underneath it all, is all this rubble at the bottom of my heart, all
  the confusing questions, all the imagined horror, all the surprise and the
  lack of surprise.
  
  But after a year, at least, my faith is greater in what I have seen and what
  I have heard. And I know that something amazing, hard, cruel, foolish and
  strange happened and that I was a witness to it. And I know that something
  like it could happen again?no, not planes into New York or Washington,
  but equal horrors. You and I both know that talk of war is in the air again.
  As the admirable Szymborska put it so clearly: "All the cameras have left
  already for another war."
  
  And I have to hear that too, and believe that I am hearing it. But I sure
  as hell don't have to like it, approve of it, or agree that such a war is
  necessary or good in any way. And I assure you, I don't.

  There's a thread you follow. It goes among
  things that change. But it doesn't change.
  People wonder about what you are pursuing.
  You have to explain about the thread.
  But it is hard for others to see.
  While you hold it you can't get lost.
  Tragedies happen; people get hurt
  or die; and you suffer and get old.
  Nothing you do can stop time's unfolding.
  But you don't ever let go of the thread.

On What It Is That Sustains Me
  Mark Belletini
  
  God came out of hiding, a year ago today. Yes, God. Oh, now don't get me
  wrong. I've read the figures?attendance at churches and synagogues went
  up for about three weeks, then tapered off back to normal. That certainly
  happened here. But I am not talking about the God of theology and denominations,
  although they sometimes clearly overlap the God I'm talking about.
  
  No, the God that came out of hiding after 9-11 was the political God, the
  "capital G" God, the one on our money, in our pledge to the flag, and on
  the lips of presidents. The God of "Civil Religion," to use Robert Bellah's
  term.
  
  Ah, but alas, personally, I do not believe in such a God. A God who loves
  America more than any other nation, who blesses it and keeps it safe and
  chastises it. Furthermore, I do not believe in a God who loves the Muslim
  people more than Christians, or Jews more than Muslims, or a God who hurls
  agnostics and unbelievers into hell. I do not serve such a God, nor will
  I. I don't think I ever have served such a god, even in my youth, when I
  was taught clearly by the nuns that God was a god for all nations, not just
  one; all people, not just the self-anointed. I just cannot believe in any
  nationally partisan God. Not even, though I am a good voting citizen of the
  United States, an American God.
  
  And because I don't believe in such a God, I guess I'm a true American heretic,
  by some lights.
  
  And I for one have no way of knowing about the whereabouts of other kinds
  of Gods or Goddesses either? about such I must remain relatively agnostic.
  Such willingness to remain unsure, to have little confident belief in
  metaphysical truisms, makes me a rather odd minister, I suppose, by some
  lights. Folks sometimes tell me that they see their clergy as models of great
  faith.
  
  I am afraid I am not a very good model for you, if you want an example of
  unquestioned faith in an unquestionable, all-powerful and partisan God.
  
  But I do tell people that I hold on to a thread. All of my life I've held
  on to a thread. Stafford's word is perfect?a thread. Not something with
  trumpets and lightning, crowns and gold. But something small and apparently
  fragile. Something, however, which is stronger than it looks. Something that
  doesn't seem to change as much as everything around it. Something central
  and daily in my life?
  
  All of my life I have been a believer in something powerful but not All-Powerful.
  Something not partisan, but universal. Something that "dwells in the light
  of setting suns," in Wordsworth's fine phrase, yes, but even more in the
  light of bristling questions. I call what I believe in Love and Truth. I
  can also fairly call this thread G-d, or the Divine. Sure, I could just use
  the words Love and Truth by themselves, I suppose. But with the philosopher
  Gandhi, I rather dislike throwing out words just because some people use
  them in a way I don't happen to like. Love and Truth are the imageless words
  I use for my small but growing and non-partisan G-d, the thread I hold on
  to day by day, year by year.
  
  I don't think I can ever know G-d, that is, the full truth?ever. I don't
  think I can fully love, either. But all my life I have felt the need to pull
  myself along that fragile thread of belief in Love and Truth as the closest
  I'll ever get to the Ultimate. My own life is not ultimate. My nation is
  not ultimate, great though it can be. My religion is not ultimate, my culture
  is not ultimate. Love and Truth are Ultimate for me. And I am convinced I
  can only move closer to such divinity by engaging with you, and you engaging
  with me. You have part of the truth too, as I do. Even people I do not like
  at all are part of that struggle for truth, even people in whom I would rather
  not find the slightest thing to love. Everyone is in this together.
  
  "Tragedies happen," writes Stafford succinctly. "People get hurt or die.
  Nothing you do can stop time's unfolding." True as can be. And as I said,
  even my own life is not ultimate. But what gets me through absolutely horrible
  times is my little, heretical faith in the small and not terribly dazzling
  Ultimacy I call my "thread," or my divinity, or my G-d, or Love and Truth.
  I hold on to that thread. I pull myself along its length.
  
  I pray it will be there until the very moment I close my eyes around death.
  It doesn't offer me explanations or quick fixes. It doesn't promise me salvation
  or to make me the exception from tragedy. It puts no star on my forehead,
  nor pin purple medals on my breast, nor does it stamp me with the "mark of
  Cain" or "the number of the Beast." It simply sustains me.
  
  It is this divinity I worship, this divinity I value above all. Whenever
  I turn from this divinity, by saying that my work, or my comfort, or my pride,
  or my own personal visions, or my nation, or my views are Ultimate instead
  of ever-unfolding Truth and Love, then I find my life to be miserable and
  I am simply exhausted.
  
  This thread is what has sustained me little by little during this last year
  of strangeness, violence and tumult. What is it that has sustained you?

   It was around this time when some folks came up to give him a message.
  They brought the news that some of his fellow Galileans had been recently
  slaughtered by Governor Pilate, slaughtered as they were making their way
  to the Temple to make sacrifice!
  
  He said to the messengers "I wonder, do you imagine that these unfortunates
  suffered this fate because they were worse offenders than anyone else in
  the Galilee? I tell you No, but I assure you, unless all hearts find a way
  to change, people will continue to perish."
  
  He continued his questions: "And those 18 people who were crushed when the
  tower of Siloam fell on them...do you think they were worse offenders than
  any of the other residents of Jerusalem? I tell you NO, but unless all hearts
  find a way to change, people will continue to perish.

On All This Talk of Good and Evil
  Mark Belletini
  
  Not only did the Civil God come out of hiding, but within the first three
  weeks of last year's event, I heard the theological and ethical word "evil"
  spoken by secular authorities more often than I ever heard the word in Seminary,
  or, for that matter, I think, in my whole life.
  
  Now no one, except the hideously broken and cruel, rejoice in misery and
  death. The attacks by plane last year were, as far as I am concerned, undeniably
  horrible, terrible, and acts of murder.
  
  But there is danger in making such events "cosmic," and caught up with the
  words the three major Western Religions sometimes use to indicate something
  Absolute and Ultimate.
  
  We here in the United States of America are the Devil and Great Satan incarnate,
  by the lights of some of our detractors. And Rev. Pat Robertson in this country
  daily decries the "diabolical evils" of Islam on his television show. The
  Jews were mere "vermin" according to the Nazi officials, cockroaches at best.
  The Armenians were sub-human to the Turks and the Turks sub-human to the
  Greeks. The Japanese were monkeys at best, according to the propaganda posters
  pasted on United States walls during the war, and the Vietnamese were dehumanized
  as "gooks."
  
  The Tutsi and Hutus found a hundred ways to reduce each other to demonic
  ciphers, making murder itself no more terrible than accidentally stepping
  on ants.
  
  Blame and caricature is an old game. They used to say that victims of outrage
  or tragedy had brought it on themselves, as the story in Luke reminds us.
  The 18 people lying under the tower of Siloam were sinners, culprits, offenders,
  according to the philosophy of the times. Some still believe such things
  in our own day. "They must have deserved it." Or, in our day, other philosophies
  are heard too. It is the perpetrators who are sinners, culprits, offenders,
  pure devils, the true Satans. And, of course, we who didn't fly airplanes
  are pure and good, angels and seraphim.
  
  I just can't think this way, this them and us language. It grates against
  everything I have ever lived for, or believed.
  
  Instead, I think about one of the pilots who flew the plane that crashed
  into the fields of Pennsylvania. He grew up middle class in Lebanon, played
  basketball, and helped kids after school. He laughed and loved and lived
  a life many a teen lives in Worthington. And then he flew a plane and killed
  many people, including himself. What changed in him so that he could do such
  a thing? Did his politics get that fierce by magic? How did his religio-cultural
  choices become that closed-minded? What did he hope to accomplish by what
  he did?
  
  The act itself is simply horrible. Killing makes me sick to my stomach. Yet
  how does one go from playing basketball to killing? It boggles the mind.
  
  There can be no simplistic answers.
  
  But I think this is why the ancient teacher Jesus is so critical of folks
  who try to dehumanize, to reduce people to categories like sinners or devils.
  
  This is why Jesus rejected the idea of pure blame. "We all have to work to
  change our hearts," he suggests, "in a world where such terrible things happen."
  We are bound in this together. We are all human beings, neither divine nor
  diabolical. It's not a question of blame or scape-goating the evil, and then
  anointing oneself pure and innocent. Granted, some of us are terribly broken,
  so broken we might need to be contained for our own sake as well as others.
  But no matter, we are all human beings, and we are going to have to figure
  out solutions together, or end up wiping each other out entirely.
  
  It's not a question, as Pat Robertson thinks, of converting all Muslims to
  Evangelical Christianity. It's not a question of bombing the bejesus out
  of other nations and bringing them into submission. It's not a question of
  wiping out this or that people, or bulldozing the houses next door, or, God
  help us, blowing up children.
  
  Our religious tradition has said that "we're all in this together" for hundreds
  and hundreds of years. It has held us to account by warning us about putting
  anyone into a category beyond redemption, or of sending some people off to
  hell forever. It asks us to be faithful and true to each other no matter
  how difficult it is?how long it takes?even if it takes more than
  a single lifetime. Our beautifully articulated tradition asks us to risk
  failure and to try again. It asks us to learn and study and refuse to hide
  behind ignorance or prejudice. It tells us that we all have our share in
  the joys and miseries of the world, and that thus, we are all called to lift
  up the joys and put an end to misery together.
  
  When I think of this anniversary day of 9-11, I think these things most of
  all?


      I will probably have to learn to live with rubble in my heart the rest of
      my life, but I will nonetheless live my life as lovingly and as truthfully
      as I can.
    
      I can continue to walk through life holding on to the same thread that has
      always sustained me, the ever unfolding Love and Truth which open new worlds
      I cannot not now dream, and 3. It's never a question of blame or clear
      categories, it's always a question of working together, struggling together
      through the generations until the luminous words we utter are transformed
      into the luminous lives we live.
  

  We, this people, on this small and lonely planet,
  Travelling through casual space
  Past aloof stars, across the way of indifferent suns
  To a destination where all signs tell us
  It is possible and imperative that we learn
  A brave and startling truth.
  
  And when we come to it,
  To the day of peacemaking
  When we release our fingers
  From fists of hostility
  And allow the pure air to cool our palms;
  
  When we come to it,
  When the curtain falls on the minstrel show of hate,
  And faces sooted with scorn are scrubbed clean
  When battlefield and coliseum
  No longer take our unique and particular sons and daughters
  Up with the bruised and bloody grass
  To lie in identical plots in foreign soil.
  
  When the rapacious storming of the churches,
  The screaming racket in the temples have ceased.
  When the pennant are waving gaily
  When the banners of the world tremble
  Stoutly in the good, clean breeze.
  
  When we come to it,
  Then we will confess that not the Pyramids
  With their stones set in mysterious perfection,
  Nor the gardens of Babylon
  Hanging as eternal beauty
  In our collective memory
  Not the Grand Canyon
  Kindled into delicious color
  By Western sunsets
  
  Nor the Danube, flowing its blue soul into Europe,
  Nor the sacred peak of Mt. Fuji
  Stretching to the Rising Sun,
  Neither Father Amazon nor Mother Mississippi
  who, without favor,
  Nurture all creatures in the depths and on the shores,
  These are not the only wonders of the world.
  
  When we come to it,
  We, this people, on this miniscule and kithless globe
  Who reach daily for the bomb, the blade and the dagger
  Yet who petition in the dark for tokens of peace
  We, this people, on this mote of matter
  In whose mouths abide cankerous words,
  Which challenge our very existence,
  Yet out of these same mouths
  Come songs of such exquisite sweetness
  That the heart falters in its labor
  And the body is quieted into awe
  
  We, this people, on this small and drifting planet
  We learn that we are neither devils nor divines.
  When we come to it
  We, this people, on this wayward, floating body
  Created on this earth of this earth
  Have the power to fashion for this earth
  A climate where every man and every woman
  Can life freely without sanctimonious piety
  Without crippling fear.
  
  When we come to it,
  We must confess that we are the possible,
  We are the miraculous, the true wonder of this world, that is when, and only
  when,
  We come to it.
