     Easter 2011 and Flower Ceremony   
April 24, 2011 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 
  Opening Words
  
We are here, 

after a week of cold rain and rare sun 

to celebrate Easter, the ancient feast of spring. 

Here on the common earth we worship
, 
here in the north, yes, blossoming with flowers, 

but everywhere, everywhere in the world
 blossoming with dreams of liberty, 

and a longing for real living, real loving. 

 
And so, we pledge to journey together along the way
s of truth and affection, as best 
as we can name them now, or may learn them in days 
to come; that we and our 
children may be fulfilled, and that we may speak to
 our world in words and lives of 
peace, justice and goodwill. 

 
Thematic Sentence: John 19:41 

There was a garden near the place where he was cruc
ified, and in that garden was a tomb 
in which no one had ever been laid. They placed Jes
us in this tomb. 
 
Hymn:
 When Mary Through the Garden Went 
 
(Flowers are brought forward) 

 
The Sequence---Exultet for Easter 2011: 
the following text was spoken in unison, then 
read by Mark slowly, as interpreted by our movement
 choir 
 
Love, love, when you wake us, 

when you hold our face 
 in your hands,  
we want to rise up into the real air of your 
 touch and laugh at everything  
that is not the law of happiness.    

 
Drenched in the sun, 

we are nowhere else but here.     

 
words
 from my good friend
 Kim Vaeth, 1999, from
 Her Yes, After the Cold War 
 
   The First Reading
 comes from Marianne Sawicki, a professor of philoso
phy at Penn 
State, and a rather brilliant scholar in early Chri
stian origins. This is from her book 
Seeing The Lord, 1994. 

 
Resurrection, in first-century Jewish thought, was 
expected as part of the new age that 
was going to begin. Opinions varied as to the scope
, or whether it would happen at all. 
But the notion 
intended
 a MASS resurrection, a resurrection to a restored 
life here on 
earth, and 
not
 the singular privilege of someone who would appear
 alone here after his 
own death, and then disappear all together. Thus th
e culturally available image of ?rising 
of the dead? was not a good fit for the case of Jes
us. He was forced into that mold, a mold 
with considerable warping. 

 
What then was happening with Jesus before the women
 brought forth their story that he 
rose up and left his tomb empty? His body was being
 recognized in the bodies of other 
genders, classes and ethnicities than his own, leak
ing through the cracks, getting around 
the borders. Jesus didn™t need an empty tomb until 
he became the fulfiller of prophecies. 
 
The Second Reading
 is from the ecstatic poet James Broughton (the Rum
i of America, in 
my opinion) from his collection Lauds. This poem is
 exactly 30 years old. 
 
I am the old dreamer that never sleeps 

I am timekeeper of the timeless dance 

I preserve the long rhythms of the earth 

and fertilize the rounds of desire. 

 
In my evergreen arboretum 

I raise flowering hopes for the world 

I plant seeds of perennial affection 

and wait for their passionate bloom. 

 
Would you welcome that sight if you saw it? 

Revalue the view you have lost? 

Could you wake to the innocent morning 

and follow the risks of your heart? 

 
Every day I grow a dream in my garden 

where the beds are laid out for love. 

When will you come to embrace it 

and join in the joy of the dance? 

 
Sermon 

 
So today is Easter. Our English word for this day, 
Easter, is somewhat unique in the 
world. It distinguishes us from most other language
s spoken in the world. In Greek and 
Bulgarian, today is called Pashka, in Russian, Pask
ha. In French, Pâcques. In Italian, 
Pasqua, in Indonesian, Paskah, in Norwegian Paske, 
in Spanish Pascua, all of which 

   come from, some of you will have guessed, the Hebre
w word for the Jewish freedom 
holiday, Passover, Pesakh.  Some linguists think th
e German word for Easter, Ostern, is 
related, but they™re not quite sure how. 

 
But in English, it™s Easter, which sounds an awful 
lot like the direction 
East
. Which 
makes sense, because a man, now called the Venerabl
e Bede, who lived in the 700s back 
at the very beginning of our language, asserts that
 the word Easter comes from Eoster-
monath, or the Month of April, named, he thought, f
or a long forgotten goddess of the 
dawn, and thus of the East, named Eoster. We have a
pparently never found supportive 
evidence from anyone else in England to support wha
t he says. We have, at most, a lot of 
conjecture at this point. 

 
In a few other languages, like Czech and Polish, Ea
ster is called, by words that translate, 
?The Great Day,? or even, ?The Great Night.? And in
 Serbian and Japanese for example, 
today is simply referred to as ?Resurrection day.? 
  
Resurrection is a word that predates Easter by a lo
ng shot. Egyptians, Greeks, some 
Asians and even some liberal Jews in the first cent
ury, called the Pharisees, all spoke of 
it. (More conservative Jews in the days of Jesus, t
he priesthood in particular, thought it 
was a rather nutty idea.) For some, resurrection wa
s a symbolic, or even a political 
expression, but, for others, it was literal hope of
 a return from death, as real as rain.  
 
But as Marianne Sawicki points out, for the Jews wh
o did believe in the concept, it was 
never
 used in the singular. Never. It always referred a 
whole group of people rising up at 
the same time. There was no privilege given to any 
particular person. It was never going 
to be one great big round stone rolling away from t
he mouth of a tomb, but 
all 
of them, 
together. At the same time. And so, Sawicki says, t
he creators of the resurrection stories 
in the gospels had to distort the original idea a g
reat deal.   ?He was 
forced
 into that 
mold,? she writes with power, ?a mold with consider
able warping.? 
  

Then, Sawicki asks the following amazing question, 
and answers it: ?What then was 
happening with Jesus before the women brought forth
 their story that he rose up and left 
his tomb empty? His body was 
being recognized
 in the bodies of other genders, classes 
and ethnicities than his own,
 leaking through the cracks, getting around the bor
ders.? 
 
The empty tomb story is a later addition to the sto
ry of Jesus. As Sawicki says, he didn™t 
need one until he became a fulfiller of prophecies,
 that is, until his followers tried to find 
biblical allusions to give meaning to his tragic de
ath.  Jesus™ body was probably ?buried? 
by being thrown into a common pit, like everyone el
se who was executed in those days 
by the Romans. By forcing such a humiliating conclu
sion, the Romans eliminated the 
necessary mourning rituals of family and friends of
 the deceased, a cruel finale to an 
awful death. This loss of a mourning site was espec
ially terrible in the ancient near east, 
with its proud traditions of women taking care of t
he bodies of, and ritually mourning, the 
dead. Men had little to do with such things; their 
grief was often contained and 
suppressed by strict cultural conventions. Women, h
owever, were the ones who washed 
the bodies, anointed them for burial with scented o
ils, wrapped them in cloth, and did the 

   public mourning. They were often trained from birth
 to weep together in public 
ceremonially, almost like a choir of tears.  In man
y Mediterranean cultures of the present 
day, including my own ancestral culture, this custo
m has still not died out. 
 
And it™s from this tradition of mourning at tombs t
hat the first Easter stories stem. Traces 
of these ideas are found in the gospel stories of t
he women coming to the tomb of Jesus to 
wash and anoint his body. Other traces of these ide
as are found in the gospel stories that 
have come down to us. People only recognizing this 
risen Jesus 
in the bodies of other 
people
 who are still alive
. Like the story found in the Gospel of Luke about 
the dusty 
traveler–a stranger– walking along the road. Like t
he nameless cook making breakfast 
at the beach found in John. Like the stranger who e
ats a bit of honeycomb with them in 
the Gospel of Luke. The most famous example among t
hese Easter stories is the one in 
the Gospel of John where Mary of Magdala interprets
 a poor slave, that is, a gardener, as 
the risen Jesus. The gardener, in fact, is taking c
are of the very garden where Jesus™ tomb 
was, according to John. 

 
Gardens. Not something I know much about. I live in
 a loft downtown. Oh, I grow a few 
kitchen herbs–rosemary, mint, tarragon– on my balco
ny rail, but I am not Mr. 
Greenjeans by any means. 

 
But, as someone who reads a lot for his work, I do 
recognize the literary 
meaning
 of 
placing the tomb of Jesus ?in a garden.? The image 
of the garden is found at the very 
beginning of the Hebrew scriptures, the well-known 
Garden of Eden. When the author of 
John places the tomb in a garden, it™s not geograph
y, but a reference to the original 
mythic garden. The mythic garden where the tree of 
life used to be. The tree of life–the 
fruit of which would keep people from dying. Keep t
he flowers from dying. Keep 
everything the same. The Garden of Eden, in short, 
was a magic garden.  
 
A garden just like the one in our story this mornin
g. A garden where the plants and 
flowers never droop or die. Where the rabbits won™t
 do what comes naturally and eat the 
lettuce; where the produce is gigantic, and glows i
n the dark. Where all of our wishes and 
whims come true. Where nothing changes for the wors
e, ever, and nothing is lost, ever. A 
fantasy place.  

 
And, a place, I am sorry to say, where I often live
 sometimes myself, thinking in my heart 
that death is not something that is ever going to h
appen to me. I am aware that I often 
think of death as a surprise, some trick. It™s neve
r expected–even when I am expecting 
it. Thinking of it is always a subject to be avoide
d. 
 
But in the Easter interpretation of the Garden of E
den, there is no tree of life in the center 
of the garden. There 
is
, however
, 
a 
tomb
 at the center of the garden. Death is thus 
declared as part of the garden cycle. No flower blo
oms forever. They all wilt eventually. 
Death is part of life.  

 
   The older magic garden with its tree of life, does 
not exist any more. And, the Easter 
story suggests, we were probably right to leave suc
h a garden, that is, leave the notion 
that things last forever, or that we can have the w
orld as we like it.  
 
The Easter story adds another detail, however. It s
ays that the tomb is empty. In other 
words, although death is part of reality, it is not
 as powerful as life. Life, as the flowers 
reveal to us every spring, always blooms again. Jus
t as life always rises again in new 
people being born, year after year. These children 
grow and become new adults over 
time. They are alive. They change. 

 
The dead never change, however. Death is the chief 
example of changelessness in the 
world.  

 
But life is growth. Life is risk and freedom. The g
arden of life grows and blooms in the 
spring each year, and we bring them to this table e
very year on Easter, a thousand flowers 
in common vessels, a magnificent sight.  The poet J
ames Broughton asks us this in his 
poem, 
Gardener of Eden
:  
 
Would you welcome that sight if you saw it? 

Revalue the view you have lost? 

Could you wake to the innocent morning 

and follow the risks of your heart? 

 
He speaks of what it means to plant a garden: 

I raise flowering hopes for the world 

I plant seeds of perennial affection 

and wait for their passionate bloom. 

 
In other words, the flowers, though they don™t last
 forever, will come up again next year. 
They will look much the same, but they will be grow
ing in the mulch of flowers that 
grew before them, and are rotting into rich soil. T
hose new flowers on the table next to 
me aren™t the same flowers as the ones which were h
ere last year, but they are just as 
beautiful, just as diverse, just as stunning and ju
st as fragile. 
 
And it™s this insight which provides me with a way 
to see Easter these days. It™s a 
celebration about life and death. It™s about, in fa
ct, the life and death of an ancient 
teacher, and his relationships. But it™s not just a
bout his relationships. It™s about your 
relationships and my relationships. It™s about your
 life and death, and it™s about 
my
 life 
and death too.  

 
Here™s how I have been seeing it. Here is the comfo
rt–the ?flowering hope,? to use 
Broughton™s image– that gets me through the day, th
e weeks and the years.  
 
I say that, right now, you do not see all of me. Yo
u only see the present form of me. Part 
of me has already died. Part of me is already gone.
 Where is the fellow who was 
composing this sermon last night? Gone! Where is th
e boy of six who played at mud in 

   his grandma™s rock garden? Gone! Where is the facto
ry worker in Detroit making springs 
for Dodge trucks, or the sculptor fashioning figure
s out of terra cotta in college? Gone? 
Where is the happy man in a long relationship of lo
ve? Gone. Where is the shy, skinny 
teenager walking the halls of the house at 15414 Sp
ringgarden Ave in Detroit? The house 
is still there, I suppose, but who knows who is liv
ing there now. I™m not, that™s for sure. 
The ?me? that lived there is dead and buried in a t
omb of not very clear memory.   
 
Let me make it more clear. If I suffered a car acci
dent and lost my leg, would I lose 
?me?? If I lost my address, as I have many times–wi
th every move–or lost my hearing, 
as my doctor tells me I am, would I be losing the m
ost essential part of me, the most alive 
part of me?  

 
It seems to me these days, as I think over my life,
 that the most important, that is, the 
most alive, parts of me are invisible. They cannot 
be placed on a scale. They are not my 
addresses, my phone numbers, my body parts, my form
erly brown and long hair, or my 
present blood sugar count. These visible things all
 change, and eventually all of them–
 every single one of them– will pass away. But my lo
ve for my son, Tony, my love for 
my mother Elisa, my love for my sister Lynne, or my
 cousin Sergio; my love for my 
friends Richard, or Doug or Kevin or Kim, is the mo
st real part of me. I have planted 
these seeds of love in the garden of the world.  I 
water them daily with attention and care. 
Even if I have to weed the garden now and then–some
 friendships simply end–I still 
see the garden growing. The blossoms opening. Not t
he same as last year, but alive, and 
beautiful–and connected by love to the most alive p
art of me.  
 
When it comes time for me to die, I have every inte
ntion of dabbling in a bit of 
resurrection myself–not of my body, but of the love
 I leave behind–the best part of me, 
the seeds I™ve sown for potential harvest one day. 
You won™t recognize me–I may look 
like a gardener then, or a cook making breakfast on
 the beach, or dusty traveler, a 
stranger going down the road. Who knows? And it™s n
ot important that you recognize me 
by name–after all, that™s not very important either
 in the scheme of things. I could 
change it even today with a stroke of a pen, and th
en who would I be? No, I am not even 
my name. But I am alive and my aliveness will keep 
going once I™m gone. 
 
The ancients were right when they joked, ?You can™t
 take it with you.? No, not at all. 
You have to leave it right here. The echoes of the 
love, devotion, kindness, healing, for-
giveness, and justice work that you leave behind ar
e the most alive parts of you. As far as 
I am concerned, neither my ego, nor even my memorie
s and hopes, are more important 
than the quality of the relationships I am woven in
to over the years. 
 
Jesus of Galilee was executed, and his body was thr
own into a pit, most scholars say, on 
the day we now call April 7th, 1,981 years ago. But
 when Bishop Tutu conducts the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission in South Africa
, or Dorothy Day opens a 
Hospitality House, or my Mennonite friends choose h
ospital work and refuse to kill in 
war, or the Unitarian Universalist Service Committe
e sends help to Japan or Haiti, or 
people from this congregation help resurrect a shat
tered New Orleans or research for our 

   BREAD organization the problems of our shared commu
nity, I wonder why anyone 
thinks that so weak a thing as death on a Roman cro
ss can silence such a life. 
 
So call today Easter if you favor English, or Pashk
a, or Pasqua, or just the Great Day. 
Don™t look now, but you might at least begin to hea
r the rattle of many, many stones 
rolling away from the tombs in the garden of this w
orld.  
 
I close with the inimitable Broughton: 

 
Every day I grow a dream in my garden 

where the beds are laid out for love. 

When will you come to embrace it 

and join in the joy of the dance? 

 
Offering 

We who have been blest with this place 

may also choose to bless it. 

We who have been blest with our lives 

may also choose to live lives of gratitude 

by sharing the responsibility 

for this, our common house of spirit. 

By electronic means of the modern era, 

or by the ancient spiritual practice of the offerin
g, we give and bless.  
 
The Flower Ceremony
,  
established by Norbert Capek 

 
Consecration of the Flowers, 
adapted from the words of Norbert Capek 
 
Jolinda Stevens, Religious Education Director      
  
 
Spirit of Life 

let these flowers speak to us this morning 

of our lives here upon the earth. 

Our lives beneath the sun, 

beneath the rain, 

beneath the stars. 

 
EAST 

 
May they remind us, amid diversities  

of gifts, and diversities of knowledge 

and feeling, to find strength in our 

differences, and unity in our common 

desire to live just and happy lives. 

 
   SOUTH 

 
May they remind us of the value of true friendship,
 where we may share the realities of 
our hidden heart, and support each other. 

 
WEST 

 
May they make a portrait of a cherished 

community, where distinctions are expressions 

of beauty, not sources of anxiety. 

 
NORTH 

 
May we never compete with each other,  

but cooperate together to build a future 

of peace, justice and freedom for all. 

Let these flowers remind us that it is not importan
t what we look like, or whether our 
efforts are great or small at any given time, but t
hat nevertheless, all of us are in this 
together. 

 
EVERYONE (LED BY JOLINDA) 

 
Now kindle the flame wherever sorrow reigns. Tell t
he stories of those who 
overcame their troubles. Breathe in the flowers of 
faithfulness, the air of love. Join 
your heart to the hearts of all who suffer. Let wou
nds heal, and eyes shine again 
with joy. 

(words from a Flower Ceremony hymn by Norbert Capek
) 
 
  

 
