Wednesday, April 21, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "After these things the word of the Lord came unto Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram; I am thy shield, and THY EXCEEDING GREAT REWARD." Gen. 15:1. "But without faith it is impossible to please him; for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that HE IS A REWARDER OF THEM THAT DILIGENTLY SEEK HIM." Heb. 11:6. "Be strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak; for YOUR WORK SHALL BE REWARDED." 2 Chron. 15:7. "The righteous shall rejoice WHEN HE SEETH THE VENGEANCE; he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked. So that a man shall say, VERILY THERE IS A REWARD FOR THE RIGHTEOUS; VERILY HE IS A GOD THAT JUDGETH IN THE EARTH, (i.e., from whence the term "Earth-Judgment" derives, such as the recent coal mine explosions in Virginia, wherein 25 + 4 were killed, and which we call GodSmacks, requiring that we accurately discern "the signs of the times," [Mat. 16:3] and that we "rightly divide the word of truth." [1 Tim. 2:15])." Psa. 58:10,11.  Here the "REWARD" from our Father for His Elect consists of their enormous comfort, joy, and boundless satisfaction in witnessing God's holy vengeance falling upon the heads of their persecutors and oppressors; to wit: "And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?" Rev. 7:10. "And the Lord (Jesus) said, Hear what the unjust judge saith. And shall not God AVENGE HIS OWN ELECT, WHICH CRY DAY AND NIGHT UNTO HIM, though he bear long with them? I TELL YOU THAT HE WILL AVENGE THEM SPEEDILY. Nevertheless when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?" (Lk. 18:6-8)  This rhetorical question by the Lord Jesus Christ suggests that He WILL NOT find "the faith of God's Elect" ­ (i.e., "Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to THE FAITH OF GOD'S ELECT," Titus 1:1) ­ on the earth when He returns to the earth the second time in power and great glory(!)(!)(!). Beloved, De minimis does not count. When the number of a given population is so small as to be a statistical zero, that population no longer counts in the grand scheme of things. It is called the De minimis doctrine ("De minimis non curat lex," which means, the law does not concern itself about trifles). Something like that legal doctrine applies here.  When only the little flock in Topeka is left on the earth contending for the faith once delivered to the saints (Jude 3), the end is very near. It also means our calling and election is sure, as in the days of Noah, with Noah and his family, except Ham. And, remember the context, Beloved. The Lord Jesus is talking about a diminutive, mercilessly oppressed, incessantly and irrationally persecuted body of people ­ a little flock of slaughter, here called, "HIS OWN ELECT," (Zech. 11:4,7 and Lk. 18:7). "For unto you (i.e., HIS OWN ELECT) it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, BUT ALSO TO SUFFER FOR HIS SAKE; Having the same conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear to be in me." (Phil. 1:29,30)  Moreover, at the time the Savior spake ­ and the Holy Ghost recorded ­ the Parable of the Unjust Judge to His little flock, His own elect, there is a strong suggestion that they were about to faint and fall away under the unending stress of severe and long-lived persecution, such that the little flock of slaughter were crying to God day and night for vengeance. Beloved, these dear ones, our fellow-servants of the Lord Jesus Christ, had reached the end of their rope so to speak. When the Savior promised them what they were sighing and crying for; to wit: SPEEDY AND JUST AND ADEQUATE VENGEANCE UPON THEIR SATANIC OPPRESSORS AND PERSECUTORS (!)(!)(!) ­ I say, when Christ assured them that vengeance ­ (which was the only acceptable answer to their pitiful and incessant prayers and supplications and groanings which cannot be uttered ­ that vengeance was speedily on the way ["I tell you that he will avenge them speedily," Lk. 18:8]; He then added these very unique words, which require some additional expository comment; to wit:  Wednesday, April 21, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  "Nevertheless when the Son of man cometh, SHALL HE FIND (THE) FAITH ON THE  EARTH?(!)(!)" (Luke 18:8)  In the first place, the definite article limiting adjective "THE" immediately precedes "FAITH." It's not just any old faith, but it's "THE FAITH." And THE CONTEXT ­ rightly dividing the word of truth, and accurately discerning the signs of the times ­ LEAVES NO DOUBT just what "THE FAITH" the Holy Ghost and the Lord Jesus Christ are talking about, and who possesses this wonderful "THE FAITH."(!)(!) These amazing people are called God's "OWN ELECT," (Lk. 18:7) which means that their calling and election is assured; which means that they are as sure for Heaven as if they were already possessed of their new bodies and walking streets of gold. These remarkable people have outraged the whole world by simply preaching "THE FAITH OF GOD'S ELECT" (Tit. 1:1) to all mankind ­ for the love that they bear to the King of the place.  Recall again the preamble to this parable; to wit: "And he spake a parable unto them to this end, that men (i.e., God's men, or God's Elect) ought always to pray, and not to faint." Lk. 18:1. When the Son of man comes, will he find the kind of holy faith that inspires bitter persecutions and violent rejections of both the messenger and the message? Will He find such vital, active faith anywhere on this earth? Answer: NO. When the Son of man comes, will he find the kind of holy faith that inspires praying as the only antidote to fainting under the weight of universal opposition, defamation, vilification and reproach? Answer: NO. When the Son of man comes, will he find the kind of faith that drives God's elect to plead, with strong cryings and tears, with groanings that cannot be uttered, crying out to God day and night for vengeance upon all his murdering, and prevaricating enemies, who are seeking his utter destruction, 24/7? Answer: NO. When the Son of man comes, will he find the kind of faith that sustained Paul in Asia? As he later described; to wit: "For we would not, brethren, have you ignorant of our trouble which came to us in Asia, that we were pressed out of measure, above strength, insomuch that we despaired even of life; But we had the sentence of death in ourselves, that we should not trust in ourselves, but in God which raiseth the dead; Who delivered us from so great a death, and doth deliver; in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us?" (2 Cor. 1:8-10)  Answer: NO. Beloved, let us take a mental inventory. Except for our loved ones at Westboro Baptist Church, do you know of any person on this earth, at this hour, about whom you would be confidently willing to say; to wit: If the Lord Jesus should return to earth in power and glory today, as He said He would, on a day and at an hour certain, this or that person has the faith of God's Elect, such as would entitle him to a place in Heaven? I say, aside from your fellow church members at WBC, do you know of any such faithful, Heaven-bound person? Answer: NO. I don't know of any such person, off hand. And I have been preaching and looking for such "peculiar people" (Tit. 2:14) for 64 years. In fact, except for my loved ones here at WBC, I can't recall a single person crying day and night unto God for vengeance, citing Lk. 18:7,8; to wit: "And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless when the Son of man cometh, shall he find (the) faith on the earth?" Lk. 18:7,8.  Furthermore, these enigmatic statements about everlasting divine vengeance being inflicted upon the overwhelming mass of mankind, as punishment for persecuting the tiny remnant of God's own elect ­ is really a very simple proposition, and is only made complicated by the deliberate perversions of Scripture by the twisted Arminian theology of demon-possessed preachers, teachers, and assorted offscouring of academia. Since the days of Cain and Abel ­ and down to the present hour ­ the nonElect (those predestinated to go to HELL when they die, i.e., those whose names are not written in the Lamb's book of life) ­ have persecuted to the death those whose names ARE written in the Lamb's book of life, i.e., those who are predestinated from the beginning of the world to go to HEAVEN when  Wednesday, April 21, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  they die. It's just that simple. To wit: "And Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare  Cain, and said, I have gotten a man from the Lord. And she again bare his brother Abel. And Abel  was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground. And in the process of time it came to pass,  that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the Lord. And Abel, he also brought of  the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof. And the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his  offering. But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect. And Cain was very wroth, and his  countenance fell. And the Lord said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance  fallen? If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door.  And unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him. And Cain talked with Abel his  brother; and it came to pass, when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother,  and slew him. And the Lord said unto Cain, Where is Abel thy brother? And he said, I know not; Am  I my brother's keeper? And he said, What hast thou done? the voice of thy brother's blood crieth  unto me from the ground. And now art thou cursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to  receive thy brother's blood from thy hand." Gen. 4:1-11.  Beloved, the holy blood of God's Elect people has a mournful cry in it. It cries to God from the ground which has opened her mouth to receive it from the non-Elect people's hand who slew them ­ all the way from righteous Abel (Mat. 23:35 and Lk. 11:51) to the spirits of just men made perfect and crying for vengeance from God from under the holy altar; to wit: "And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? (Rev. 6:10)  God's Elect see very clearly that Cain, the first man born of woman in human history, was typical of every reprobate, i.e., every non-Elect son and daughter of Adam. "Ye are of your father the devil," our dear Lord Jesus says to every single one of Adam's corrupt seed, "and the lusts of your father YE WILL DO. HE WAS A MURDERER FROM THE BEGINNING (think, CAIN [!][!][!])." Yes, Beloved, such is the faith of God's Elect, which the Savior suggests will not be found on earth when He appears the second time. Put another way, when Cain and Abel stood on the killing fields of the primeval, freshly-cursed earth, and argued religion (i.e., "And Cain talked with Abel his brother; and it came to pass, when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and slew him." Gen. 4:8). I say, at that moment of murder, Abel stood, representatively, and for all time, for all God's Elect; and, at that moment of murder Cain stood representatively and for all time, for all the non-Elect, or Reprobates.  The issue was, is, and always will be, eternal salvation; ergo: Calvinism vs. Lying, Murdering Arminianism. The Saved vs. The Lost. Heaven vs. Hell. Such is the faith of God's Elect ­ i.e., those things just articulated. When the dear Lord Jesus returns to earth to gather His Elect together for the purpose of recognizing, vindicating, avenging, and honoring them; will He find people believing, preaching, and defending the religious doctrines and practices proclaimed in this Sermon? I think not. To wit:  "And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. NEVERTHELESS, when the Son of man cometh, shall he find (the) faith on the earth?" (Lk. 18:7,8)  Hear the Lord Jesus as He preached the Gospel here when He dwelt below; (To wit: "Then came the officers to the chief priests and Pharisees; and they said unto them, Why have ye not brought him? The officers answered, NEVER MAN SPAKE LIKE THIS MAN." Jn. 7:45,46.) Beloved. The Gospel our Lord Jesus preached was a message of divine VENGEANCE upon all those who persecuted His people because of their testimony for Him and His kingdom. No message is clearer in the Bible.  Wednesday, April 21, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  "Wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the children of them which  killed the prophets. Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers. Ye serpents, ye  generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell? Wherefore, behold, I  send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes; and some of them ye shall kill  and crucify; and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and persecute  them from city to city; That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon  the earth, FROM THE BLOOD OF RIGHTEOUS ABEL unto the blood of Zacharias son  of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar." (Matt. 23:32-35)  Here is the Lord Jesus Christ preaching to throngs of people living in the 1st Century AD, and charging them with what amounts to the murder of Abel, shed admittedly by his brother Cain some 4 thousand years earlier (!)(!)(!). Beloved, we are here dealing with the righteous laws of God governing His Heavenly Kingdom, and we should bow in humble adoration and praise and thanksgiving, that His grace has delivered us from the wrath to come. To wit:  "There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rideth upon the heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the sky. The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms; and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee; and shall say, Destroy them... Happy art thou, O Israel; who is like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy excellency! and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee; and thou shalt tread upon their high places." (Dt. 33:26-29)  God's holy Vengeance is the exclusive prerogative of The Almighty. It is one of His most important attributes, which He is very jealous over, and which he cherishes, guards and exercises with extreme care. Our Father warns his children not to meddle with His Vengeance; to wit: "Dearly beloved, AVENGE NOT YOURSELVES, but rather give place unto wrath; for it is written, VENGEANCE IS MINE, I WILL REPAY, saith the Lord." Rom. 12:19.  Indeed, it is His glorious attribute of Vengeance that identifies Him as the God that we know. We know Him by many of His Holy Names, Titles and Attributes. But, Beloved, I submit that if one Attribute dominates all others in Scripture, it is His awful Vengeance ­ followed closely by, and appended to, His blazing, fiery hot JEALOUSY; to wit: "For we know him that hath said, VENGEANCE belongeth unto me, I will recompense, saith the Lord. And again, The Lord shall judge (avenge) his people. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God." (Heb. 10:30,31) "For thou shalt worship no other god; for the Lord, whose name is JEALOUS, is a jealous God." (Ex. 34:14)  "Ye shall not go after other gods, of the gods of the people which are round about you; (For the Lord thy God is a JEALOUS God among you) lest the anger of the Lord thy God be kindled against thee, and destroy thee from off the face of the earth." (Dt. 6:14,15)  New Testament update: "Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils; ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's table, and of the table of devils. Do we provoke the Lord to JEALOUSY? Are we stronger than he?" 1 Cor. 10:21,22. The last verse of 1st John: "Little children, keep yourselves from idols. Amen." 1 Jn. 5:21.  Gill: "Nothing is more highly resented by God, or stirs him up more to wrath and fury, and to inflict punishment; He cannot bear, nor will He admit of a rival; He is JEALOUS of His own honor; nor will he give or allow others to give His praise and glory to others."  I love you. Amen.  
