
The Role of Ozone

  The inhabitants of Punta Arenas in Chile became prisoners in their own homes
  in October 2000. They weren't hemmed in by insurrection or the threat of
  infectious disease, but by the sun blazing above them. A month earlier, NASA
  scientists had announced the largest-ever hole in the ozone layer above
  Antarctica, over an area more than three times the size of the U.S. By October
  it had extended over the tips of Chile and Argentina, opening up over Punta
  Arenas. As harmful Ultraviolet-B (UV-B) radiation spread over their city,
  those venturing out during daylight hours risked irreversible damage to their
  skin and eyes, which could result in cancer and cataracts. In neighboring
  Argentina, citizens of Ushuaia were warned that unprotected skin could burn
  after just seven minutes' exposure. The filter of ozone high up in the
  stratosphere had been whisked off and the ultraviolet radiation was pouring
  in through the hole, a bit like a beam of light falling through a magnifying
  lens.

Riches

  I have an abiding bliss
  and a lost fortune,
  one like a rose,
  the other like a thorn.
  I was not cut off from that
  which was stolen from me.
  I have an abiding bliss
  and a lost fortune,
  and I am rich with purple
  and with melancholy.
  Oh, how beloved is the rose,
  and what a lover, the thorn!
  Like the double contour
  of twin fruits, I have an abiding bliss
  and a lost fortune.

Benedictus Terrae

  Blessed is the earth, our only home, 
  our holy home.
  Blessed is the earth, our only home,
  our common home.
  Blessed is the earth, our only home,
  our ailing home.
  Blessed is the earth, our only home,
  our fragile home.
  Blessed is the earth, our only home,
  our common responsibility.
  Blessed is the earth, our only home,
  our holy responsibility.
  Blessed is the earth, our only home,
  our only home, our only home.
  Blessed is the earth. May we love it
  even more than we love ourselves,
  day upon day, year upon year.
