THERE is hardly a Hindu person in India who has not heard the name of Saint Ramdas. He was a perfect and realized Being and was the Master of Shivaji the Great, the founder of the Maratha Empire in the seventeenth century. He advised this Royal disciple not merely in spiritual matters but also in daily matter as well as those of political concern. Venabai also had the fortune of finding her master in this Great person—Ramdas. 
There was a person named Deshpande, who lived at Kolhapur, and he had a daughter named 'Vena'. She was married early in her childhood and lost her husband, when she was not even ten years old. After this sad and most unfortunate event, she used to pass her time in reading religious books and serving her father-in-law and mother-in-law. Once, while she was reading Ramdas came there as a mendi­cant and asked for something to eat. Little Venabai who was then only eleven years old was so much impressed and attracted by the personality of her future Master, that she requested her mother-in­law to give him some milk. But, she did not give him the milk as she wanted it for some purpose; and Ramdas went away. Venabai was very much upset at this. 
After some days, Ramdas came again for the next time and again found Venabai reading. This time, he asked her the name of the book she was reading; and after knowing that, he asked her if she understood anything of that. She modestly replied, ''How can a girl of my age understand this high philosophy? I only know that I should read something good; that is what I am doing. But if your religious highness permits me, I would like to ask you some ques­tions." The Master was delighted at the intelligent answer of the lit­tle girl and gladly agreed to grant her request. Then, she asked him about twenty-five questions, some of which are as follow:— 

''Who is Jiva?'', ''Who is Shiva?'', ''What is Maya?'', ''Who is said to be 'born'?'', ''Who is said to be dead?'' 
The Master was extremely surprised at the type of questions which were decidedly extra­ordinary for her age. All these questions were composed in an abhanga and Ramdas also gave answers to all of them in abhanga and went away. Since this time, Venabai began to feel that Ramdas was her Master and longed for meeting him again. Day after day, the longing increased and shortly afterwards, she went to Kolhapur to her father's house, where she met Ramdas again. Here he advised her to repeat the name of Rama— the Lord. She requested him to take her with him, but he said that the proper time had not yet come. She was extremely sorry at this; and since then she used to pass her time in repeating the name of the Lord and thinking about the Master, waiting for him. The members of the family, on both sides did not like this; and people, began to say that the girl had become mad after the Sadhu due to the carelessness of the parents about her conduct. But Venabai would not be pursuaded; and at last, her parents-in-law sent her to her father's house. The father and the mother also did not show any tolerance: and one day, they gave her a dose of strong poison; and locking her in a room declared that she was bitten by a serpent. Venabai's body began to burn with the poison; and she wanted water to drink but could not get it. The colour of her skin was very fair; but the poison turned it into a dark colour. At last, Venabai could not bear the pangs of death; and she remembered her Master. She bowed down to him (imagin­ing him to be present) and was ready to breath her last. But all of a sudden, to her great relief and surprise, she saw her Master, standing in front of her. He gave her some water to drink from his Kamandalu (begging bowl); and she at once felt relieved of her pain. Then, the Master said that the change in the colour of her skin was going to help in her future, for owing to her beauty, she would have become the target of public criticism. 

While they were thus talking, Venabai's father came to the door to see if she had breathed her last, but he was surprised to hear her talking with somebody: and he was still more surprised when he unlocked the door and saw that the person talking with his daughter was none other than Ramdas. When the door was opened Ramdas went away without exchanging a word. But Venabai's father repented very much for his cruel treatment to his little daughter; and finding that she was now alive due to the divine grace of her Master he handed her over to Him. Henceforth, she lived with her Master enjoying the divine bliss of his sacred company. Once, in the later years of her life, she was asked by the Master to go and take charge of a math (monastery) which he had founded. But, saying that she did not want to stay away from the Master and that she wished to leave her body at the feet of the Master, she modestly refused to go there. In Shake 1660, her last desire was fulfilled. She was asked to deliver lectures on the book she has written, which narrates the wedding ceremony of Rama, one of the Avatars of the Lord; and on the fourteenth day of this programme, just after finishing the last word of her lecture, she came to her Master who was standing by, handed over her Veena (munical instrument) to Him and placing her head upon his feet breathed her last. 
The book of Venabai which is above referred to is one of the famous books of her century. The style is lucid, simple and sweet. The book is so popular in the learned circles that it is often prescribed by the Universities for post-graduate studies. Besides this book, she has written some more poetry. In one piece of poetry she describes the demands of the subjects of Ayodhya when Rama comes to the throne. In another piece of poetry, she describes the conversation of Rama and the boatsman who took Him through the river, when He went into exile. Most of the poems are about the life of Rama; but she has also written many highly metaphysical poems.
