 “I have come to help people to realize their ideals in daily life.” 
On the first view it seems as if there are not any principles in our judgments of approval and disapproval. They seem to be all unrelated to each other. Chaos seems to be the most strikingfeature of our value-judgments. But it is possible to discern in them evidence of increasing reference to an objective ideal. This ideal is seen to have claims upon all individuals alike; and as it is not something private to a singleindividual but is a universal regulative principle, all value-judgments made by reference to it are objective.
    The objectivity of values is thus ultimately derived from the operation in practical con-sciousness of universal principle. Some such universal principlegiving unity to the realm of values is a necessary postulate of all moral 
—Shri Meher Baba 

science. Philosophical speculationcannot rest satisfied with an unresolved pluralism of values. It seeks to discover some common meaning in and through them.
It is possible to look upon the unitary principle of values as the ultimate goal of the life of the individual who eventually attains it through the pursuit of the apparently diverse and unrelated values of his practical conscious­ness. They are not like so many will-o-the-wisps leading him nowhere. They might all, in the long run, bring about some kind of attainment which has an ultimate and eternal significance.
It is sometimes argued that the pursuit of values is in its nature never-ending. The individual can at best hope to approximate to his ideal increasingly, though the idea 
*This series of articles is based upon my thesis submitted to the University of London in1933. 
always eludes him and remains beyond his reach. He must, therefore, learn to take delight in the progress towards per­fection. Not perfection but pro­gress towards perfection is his real concern. From the philosophical point of view, such a position is untenable. 
Life cannot be a perpetual going on without arriving anywhere. 
There can be no approximation or progress towards the ideal unless it can be attained at some stage. If it always remains as unattainable as ever, how can it be held that he ever comes nearer to it than before? There is no escape from positing a perfection which is the goal of human endeavour. 
But at the same time that ultimate perfection is not a purely transcendental goal to which the ordinary values of practical consciousness are merely instrumental. The end is also in a sense in the process. We cannot deplete the present life of the individual of all true values, and make of his dim future its real repository. The goal is also immanent through­out the process of attaining it. And from this standpoint, the realm of values is a kind of differentiated whole, 
a unity in difference, expressing itself in diverse values which are so many moments in its totality. 
The so-called "conflict of values'' is a misleading expres­sion. There is no real conflict between true values. If there seems to be a conflict among the diverse values of practical life, it is due to the lack of the true understanding of their real meaning. In fact, the conflict really exists not between the different values but between the different "selves" within the individual. They tend to run in diverse directions owing to a confusion born of the ignor­ance of the true value.
    The realm of values must not, however, be looked upon as being a rigid system from which the individual might derive fixed and eternal rules for the guidance of his practical con­sciousness. There is no stan­dard outside the individual with which he might measure everything and give it its proper place in the scheme of life. Nor is life, properly speaking, a scheme comparable with some accurately scanned and a definitely outlined map. It is essentially a creative process. 

In life there are no recurrent instances of a particular type. Every situation in life is unique, and demands a unique solution, a specific response for which there is no precedent. An earnestness to respond to the situation in a way that would express the true value is, in such cases, more helpful than an allegiance to some dead formula. It is through the movement of life itself that it is possible to see and realize the true values. 
The ideal, then, is not some principle external to the indivi­dual. It is operative within the individual as his innermost being. In a very important sense it is the very reality of the indi­vidual. The individual becomes utterly false abstraction when he is regarded as complete apart from the ideal which he tries to realize. He is a continuous becoming, and that which he tries to become is the clue to understand the process of that becoming. 
The ideal is, however, not always explicitly present to human consciousness. When new values are created, the individual does not begin by apprehending them in the realm of facts. A negative value-judgment on a situation always seems to precede any attempts to create a new value. All that the practical consciousness is aware of is that a particular situation is unsatisfactory. This starts the movement for altering the situation. But the very possibility of the individual being dissatisfied with a situa­tion presupposes an implicit awareness of that which will bring him satisfaction. The ideal is thus clearly necessary for any significant practical activity. 
It is true that the individual cannot fully know the actual contents of this ideal. All that is signified by words, like "goodness", "truth", or "beauty" can give him only the formal features of the ideal. They do not help the individual to know in advance what things are really good or beautiful or true. Nor can the individual know the total contents of the ideal by actual observation of everything, which is good or beautiful or true, even if it were possible for him to do so. For life is not a sealed book. It is dynamic and creative, not static and complete. The creation of new values is an important feature of practical consciousness. 

There can be no doubt that the individual can create new values. But the values are not, therefore, his private creations. The sense of creation while realizing values in the realm of existents is an indubitable fact. But the creation is not lawless. Values are not the products of the unrestricted fancy of the individual any more than the truths received by him through his activity of thinking. The individual creates values in the sense of being the author of the activity which brings them into existence. But he can bring them into existence only by virtue of the operation in him of a universal ideal. 
The reality of the operation in practical consciousness of an ideal may be doubted on the ground that no such ideal is explicitly present to human consciousness. But it is the paradox of moral and spiritual life that the good has to be realized before it is known. The moral life comes before the science of ethics. It is not at all the business of the moral philosopher, qua philosopher, to provide life with a standard or create a value which is non­existent. His task is simply to analyse the lives of moral people and bring out the con­cept of the good which is already implicit in them. The concept of the "good" is in a sense an outcome of post­mortem examination. It is not as concept that the good can become a dominating factor in shaping the life of the indivi­dual. It becomes really impor­tant only when it comes to him as a kind of reality which invites him to itself. The moral philosopher wanting to have a science about the good tries to isolate it from the material in which it has got inextricably woven, names it and turns it into an abstract concept, and sometimes finds to his own astonishment that the phantom of his mind cannot explain the many-sided facts of life. 
The ideal can only be known through its realization. Human beings are mostly in the process of realizing it. The self-integration or self-know­ledge of an individual admits of degrees. The individual tries to attain it piecemeal. A clear-eyed understanding of the supreme good in its com­pleteness
can only come to those who have carried on the pursuit of self-knowledge and self-integration to its successful termination. 
As the ideal is not present to human consciousness in the same way in which other facts are, the reality of the ideal is essentially different from the kind of existence which belongs to facts. It is always something that ought to exist. It may or may not be realized in factual existence. As a rule it is only partly realized in existence. 
But that which ought to exist is not in any way less real than that which merely exists. The world of the ought has a certain amount of independence of its own, and it cannot be derived from the realm of facts as such. There is no transition from the merely "is" to the "ought". As Lotze points out, we are on the right track when we "seek in that which should be the ground of that which is". The ideal, therefore, is both real and universal in spite of the fact that it is not explicitly present in our cognitive consciousness in all its completeness. 
As seen above,  the  reality of the ideal is different in kind from the reality of facts. But the ideal is not something altogether unrelated to the realm of facts. It is always being realized in the realm of facts. Individual existents become significant by virtue of their capacity to realize values. Facts exist for the sake of values. 
Corresponding to this essen­tial relation of values to indi­vidual existents there is the primacy of practical conscious­ness over the theoretical. There is a very real sense in which love for "knowledge for its own sake" might be compared with the love of a miser for his hoarded wealth: in both cases there is a preponderance of means over ends. 
But knowledge for its own sake is itself in an important sense a part of practical con­sciousness. It cannot come to exist except as a result of a desire to know the truth. But truth becomes an object of a conative attitude when it is recognised as a value. In the wider sense, therefore, the realm of values explains the total conscious life of per­sons—the theoretical as well as practical consciousness. 

