Nammazhvar means “Our own Saint”. He is the first of our Saints and is said to have born in B. C. 3102 or about 43 days after Lord Sri Krishna left this world at the end of Dvapara age. Srinagari (Tiru-nagari) on the river Tamraparni (in the Tinnevelly District, Southern India) is his birth-place. He was the son of Kariyar and Udaiya-nangaiyar, and the grandson of Porkariyar. Saint Madhura Kavi had already incarnated in a Brahmana family to foretell the advent of St. Nammazhvar. The parents of St. Nammazhavar named him Maran. For sixteen years this child would neither open its eyes or mouth. 
Saint Madhura Kavi travelled far and wide and was returning from Badarikasram to Ayodhya. On the way he saw a brilliant light in the southern direction. That light led him to Srirangham and then to the place where the wonderful child Maran was born. He saw the light or star there, under a Tamarind tree. He saw it in the person of Saint Nammazhvar, who was sitting there absorbed in meditation. Madhura Kavi put him the following question: "If in the womb of what is dead† a subtle thing is born, what doth it eat, and where doth it abide? '' 
“It eateth that: it abideth   there.”‡ 

Madhura Kavi was transported with joy and became our Saint's ardent disciple. The Divine Heart of the Saint poured forth into melodious song the essence of the four Vedas in: 
1 Tiruviruttam—The Essence of Rig-Veda. 
2 Tiruv-Asiryam-The Essence of Yajur-Veda. 
3 Periya-tiruvandadi—The Es­sence of Atharva-Veda. 
4 Tiru-voy-mozhi—The Essence of Sama-Veda. (The Lord said He was Sama Veda: Gita X.22.) He was canonized as the Head of all Saints and Sages (Prapanna-Jana-Kutasthah). 
It is falsely said that even the Dravidians worshipped many gods. It is now admitted that the Rig Veda (the oldest book in the library of mankind) emphatically asserted that there is only One God, who is called by many names. (Ekam Sat, bahuda vipraha vadanti—There is only One God. He is called by many names by the wise.) Our Dravidian Saint also taught the same Truth. A great writer says: "Of the many spiritual truths revealed by our 
Saint—a few of which now find light in English dress in the book called the 'Divine Wisdom of Dravida Saints'—the foremost truth established is the oneness of God, whose highest and most complete conception is even etymologically enshrined in the Holy name of Narayana (the Deity combining within himself the Emanative, Pre­servative, Regenerative etc. powers), whose temporary functional forms for the projection and retraction of the Kosmos, being Brahma and Rudra respectively, and the permanent preservative principle, assuming the name of Vishnu subsisting directly as Vishnu-principle, and indirectly so through the partial functions represented by Brahma and Rudra." 
This is the Saint's fundamental 
teaching on which his other 
teachings are based. 
In my next article I shall deal in a small compass with some of the teachings of our Dravidian Saints and Sages. 
Blessed be our Saints—St. 
Nammazhvar and St. Madhura 
kavi-Azhvar.  

. 
