
THE NEW CENTRE The project of Baba's Universal Ashram proceeds in full swing. Once decided, the Master's activities are so speeded up that even the sea­soned mandali have difficulty to keep pace with his instructions. Wonderful results accrue if one only follows intuitively and with submission the line of action marked out by Baba. Even in Government affairs, where official and depart­mental procedure and action would take months for a plan to fructify, Baba’s quick methods and the impetus he gives to all concerned work wonders to finish it all in as many days. In this particular case the preliminary process of the purchase of lands from the Mysore Government and about forty different private parties, with all the technical and requisite details through which this has to pass, would ordi­narily have taken months to complete. But due to the personal interest and actual co-operation of the Dewan, and 
to the enthusiastic collaboration of his subordinate executives of different departments of the State, all these laborious details were handled and worked out within a few days, a wonderful record that has amazed even the workers themselves. It is indeed a credit to all the State officials and their staff whose untiring efforts were instrumental to the surprisingly quick result. While it is certainly due to the impetus given by the Master to all who participated, we wish to place here on record our deep sense of appreciation for the very sincere and whole-hearted interest and enthusiastic co­operation in this great potential undertaking, as shown primarily by the Dewan, Sir Mirza Ismail, and through him by the departmental executives of the State—the Engineering, Revenue and Judicial in particular. 
Along with this initial work of the purchase of lands, over 560 acres, plans for the nine different blocks, comprising 350 
rooms, which will be the edifices for the huge Spiritual Centre, were worked out and drawn to scale during the month, preparatory for the building operations. 
It is a unique scheme—this great Universal Ashram with its wonderful departmental details, as worked out by the Master, to make it the only institution of its kind in the world, preparing within its walls not only beginners and aspirants of the Path of Spirituality but also highly advanced souls and yogis, and inhabiting even saints from all over, who will all work individually and collectively for the spiritual emancipation of mankind, under the direct and personal supervision, guidance and help of the living Master, Shri Sadguru Meher Baba, The scheme, in its entirety, would be too elaborate for description at this stage. A separate brochure detailing all its departmental working and other description is proposed to be printed later. Meanwhile, it is by way of a passing reference that I give this information for our group and for other spiritual aspirants who may feel inclined to join 
the institution whole-heartedly. Apart from other considerations that will be judged and looked after by the Master himself, the principal qualifications and conditions for admission will be Love of God and Longing for Union. The Master himself will be the sole and supreme authority in directing and the entire functioning of this Universal Ashram. 
FOUNDATION DAY—25TH OF 
OCTOBER 
Baba has fixed the 25th of October for starting the building work on the site at Byramangala, about 22 miles from Bangalore, and he will himself lay the foundation with his august hands. 
Personally he would prefer to do it quietly and in a private gathering of his intimate group and those of the Government officials and staff who actually participated in this work, but looking at the importance of the unique institution that this Centre is proposed to be and the great work of spiritual uplift of humanity intended to be done therein, his group has expressed a desire to keep it open for those of the aspirants in the State who would like to 

come there on the occasion, as well as for the village population, who will all incidentally have the opportunity of having the Master's darshana. It is, therefore, intended to keep it open for all. 
MEHERABAD ASHRAM SHIFTS 
TO BANGALORE 
After Baba definitely decided to remain in Bangalore, the transferring of the entire Meherabad Ashram from Ahmednagar to Bangalore continued. Of course most of the group—about 50—had already left at the same time as Baba in different parties, but others were still staying there, including the inmates of the Mast-Ashram and their supervising staff. This group was the first ordered to be shifted last month, and the whole Mast-Ashram left Meherabad in the middle of September. To bring a party of about 20 of these spiritually-advanced yet mentally deranged masts to a distance of over 600 miles was a job indeed. But the well-trained and hardy members of the Master’s mandali in charge managed it with their faith in the Master’s inner help in this hazardous undertaking, and without any trouble whatsoever brought this strange group safely to all this distance. The masts were unexpectedly quiet all the time, even under the ever-changing conditions and in unfamiliar surroundings, during the long journey of two days, with the exception, however, of one or two funny incidents. 
Ever since their arrival, Baba, as is his custom with these masts, com­menced bathing and feeding them personally. This phase of the Master’s work for the last three years seems to play an important part in his spiritual working, as it has been continued ever since its commencement at Rahuri in 1936 and also during his journeys in India as well as in the West. Even here, the search for new masts continues. Immediately after the Master’s arrival, men from his mandali were designated on the special duty to find masts from this section of Southern India. A few of these have already been brought, bathed and fed by the Master and sent away. Others are still searched after, as the Master wants to collect more from different parts of the country. Interesting details of 
this search, how some of these were brought, their significant remarks, etc. form a separate chapter in itself, which will be dealt with later in these columns. 
BABA IN SECLUSION 
FOR A MONTH 
From the 21st of September Baba has again been in partial seclusion, with fast, for a month, seeing none except his intimate group, who have to carry out his orders for external work. 
BABA’S SECLUSION – NOT 
“MEDITATION” – 
BUT INTERNAL WORK 
This is no period of “meditation” as the world or even the spiritual aspirants may erroneously term it. It must be clearly understood that meditation as such is not for Masters who have already attained Perfection, but is meant as one of the preliminary processes and initial steps for those still on the Path. These periodic “seclusions” by the Master differ from other periods of his life and working in that he sees and interviews none but his intimate group of disciples staying nearby, and even these meetings are very restricted, to certain fixed hours of the day and to certain members only. He is thus literally cut off, during these periods, from all external contact with the world, but working internally, all alone in his room, probably in communion with Masters and Saints of the Spiritual Hierarchy. What this spiritual “working” is, we can hardly ever conjecture. But from the trend of events and developments now becoming apparent all over the world, and the complications that each new development and incident creates in the world situation, we can safely surmise that it may be in connection with the currents of world events that the Master’s inner working may be mainly concerned. The lust for greed and power as evinced at present the world over is gradually dragging mankind, even in this age of science and civilization, to the degrading level of bestiality of the prehistoric age of the aborigins and savages. Where it will all eventually lead to, we human beings shudder to think. 
But the Master’s stray ref­erences and remarks about this and his difinite explanations given at times during 

the past years and even now concerning the great spiritual upheaval that must take place in the whole world—and that has commenced all over—confirm this and convince us—his intimate mandali staying with him—that it is with the present world situation that this period of his “seclusion” is concerned. We who have been quietly listening to the revelations made by the Master in some of his pleasant moods during all these years, can also safely say that it is these silent and mystical workers who hold the “key” to all situations and complications created by minkind, however intellectually advanced. These alone can deliver mankind from the clutches of maya of whose glamour the world is now enamoured and driven to degrad­ation and ruin. But a suffering world may well ask, “Will it be saved, in time?” 
We refer all to an explanation Baba gave during an interview to a journalist—Mr. T. A. Raman—and published in the “Evening News of India” on January 7, 1937. 
WHEN THE WORLD WILL LISTEN “……….Why does not Meher 
Baba break his self-imposed silence and preach in the market place? But, argues the sage, every great change must be carefully timed. How else could it be with the greatest revolution in the mind of Man? The time of preaching in the market-place will come, says Meher Baba, only after the world has been humbled and purified by a carnage greater than any the world has yet seen. 
This is the prediction which has won headlines for Meher Baba the world over. The prospect of a World War draws near every day, and most of us now take it for granted. It needs no prophet to foresee the inevitable, but it is important to remember that Meher Baba has been predicting it for years now, from immediately after the last armistice when another such war seemed impossible. The next war, according to Meher Baba, will be shorter, but far more terrible than the last, and India will be radically affected, and as a result of it, social and economic conditions in this country will be revol­utionized. The last war was not enough to bring about a change 

of heart in Man, says Meher Baba, I continued; but Meher Baba and to this statement can all agree. looked straight at me and smiled, The world purged of its pride will while his fingers traced out on the listen to reason only after an even cardboard— more terrible purgatory. “My son, I have no opinion to 
offer, I KNOW.’”
“That is your opinion then,” 


