Once Harun-ar-Rashid, the Caliph of Baghdad, was celebrating a royal occasion. He ordered a grand display of costly jewellery and other precious articles in the palace and its precincts which was thronged with the notables of the time as well as the commoners. 
When the celebrations were at its height, the joviality of the atmo­sphere developed in the Sultan a magnanimous mood to which he gave a right royal expression. All of a sudden he ordered the assem­blage to touch any valuable thing they liked, and the article, however precious it might be, would belong to the first one touching the same. 
No sooner the gathering took in the royal command, a rush was made by everyone to possess the costliest thing within approach. 
A beautiful slave girl, quite composed and serene standing by the side of the throne, requested the Caliph to reaffirm whether really anything touched that day would belong to another. On getting an affirmative reply, the slave girl immediately touched the Caliph himself on the arm to the asto­nishment of everyone around, saying, "Why should I run after secondary things when the primary object is here?" 
The Sultan never bargained for this. But in token of his admiration of the high standard 

POEM 21 

of discrimination evinced by the girl, he complimented her for her ingenuity and originality, and said, "Woman though you are, you have carried the palm today in the face of hundreds of men, by sheer dis­crimination. Now that you possess me, the whole of my kingdom is yours." 
Certainly it bespeaks a very high standard of moral courage and discrimination to grapple with the substance and eschew the shadow. The lure of the world is irresistible and too overpowering to ordinary mortals; but it is left to the immortals amongst mankind—the Prophets, saints and philosophers— to rise above the world of senses to the world of spirit which is life real. Truly has it been said by a Persian poet: 
"I admire the immutability of the base metal—copper; it remains unconquerable to anything except alchemy." (Here copper represents man and alchemy signifies God.) 

. 
