Once Hazrat Ghaus Bahaul-Huq of Multan (Punjab), with a high saintly reputation in the surrounding country, was seated on the terrace of his house. All of a sudden below in the street a hue and cry was raised that a man had accidently fallen into a well. The Saint, on hearing this, could not resist the temptation, and, extending his hands from where he was, brought the man out from the bottom of the well. 
A Perfect Saint of the time, exter­nally weather-beaten and famished, happened to pass through that locality. On noticing the miraculous perfor­mance by Hazrat Bahaul-Huq, he addressed him saying, "My son, this is a child's game that you have indulged in. If you are wise enough to learn anything, learn Perfection (Faqiri)." 
On hearing this bit of corrective advice, Bahaul-Huq came down from the terrace, and asked the Saint as to what he meant by Perfection (Faqiri). He replied, "My dear child, Perfection is that state of spiritual being which, once attained, nothing can mar, spoil or snatch away. It can neither be affected or disturbed by the perpetration of anything unlawful, nor can drink, fornication or thieving bring about its deterioration. Perfection is for all times above the moral values of good and bad set up by man as a social animal. Perfection is immutable, unchangeable, and everlasting in essence." 
Uttering this sermon on Perfection, the Saint quietly left the place. Hazrat Bahaul-Huq in the meanwhile felt doubtful about the bona-fides of his claim to Perfection, and decided to test him if his words were in conformity with his deeds. 
Hazrat Bahaul-Huq, in pursuance of his plan, slaught­

ered a pup of a. dog and prepared a very delicious dainty known in the East as pulao. He also secured the services of a beautiful young girl, who, with a. bottle of wine and the pulao, was instructed to entertain the claimant to Perfection, as best as she could. 
The Perfect Saint immediately took in the situation, and understood that the feast was meant to try and guage his Perfection. He, therefore, spared himself nothing, and having done full justice to the feast, he sent word with the girl that such childish pranks could not affect him at all. 
No sooner the girl recounted the happenings of the day, Bahaul-Huq felt baffled, and the next day he left on a horse to talk out the situation with the Perfect Saint, determined to learn or teach. Just before reaching his destination, he was required to ford a shallow river, and while doing so in midstream, his horse began to excrete dung and urine. From the opposite bank the gluttonous Faqir bawled out saying, "My child, you are polluting the river." Bahaul-Huq replied, "What religious ignorance! Can a flowing river be polluted by a little urine and dung?” The 
Perfect Saint retorted, "You are a wonderful theologian indeed! A little urine and dung, as you say, can never pollute a flowing river, but a dog­pulao, a girl and a bottle of wine can pollute the unlimited and Infinite Ocean of Divine Knowledge and Bliss which I am." 
This admonition was an eye-opener to Hazrat Bahaul-Huq, and he became convinced that miracle-mongering and Perfection are poles apart. He forthwith surrendered to the Saint and begged of him to guide him towards Perfection. 
The Perfect Saint, taking pity on his mis-guided spiritual condition, ordered him to give up all his life­long religious practices and asceticism, and adopt the Path pursued by men of God. This method evidently involves the foregoing of all desires of the material and religious life. It also means non­recognition of miraculous powers, and stepping determinedly and irre­vokably into the life and domain of despair, selflessness, ego-annihilation and hopelessness. Un1ess one is ready for this unreclaimable position, Perfection (Faqiri) is only a dream. 
