
WE cannot get any further details of Bahinabai'a life from her writings except that she had two daughters and a son and that her husband did not live till the end of her life. But we have a sur­prisingly detailed account about her previous twelve lives in her own abhangas. She gave all this account to her son Vithal while she was on the death-bed. Just a week before her death, she knew that she was to leave her body and so she asked her son who had been to some other place for the funeral of his wife, to come to the place where she then was. After he came there, he told her that he had a dream about her death and that he had arranged for her 'Samadhi' on the banks of the river Godavari. She expressed her satisfaction at this but said that there was not enough time for her to go there, as there was very little 
time at her disposal. Then for the last three or four days she gave to her son the detailed account of her previous lives. She knew that the sceptics would doubt the truth and seriousness of that account as well as the very existence of rein­carnation; but she felt that one should not care for their opinion and neglect them. 
Those, whose lives are wholly on this material plane would not be able to grasp the mystery of remembering all the events. which took place in pervious lives. Ordinarily one does not remember anything from past lives; nor does he know anything about the very existence of past or future lives. So Bahinabai's case must be look­ed upon as being undoubtedly extraordinary. 
She remembered everything about her past lives very clearly; it was like seeing her own image in a clear looking 

glass. She appears to have been a woman in all the lives which she has described in detail and this son of hers also came in contact with her in some way or the other. She was born, in all these lives in India, her religion also being the same. In the first three lives, she was a 'Vaishya' by caste. In these three lives, she was not married. In the first life she was born at Betawada, on the banks of the river Tapti and her name was Waruni, Her father's name was Kedar and her mother's name was Rupawanti. Kedar's Master asked him not to marry his daughter, as he knew before-hand that she was to live for only thirteen years. In this life, Vithal was in the service of Kedar's Master. 
In the second life, Bahinabai was the daughter of one Satwik who was a devotee of Lord Shiva. He lived at a place named Kumchakra on the banks of the river Falgu. In this life, Vithal and Satwik were co-disciples of a common Master named Suwarna. Satwika had seven sons; but as he wanted a daughter he performed some religious rites and then as a result of these rites he got this daughter who lived for twenty-eight years but did not marry. 
In the third life, Bahinabai was the daughter of a man named Vardhaman. Vardhaman had four sons and Vithal appears as one of them. In this life, Bahinabai's name was Hemakala. When she became marriageable her father began to try for her marriage; but her mother was told in her dream that Hemakala should not be married and so he left trying for her marriage. Hemakala spent the remaining days of her life in serving a Brahmin Master named Ragakala. Vithal also was living with this Ragakala. Hemakala lived for twenty-four years. 
No detailed account of the fourth, fifth and sixth life is given; Bahinabai seems to have spent these lives as one who had gone astray from the Path (Yoga­bhrashta). In the seventh life, Bahinabai lived with a cowherd while she looked after the cows; she also enjoyed the company of great bhaktas; and a great saint, who knew her sanskaras, and poured his grace upon her. In this life she lived for sixty-six years. 

In the eighth life Bahinabai was born in the village of Ellore. There was a great learned man named Dharmadatta and Bahinabai was born as his daughter. She lived for eighteen years and was married in this life; but the husband died very soon and she says that the death was for her ultimate good. 
In the ninth life, she was the daughter of the parents as those in her eighth life. In the tenth life, she was the daughter of a Brahmin named Koushik and lived for forty-two years. She was married and had three sons. Her first son was Vithal; and both of them had the same Master named Keshava. 
In the eleventh life, she happened to be the daughter of a Brahmin named Gokarna, who lived in Pravarasangam on the banks of the river Godavari. Bahinabai’s name in this life was Soujinya and that of her mother was Saguna. At the age of seven, she was married to a person named Yogeshwar. He had many spiritual powers and was highly advanced. He was greatly satisfied with his wife and he taught her some yogic practices. Vithal was her son also in this life. 
In the twelfth life, Bahinabai was born at a place named Lakha-khani. The name of her father was Ramchandra and that of her mother was Janaki. She was not able to speak for a long time in her childhood and so people thought that she might be dumb. But later on she was able to speak and was married to an astrologer, who was a great devotee of God Ganapati. She lived for thirty-six years in this life. 
In the thirteenth and the last life, Bahinabai became realised. Her Master Tukaram had told her that she was to get realization in this life, that Vithal was connected with her since her first life and that he also would get realization after five more lives. After she told all this account of her past lives, she described the high state in which she was at that time and then she told her son that he was to have great advancement on the spiritual path in that life, that he would make more and more progress in every life and that in three lives he would be born in Benares. His next life was to be that of a Sanyasi and in the fifth life he was to get realization at the age of eighteen. 

Bahinabai, in her later years, had lived with the great saint Ramdas, Master of Shivaji, the great. She took Samadhi at the age of seventy-two. She has fully described her state of conscious­ness while she was sitting in a 
particular position (facing towards the north and engaged in pranayama) to breath her last. She said that she remembered many more past lives but that she did not have sufficient time to relate the incidents connected with them. 

