
From Ajmer, our party moved eastward again and came to Bhopal, near Central Provinces. Here again, we lived the  same life of activity in quiet and seclusion, for about a week. Baba was mostly busy with the masts, searched out from the surroundings. Our sojourn here was also kept  strictly  private, and all mail, telegrams, cables, etc. were received and delivered care Station Master, Itarsi, a junction  on  the  G.  I.  P.   Railway,
5 miles away. A member of the group was specially deputed on this duty to travel to and from Itarsi daily.
CENTRAL PROVINCES
Seemingly, nothing of particular importance trans-­‐ pired, and we moved on to  our next station, Jubbulpore, to have another long stay there for the Master's special work with the masts,  as  also  for   some important work in  connection with the establishment of a Spiritual   Centre.    A    number  of
 
masts, observed and marked out by Baba en-­‐route and also searched out from different parts of the country surrounding here, were ordered to be brought here. Emissaries of the Master's group are sent out in different directions on this  hazardous task. In the scorching heat of the summer season, they  move about in the  places and directions indicated by Baba, and a number of these masts are gathered and kept in special quarters rented for them in a quiet locality and corner of the cantonment area in Jubbulpore.
For the world outside which has hardly any idea of spiritual Masters and their works, all this may seem so strangely insignificant, and very naturally too! For while the world conditions are in such turmoil and every new day brings some startling	revelations	of aggression and oppression by one power over another for greed of self, when the seething masses of humanity the world over clamour for every penny   or
piece of bread in
desperation for the struggle of existence, and when mankind naturally expects a Master like Baba to work up  some  wonders  or miracles to bring peace to the struggling humanity, his silent work in  quiet  corners  of  the  earth with these "derelicts of humanity whose existence is of practically no importance or consideration for  the  world— very naturally would  not  appeal  to those  who  cannot  penetrate the great spiritual import and significance of works connected with Masters. However, there are in the world  those  who  do  believe  that  whatever  the Masters  of  Spiritual   Perfection do, has great significance, as it is always for the  spiritual  benefit and uplift of humanity, and this particular work of the Master at the moment to such spiritually-­‐ dazed souls has a special significance. To those  of  our group who  have  actually witnessed and  even  participated in these activities with the dear Master, all this is a revelation—a glimpse into the realm of Reality where life has true and eternal value. The surprisingly varying traits of these masts, and the child-­‐like,   innocent   and myster-­‐
 

ious utterances and expressions of what they see and feel, however faint, of the life beyond the gross, have a significance too deep for our ordinary understanding. It must all be seen to be believed. And the great importance Baba himself gives to this particular work, to the exclusion of other things, adds much to its import.
cannot, therefore, close this chapter without giving our readers an idea of the typical traits of these masts,  searched out and given personal care and attention by Baba in Ajmer, Bhopal, Jubbulpore and the country around. "I love these Lovers of God," he repeated remarkedly, "they know nothing of the world; they are  so  blissfully indifferent  even  to  their bodily needs...All for their Love of God, when the whole world craves and cries for maya ( lust, greed, etc. ) and rushes to each other's throats for its gratification."
THE   MASTER'S   WORK   WITH
THE SPIRITUALLY ADVANCED
THOUGH DAZED SOULS
One of these "Lovers of  God"  who lived in Ajmer for  years near the Khawja Saheb's dargah (tomb) was very far
advanced.    Baba   confirmed this, and said that he was nearest to the goal—in the sixth plane of consciousness. He was well-­‐ known all over  there  and actually	worshipped	by thousands residing in Ajmer and others visiting this holy place of pilgrimage ( due to the Khawja Saheb's dargah and the highly spiritual influence which the great ancient Saint still holds). It may be interesting to note that this particular mast was brought by our tongawalla (cabman), a notorious drunkard, but very good of heart and quite the type of man required for our work. He was the first to jump in with his cab when one of the mandali (close group of the Master's disciples) went to Ajmer for preliminary inquiries, and ever since was linked and called for our work. His abrupt or chance coming into contact with our grou and active participation in our campaign for the search of the masts in Ajmer is again indicative of one of Baba's ways of working-­‐-­‐-­‐of finding the right man for the work intended and having his work done through persons like this one, addicted
 
to drink and  absolutely neglected and avoided by all who knew him for  his  indifference and negligence even in his vocation of plying a hired  cab. But even such seemingly useless persons are also utilized by the Master for his work, especially where even his mandali found it difficult to manage. In fact this tongawalla himself seemed to us as a "half-­‐mast", and we would have liked the Master to give him the bath, before all others!
When one  morning, this typsy tongawalla brought this mast to  Baba  hours  later  than th time he had himself given, he explained that it took him a very long time to go about in  search  of this particular one wanted by Baba, as he was not on the usual spot. Then again it was after two hours of mild, loving talks and persuasions and very tactful handling that he could  manage to bring the babasaheb (as they called the mast there) to  Baba. He was kept by the Master in his own room. "He is merged, not in God but in seeing God (Divinity)—say lost in it,' explained Baba. He is tall, rather slender i   build, with a
long face and a dazed expression, but with eyes that sparkle and express  so  much.  His   smile which is constant is the smile of a soul lost in search of some-­‐ thing inexplicable, unattainable, and having found it, feels dazed. Truly he is a mast, but of a very mild type, meek like a lamb, mechanically  following   the words or directions of those around him, resisting  or  hesitating only  at  times  in  certain moods, when the reconciliation of the higher consciousness  in  which  he  is with  the  normal   consciousness, is difficult. Lost in the ecstasies they enjoy of the higher consciousness of the planes, they feel greatly disturbed, and often  cry when  told  to  do  certain  things by men of earth—which pulls them down  and  brings  about a conflict of the higher consciousness with the  lower. That is why Baba repeatedly orders and sees that there is no coercion or  force  brought  on them by any of his mandali  who are assigned  various  duties  to wait and watch on  them  and  serve  them  in  various  ways under his directions.  He  himself  is  so  infinitely  patient with them,
 
and lets them have their  own way when they are  obdurate  until they are quiet and come round again of their own accord.
The mast, just brought in, at first hesitated to come in and even wanted to go away, but the patient and loving persuasions of the Master and his faithful band of workers and, above  all,  his own personal touch eventually reconciled him to the surroundings, and he submits to the Master's directions. After the bath, he is given a new white kafni (robe) which transforms him physically into quite a different being. Not only is his physical  appearance thus altered, but his mental outlook also seems to have undergone a great change. After the  beneficent bath, the blankness in his look and eyes is replaced by an awareness of being in the presence of someone who, he feels, is divine beyond concept-­‐ tion. It seems to be more  than  the fulfilment of life's desire and years of longing, and the search for the Beloved seems now to have ended. Although he can neither speak, much less explain, in his state of mental blankness of the
physical    plane,    his    eyes   and
expression speak volumes.
Later Baba personally feeds him with rice, dal and bread, in his own room. At such times, when Baba feeds these masts, no one else is allowed to remain in the room. He does it all alone. He is, through this food that he puts into their mouths, feeding them with the Divine nectar, filling  their souls with the Divinity that the Master radiates!
A few days after this mast arrived, once while he was resting, Baba sat near him to give his spiritual touch by gently trying to press his feet. What a humble gesture by a Master of Perfection! But for true lovers of God, he does it and feels very happy doing it!  Although eternally happy himself in His supreme state, seldom is that happy expression as visible as on such occasions when he so lovingly stoops to serve these "derelicts of humanity " and administers his divine treatment and touch to those who truly need and are helped and pushed forward. The Divine Beloved always likes lovers of  Divinity, and   none   such   would   be   so
 

welcome to him as these, who, in the spiritual intoxication of their advanced state, are lost to the world outside and even to their physical selves. That is why Baba remarked in the presence of this mast, “Nothing makes me so happy as the sight of these real heroes." How true! He  never feels as happy when surrounded by thousands who worship him devotedly than in the presence of these masts. Certainly world of riches is worth nothing if it  be not utilized towards the amelioration of the needy. Nothing gives one such sublime happiness a spontaneous giving to those who truly need, and no doubt Baba feels so happy, sharing his divine life with these true "lovers" who need it and could be benefitted. Crowds in Jubbulpore during the tour did not interest him as much as did these select few lovers of God. "These are very useful medium for me to work through  on  higher planes," he explained.
When we, on our ordinary human plane of consciousness, feel such delight at the recognition of Baba's Divinity by these masts, how happy  must they themselves feel in his
Divine Presence! And how happy does the Master feel when such an one recognises him, however faintly!
Asked as to whom he had come, the mast replies at once, "Malik ke pas aya," meaning "I came near the Malik (Master)."
Again when Baba tried to press his feet tenderly, he had a smile on his face and murmured very gently, "Malik, ayasa mat karo," " Master, pray don't do this." Even from his planetory heights of subtle regions, the struggling soul's consciousness feels disturbed at the Perfect Master humbling before him in this gesture! From such dizzy heights of consciousness (of the sixth plane) to be conscious of the ordinary worldly formalities, and to possess a sense of reverence for One higher than oneself, is wonderful indeed!
Like a patient in a delicate condition, he is tenderly nourished and kindled. His reticence disappears gradually, and he meekly submits to stay with the Master, eat and drink from the Master's own hands,  and feels  strangel    conscious of
 

something sublime and divine that he sees and feels in him! And when the Master is out or away or otherwise engaged elsewhere, sitting all alone in the Master's room, in his ecstatic mood, he chants some mystical lines or sings some divine songs to give vent to his inner feelings. One of the typical lines of these mystical verses will give our readers a    idea of his true state:
Jisn   diya hai derd-­‐e-­‐dil,
Uska Khuda bhala kare; meaning, may God  bless him who has given this pain of the heart (pangs of separation), i. e., even the One (Beloved) who has made	my	heart	bleed	with suffering (for separation) ma be blessed by the Almighty!
Once during the beneficial bath, he abruptly touched Baba's feet with his right hand and hurriedly raised it to  his  forehead as a gesture and  mark of worship. This seemed simply mechanical, since, the very next moment, he appeared to forget. But the fact of his making this gesture, though unconsciously, indicates a sign of recognition, however dim or faint, even  on  the higher planes, by souls so
far-­‐advanced as this, of the Master's state of Perfection and super-­‐consciousness which only highly evolved consciousness could fully  understand and grasp. And the fact of this recognition of a Spiritual Master's perfection rather than the daily recognition of things on the physical plane, all the more proves the true heights which they have attained.
Nowhere does Baba's Divinity reveal itself as more  inspiring  than in these acts  of  service  to  the truly needy Lovers of God whom the world of maya, in its ignorance, has mercilessly neglected. These are  sights  only to be seen to be believed—a regular feast for the eye of a devotee to  see  the  beloved  Master work and play his divine game of give-­‐and-­‐take with the true Lovers  of  God I
FURTHER INCIDENTS OF THE
MASTER WITH THE MASTS
Once, when Baba and two of his mandali went out in search of these masts in a tonga (cab)  in the streets and locality around the Khawja Saheb's dargah in Ajmer, one of these masts, all of a sudden in an ecstatic mood, began    to   shout    aloud— "Are
 
dekho, Shankar aya— bhago, Bhagwanka darshan ker lo"— meaning, "Oh Look! Shankar (one of the Hindu gods) is here! Run, hurry up! Have Bhagwan's (God's) darshana!" All eyes were on Baba instant-­‐ aneously. Some stared at him in blank gaze; others made typical gestures or expressions as a mark of recognition of a  higher being worthy of respect or reverence which they gave in their own way. The whole scene was enacted in a few seconds, and Baba proceeded further with the party taking rounds in certain quarters.
Another	whom	Baba	parti-­‐ cularly pointed to one of his mandali to be brought  over  to him, when told by the disciple, "Baba has sent for you  and wants you to go to  him,"  he cried out, " Dhanya  hai  ham ko," meaning, " Hail myself! " i. e., am the most fortunate to have the rare privilege of  being invited in the presence of a Perfect Master.  Baba  order-­‐ ed a silver coin to be given to him, which he accepted blankly. This	is	symbolic	of     Baba's preliminary	contact.		He		was subsequently     brought     over     to
Baba, washed, clothed,
fed  and  then  sent  on  like  some
others.
One of these masts, traced during the search in Ajmer, when asked to come to  Baba,  said  at first, "Love is the best and  sublimest  thing  of  all."  He repeated this a number of times, almost after every other sentence he spoke. In one of those gay moods, typical of these spiritually-­‐ intoxicated souls, he went on uttering something which was eloquent and full of spiritual import, on the subject of Ishk-­‐e-­‐ Hakiki (the Love Divine  ):
"I gave my heart (love) away to One, but that One (Beloved) disappeared ever since I saw him first……I searched for him, all these years, but he couldn't be traced…..Eventually, how-­‐  ever, I found him…I found him, here, today !"
Here, he stopped for a while.
Then raising his head again, as if ready to deliver another sermon, continued:
"To love is no easy task…… Those	who	are	used	to easygoing	life		or	fond	of luxuries, should not go in for it. Love is not meant for such.
 

are heroes, who have courage, patience, who could suffer....Love is the real thing ! "
These spontaneous outbursts of a true lover of God who has practically lost himself in it and knows nothing but that, speaks of the true qualities of Love Divine. Those who talk of Love superficially and want it cheap and easy may learn much from one who has an actual experience of this kind.
The peculiar characteristics of some of the masts gathered and brought over to Baba in Bhopal were quite in contrast with the above—at times blissfully happy, at other times quite frantic and even aggressive to the men around. One of these, named "Lettuce ", a regular visitor, would come and go when he liked any time during the day and even during late hours of the night. He would lie down at ease for hours, murmur or chant something too sweet for words, but when out of mood, would become quite another person, and would not hesitate even to make assaults or go to the extent of throwing missiles   or   whatever   came    to
 
Love is meant for those who	hands.   In   one   of   these  frantic
	moods,    hearing    some  persons
discuss
 
the present-­‐day world conditions, especially the European crisis, he blurted out in no equivocal terms, "Ye sabko ukhad denge—sidha kar denge," meaning, "all these mischief-­‐mongers and miscreants will be eventually wiped off and everything will be set right "— words too significant for world crisis that are ahead.  These pungent remarks  are  full  of import, which mean to convey, in clear and precise terms, that the great powers that have been working behind all this apparent chaos, which is but the external phenomena of the  internal  working of the Powers that be, are now up to destroy all  the undesired elements that tend to mar the progress of human evolution towards a higher destiny. These impurities of self-­‐ interest, lust and greed must be removed before  things  could  be set right.
Baba has always been stressing this most vital point that the root of all unhappiness throughout the world is self-­‐interest. A life or movement, started with the best of motives and interests for the service of humanity, is spoiled the
 
moment this "self" creeps in. Lust and greed for power or for name and fame rule supreme, and the very moment a noble aim with the life is started, it is thwarted. It is the same all over the world in all the spheres of life, whether in religion or in politics. It seems a wave of personal selfish element in every branch of life activities has come over, sweeping in its surge all the best that human character could give—those noble characteristics of human nature that go to make man divine.
Explaining the various expressions of ecstasy as demonstrated by these masts, Baba once said, "They feel so happy with Baba, because they see Baba and know who Baba truly is— thing which you, with your human eye, cannot see. The special eye that sees this Divine Form of Baba is quite another. With these eyes of yours, you see these playthings of maya —these “toys ", table, chair, etc. The internal eye that sees through all these and sees God alone is altogether  different."
NEWS IN GENERAL
Baba's  long  absence from�his
headquarters at "Mehera-­‐
bad'', Ahmednagar, ever since he embarked on the present tour in India, November last, has been a cause of no small anxiety for his numerous disciples and devotees. They are craving for just a darshana or meeting even for a moment. Many a difficult problem in life has been kept pending his arrival and advice. Those whose longing for a personal meeting have been too keen and deep are in a state of continuous agony as known only to themselves. One of these, for the love of the Beloved Master	and	suffering		acutely owing to separation for such a long time, voluntarily took to a "fast unto death", causing grave anxiety to all around in the family. regular series of telegrams has been exchanged daily between Baba and the family of the person fasting, whose persistent efforts and loving persuasions to pour in even liquid food for days have proved futile, until they have been eventually	compelled	to	seek Baba's advice and help. And even Baba's orders to take at least liquid  food  have  been  resolutely
refused. The fast being too severe,
 

the person not even accepting drinking water for eighteen long days at a stretch, the condition eventually went to a climax. The person is reduced to a living skeleton unable even to lift the hand, the whole body became entirely stiff and rigid, like solid piece of lifeless framework. The Master had to intervene.  The  call of love had to be  responded. Leaving all the group and even his important work with the masts in Jubbulpore, the Master has to go, undertaking a long journey  in  these hot summer days. He  sees  the person. His august presence  and loving persuasions eventually succeed. He personally admini-­‐ sters a few drops of fruit-­‐juice, the first liquid food to enter the person's throat after eighteen days of severe fast! The poor family is relieved of a severe tension after days of anxiety, and although resistenc was offered again in the beginning after the Master had left to accept any food, the  person came round quick1y. The Master had set the ball rolling, and the person now takes even solid  food.
Incidentally,    Baba   took   this
opportunity to visit Nasik,
Ahmednagar, Meherabad, Poona, Various plans are suggested, and Talegaon and Bombay, to meet his  the  Master's  final  decision  is disciples  and  devotees  anxiously   anxiously    awaited    by    all  awaiting for  his  darshana  for  so  concerned,  whether  to  establish  long. It  was  a  hurried  trip—all  this Centre at Mandla as originally  these  places  being  visited  within    proposed, or at Jubbulpore, or at   five days.	both these places, separately.
The question of  establishing a		Some    interesting   talks   and Spiritual  Centre  on  this  side  has   discourses   are   given    by   Baba  still   been   under  consideration.	during    this    period,    which  we
propose to publish later.
