
Question
For an aspirant to the Path in search of a Murshid (Master) is there any infallible method of recognizing a Perfect Master?
Answer
Spiritual attainment to the planes one may not satisfactorily allocate or discriminate. All those from the first to the sixth plane come under the general category of "advanced souls" more or less. But when luckily one comes into contact with Perfection, it represents unmistakable  signs for a seeker of Truth who is patient an   sincere.
There are three important factors that are characteristic of the state of Perfection. First, Perfection is not only "Oneness with God" but the continued and uninterrupted experience of Oneness in everything. A Perfect Master continuously, withou any break, experiences or realizes his own Self as the Self in all. This inner experience objectively manifests itself in the spontaneity o  Love that such an one feels or
 

expresses towards  all  creation. To him nothing is attractive or repulsive: Good, bad; saint,  sinner; beauty, ugliness; wisdom, idiocy; health, disease are all different modes and moods of his own manifestation. When embodied Perfection loves, fondles, feeds any living creature, it feels and enjoys as i it is loving, fondling and feeding its own Self. In this state no vestige of "otherness" is left.
The second point is the undeniable atmosphere of bliss that Perfection radiates in its immediate vicinity and which a visitor cannot help feeling or noticing. A Perfect Master  not only enjoys infinite bliss, but also experiences universal suffering. The poignancy of suffering, however, is nullified and subdued by the overwhelming joy or feeling of bliss. Hence, Perfection outwardly always appears blissfully calm and unperturbed in the face of every kind of pain, persecution and penury.
The third most outstanding
characteristic of Perfection is its power to adapt itself to any level or strata of humanity. It is as nonchalant on a throne as it is obviously	indifferent		and undisturbed in a gutter. It is impecunious		with	the	poor, extravagant with the rich,  lordl wit kings, wise with the learned and  naively simple  and innocent
 

with the illiterate and ignorant. Just as a Master of Arts delivers  or teaches English in different way to a beginner than to an undergraduate, similarly, a Perfect Master adapts himself to the level of the one whom he wants to uplift spiritually. Each one to its meed and everyone to its aptitude, is the perennial plan of personified Perfection.
 
The Vaishnavite Saints of Southern India an	their Hagiology*
THE LIVES OF THE TRIAD
i.	ST. POYGAI AZHVAR
ii.	ST. PUDATT AZHVAR
iii.	ST. PEY AZHVAR
BY C. V. SAMPATH AIYANGAR

 
These were contemporaries. I have stated that the word Azhvar means "sunk deep in God-­‐love." What does this mean? A saint is  one who is intoxicated with the  love of God; in him  there  is  nothing like spiritual ambition. Spiritual I-­‐ness is worse than worldly I-­‐ness. A  great  thinker said that the danger of "spiritual intumescence" was more dangerous than "worldly pride ". The late Partha-­‐sarathy Yogi, therefore, truly observed, "Even after the pitfalls of avarice and amorousness have been escaped, there remains a pitfall which is more dangerous still, namely ambition, with which  false  ideas  of greatness, too, have been associated by large numbers even of the  comparatively  better  classes  of  mankind.   This greater
 
pitfall is ambition, or that treason-­‐inducing vice which makes Shakespeare put into the mouth of the patriot Brutus the following speech: As he was my benefactor I loved him, but as he was ambitious, I slew him.' Thus God slays the ambitious or those who attach undue or sole virtue  to their own efforts with which God, they think, can be purchased."
So says the New Testament: "For he that is called in the Lord, being a bond-­‐man, is the freeman of the Lord. Likewise he that is called being free, is the bondman of Christ." The whole thing was put in a nutshell by Hadis thus: " My servant draws nigh to me by pious deeds till I love him, and when I love him, I am his eye, his tongue, his foot, his hand,

and by me he sees, hears, talks, walks, and feels." This is "wisdom love" to use the beautiful expression of St. Nammazhvar. It means "Love to God by  completely surrendering oneself to the will of God." And th will of God is to work without relaxation for the evolution of His Universe (Gita. Chap. III, Shlokas 22 and 23). The Lord,  therefore,  says, "Do thou always perform actions which are obligatory, without attachment." (Ibid-­‐Shloka 19). In fine, loving service to God in His great work of evolution is the  "all" of saints. Such was the service of our Azhvar Triad.
Tradition tells us that Poygai Azhvar (the first of the Triad)  was born in a holy tank in Kanchipuram (the modern Conjeevaram, which is about 45 miles south of Madras), in Dvapara age, Siddhartha year, Asvayuja month. It is said that the second Saint Pudatt-­‐Azhvar was born out of a Madhavi flower (Gartnera	Racemosa)	in Mallapura (now known as Mahabalipuram, which is south of Madras). He was a day younger than
 
Poygai Azhvar. The third Peya-­‐ Azhvar was born in Mylapore, which is a portion of the city of Madras. He was born a day later than  the  second Azhvar.
The first was also called Saro-­‐ muni, because he was born in a tank. The third was called Bhranta-­‐Yogi (mad with love of God). As a great writer says, these were three spiritual flowers that were sent  to  perfume  the mundane atmosphere. They were perfect in  three  spiritual essentials: Jnana (Knowledge of God), Bhakti (Love to God) and Dispassion (non—attachment). Their lives, therefore, serve as splendid examples for those who wish to drink the manna of spirituality in this maya world. Their only food was Love  of  God. As St. Nammazhvar said: "In Thy milk of Grace, grew I ripe.  Verily  he who can drink the milk of His Grace is the true  saint.  That  is  why it is truly said that saints are gods on earth. The great devotee Nanjiyar used to say, "Whenever I saw a saint, a devotee of the One God (Vishnu), and I fell at His feet with m     head touching

them,  felt as if  ate my fill, as if  my hunger vanished ." Do not we feel so in the presence of our dear Baba? That is why it is said in the immortal Gita :
When it is night to all,
the saint is awake; When they are awake,
it is to him night." The New  Testament says :
But the sensual man perceiveth not those things that are  the  spirit of God, for it is foolishness to him." In the words of the Gita,
" houseless and strong willed ", these three chosen messengers of God went from place to place  with the banner of spirituality in their hands for the benefit of those who would  listen  ay, for the benefit of all ). Once the first Saint was in Tirukkovitur (a town in the South Arcot District,  Madras Presidency ). He was overtaken by heavy rain, and  took shelter in a small crevice.  The second saint happened to pass that side, and asked if there was room for one in that crevice. The first replied that there was room for only one. Then the second retorted that if there was room for one to sleep, there must be  room fo   two to  sit. When
 

the first heard this he let the second in. Before they settled themselves in that snug abode,  the third Yogi came there. The  two who were in said that there was no room for a third. Bhranta Yogi then retorted that if there was room for two to sit, there must be room for three to stand. On hearing this the third was let in. There the three great Messengers of God, His elect, met, and these felt that something was forcibly squeezing itself between them in a place where there was hardly any room for a fourth person. They all were very anxious to see the "stealing stranger" with a lamp. Which was that lamp? The first Saint sang:
"The solid land the lamp, its girdling liquid the oil, and light the shining sun. And thus shall discover the stealing stranger."
The second said :
"With love the lamp, longing
the oil, The frenzied heart the wick,
the soul melted,
The light of wisdom, light I
to Narayana In meet Tamil,   know so
well.” The third blessed Saint said : "Lo Her—Mercy—  see; and
His form of Gold I see;
And Their sun effulgent hues blending, indeed I see;
Proud daring Discus, and
friendly Conch I see; All this, this blessed day, in
Him the Ocean-­‐hued." These "Lamps our blessed Saints lighted, and there they saw the Motherhood of God and Father-­‐ hood of God. They  saw  the  Beatific  Vision.  The  first  then sang :
The first  Tiru-­‐v-­‐Andadi
and the second, i    His  second Tiru-­‐v-­‐Andadi
and the third, ii   His  third Tiru-­‐v-­‐Andadi.
 
(Andadi is a poem with Andadi verses. Andadi is a rhyme in which the last syllable, word or words of one stanza is the first of the succeeding. This word also means "the first, the  last-­‐God.")
All these hymns brim with Knowledge of God, Love of  God  and Vision of God, but in each one of these elements predominates. These three works tell the world how to realize the One who appears Many. It is by unequi-­‐ vocal Love that this can be  attained, says the Lord of the Gita. And these three Elect Saviours  have clearly shown the Path by their own lives and the three immortal works (Prabandhas). "Blessed  be  the  Azhvar Triad"
