Detachment like attachment is something that is bred inside the individual. But it is deliberately cultivated. You only know that you're attached to something when losing it engenders suffering and a great deal of pain and a prolonged heartache and a pretty depressive type of misery and the desire is that you want it back. This can be someone that you fell in love with. It can be a house that's been burned down by fire and uninsured. It can be some piece of apparel; some sentimental piece of jewelry that has been handed down in the family. It can be your job. It can be separation from an avocation which, if you're transferred to another area and cannot practice, causes you a great deal of pain. Anything that causes pain when you're separated from it tells you that you're attached to it, and you haven't detached yourself from it. Detachment comes as a result of the individual becoming a witness to the pranks of the mind, and the mind should be regarded as synonymous with maya. This is the instrument that maya uses in order to continue its pranks, and it is something that is stuck to you so intimately that it is sticking to you like fly paper, and no matter how much you try to release yourself from it, the fly paper is still stuck to you. I don't know if you've ever had the experience. 
The mind refuses to let go. Even, Baba has described, when the Perfect Master or the Avatar finally releases one from the sheath which seems to attach the mind to the world–not only the gross but the subtle and the mental world–the mind refuses to give up, maya refuses to give up, even when it's at its weakest. When the mind is finally released, it's as though you have been released from a prison, and the sharpness of the pain of being released from this prison is similar to a butterfly trying to release itself from its cocoon in which it has made its metamor­phosis from a caterpillar. This is an experience which is so painful that when you wrench yourself free, you realize that you've been in a prison. The amount of exhilaration of the sense of Real Freedom now is in inverse proportion to the feeling you had of imprison­ment in the mind, in maya. Because even in the planes you are in real illusion. In the physical world, the world you're in now, the gross world, you're in the world of false illusion. Everything is falseness, but we consider it as being real. 
We must always remember that we live in a world of objectivity, a world of objects. The reason why the individual never turns to himself as being responsible for anything that is happening in life, the reason he will blame circumstances, he will blame conditions, other people, other situations, you see, is because he lives in a world that is outside of himself. There is no other world except that which is in front of your eyeballs. No world exists behind the eyeballs because very little attention has been given to it. Most of the attention that has been developed in one has been on the outside. The blackboard is on the outside at school; the books you read are on the outside; the environ­ment, the landscape is on the outside. So you're taking everything from the outside into the inside of you. Therefore you get the habit of feeling that conditions and circumstances, everything that hap­pens to you, happens on the outside, whereas actually it's negotiated by what you do to the environment. You little realize that you and not people or situations are motivating your conduct. If you were to prepare your inside as to the quality and the kind of motivation you should exercise in the environment, you would find that the environment and people would respond to you in a different manner. Because you've given no preparation to the inside, the outside does not respond. Everything (all the stimuli) is coming from the outside to your inside. It's pouring in. It's bombarding you continuously, and you react to the outside, and the inside is left so undeveloped, you are powerless to cope with it. Therefore, when one gets oneself into a situation which causes one to be depressed and unhappy, one blames the outside and not the inside because the bombardment of stimuli from the outside is so tremendous, you haven't built or arched or buttressed the inside to cope with it. You collapse on the inside and you blame the outside for what's happening on the inside. I hope I'm making myself clear. 
That is the reason why we think of the God-Man, Meher Baba. He is the Perfect One, and although He is on the outside, He is actually an external represen­tation, an outside manifestation of what He also is on the inside of you. If you were to take an image of the God-Man who represents the absolute completeness of life into your inside, there wouldn't be anything else that you would desire in the world because He is a representation of infinite attributes. And you take these attributes that He represents–the good, the divine, the beautiful, the epitomization of happiness, of bliss, the epitomization of Truth, of peace, of harmony, of good feeling, any attribute which you can name–and you allow it to sink in deeply; let it percolate and pervade through the whole of your being in quietness, in stillness. The only object that you take from the outside to the inside in the stillness is the Avatar in the person of Meher Baba. Once you root Him on the inside, that will be the beginning of this harmony and the peace and the good feeling. Please remember, it isn't easy. Maya, or the mind, will resist any attempt that you make to go deep within yourself. 
Out in the world you hear people talk of self-discovery. We don't know whether they're talking about the little self, the personality self, or they're talking about that three letter dirty word which we call God which many of them are afraid to say out loud. If it's God, it means a capital "s" to the Self" and this Self in each individual is connected with the One Self which is the Over Soul or the Over Self, or as Baba expressed it, the "Isness of Existence." That's 
where you're tied into. So unless you can image the God-Man within you, you will never discover your Real Self. 
Another misconception taught over and over again is that you are the image of God. This of course makes you feel rather superior, but, you see, you're not the image of God. They left out one little letter. This letter changes the entire context. You are not the image of God. You are the imaged of God. You, me, everyone, everything are simply figments in the imagination of Almighty God. You have been imaged in the imagi­nation, by the imagination of Almighty God, in the infinite mind of Almighty God. You've merely been imaged. That's all. Evolution and involution are simply the continuation of the imagery that God is contin­uously exercising with His infinite mind. I hope that is clear. Now only the God-Man is the Image of God. The Perfect Master is the Image of God. It doesn't mean that once the soul has acquired the human form you're the image of God. You become that image of God, identical with God, when, in the human form you are completely conscious of Infinite Knowledge, Infinite Power, Infinite Bliss, and simultaneously you're also conscious of, but are completely detached from and unaffected by maya. You enjoy the happiness and the sufferings of maya because of your own will; because, after achieving the Christ or the Perfect Consciousness of Almighty God, you have been selected to return to earth to continue the work of God. 
So the way we know that we are detached from something is that we don't miss it. I can give a personal illustration that came to me now. When I went to India for the first time in 1957, Baba had sent His "come" cable for me to come and treat Him as a doctor. When I left my office, when I locked up that clinic, it didn't matter one hoot whether I was ever to return or remain away from it for an indefinite time or forever. That was at a time when my clinic represented virtually everything in life–it was my livelihood and everything that I had strived for. When I arrived in India to work with Baba, it didn't matter one whit when I was going to return. I didn't have the slightest bit of worry or concern, in fact, I never gave it a thought. I didn't know until the second week in India when I was to return. I was sorry to leave, but Baba always makes it easy for one to leave Him, to part with Him. He tells you, "Take Baba with you." "I am always with you." When I returned there was a bus strike, or was it a subway strike, I don't recall, and it didn't matter whether my office was busy or unbusy. I wasn't concerned. Now this is an illustration of detachment. In other words, I came back with the attitude of leaving everything to Baba. Leave everything to Him. 
Also remember and never forget this definition that Baba gave of your life in the gross world–that everything that has a beginning has an end. Only in Reality there is beginninglessness and endlessness. But in the material or physical world the misery that you feel had a beginning and will have an end. The happiness that you have, the success that you have, the failure that you have had a beginning and will have an ending. Always be careful that you witness the pranks of maya. Do not allow maya to involve the mind in situations and conditions. The mind which is maya will seize every opportunity for taking you away from God or the God-Man. Maya's very life is your mind, and the more you try to lessen the intensity with which you give your attention to the objectivity of the world, the more maya will try to pull you back. Maya will offer an all-powerful resistance because if it loses the attention of your mind on its table of niceties and delicacies that it has set before you, it is going to lose your involvement in it and its vagaries. Maya will lose its ability to involve you in success and failure. It cannot raise you to the heights of sublimity or plunge you to the depths of debauchery or depression. It isn't going to have that fun anymore. 
What you want to become is not the dunce of maya; you want to become the fool of God. You want to become His fool. You want to become His footstool. You want to become God's football. You want Him to kick you around. You must begin to dedicate yourself to the God-Man seriously and with sincerity in stillness–you don't do it aloud because maya will know what's going on. You image the God-Man and then bring your feeling to bear upon that image so that it becomes all-pervading all through your own being. And remember you are making all-pervading what is all-pervasive through the entire universe. But it is never felt unless you initiate the feeling within yourself. Silently calling out the name of Meher Baba, you will awaken the God-Man to hear this cry. This cry will be heard by the God-Man within you, and He will awaken. He will make this a solid substance, a solid thing, a solid Reality within you. 
Whenever you experience misery in the outside world or you experience it in the physical body, maya punishes you the most. You can get rid of your pain easily, and get quick relief if you surrender to maya. But if you refuse to surrender to maya and you keep calling out the name of the God-Man–you call Baba, Meher Baba, Meher Baba, Meher Baba–your misery is going to be prolonged. There's where the test is. There's the struggle–between God and maya. And you are caught in the middle. Baba has given an illustration of how maya exerts a pull on one of His arms, and Reality exerts a pull on His other arm, and it almost seems as if His arms are pulled out of the sockets. Well you are going to go through that .same experience. You are going to be put to the test. Because when misery comes your way, the test will be in which direction you are going to go–towards the God-Man or to fun and maya. There is where you are going to make your choice. Because selecting the God-Man's life is not an easy one. It's going to be difficult. But if you should conquer it, the yoke will be very easy and the burden will be light. It will become very simple. This is the fight that everybody must meet and overcome. And it's a tough fight. But if you persist, and you exercise guts and gumption, you will win through, and then God knows that He has a real lover. 
When this besets you in the physical world, where maya is concerned, you must never give in. Never give in. Never, never, never. You give in only to God. You give up maya, and you give in to God. There's always a giving up and a giving in to God. Until now you've been giving in to maya, and you gave up God. You 
gave up Self. It has been lost, and you want to find it again. Actually Baba says that there is nothing to seek. It is already there. But you must seek it within yourself nevertheless. Even though it's there, you've got to look for it there. You must uncover it there. It's covered because you haven't uncovered it. You must seek deeply within yourself and uncover it, and there it is, and the seeking is over because you've found it with the uncovering. And you take possession of it and you never, never let it go. You let go of maya, but never let go of God. That's what the Damaan is. You see, the Damaan is simply another external representation of the personification of the God-Man. The Damaan is what the God-Man wears. You take hold of Him, you grab it. There is a line from a Persian poem which says, "A hundred times I felt that I held your garment firmly in my hands; when I opened my eyes I was amazed to discover it was my own garment I was holding." When you hold on to the God-Man, you're really holding on to your Real Self. The Real Self is still the mystery not yet discovered. But the God-Man is the identical Self that You with a capital "Y" are. That's what you are. That is the Self. The personality of Meher Baba disappears, and you, your very own Self is what remains in its place. 
So the fight is on. You take up those cudgels, and you work with it. It requires daily application. If you don't apply yourself, it means that maya has hold of you. Anytime you give yourself up, in toto, to anything in the world of objects, you are denying your Real Self–you are saying, no, to the God-Man. To say, yes, to the God-Man is to say, no, to the world of objects. So start with it five minutes, ten minutes, fifteen minutes a day quietly in stillness. You can do it on a bus. You can do it on a subway with your eyes closed, on a street comer; you can do it in a park or in the quietness of your home. If your home isn't quiet, the last ditch of privacy is the bathroom with a locked door. You close your eyes, and no matter where you are, Baba is there if you bring Him into your conscious-ness–into your inside to remember. So give time to it. Give your attention to it. The more you give attention to it, the more this Thing on the inside will grow. It'll develop; it'll expand, and then gradually you will become free on the inside because you will have become freed of the world of objects–freed from objectivity on the outside. 
The closer you get to God, the more misery you will have to go through. That is the test. Your attachment certainly is not to misery. Your attach­ment is to God. Maya will cause the misery to persist. You will eventually be freed when God knows that your love for Him is absolute and complete. When it's absolute and complete, suddenly, out of a clear blue sky, it's done. You wake up as though you've been in a dream. You had a violent, terrifying dream, and it's all over. You feel established in God, with God. It's an experience that's totally subjective, and you'll not understand it until you go through it. Maya refuses to let go of its victims. It still wants to have you. There isn't any more choice victim than one who has had a very close personal relationship with the God-Man when He was in the body. Misery will be at its ultimate. There is the test where I have had to stand off quietly from my mind, detached, and internally just laugh at it. I know that it had a beginning, and it will have an ending. Nothing in the physical world lasts forever. Once it begins it also is done with. All this happens on the inside, and you just let it happen. You know that maya is trying to have its day. But it cannot have its day because the only Supreme Power in the universe is that of God, and maya is only an imitator of God. It's a shadow. If I wanted to surrender to maya, this whole thing would be gone in twenty-four hours– what I am going through. I would be a happy fellow again, but in. order to do that, I would have to let go of the Damaan of Baba. In order to give way to maya, I would have to surrender the Damaan of Baba. Well, I'm in a very advantaged position. When Baba in 1957 literally lifted up His own Damaan, closed my hands right over the hem of His sadra and took His hands and clasped them over mine, He said, "Never let this go! Even if you let it go. I won't let you go!" So I am in a very advantaged position. But that's the test. He has given me an easy way out if I am willing to take it. But I am not willing to take it. One who has received a great deal of love from the God-Man as I have received, a great deal is expected of him. To him who has been given much, much is expected from him. The Mandali would see this Love that Baba poured on me, just one little fellow there. They had never seen such continual embraces and kisses. That's why I am being brought to the slaughter. Because, to the one who is given so much, so much is going to be expected of him. They would rather that Baba would flail me and chastise me and beat me up a little. Then much would not be expected of me. They would always look upon me as a lamb being led to slaughter. It's difficult to understand that to give into maya, you have got to release the Damaan of Baba. There can be no release where I am concerned, even though He had given me a loophole. 
