 Peace          
                                                   
                                                   
                  
December 13, 2009
                                                   
                                                   
  
Rev. Mark Belletini 
Opening Words
 We are here, 

As autumn goes to sleep and winter knocks,
 To worship, to celebrate and wonder, and 

ask deeper questions of ourselves
 and of our common world, moving through time. 

So now we claim the gift of this time together
 With these words: 

 
Mindful that we share a common world, but approach 
that world in different ways, we 
begin our celebration together by kindling our prom
ise of mutual honesty, attentiveness, 
and deep courtesy. May we become more proficient at
 gratitude and awareness, that we 
might more deeply embody the kind of justice and pe
ace which embraces everyone on 
earth. 

 
Sequence
  
Somewhere on this round planet of ours, it must be 
evening, the west glowing pink and a wistful 
orange. And the Hanukkah candles are being kindled,
 the ancient blessing spoken or sung. Many 
do not notice the small candles in the window. It™s
 not their holiday. Some do it for their 
grandchildren, others because they can™t remember a
 December without the candles. But I assure 
you, somewhere it is happening, right now. 

And somewhere, tears dampen a cheek, and some notic
e and others don™t; and somewhere, loud 
laughter cracks through a room. Some share it, othe
rs find it strangely rude. And somewhere, oh 
yes, right now, there is singing, but not everyone 
knows the tune; and somewhere right now a 
flash of anger erupts, or a head shakes in resignat
ion, but not everyone shows anger by raging, 
and not everyone bows their head. Somewhere, right 
now, gunshots ricochet and nerves leap. But 
even war™s harsh sounds can drown out the dream of 
peace in most every human heart, the sweet 
emblem of which begins now, this wondrous silence–.
 silence 

Somewhere, maybe right here, hearts open up in the 
silence, and images from our days rise up. 
Somewhere, maybe right here, we are reminded of how
 connected we are, how woven we are, to 
others, to our loved ones and remembered ones, and 
how all of our years, both happy and sad, 
flow into this moment.  In the silence, we are free
 to name the faces attached to our joys or 
sorrows, reminding ourselves of all the gifts and a
stonishments which Life bestows to our 
humanity–
 
 naming 

Somewhere, maybe right here, singing reaches out an
d waters the fields where in the silence we 
may have sown a million seeds of peace. May they gr
ow, may they rise up and blossom, even 
though winter is almost here–. 

 
The First Reading
 comes from a stellar on-line essay by Tom Englehard
t, written two years ago 
on his blog, Tomdispatch. Where Have All the Protes
ts Gone? 
In the Vietnam era, demonstrations started small an
d built slowly over the years toward the 
massive -- in Washington, in cities around the coun
try, and then on campuses nationwide. In 
those years, as anger, anxiety, and outrage mounted
, militancy rose, and yet the range of antiwar 
demonstrators grew to include groups as diverse as 
"businessmen against the war" and large 
numbers of ever more vociferous Vietnam vets, often
 just back from the war itself. Almost 
exactly the opposite pattern -- the vets aside -- h
as occurred with Iraq. The prewar 
demonstrations were monstrous, instantaneously giga
ntic, at home and abroad. Millions of 
people grasped just where we were going in late 200
2 and early 2003, and grasped as well that 
an American-occupied Iraq would lead to disaster an
d death galore. The New York Times, 
usually notoriously unimpressed with demonstrations
, referred to the massed demonstrators then 
as the second "superpower" on a previously one supe
rpower planet. And it did look, as the Times 
headline went, as if there were "a new power in the
 streets." 
But here was the strange thing, as the "lone superp
ower" faltered, as the administration and the 
Pentagon came to look ever less super, ever less vi
ctorious, ever less powerful, so did that other 
superpower. Discouragement of a special sort seemed
 to set in Œ initially, perhaps, that the 
invasion had not been stopped and that, in Washingt
on, no one in a tone-deaf administration 
even seemed to be listening. Still, through the fir
st years of the war, on occasion, hundreds of 
thousands of demonstrators could be gathered in one
 spot to march massively, even cheerfully; 
these were crowds filled with "first timers" (who w
ere proud to tell you so); and, increasingly, 
with the families of soldiers stationed in Iraq (or
 Afghanistan), or of soldiers who had died there, 
and even, sometimes, with some of the soldiers them
selves, as well as contingents of vets from 
the Vietnam era, now older, greyer, but still vocif
erously antiwar. 
However, over the years, unlike in the Vietnam era,
 the demonstrations shrank, and somehow the 
anxiety, the anger -- though it remained suspended 
somewhere in the American ether -- stopped 
manifesting itself so publicly, even as the war wen
t on and on. Or put another way, perhaps the 
anger went deeper and turned inward, like a scourin
g agent. Perhaps it went all the way into what 
was left of an American belief system, into despair
 about the unresponsiveness of the 
government -- with paralyzing effect. As another po
tentially more disastrous war with Iran edges 
into sight, the response has been limited largely t
o what might be called the professional 
demonstrators. The surge of hope, of visual creativ
ity, of spontaneous interaction, of the urge to 
turn out, that arose in those prewar demonstrations
 now seemed so long gone, replaced by a far 
more powerful sense that nothing anyone could do ma
ttered in the least. 

 When it comes to the Vietnam analogy domestically, 
the question that still hangs in the air is 
whether, as in the latter years of the Vietnam era,
 the soldiers, in Iraq (and Afghanistan) as well 
as here at home, will take matters into their own h
ands; whether, as with Vietnam, in the end Iraq 
(and Iran) will be left to the vets of this war and
 their families and friends -- or to no one at all.
 The Second Reading
 is the most excellent poem, ?A Few Questions Not En
tirely Political,? by 
the long-time Quaker poet, Jeanne Lohmann.
   

Slamming into us, the wind 

pushed our placards off the iron railing 

outside the federal building. 

  

Wanting words I could stand by 

these made me uneasy:  a strident facile blame, 

the public appeal to guilt. 

  

After the vigil, riding home on the bus 

I try to resist a temptation to sadness. 

The precarious balancing acts of our lives 

leave much undone.  By not so much as the weight 

of one raindrop could we lessen the misery of the w
orld 
  

A fat passenger settling into the next plush seat 

squeezes me close to the window.   

I feel like a fugitive, the questions from my  

faithful and radical friends spinning the tires on 
the rain-slick freeway: 
what rouses us, finally?  Why choose Bosnia 

and fail Guatemala?  Why no attention 

to years of massacre in El Salvador? 

Why relief for Somalia and not the Sudan? 

Chechnya?  China?  Cuba? 

  

We could name other places, always. 

And closer home there™s politics to consider. 

Choices.  The terrible complex dilemmas. 

  

We can™t fix everything. 

  

But how do we answer each other 

or the starving and tortured, 

the broken and passed-over, the children 

whose cries didn™t reach us 

or came from the wrong place, wrong time and were n
ever loud enough? 
 
Sermon 

Often, when I was a child, my mother would call up 
from the basement and ask for something 

 she needed in the upstairs pantry. She would be dow
nstairs making a huge cauldron of broth in 
the ?lower kitchen,? something found in almost ever
y Italian American home. ?Mark, could you 
bring me down another onion??  I would say, ?Sure, 
ma,? and then I would look in the pantry for 
an onion. 

 
I knew what an onion looks like. Roundish.  Kind of
 yellow. With a papery skin. So I would look 
and look through the bin where the onions and potat
oes were kept. No onion. I would call down 
and tell her that there were no onions. She would g
rumble, and then I would hear her coming up 
the steps. She would go to the pantry, look in the 
bin, and pull out an onion. ?See,? she would 
say, clearly annoyed.  ?There is TOO an onion.? 

 
Of course it wasn™t what I was looking for. It was 
red, almost purplish. It had no papery skin, but 
was shiny as a Christmas tree ornament.  I didn™t s
ee it, because I didn™t know onions could 
be purple-red. I thought onions were only a yellow-
 tan. On that day, I began to learn an 
important lesson. You might find what you are looki
ng for if you don™t have a pre-conceived 
notion of what it looks like. If you know what you 
want in advance, you might not see what is 
right in front of your face, if what you are lookin
g for doesn™t resemble what you imagine. 
 
So when a wonderful person in the congregation was 
talking to me recently, she took me off 
guard when in the middle of a conversation she said
 to me: ?I don™t know what™s going on in this 
church. It™s changed so much. Back in the old days,
 we were a lot more socially concerned that 
we are now. Now there is hardly any social justice 
work going on at all any more.?  
 
I was totally confused when I heard these words. I 
began thinking of all the work led by 
members of the Social Justice Committee, the Empty 
Bowls program, the Guest at Your Table 
program, the letter-writing. I was thinking of how 
many marched in the Pride parade, how 250 of 
us showed up at a BREAD meeting to put pressure on 
urban leaders for positive change. I was 
thinking of all the work Alice Rathburn does to enc
ourage people to join BREAD research 
teams, so that our justice work is grounded in cold
 hard fact. I was thinking about the many trips 
our own children take down to the Hocking Hills wit
h Jacques Angelino where they confront 
poverty face-to-face, a life-changing event in many
 cases. I thought of all of these things and 
a hundred more, and was baffled by her statement. 

 
But instead of expressing my bafflement, I did the 
sane thing and asked a question, always a 
wiser approach than leaping to conclusions.  ?What 
do you mean?? I asked her. And she said: 
?We used to join peace marches all the time, and no
w we don™t, even though there is another war 
going on.? 

 
And immediately I remembered the onion story. Peace
 marches for this wonderful woman, 
BREAD for me. They look different, like a yellow on
ion and red onion look different. But as 
both onions will season the broth, so both a peace 
march and hard work on a research team are 
expressions of the deep social justice concerns of 
this congregation. Someone could argue that 
one is more basic than the other, but I rather agre
e with Martin Luther King Jr., who made it 
clear that any dream of peace without a commitment 
of economic justice tends toward a ?feel 
good? romanticism, so, for me, they go together. In
 fact, no one can pry them apart. 

  
Now it was clear last week that, when Nathan played
 ?Where Have All the Flowers Gone? for an 
interlude, a lot of folks seemed to have known the 
words, because without any prompting, they 
joined along. Old Pete Seeger song. From the sixtie
s and early seventies. The Vietnam War days.   
 
But when I looked at the folks who were singing it,
 I noted that they were almost all of the same 
generation, give or take fifteen either way. This w
as a song sung during those well-remembered 
protests during the Vietnam War, a song deep in the
 very bones of many. But many others 
simply did not know the song. They had never sung i
t before. 
 
And the Vietnam War was not the first war. And that
 anti-war song was not the first anti-war 
song.  Nor do songs pointing out the harsh realitie
s of war belong to Unitarian Universalists 
alone, during the sixties or in any other generatio
n. We used to sing ?Where Have All the 
Flowers Gone? in the Catholic church I attended whe
n I was younger, and we™ll sing it again 
today here in a Unitarian Universalist congregation
. The song doesn™t belong to any particular 
religion or people. But it IS a song known a lot mo
re by people of one generation than others. 
 
Yet the song itself is something that has changed, 
just like the experiences of the generations has 
changed. Seeger didn™t create his song in a vacuum.
 Seeger™s words to the song were an 
adaptation of a very old Ukrainian folk song, quote
d by the Nobel Laureate Mikhail Sholokhov 
in his award winning novel Tikhiy Don
, in Russian, or Quiet Flows the Don
, 1934. The Don, you 
may know, is one of the great rivers in Russia, and
 Sholokhov™s novel is one of the great novels 
of the twentieth century. Seeger generalized the wo
rds a bit more, to be sure. But please, 
Sholokhov was just as aware that 
war is hell
 as Pete Seeger was. And just as aware as General 
Sherman was, when he first uttered those famous wor
ds here in Columbus back in 1880. And 
just as many Vietnam vets confirmed that war is hel
l, even before they came home and were 
forgotten. Being for peace and against war is not s
omething invented in the 1960s. It™s been 
going on since long before Rome fell. Songs, protes
ts and everything. Even the Hebrew 
scriptures urge us to beat our swords into plows, a
nd convert our spears to pruning hooks. 
 
According to Tom Engelhardt in our first reading, w
e actually did march for peace and against 
the war in Iraq, at the beginning. It was very much
 like during Vietnam, he says. But it did not 
stay the same. For Washington has been a different 
place for the last twenty or so years than it 
was in the 1960s.  Tom Engelhardt uses the kindest 
word possible, calling our first 21
st
 century 
leaders ?tone deaf.?  Again, he reminds us there we
re plenty of marches and protests at the 
beginning of the war. I preached against the Iraqi 
war many times, in fact, although not everyone 
agreed with me, and told me so. But Engelhardt noti
ces a difference between the Vietnam era 
and our era, and I think what he says is a very imp
ortant insight: 
   

However, over the years, unlike in the Vietnam era,
 the demonstrations shrank, and somehow the 
anxiety, the anger -- though it remained suspended 
somewhere in the American ether -- stopped 
manifesting itself so publicly, even as the war wen
t on and on. Or put another way, perhaps the 
anger went deeper and turned inward, like a scourin
g agent. Perhaps it went all the way into 
what was left of an American belief system, into de
spair about the unresponsiveness of the 
government -- with paralyzing effect. 

  
Quaker poet Jeanne Lohman brings up that paralysis 
powerfully. It™s a paralysis, she suggests, 
caused by the information age. We are not just over
whelmed by the events in Iraq–however we 
feel about that particular war; the horror of war, 
I hope, is clear to  everyone of good will, no 
matter what their political bent. But there are so 
many
 wars. And it™s not just war which brings 
hell to the earth, but the pathetic government resp
onse to Katrina, the growing climate crisis, the 
recorded torture of the last decade, and the thousa
nd unjust imprisonments at the expense of 
human rights, exposed by Amnesty International. And
 even if we ignore all the rest of that, how, 
I wonder, are we to weigh which wars to protest aga
inst? 
What rouses us, finally
? the poet asks 
with brutal clarity.
 Why choose Bosnia and fail Guatemala?  Why no atte
ntion to years of 
massacre in El Salvador? Why relief for Somalia and
 not the Sudan? Chechnya?  China?  Cuba? 
  

We could name other places, always. 

And closer home there™s politics to consider. 

Choices.  The terrible complex dilemmas. 

We can™t fix everything. 

 
Now hear me, please. What she is offering us here, 
I say, is not a cry of despair. This is a real 
question she is asking–
what rouses us finally?
 to which she offers a real answer: 
We can™t fix 
everything
. In fact, her plainly worded statement is 
exactly 
what I mean when I say that social 
justice work without a spiritual center moves towar
d either guilt-ridden self-congratulation or the 
self-righteous shaming of others–.and  WAY too quic
kly. Remember the beginning of 
Lohman™s poem? Returning from a peace march in fron
t of the Federal Building, she writes:  
 
Slamming into us, the wind pushed our placards off 
the iron railing outside the federal building. 
Wanting words I could stand by, 

these made me uneasy:  a strident facile blame, 

the public appeal to guilt. 

 
No, social justice work, peace work after a decade 
of tone deaf national leadership, is not finding 
words that make us uneasy, and flinging them at fol
ks in anger, and trying to drum up their sense 
of guilt. To work for peace or economic access hone
stly, in our age, which is different than the 
Vietnam age in a thousand ways, is to begin by admi
tting that many things will simply not get 
done by us. Others may get them done, but we have t
o trust them to do it, and cannot shoulder 
everything ourselves. It™s to do the work and not b
lame others for not being ?roused? by the 
same thing that ?rouses? us, as if our understandin
gs could or should be universal. To work 
honestly for peace, and economic justice, is to adm
it real limits and boundaries, and not feel like 
we are failures just because we are human and canno
t topple regimes with letters and marches 
planned two weeks in advance. It™s to admit that we
 will never have control over all the 
injustices of the world even if we try with all our
 might, give up sleep, and never take our 
children to soccer practice again, so we can spend 
all of our time working on the issues–the 
issues which ?rouse us.? To approach social justice
 work of any kind with a spiritual grounding 
is to admit to not being omnipotent. It™s to take s
eriously that human beings are not stand-ins for 
some miracle working God. It™s to not live with pan
ic, but with steadfastness of purpose, without 
sacrificing daily devotion to our families and frie
nds, and the personal needs of body and spirit. 

  
In the end, whether or not we march, or sing songs,
 or meet 300 strong at a BREAD meeting 
may not be for the making of peace, or the establis
hment of a socially just world, as if by magic. 
The marching and the singing may be more important 
as strengthening for our own spirits so we 
don™t despair, don™t forget our power, cultivate ou
r steady patience, don™t give up, give in, wear 
out. Maybe, as is often true, our children™s story 
offers us the best clue about this month™s theme. 
In 
Peace Week in Miss Fox™s Class,
 the students learn that wanting peace means they t
hemselves 
have to  act peacefully. No name calling. No throwi
ng things. No sarcasm. No revenge. No 
blaming others. No quick reactions. No self-righteo
usness. No ?we™re the good guys, and if only 
everyone was just like us, the world would be a bet
ter place.?  No, none of that.  
 
By shouldering responsibility for the only persons 
we can be responsible for, ourselves, we 
spiritually prepare ourselves to move peace issues 
forward in the world. Whether we sing and 
march again as once we did, or push forward on the 
social organization level with BREAD, 
Results, etc, or whether we work for peace by cooki
ng or bringing food for the hungry, it™s 
important to remember that it™s all worthwhile, bot
h for ourselves and for the world of our lives. 
There is no one-size-fits-all. And no matter what c
olor the onion is, the broth is always better. 
 
So I am grateful for the observation that prompted 
this sermon. It made me think a bit. I hope it 
made you think a bit too. And maybe, it might even 
serve to begin to clarify what really rouses 
you, so you can decide just what compelling, unders
tandably limited, but powerful thing it is you 
want to do next. 

 
Offering 

 
How do we support this place which is 

dear to our hearts? With our time. With our 

kindness. With our cooperation. With our 

creativity. With our spirit. With our sustenance. 

The morning offering will now be given and 

received. 

 
Returning Words 

  

From the Nobel Acceptance Speech in Oslo given by M
ikhail Sholokhov Humanity is not 
divided into a flock of individuals, people floatin
g in a vacuum. We all live on earth, we are 
subject to its laws, and, as though, in the words o
f the Gospel ?every day has sufficient troubles 
and trials,? it also has sufficient hopes for a bet
ter future. I say that vast sections of the world™s
 
peoples are inspired by similar desires, common int
erests which bind them together far more 
than they divide them. What then are we called to d
o, we who are but tiny particles of the 
vastness called humanity? We must be honest, and te
ll the truth, and strengthen each other that 
we can still believe in our power to champion a bet
ter, more peaceful future. 
  
