Sunday, November 16, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes condemned them with an overthrow, making them an example unto those that after should live ungodly. And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation (behavior) of the wicked: (For that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds.)" 2 Pet. 2:6-8.  These are among the last words the apostle Peter ever wrote, and on that account alone they are very rare, sparse, and precious. A few verses above our text, we have the privilege of reading these somber words from an old man; to wit: "Yea, I think it meet," ­ (i.e., proper, appropriate), ­ "as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in remembrance;" ­ (these words suggest that Peter had often preached the things that I am preaching about today, relating to Lot and the fiery overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, and the filthy, atrocious, abominable sex-sins of Sodom that brought about the complete destruction of an entire civilization; for, it is not possible to stir somebody up by putting them in remembrance unless you have jolly well told them a lot of things to put them in remembrance about. And, in the verse immediately following, Peter says: "Moreover I will endeavor that ye may be able after my decease to HAVE THESE THINGS ALWAYS IN REMEMBRANCE." (2 Pet. 1:13,15)  Yes, Beloved, depend upon it: this elderly apostle of Jesus Christ devoted a whole lot of his preaching time to the filthiness of the fags, in refutation of the claim by the lying sodomite community all around us, that not much is said in the Bible on the subject of fags and their filthy, vile and Hellish abominations):  "I think it meet (proper, appropriate), as long as I am alive on this earth, says the aged and soon-to-die apostle, to STIR YOU UP BY PUTTING YOU IN REMEMBRANCE; Knowing that shortly I must put off this my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath showed me. Moreover I will endeavor that ye may be able after my decease to have these things ALWAYS IN REMEMBRANCE." (2 Pet. 1:13-15)  On this point, Gill says this; to wit: "What he means is, to leave these exhortations and admonitions IN WRITING, which they might read, and be of use to them when he was dead and gone; and indeed by this, and his former epistle, though being dead, he yet speaketh."  In fact, Peter ties the horrendous overthrow and everlasting doom of prosperous Sodom and Gomorrah and the vibrant, thriving cities of the plain, DIRECTLY to the FALSE PROPHETS. I say, that God ties their fiery overthrow and everlasting doom DIRECTLY to the FALSE PROPHETS. Thereby to show how despicable false prophets are in the sight and consideration of Almighty God. Beloved, please notice that the first chapter of Second Peter ends with God's most glorious commendation of His faithful prophets; to wit:  Sunday, November 16, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 2  "For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man; but HOLY MEN OF GOD SPAKE AS THEY WERE MOVED BY THE HOLY GHOST !" (2 Pet. 1:21)  BANG! That's the way chapter one ends. That's the last verse (vs. 21) of chapter one. Now see how dramatic this is. Chapter two opens with verse one powerfully contrasting with the last verse of chapter one; to wit: "BUT THERE WERE FALSE PROPHETS ALSO AMONG THE PEOPLE, EVEN AS THERE SHALL BE FALSE TEACHERS AMONG Y0U;" and from there to the end of chapter two (22 verses) Peter identifies these dangerous heretics; prognosticates their inevitable doom; and warns their many sycophants (sycophants means craven, groveling, cowardly disciples and followers; toadies).  The heart of it all is our text. The three epic events in which fallen men and fallen angels AND SODOMITES are tied to FALSE PROPHETS shows the importance of our dealing aright with this fearsome subject. Having introduced the subject of false prophets, the apostle Peter moves swiftly to their perilous position in the economy of God; to wit: God spared not the angels that sinned, God spared not the old world but saved Noah, and God spared not Sodom but saved Lot ­ BANG ! ­ and God most certainly will not spare fags and fag-enablers; but will save us from the wrath to come; to wit: "The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly (i.e., WBC members) out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust (i.e., all fags and fag-enablers) unto the day of judgment to be punished." (2 Pet. 2:9)  "For God hath not appointed US (i.e., WBC members) to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ." (1 Thes. 5:9)  "Whereby are given unto us (i.e., WBC members) exceeding great and precious promises: that by these ye might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world (i.e., a world of fags and fag-enablers all around us) through lust." (2 Pet. 1:4)  "And we know that we (i.e., WBC members) are of God, and the whole world (i.e., a world of fags and fag-enablers) lieth in wickedness." (1 Jn. 5:19)  And, our Lord Jesus Christ referred to two of these three EPICS as clear and ringing harbingers of His own Second Coming; to wit: "And as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the days of the Son of man (i.e., His Second Coming in power and great glory)... LIKEWISE ALSO as it was in the DAYS OF LOT; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded;" ­ (i.e., a vibrant, thriving, prosperous economy); ­ "But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed." Lk. 17:26,28-30.  The little conjunctive word "FOR" which opens the verse at 2 Pet. 2:4, ties the three Great Epics of all time directly to the False Prophets who are identified for the edification of His People by the six descriptive clauses of the three verses at 2 Pet. 2:1-3; to wit:  Sunday, November 16, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 3  1) They "privily shall bring in damnable heresies," such as God loves everyone, man has a free will, and, It's OK to be gay;  2) "Even denying the Lord (Despot, never used of Christ, always used of God the Father, absolute Sovereign of all creation, with the absolute right to demand, and receive, the full and unquestioned obedience, love and worship of every individual of mankind, and instead they speak and live as though He does not exist, that is, they deny predestination of all things) that bought them;"  3) "And many (think, Billy Graham, Rick Warren, Joel Osteen, thousands of Satanic megachurches) shall follow their pernicious (i.e., Hell-bound) ways;"  4) "By reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of" ­ (i.e., God's word for it, the False Prophets are directly, if not entirely, to blame for all the filthy talks and hard speeches that are heaped upon us every day, and whereby the rabble are roused at every level of society to do WBC members harm).  5) "And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you;" Beloved, how much money has the lying, deceptive fund-raising ­ through drives and letters from the fags and the preachers and the office-seeking politicians and the governments and the courts, etc., ­ raised on our backs? I say, Beloved, how much money ­ do you suppose ­ have they flat-out stolen from this little church over the years? "Do not rich men" ­ (i.e., financially and politically powerful men) ­ "oppress you, and draw you before the judgment seats?" I.e., so they can bleed us dry of our little funds that the members of this tiny church have worked and sacrificed for, and for investment in the kingdom of God?)" Jas. 2:6. I tell you, Beloved, we know from bitter experience on the ground, as they say, what it means when the Lord our God tells us that one identifying mark of these demon-possessed False Prophets is that "through covetousness they with feigned words make merchandise of you." Every penny will turn into fire and brimstone and will burn them, for all eternity.  "Go to now, ye rich men, (i.e., ye financially and/or politically powerful men), weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments are motheaten. Your gold and silver is cankered; and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. Ye have heaped treasure together for the last days. Behold, the hire of the laborers who have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, crieth: and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of sabaoth. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter. Ye have condemned and killed the just; and he doth not resist you. Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord... Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh." (Jas. 5:1-8)  Sunday, November 16, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 4  6) And, finally, "Whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not." To which should be added from verse #1, that these False Prophets "bring upon themselves swift destruction." Thus you see, from these six categories of identification which the Holy Ghost has given us, that these millions of False Prophets, worldwide, living and dead, are in a most precarious position. Gill says:  "Their eternal condemnation, which God in His righteousness has determined, from the creation of the world, as the Ethiopic version reads, to bring them into, for their vile principles and practices, is not retarded and delayed; it does not tarry, it will come upon them at the appointed time; and their damnation slumbereth not; an avenging God, who has appointed them to damnation for their sins, slumbers not; the justice of God is not asleep, nor careless and negligent, but is awake, and watches over them, to bring the evil upon them they have deserved, and is in reserve for them, and will hasten to perform it; the determined destruction does not lie dormant, but in a little while will be stirred up, and fall with dreadful weight on such sinners."  And now comes the little conjunctive word "FOR", which ties the three Great Epics of all time directly to the False Prophets; to wit: The False Prophets, with their "doctrines of devils and their lying hypocrisy" (1 Tim. 4:1,2) and their being "carried about with divers and strange doctrines" (Heb. 13:9) ­ are to blame for precipitating these three dreadful tragedies. Beloved, we ought to preach these truths to the False Prophets all about us, cutting them no slack, as they say; and we ought to consider them in their true light in all respects ­ angels as well as men. Yes. The first Great Epic appears to be the fall of angels, and the precipitating cause appears to be False Prophets preaching Arminian lies; to wit: "FOR if God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment." (2 Pet. 2:4) When Satan was cast out of Heaven because of his sinful, False Prophet, Arminian rebellion against God, he led a third of the angelic host with him; to wit: "And the Great Red Dragon's tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth." (Rev. 12:4) The Lord Jesus said, "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven." Lk. 10:18. Satan's lying, False Prophet, Arminian, message of rebellion against God was preached to our mother Eve in the garden of Eden; to wit: "Ye shall not surely die: For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil." (Gen. 3:4,5)  Satan's lying, False Prophet, Arminian, message of rebellion against God was more fully revealed by Isaiah, at the time of the fall of Babylon; to wit:  Sunday, November 16, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 5  "How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning (or, Day Star)! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I WILL BE LIKE THE MOST HIGH. Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit." (Isa. 14:12-15) Beloved, every Arminian preacher in the world is a lying, Satanic, False Prophet. "Beware!" warned our dear Lord Jesus Christ in His famous Sermon on the Mount. "Beware of FALSE PROPHETS, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits." Mat. 7:15,16. Make no mistake, Beloved: Ye SHALL know them. Now we come to the second of the world's three Great Epics, commonly known as the Great Noahic Flood; to wit: "FOR if God spared not the angels... AND SPARED NOT THE OLD WORLD, but saved Noah the eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly." (2 Pet. 2:5) Noah was a preacher of righteousness, which means he preached only the IMPUTED RIGHTEOUSNESS OF JESUS CHRIST ­ and none of his own; to wit: "Even as David also describeth the blessedness of the man, UNTO WHOM GOD IMPUTETH RIGHTEOUSNESS WITHOUT WORKS." Rom. 4:6. And we know, from the passages now before us, and others, that the "old world," called by God, "the world of the ungodly," was filled with lying False Prophets preaching Arminian Free-willism in opposition to, and in violent hatred of, Noah's Calvinistic-style imputation of God's righteousness as the only way to salvation. As of the apostate Jews of Paul's day, so of the 16 billion souls of the "old world," it must be said: "For they being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God." (Rom. 10:3) Hence, they all drowned; and hence, they all went to Hell; thanks to the multitude of False Prophets. God saved Noah from them by sending a worldwide flood to destroy them all, just in the nick of time. "By faith Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house; by the which he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith." (Heb. 11:7) And now we come to consider the third of the three Great Epics of the world, which is the subject of our text at 2 Pet. 2:6-8.  Sunday, November 16, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 6  "And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes condemned them with an overthrow, making them an example unto those that after should live ungodly; And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation (behavior) of the wicked: (For that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds;)" (2 Pet. 2:6-8)  In many ways, this third Epic is trivial, compared to the first two Epics. Both the Fall of Angels, and the drowning of the whole antediluvian world, involved the doom of hundreds of millions ­ possibly even billions ­ of intelligent creatures, and their ultimate casting into Hell. Whereas, in the case of Sodom and the other cities of the plain, no more than 16 million souls were reduced to ashes and cast into everlasting Hell in an instant. The explanation seems to be the filthiness and the enormity of the sins of the Sodomites, which were especially obnoxious and abominable to God. Lot was vexed with the filthy behavior of the entire population, and Lot's righteous soul was vexed all day, every day, 24/7, with the unlawful deeds of the entire population. Those vile beasts appear to have put their filthy abominations into law, making it a criminal offense to criticize or oppose them in any way; to wit:  "This one fellow (Lot) came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge: now will we deal worse with thee, than with them. And they pressed sore upon the man, even Lot, and came near to break the door." (Gen. 19:9)  The angels saved Lot at the last minute; and the Lord God delivered him finally and permanently by sending a fiery holocaust that turned their bodies to cinders, and cast their souls into Hell. And we know, from the passages now before us, and others, that ancient Sodom was filled with lying False Prophets preaching Arminian Free-willism, which was primarily to blame for Sodom's filthy, abominable condition; to wit:  "Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire." (Jude 7)  Gill says that GOING AFTER STRANGE FLESH means:  "Not other women besides their own wives, but men; and designs that detestable and unnatural sin, which, from these people, is called sodomy to this day; and which is an exceeding great sin, contrary to the light of nature and the law of God, dishonorable to human nature, and scandalous to a nation and people, and commonly prevails where idolatry and infidelity do, as among the Papists and Mahometans; and arose from idleness and fulness of bread in Sodom, and was committed in the sight of God, with great impudence."  Beloved, are not conditions ripe for the next and final Great Epic? The Second Coming of Jesus Christ in power and great glory.  "For the coming of the Lord draweth nigh." (Jas. 5:8)  Amen.  "Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus." (Rev. 22:20)  
