Sunday, June 16, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 1  "When thou goest out to battle against thine enemies, and seest horses, and chariots, and a people more, than thou, be not afraid of them: for the Lord thy God is with thee, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. And it shall be, when ye are come nigh unto the battle, that the priest shall approach and speak unto the people, and shall say unto them, Hear, O Israel, Ye approach this day unto battle against your enemies; let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye terrified because of them; for the Lord your God is he that goeth with you, to fight for you, against your enemies, to save you. And the officers shall speak unto the people, saying, What man is there that hath built a new house, and hath not dedicated it? Let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man dedicate it. And what man is he that hath planted a vineyard, and hath not yet eaten of it? let him also go and return unto his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man eat of it. And what man is there that hath betrothed a wife, and hath not taken her? let him go and return unto his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man take her. And the officers shall speak further unto the people, and they shall say, What man is there that is fearful and fainthearted? Let him go and return unto his house, lest his brethren's heart faint as well as his heart. And it shall be, when the officers have made an end of speaking unto the people, that they shall make captains of the armies to lead the people. When thou comest nigh unto a city to fight against it, then proclaim peace unto it. And it shall be, that if they make thee answer of peace, and open unto thee, then it shall be, that all the people that is found therein shall be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee. And if it will make no peace with thee, but if it will make war against thee, then thou shalt besiege it: And when the Lord thy God hath delivered it into thine hands, thou shalt smite every male thereof with the edge of the sword." (Deut. 20:1-13.)  Having made the principles involved with Gideon's life, we take him up in his middle age and at a time when the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord. "And the Lord delivered them  into the hand of Midian seven years. And the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel: and  because of the Midianites the children of Israel made them the dens which are in the mountains  and caves, and strong holds. And so it was, when Israel had sown, that the Midianites came up,  and the Amalekites, and the children of the east, (three great then-world powers) even they came  up against them; and they encamped against them and destroyed the increase of the earth, till  thou come unto Gaza, and left no sustenance for Israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor ass. (Thus  were the children of Israel reduced to poverty and all the misery that poverty brings upon a nation.  And that is where this nation is headed.) For they came up with their cattle and their tents, and  they came as grasshoppers for multitude; for both they and their camels were without number:  and they entered into the land to destroy it. And Israel was greatly impoverished because of the  Midianites; and the children of Israel cried unto the Lord. (Crying unto the Lord is the only way  out for this evil nation, and they are doing just the opposite, they are continuing to sin grievously.)  And it came to pass, when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord because of the Midianites,  That the Lord sent a prophet (in one way or another, when God moves upon the scene, his  prophets are involved; they may be identified and they may be obeyed) unto the children of  Sunday, June 16, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 2  Israel, which said unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I brought you up from Egypt,  and brought you forth out of the house of bondage; And I delivered you out of the hand of the  Egyptians, and out of the hand of all that oppressed you, and drave them out from before you,  and gave you their land; And I said unto you, I am the Lord your God; fear not the gods of the  Amorites, in whose land ye dwell: but ye have not obeyed my voice. And there came an angel of  the Lord, (sooner or later, the angels become involved, heavily involved) and sat under an oak  which was in Ophrah, that pertained unto Joash the Abiezrite; and his son Gideon threshed  wheat by the winepress, to hide it from the Midianites. And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and said unto him, The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valour." (Judges 6:1-12.) (Which glowing language could and should be applied to each of God's elect on earth. Just as angels are with us every moment of the day and night so we often don't have apprehension of it.  Even so "thou mighty man of valour" applies to each of the elect of God because the same spirit works in them.) "And Gideon said unto him, Oh my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why then is all  this befallen us? And where be all his miracles which our fathers told us of, (such language always applies to God's elect who oft times are not aware that the Lord was with them where they  were, on the ground) saying, Did not the Lord bring us up from Egypt? but now the Lord hath  forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands of the Midianites. (And the following is most  precious language, to wit:) And the Lord looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might, and  thou shalt save Israel from the hand of the Midianites: have not I sent thee? (True of each of God's elect, the Lord is with him or her, and that is demonstrated by "this thy might," which is  not perceptible to the messenger of God himself. And what is his might? His firm but complete knowledge of the scriptures. That's our might! You do err, said Christ, not knowing the scriptures nor the power of God, that is, God's might bestowed upon each of his elect.) And he said unto  him, Oh my Lord, wherewith shall I save Israel? Behold, my family is poor in Manasseh, and I am the least in my father's house. (Which would make Gideon the proud possessor of true meekness and humility, ­ foolish, weak, base, despised, the true marks of God's elect on earth in  this evil age.) And the Lord said unto him, Surely I will be with thee, and thou shalt smite the  Midianites as one man. (True miracles from God thus seem to be on the way, even as Gideon bemoans his weakness ­ his visible weakness.) And he said unto him, If now I have found grace  (this is none other than the angel of the Lord talking, you know; the declaration of the elect of God in every occasion. The language of Noah and all the patriarchs - if I have found grace ­ [because  God inculcated it in each little sheep]) in thy sight, then shew me a sign (PLEASE) that thou talkest with me. (That I'm not blowing hot air. Again Gideon pleads for some token from the Lord  his God.) Depart not hence, I pray thee, (this conversation he has with the Lord Jesus is amazing  stuff!) until I come unto thee, and bring forth my present, and set it before thee. And he said, I  will tarry until thou come again. And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid (for the Lord Jesus  Christ) and unleavened cakes and an ephah of flour: the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the  broth in a pot, and brought it out unto him under the oak, and presented it. (Just as Abraham did  for the Lord Jesus Christ under that oak.) And the angel of God said unto him, Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth. And he did so."  (Judges 6:14-21.)  We can inquire more closely into this beautiful event when we are in heaven.  I love you. Amen.  Sunday, June 16, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 3  "And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and said unto him, The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valour." (Judges 6:12.)  (Which glowing language could and should be applied to each of God's elect on earth. Just as angels are with us every moment of the day and night so we often don't have apprehension of it.  Even so "thou mighty man of valour" applies to each of the elect of God because the same spirit works in them.) And the following is most precious language, to wit: "And the Lord looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might... (Judges 6:14.) (True of each of God's elect, the Lord is with him or her, and that is demonstrated by "this thy might," which is not perceptible to the messenger of God himself. And what is his might? His firm but complete knowledge of the scriptures. That's our might! You do err, said Christ, not knowing the scriptures nor the power of God, that is, God's might bestowed upon each of his elect.) "And he said unto him, If now I have  found grace (this is none other than the angel of the Lord talking, you know; the declaration of the elect of God in every occasion. The language of Noah and all the patriarchs - if I have found grace ­ [because God inculcated it in each little sheep]) in thy sight, then shew me a sign (PLEASE) that thou talkest with me." Judges 6:17. (That I'm not blowing hot air. Again Gideon pleads for some token from the Lord his God.) "Then the angel of the Lord put forth the end of the staff  that was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and there rose up fire out of the rock, (That is the title of Haven's novel ­ Fire from the rock.) and consumed the flesh and  the unleavened cakes. Then the angel of the Lord departed out of his sight. And when Gideon perceived that he was an angel of the Lord, Gideon said, Alas, O Lord God! for because I have  seen an angel of the Lord face to face. And the Lord said unto him, Peace be unto thee; fear not: thou shalt not die. (Gill says: "whom he had reason to believe was the Lord himself, a divine  Person, by the miracle wrought; and it was a commonly received notion even among good men, in  those times, that the Lord was not to be seen by them and live, as appears from Jacob, Manoah,  and others; at least the appearance of a divine Person, and even of any messenger from heaven,  was startling, surprising, and frightful to them; which arose from a sense they had of the divine Being, and of their own sinfulness and frailty.") Then Gideon built an altar there unto the Lord, and called it Jehovah-shalom (The Lord our peace.) unto this day it is yet in Ophrah of the Abiezrites. And it came to pass the same night, that the Lord said unto him, Take thy father's young bullock, even the second bullock of seven years old, and throw down the altar of Baal that thy father hath, and cut down the grove that is by it" ­ (the event here is going to be his conflict and contest with the local men - they will want him dead. This shameful idolatry must be hit head on in every instance and every age, and it always generates conflict and violence. Gideon's father is soaked in it, but he sees the light when Gideon sees the light, which is often the case, to wit: And build an altar wherever you can to the living and true God in every dispensation. We must see the light while we have the light. "And if we walk in the light as he is in the light  and have fellowship one with another and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin." [1 John 1:7.] This religious experience took place in the night hours, just before the dawn.) ­ "And build an altar unto the Lord thy God upon the top of this rock, in the ordered place, and take the second bullock, and offer a burnt sacrifice with the wood of the grove which  thou shalt cut down. Then Gideon took ten men of his servants, and did as the Lord had said unto him: and so it was, because he feared his father's household, and the men of the city, that he could not do it by day, that he did it by night. (That's the message in part to the messengers of God ­ PREACH IT ­ cut down the altars of sin and damnation, by day or night, but cut the thing  down.) And when the men of the city arose early in the morning, behold, the altar of Baal was cast down, (these are the men from Anathoth ­ prepared to kill Gideon because of his preaching. And these men, with blood in their eyes, were prepared to kill Gideon, that night.) And the grove  was cut down that was by it, and the second bullock was offered upon the altar that was built.  Sunday, June 16, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 4  And they said one to another, Who hath done this thing? And when they enquired and asked,  they said, Gideon the son of Joash hath done this thing. (And mighty happy to do it!!) Then the  men of the city said unto Joash, Bring out thy son, that he may die: because he hath cast down  the altar of Baal, and because he hath cut down the grove that was by it. (Then the father of  Gideon apparently had a religious experience and rose to the defense of his beleaguered son  against the entire populace of that wicked city.) And Joash said unto all that stood against him, Will ye plead for Baal? (You have a dead god on your hands and will you save him ­ he is wood  and stucco) will ye save him? He that will plead for him, let him be put to death whilst it is yet  morning: if he be a god, let him plead for himself, because one hath cast down his altar.  Therefore on that day he called him Jerubbaal, saying, Let Baal plead against him, because he  hath thrown down his altar. Then all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the children of the  east were gathered together, (and the war was on, and victory assured.) and went over and  pitched in the valley of Jezreel. But the Spirit of the Lord came upon Gideon, and he blew a trumpet; (and the revival of true religion began) and Abiezer was gathered after him." Judges 6:21-34. (The whole world knows about Gideon's great victory and the unique way it went down with a trumpet in every man's hand, with empty pitchers, and lamps within the pitchers and three hundred valiant troops, Gideon became world famous.) "And what shall I more say? For the time  would fail me to tell of Gideon (and his historically famous champions of faith.) and Barak and  of Samson, and of Jephthae; of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets; Who through  faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of  lions, Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made  strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens. Women received their  dead raised to life again: and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might  obtain a better resurrection: And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea,  moreover of bonds and imprisonment: They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were  tempted, were slain with the sword; they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being  destitute, afflicted, tormented; (Of whom the world was not worthy;) they wandered in deserts,  and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth. And these all, having obtained a good  report through faith, received not the promise; God having provided some better thing for us,  that they without us should not be made perfect. Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about  with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily  beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us, Looking unto Jesus the  author and finisher of our faith; who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross,  despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God. For consider him  that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, (you ain't dead yet! A lot of people have died for  what you are doing, so you should not be so tremulous) striving against sin. And ye have  forgotten the exhortation which speaketh unto you as unto children, My son, despise not thou  the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him: For whom the Lord loveth  he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. If ye endure chastening, God  dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not? (One of the  surest signs of a doomed society is no discipline of the children. The woman judge in Wisconsin  put the guy in jail for preaching the verse.) But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are  partakers, then are ye bastards, (yes, bastards, live with it!) and not sons... Wherefore we  receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear: For our God is a consuming fire." (Hebrews 11 and  12.)  I love you. Amen.  
