Sunday, February 6, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory; And before him shall be gathered all nations; and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats; And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world; For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; Naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in  prison, and ye came unto me. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying,  Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee  drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed  thee? Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee? And the  King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye  have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into EVERLASTING FIRE, prepared for the devil and his angels (or, messengers); For I was an hungred, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not. Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee? Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. And these shall go away into EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT; but the righteous into LIFE ETERNAL." Mat. 25:31-46.  C.I. Scofield, who put together the famous Scofield Reference Bible in 1909, was a heretic of the first water ­ specializing in Ultra Dispensationalism and Higher Criticism. For a time after the Civil War Scofield was employed as Kansas Attorney General, but got in money trouble, which ended his political career. Whereupon the sorry scoundrel left his wife and three children in Atchison where his abandoned wife worked as city librarian. A while later Scofield showed up in Texas, working as a duly ordained Lutheran preacher, where his gift of gab made him a leader in the denomination. Along the way, Scofield sloughed off his wife and children in Atchison ­ whom he never supported anyway ­ and married a newer model wife who bore him another child. We have three copies of Scofield's revealing unauthorized biography, the reading of which may cure you forever of taking theological advice from the fornicating old fool.  He has a rather lengthy note purporting to expound Matthew, chapter 25, dealing with the sheep and the goats when the Lord Jesus shall come in His glory, and all the holy angels with him, to sit upon the throne of His glory and assigns every individual sheep and goat to everlasting Heaven or Hell. What a conglomeration of Scofield nonsense. Not fit for a beginner's course in Ultra Dispensationalism and Germany's Higher Criticism. Talk about the unclean ravens feeding Elijah! Better, Beloved, to eat His flesh, and drink His blood. Jn. 6:56. "In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. (But this spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive)." (Jn. 7:37-39)  Sunday, February 6, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  So much for C.I. Scofield and his book, The Scofield Reference Bible. He is the patron saint of all these preachers and churches calling themselves Fundamentalists and Evangelicals ­ and they will fight you if you offer them a few nuggets of truth about their Scofield Idolatry.  Bob Jones University declared war on Joseph M. Canfield, the humble soul who wrote the valuable 214-page biography entitled, "The Incredible Scofield and His Book." The members of Westboro Baptist Church who carry and read Scofield Bibles should be aware of the kind of man, scoundrel, and heretic C.I. Scofield truly was. In Chapter 40, captioned "In Conclusion," Canfield writes: "Even a limited study of his major work, The Scofield Reference Bible, suggests that it is a shoddy piece of work. In no way does it deserve the praise heaped on it by his contemporaries and by later adherents. It is not worthy of the place it occupies among Evangelical and Fundamental Christians. It would be hard to praise a man like Scofield and still adhere to truth or be accurate. Those who have spoken and written in his praise have not attempted the difficult, nearly impossible task of being accurate. Praise appears to have been more important. This carelessness (or worse!) seems endemic among those who accept the Scofield system of interpretation of Holy Scripture. Carelessness with everyday truth permeates the movement. For example, note the stories in their margins, related with breathless abandon, about trainloads of stone shipped from southern Indiana to New York, and thence to Israel for rebuilding the Temple in Jerusalem!"  Well now, as one familiar with railroads, and particularly whose father was a lifetime career detective with the Southern Railroad, charged with investigating all such massive disappearances of all such trainloads of valuable merchandise; I say, the inability of railroads to locate such shipments might seem surprising if not laughable ­ except that, IT NEVER HAPPENED.  Except in the fertile brains of professional prophesy preachers (PPPers), who sell such nonsense to the gullible "christian" activist public, and who desperately need such yarns to make their phony eschatological theology plausible and excite the jaded pew-warmers. Common sense views of the Scriptures, and firm refutations by Israeli embassies, indicate that such stories are total fabrications. And, unembarrassed Fundamentalist denials never show any sense of shame for playing with truth. "Huge trainloads of American stone now headed for Israel to rebuild the Temple in Jerusalem, strangely and permanently disappear, never to be heard of again(!)" Hogwash. Why would anybody invent such a patent lie? Because Scofield and his sheep-headed Dispensational heretics NEED such poppycock to patch up holes in their goofy theology. The phantom trainloads of stone to rebuild the Temple in a Restored Israel and a Rebuilt Jerusalem, by and by, required some evidence on the ground as they say. They are called "Prophetic Fulfillments." The Scofield-type heretics often box themselves in by pinpointing dates for events to happen in the future ­ notwithstanding the Savior's express language forbidding such date-setting; to wit: "When they therefore were come together, they asked of him, saying, Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel? And he said unto them, It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power." (Acts 1:6,7) "Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away. BUT OF THAT DAY AND HOUR KNOWETH NO MAN, NO, NOT THE ANGELS OF HEAVEN, BUT MY FATHER ONLY. But as the days of Noah were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. For as in the days that were before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark, And knew not until the flood came, and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be...Watch therefore; for ye know not what hour your Lord doth  Sunday, February 6, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  come. But know this, that if the good man of the house had known in what watch the  thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house to  be broken up. THEREFORE BE YE ALSO READY; FOR IN SUCH AN HOUR AS YE  THINK NOT THE SON OF MAN COMETH." (Mat. 24:35-44)  As in the days that were JUST before the flood. Beloved, I get a gloomy, grim, doleful feeling whenever the subject of the antediluvian world comes before me for some serious study. The Jews say that "the generation of the Flood have no part in the world to come, nor shall they stand in judgment, according to Genesis 6:3: `And the Lord said, My spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh; yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years.'"  A short letter from a man in New Zealand was published in the CJ newspaper, pointing out that no civilization except the doomed one just before the Flood had ever allowed same-sex marriage. Beloved, universal same-sex marriage is just around the corner for us. Gill: "The sense is, as were the practices of the men of that generation, in which Noah lived, so will be the practices of the men of that age in which the Son of man comes; or as the Flood, which happened in the days of Noah, was sudden and unexpected, it came upon men thoughtless about it, though they had warning of it; and was universal, swept them all away, excepting a few that were saved in the ark. Eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, here, refers to their wholly giving themselves up to the pleasures of life, and lusts of the flesh, without any concern about the serious affairs of religion. the worship and glory of God, the welfare of their souls and their approaching danger, of which Noah had given them warning; their luxury and intemperance, and their libidinous and unlawful marriages; for the word used here for eating, signifies eating after the manner of brute beasts; they indulged themselves in a brutish way; in gluttony and drunkenness; and it is certain from the account given of them, in Gen. 6:2,4. that they entered into unlawful marriages, and unclean copulations; to wit: `That the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them wives of all which they chose...There were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare children to them, the same became mighty men which were of old, men of renown.' Wherefore these things may be spoken of them, as what were really sinful and wicked, and denote a course of sinning, a constant practice of those sins of intemperance and lust, and which is more fully expressed in the next clause: until the day that Noah entered into the ark. The Arabic version renders it, the SHIP, the vessel which God directed him to make, for the saving of himself and family. Now the men of that generation persisted in their wicked course of living, after, and notwithstanding, the warning God had given them by Noah, of the flood that would come upon them; and all the while the ark was building, even to the very day that Noah and his family, by the orders of God, went into the ark. And knew not until the flood came, and took them all away. That is, they did not give heed to what Noah said to them about it. They slighted and despised his warnings. They did not believe, that what he said of the flood was true. They had notice of it; but they did not know it, and therefore God gave them up to judicial blindness, and hardness of heart; and so they remained, until it came upon them at once; the whole world of the ungodly, every man, woman, and child, except eight persons only; Noah and his wife, and his three sons and their wives; for the deluge was universal; and reached to all the inhabitants of the world, who all perished in it, except the eight."  Sunday, February 6, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  Beloved. All vestiges of that filthy race of mankind were swept from the Earth. We look all about us every day, and find the same condition existing today ­ or so it seems to us, as we attempt prayerfully to accurately discern the signs of the times, and rightly divide the Word of Truth. The Old World ­ like the present world ­ gave themselves up to all manner of wickedness and uncleanness; they disregarded the warnings of Christ, speaking through Noah; to wit: "For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit; BY WHICH ALSO HE WENT AND PREACHED UNTO THE SPIRITS IN PRISON; Which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water." (1 Pet. 3:18-20) "And spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth person, A PREACHER OF RIGHTEOUSNESS, BRINGING IN THE FLOOD UPON THE WORLD OF THE UNGODLY." (2 Pet. 2:5)  How simple. How blessedly simple. And yet, how gloriously, magnificently sublime. In the beginning there was an OLD WORLD, called THE WORLD OF THE UNGODLY, which God, in 2353 B.C., totally destroyed for not heeding ONE OLD-TIME PREACHER, NOAH. All the inhabitants of the WORLD OF THE UNGODLY have been burning in Hell since 2353 B.C., (c. 4,364 years) with eternity left to go. O Eternity(!) Curses and blessings come from the same Fountainhead of Eternal Truth Incarnate (the Lord Jesus Christ). The same blessed lips that say to the righteous, Enter everlasting life; say to the wicked, Go into everlasting damnation. The same adjective that prescribes eternity for the length of eternal bliss in Heaven, prescribes eternity for the length of suffering agony in Hell. O Eternity! Love Incarnate (Jesus Christ) cursed and damned reprobate sinners on Earth. Mat. 23. And He extended the same to eternity; to wit:  "Marvel not at this; for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, And shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation." (Jn. 5:28,29) O Eternity! Elbert Munsey (1833-1877): "O Eternity! Let thy ages tramp, thy cycles roll, but thou canst not crumble or scar the walls of Hell, or rust and break its lock or silver the hair of God, who has sworn by His eternal self that the sinner shall die. The pendulum of thy horologue over the gates of woe vibrates through all eons, and says, ,,Forever, and ever ­ ,,forever, and ever ­ ,,forever, and ever ­ its sounding bell striking off the centuries, the ages, ­ the cycles. The appalling monotony of its pendulum ­ going ­ going ­ going ­ repeating still, ,,forever, and ever ­ ,,forever, and ever ­ O Eternity! God has wound up thy clock, and it will never run down ­ and its tickings and beatings are heard by all the lost ­ ,,forever, and ever ­ ,,forever, and ever." WBC ­ like Noah and John the Baptist ­ are crying out from this world's wilderness and warning this filthy generation that your doom is imminent; you have very little time. Stop your silly chatter about God loving everyone and hating no one. Away, you sickly sentimentalists! While you say God cannot hate, you say He cannot love ­ and every argument you use against Hell, is an argument against Heaven. "Bow ere the awful trumpet sound, and call you to his bar! For mercy knows the appointed bound, and turns to vengeance there."  I love you.  Amen.  
