  October 26, 1986Bethlehem Baptist ChurchJohn Piper, PastorCopyright (C) 1986, 1996 John Piper    THE ENTHRONEMENT OF DESIRE  Ephesians 5:3-6 But fornication and all impurity or covetousness must not even be named amongyou, as is fitting among saints. Let there be no filthiness, nor silly talk,nor levity, which are not fitting; but instead let there be thanksgiving.Be sure of this, that ;no fornicator or impure man, or one who is covetous(that is, an idolator), has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ andof God. Let no one deceive you with empty words, for it is because of thesethings that the wrath of God comes upon the sons of disobedience. Enthronement It is utterly crucial in approaching a text like this that we see not onlywhat the Scriptures forbid, but also HOW and WHY they forbid it. It is plainthat Paul is eager to eliminate certain behaviors and attitudes from theChristian life. But HOW does he attempt to eliminate these things? If we don't see the the HOW, then we don't see the gospel. And without thegospel, the prohibitions become the letter that kills instead of the Spiritthat gives life (2 Cor. 3:6). And this is true no matter how well we succeedin getting these things out of our lives. Success in morality without thegospel is suicide. So we must devote our earnest attention this morning not only to what theapostle prohibits, but also to how he motivates this prohibition and howhe enforces it and how he replaces it with something else. But let's begin by making clear just what it is that Paul is trying to eliminatefrom our lives. He mentions six things in verses 3 and 4: (v. 3) "Immoralityand all impurity or covetousness must not even be named among you. . . (v.4) Let there be no filthiness, nor silly talk, nor levity. . ." Let's takethese six things one at a time and ponder what they refer to and whetherany of them are in our lives. This is not a test of your vocabulary; it isa test of your purity. Are there any of these that need to be eliminatedfrom your lives? First he mentions "immorality." This is a broad term for sexual sin, butin the NT it seems to focus in fornication, that is, the fulfillment of sexualcravings before marriage. So what I want to stress this morning is that thisword and this text clearly teach that premarital sexual intercourse is wrong;it is contrary to the revealed will of God. Let me try to show you why I am persuaded that this word refers to premaritalsexual intercourse and not just to (or even mainly to) adultery or maritalunfaithfulness. There are at least three other texts where the word porneiaclearly refers to premarital sexual intercourse. First, in 1 Corinthians 7:2 Paul says, "Because of the temptation to immorality(porneia), each man should have his own wife and each her own husband." Inother words BEFORE you marry you are tempted to porneia. The sin in viewis not adultery, but premarital sexual intercourse. In the preceding chapter(6:18) Paul says this is to be shunned: "Flee immorality." Second, in Matthew 15:19 Jesus says, "Out of the heart come evil thoughts,murder, adultery, fornication (porneia). . ." Notice how adultery is listedalong side this word porneia and so is different from it. It is so clearthat the RSV goes against its usual translation of "immorality" and callsit "fornication". Jesus goes on to say that it is these things that defile.In other words our Lord himself was crystal clear on this matter of premaritalsexual intercourse: it comes from an evil heart and is a blatant contradictionof God's will that sexuality be preserved for the lifelong union of one manand one woman in marriage. (Cf. 1 Cor. 6:9 where Paul uses fornicators, pornoi,and adulterers, moichoi, the same way Jesus uses porneia and moicheia.) Third, in John 8:41 Jesus is in a heated discussion with the Jewish leaders.Jesus pushes them so hard to recognize their own inconsistencies that theyresort to an ad hominem argument and say, "We were not born of fornication!"The word is porneia and the point is: WE weren't born that way YOU were.In other words they are calling Jesus a bastard, because everybody knew thatMary and Joseph were not married when Mary became pregnant. And so sincethey did not believe in the miracle of the virgin birth, the popular rumorwas that Jesus was an illegitimate child of Mary by who knows whom. The onlypoint I want to make from this is that the word for "fornication" in John8:41 is the same as the one in Mt. 15:19 and 1 Cor. 7:2, and in all thesetexts the meaning is premarital sexual relations. Therefore this is the natural meaning to give to the word here in Eph. 5:3.Fornication should be eliminated from your life if you are a Christian. Itshould be shunned like a dangerous disease. For it is far more dangerousthan AIDS. AIDS can only kill your body. Fornication can kill your soul aswe will see from verse six in a few moments. The next thing to eliminate is "impurity" or "uncleanness" (v. 3). This isa word Paul uses a half dozen times in relation to sexual sin (Rom. 1:24;6:19; 2 Cor. 12:21; Gal. 5:19; Eph. 4:19; Col. 3:5). The word is probablyadded to fornication to emphasize the kind of degradation common in Ephesusand Minneapolis. I think he included sexual activity like homosexuality.This is the meaning he gives to the word in Romans 1:24. Paul is talking about the kinds of things that come into a culture when itexchanges God for the creature. He says that people start exchanging thenatural for the unnatural. Verse 24: "God gave them up in the lusts of theirhearts to impurity, to the dishonoring of their own bodies among themselves.. ." which he goes on to identify as homosexuality and lesbianism. Verse26f: "He gave them up to dishonorable passion. Their women exchanged naturalrelations for unnatural, and the men likewise gave up natural relations withwomen and were consumed with passion for one another, men committing shamelessacts with men." So even though our own culture may be returning to the debauchery and licenseof the first century near-Eastern paganism, those who have been called byJesus Christ into his kingdom and glory will stand firm and pure againstfornication and homosexuality. The third thing Paul mentions in verse 3 is coveteousness. This must beeliminated too from the Christian life. It generally refers to greed formoney but is really much broader than that. It means strong, inordinate craving;an inability to be content and satisfied with the necessities of life andministry (cf. Hebrews 13:5; 1 Tim. 6:8). It may be a craving for money, orit may be a craving for sex, as it seems to be here. The same word was used back in 4:19 in this same sense. Paul refers tounbelievers in that culture as people "who have become callous and have giventhemselves up to licentiousness, greedy to practice every kind of uncleanness."Literally: "they gave themselves up to licentiousness to do every kind ofuncleanness in coveteousness." Coveteousness is what drives the pursuit ofunclean behavior. It is the craving that ought to be conquered by a new andmore powerful affection. Thomas Chalmers called it "The Expulsive Power ofa New Affection." If you are a Christian these things must go: fornication; homosexuality;and the dominating power of all the cravings in your life that are not cravingsfor God. The next three things to eliminate we can take all together for the sakeof brevity. Verse 4 says, "Let there be no filthiness, nor silly talk, norlevity. . ." Paul seems to be concerned mainly about two related errors:treating things as gross or treating things as trivial, filthiness and flippancy. There are people who are so dirty inside that they can hardly refer to atree or a cloud or a fish hook or a brake pedal without treating it as filthy:they may do it with some gross language or simply with a despising attitudeand demeanor. And there are people whose vision of the world is so superficial that theytrivialize everything. Paul condemns both of these and says, Get rid of all filthiness and coarsenesson the one hand and all foolishness and levity on the other It is good for us to be warned not to make light of God's creation. You don'thave to trivialize the world in order to enjoy it. Charles Spurgeon has somewise words on the difference between humor and levity. We must conquer our tendency to levity. A great distinction exists betweenholy cheerfulness, which is a virtue, and general levity, which is a vice.There is a levity which has not enough heart to laugh, but trifles witheverything; it is flippant, hollow, unreal. A hearty laugh is no more levitythan a hearty cry." (Lectures to My Students, p. 212) In sum, then, there are six things that this text of Scripture eliminatesfrom the Christian life. The first three are fornication (premarital sexualrelations), uncleanness (gross sexual distortions like homosexuality andlesbianism), coveteousness (not merely the simple urge for sexual experiencewhich is normal and good, but the dominion of this desire that controls thebehavior and elevates the pursued pleasure above the revealed will of God).The last three are filthiness, silly talk and levity, and together they showthat the good gifts of God should not be treated as filthy or as flippant. Now before we look at HOW the apostle motivates his prohibitions, let's noticecarefully what he puts in the place of these six sins. Keep in mind the modelof 4:22-24: take off the old self and put on the new self. We are to takeoff and throw away fornication, homosexuality (and, by the way, Paul saysvery plainly in 1 Cor. 6:9-11 that some of the believers in the church HADBEEN homosexuals; he believes that change is possible, as does OUTPOST herein our own city). We are to take off the old self of fornication andhomosexuality and coveteousness and filthiness and silly talk and levity.And what are we to put on: THANKSGIVING! It comes at the end of verse 4:"Let there be no filthiness, nor silly talk, nor levity, which are not fitting;but instead let there be thanksgiving." Would you have chosen gratitude or thankfulness as the opposite of all thesesexual and verbal sins? Why does Paul? Here's what I would suggest is thereason. If fornication and impurity are driven by coveteousness, and coveteousnessis a deep discontented craving that dominates your life and even leads youto go against the will of God, then it is clear that the opposite experiencewould be thanks giving. If you are overflowing with thanksgiving to God,then you are not dominated and driven by discontentment at what you havebeen denied. Gratitude is what you feel when you believe God is for you and not againstyou. It's what you feel when you believe that he gives you only what is goodfor you and withholds no good thing (single or married!). It's what you feelwhen you trust Him, that the tragedies of your life are not evidences ofhis meanness or his incompetence; but rather that they are the disciplineof a loving Father who values your holiness above your fleeting worldlyhappiness. That's why verse 20 goes so far as to say, "Always and for everythinggive thanks in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to God the Father." So you can see how thanksgiving is the alternative to a life driven by cravingsfor what you don't have (whether sex or money). Thanksgiving says, in GodI have all that is good for me, and I will not be driven to dishonor theworth of his name just to get a few sexual sensations or a few new toys. And you can see easily how thanksgiving is also the opposite of treatingGod's gifts as filthy or as trivial. When you are truly grateful for something,you don't despise it and you don't trivialize it. Just test yourself: whenyour heart is overflowing with gratitude to God, do you use filthy languageor make light of things? No. Gratitude is what you feel when you have beengiven eyes to see that all of life is the work of a sovereign and graciousGod. It is not for trifling and it's not for defiling. So we should strip off the old garment of fornication and impurity andcoveteousness and filthiness and silly talk and levity and in its place puton the garment of gratitude. There is one other way to describe this change implied in this text. Noticein verse 5, about half way through that a coveteous person is called an idolater:"... one who is coveteous (that is, an idolator)." In other words, the root problem about being driven by the domination ofearthly desires is that it dethrones God. That is why I entitled this message"The Enthronement of Desire." So when Paul puts gratitude in the place ofcoveteousness he is simply putting God in the place of man, and specificallyhe is putting God in the place of self. Gratitude is the opposite ofcoveteousness because it enthrones God. Gratitude says that God is thesatisfaction of all my longings. Coveteousness says that God is not adequateas a satisfying treasure, I must have money or I must have sex -- God willnot suffice! And so perhaps the most important thing for us to see today is that evenin the most physical, ordinary struggles of our lives the central issue isGOD. When Paul calls the dominion of our craving "idolatry," he is sayingin effect, God should be everything to you. God should be your pleasure andsatisfaction and hope and joy and master. And all your life should be governedby an overflowing gratitude to him for his goodness and glory and grace andpower and wisdom. Now we come to the question: How does Paul motivate us to eliminate fornicationand homosexuality and coveteousness and filthiness and silly talk and levityfrom our lives? First, notice what Paul did not do: he did not quote the tenth commandment:"Thou shalt not covet" (Ex. 20:17). Why not? It is, I think, because theonly obedience that counts is obedience from the heart (Romans 6:17). Andobedience from the heart is obedience that comes from a deep agreement thatthe will of God is not only required but beautiful and fitting. So how does Paul motivate us? Two times, once in verse 3 and once in verse4 he tells us that these things are not FITTING for saints. Verse 3: "Immoralityand all impurity or covetousness must not even be named among you, as isfitting among saints." Verse 4: "Let there be no filthiness, nor silly talk,nor levity, which are not fitting." What is he saying? He is pleading with believers to be renewed in the spiritof their minds (4:23). He doesn't want mere obedience under the constraintof divine sanction. He wants new creatures, who have new new ways of seeingthe world: new values, new tastes, new desires, a whole new vision of theworld, so that things like fornication and uncleanness and coveteousnessand filthiness and silly talk and levity, and a hundred other sins, willjust seem out of the question because they don't fit any more the way weare. On this Reformation Sunday let the great Martin Luther express the root ofgospel obedience. In his magnificent essay called The Freedom of a Christian(published in 1520), he said that the renewed mind of the Christian oughtto think like this, Although I am an unworthy and condemned man, my God has given me in Christall the riches of righteousness and salvation without any merit on my part,out of pure, free mercy, so that from now on I need nothing except faithwhich believes that this is true. Why should I not therefore freely, joyfully,with all my heart, and with an eager will do all things which I know arepleasing and acceptable to such a Father who has overwhelmed me with hisinestimable riches? (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1960, p. 304) In other words, for a person who is born again and stands justified beforeGod with inestimable riches in him, coveteousness with all its impuritiesis utterly unfitting and out of the question. They can't go together. Thisis is the way Paul wants people to obey God. This is gospel (evangelical)obedience rather than legal obedience. One final question remains: if the Paul's goal is to motivate Christiansto obey with this kind of inner, free, joyful, gospel obedience, why doeshe now threaten that if they don't they will miss heaven and go to hell? For this is indeed what he does in verses 5 and 6: Be sure of this, that no immoral or impure man or one who is covetous (thatis, an idolater), has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.Let no one deceive you with empty words, for it is because of these thingsthat the wrath of God comes upon the sons of disobedience. What does thedeceiver say? Who do you think it is today that does what the deceiver does in verse 6-- "Let no one deceive you with empty words, for it is because of these thingsthat the wrath of God comes upon the sons of disobedience"? I would answer that the deceiver is the person today who says that gospelobedience can't be motivated by these words in verses 5 and 6. The deceiveris the person who says that the preaching of wrath belongs only to the law,and produces only legalistic fear. This is not true. If it were true Paul wouldn't warn his readers -- professingChristians -- about the danger of falling short of the kingdom and fallingunder the final wrath of God. The point of introducing the wrath of God andthe danger of missing out on the kingdom of Christ is not to enslave peopleto unwilling and burdensome obedience. The point is this: evangelical obediencefrom a renewed mind and a heart brimming with joy and thanksgiving is notoptional. Jesus said the same thing in John 3:3, "Truly, truly, I say to you, unlessone is born anew, he cannot see the kingdom of God." This kind of warningis not a summons to legalistic fear and slavish, cowering obedience. Justthe opposite! Both Jesus and Paul are warning us that getting rid of ourlegalistic fear, and getting rid of our slavish efforts to obey God is infinitelyserious. They are saying that it is a matter of eternal importance whetheryou are really renewed in the spirit of your mind, and whether you are reallyborn again, and really full of gratitude and joy and freedom in your obedience. When God reveals his wrath, his intention is not to contradict or hinderthe gospel motives of faith and freedom and joy. Just the opposite: therevelation of his wrath is the intensification of his demand that we trustin his mercy and delight in his grace. "He threatens terrible things if wewill not be happy!" Put off the old self of fornication and impurity and coveteousness and filthinessand silly talk and levity; be renewed in the spirit of your mind; and puton the new garment of gratitude to God that knows and does what is fittingfor the saints. For on this great spiritual transaction in your heart hangs the inheritanceof heaven or the torments of hell. O how serious and earnest and heart-searchingwe should be to make our calling and election sure and to know that we areborn of God!  Copyright 1996,1999 John Piper    Piper's Notes   
