 1 2007-8-19Emerson.doc 

 
Opening Words
  
We are here 

on a warm day in late summer 

to worship, to weave our lives 

into the tapestry of our rich heritage 

remembering that each one of us, too, 

creates history by how we live our lives. 

 
And so we say: 

 
Mindful that a growing vision of a just world calls
 us together, that a community of 
commitment, courage and care sustains us, and that 
a life transformed by depth of spirit 
may illumine our way, we kindle this light as a sig
n of our circle of life and love. 
  

Sequence 

 
A great blue heron on some August Sunday  

might see itself  

and all the morning™s caravan of clouds 

reflected in the still surface of the pond 

in which it stands. 

What might I see when I gaze at the heron? 

Or at the clouds? 

Or if I focus on a bowl of dahlias? 

The wild-carrot flowers of summer, they say, 

look like the fancy lace Queen Anne  

once wore around her neck. 

But when Queen Anne once saw the same flower, did s
he see herself? Or was she reminded of 
even earlier Cleopatra™s necklace instead? 

When I read Emerson™s essays, 

and they speak of the miracle that is 

?one with the blowing clover and falling rain,? 

do I cringe when I hear the word ?miracle,? 

or relax and greet the flow of mystery 

into me, as a lake might welcome 

the flowing streams? 

O Mystery that I am and all is! 

When I look into the still pond called silence, 

in which I, like a Sunday heron, now stand, what is
 it that I see?  You, or me? Or You and me? 
 
silence 

 
When I look into the still pond of my heart, what d
o I see reflected back? 
The faces of all those who brought me to this day, 
the living and the dead, the helps and the 
hurts, the loves and losses.  

As I offer the names of those who press into 

 2 my heart of hearts on this day, whispered aloud 

or in continuing silence, may I remember 

also to be glad for this day, this hour, 

this moment of communal peace. 

 
naming 

 
When the music of Brahms thrills me, what do I hear
? Something written when Emerson was 
alive? Or something that is being written right 

now on the parchment of my heart? 

 
 Readings
  
The First Reading
 is excerpted from the Divinity School Address of Ra
lph Waldo Emerson, 
given on a warm summer day in a room one sixth the 
size of this room in the year 1838. 
 
In this refulgent summer, it has been a luxury to d
raw the breath of life. The grass grows, the 
buds burst, the meadow is spotted with fire in the 
tint of flowers. The air is full of birds, and 
sweet with the breath of pine and new hay. Night br
ings no gloom to the heart with its welcome 
shade. Through the transparent darkness, the stars 
pour down their almost spiritual rays. 
 
These facts have always suggested the sublime creed
 that the world is not the product of 
manifold power, but of one will, and that one mind 
is everywhere active, in each ray of star, 
in each wavelet of pool; and whatever opposes that 
will is everywhere balked and baffled, 
because things are made not otherwise. For all thin
gs proceed out of the same spirit, which is 
differently named love or justice, just as the ocea
n receives different names on the shores 
which it washes. 

 
The perception of this awakens in the mind the reli
gious sentiment, and that which makes our 
highest happiness. It makes the sky and hills subli
me, and the silent song of the stars IS it. 
Through it, the soul first knows itself. It correct
s the capital mistake of the infant, who seeks to 
be great by 
following
 the great, and hopes to derive advantages from ano
ther, by showing us that 
each individual
 is an inlet into the deeps of Reason.  It cannot b
e received second hand.   
 
The 
absence 
of this primary faith is the presence of degradatio
n. The doctrine of inspiration is 
lost, the base doctrine of the majority of voices u
surps the place of the doctrine of the soul. 
Miracles, prophecy, poetry, the holy life all exist
 as ancient history merely, not in the aspiration 
of society. 

 
So let me admonish you to go alone, to refuse the g
ood models, and dare to love God without 
mediator or veil. Imitation cannot go above its mod
el. Cast behind you all conformity. Live with 
the privilege of the immeasurable mind. 

By trusting your own heart, you gain more confidenc
e. 
 
The Second Reading
 comes from the essay of Catherine Albanese on the S
pirituality of the 
American Transcendentalists, written exactly 150 ye
ars after Emerson delivered his famous  
address. (edited) 

 
 3 First, the worldview of the Transcendentalists led 
people to think of the nature of the universe as 
fostering a reverence for the divine order.  Second
, it implied that the way to learn the truth about 
human life was to look at the cosmos, taking note o
f what it said and what time or rhythm it kept.  
Third, 
if
 human life could be illuminated by viewing it from
 a cosmic perspective, then it also 
acquired greater ?reality? because it was grounded 
on the 
prior and greater pattern
 of the 
cosmos. Finally, because this human reality was sim
ply a small-scale replica of the larger cosmic 
reality, it followed that there was no radical brea
k between the sacred and the profane, and that 
therefore all human life was religious.  

 
Sermon 

 
About twenty-five years ago, my dear colleague Dian
e Miller took me on a tour of her alma 
mater, Harvard Divinity School. For three hundred y
ears or so, this school has been preparing 
individuals to serve as ministers of largely libera
l congregations, especially Unitarian and 
Universalist ones. Diane herself was minister at th
e Belmont Church back then. I was staying 
with her for a few days on a jaunt to Boston, so we
 thought this tour over in nearby Cambridge 
would make a nice summer™s morning outing. 

 
The classic old brick buildings charmed, to be sure
, in their historic Cambridge setting, just down 
from Harvard University, past the beautiful Swedenb
orgian Church. But when we climbed to the 
third floor of one long building on the campus, and
 we came to a room which I assumed was 
simply another classroom, I had a surprise coming. 

 
?This room is the chapel where Waldo Emerson gave h
is famous Divinity School Address.? 
 
?This?? I said, with complete disbelief. ?This tiny
 little room with an almost miniature podium 
and a few old pews?? 

 
?That™s right,? she said. ?That™s the very lectern 
from which Emerson held forth.? 
 
?But it™s so tiny!? I offered. 

 
?Yeah, I know, ? she said. ?Every Unitarian Univers
alist seminarian or minister from the West 
Coast thinks the same thing when they see this plac
e. You and I both know how far and wide 
Emerson™s address affected religious life in the 19
th
 century, so I suppose it™s natural to imagine 
that such a big talk must have happened in a big ca
thedral of some sort, or at least an old meeting 
house that could seat a thousand people or so.? 

 
?My God,? I said, ?he could have easily reached out
 and tweaked the noses of the graduates 
sitting in the front row. This is somehow so–I don™
t know, disappointing. Disheartening.? 
 
?Well,? Diane said, ?Look at this way. You could sa
y it™s just the best of all possible illustrations 
of the old adage ‚Good things come in small package
s.™? 
 
?Yeah, I guess that™s true,? I said. ?But boy, this
 sure was a shock.? 
 
The shock I felt, however, was nothing compared to 
the reaction in the religious world about 
Emerson™s famous address to the graduating class of
 1838 at Harvard Divinity School.  

 4 It caused an intellectual commotion that didn™t die
 down for years, all over New England. 
Emerson himself, of course, had been ordained a Uni
tarian minister, after graduating from this 
very school. He had served a congregation in Boston
, but, shy man that he was, found the 
pastoral work increasingly difficult. But that is n
ot why he resigned his ministry six years before 
this momentous speech. 

 
Emerson, you see, was something of what religious s
ociologists used to call a classic mystic. He 
wanted to be free to experience the divine, the sub
lime, the ultimate reality, call it what you will, 
personally and directly within his heart, without t
he merely inherited prompting of the external 
forms offered by the church. By that I mean the var
ious rituals, like the ceremony Protestant 
Christians call the Lord™s Supper. Today, sometimes
, people will offer the proverb ?I am 
spiritual, not religious,? to mean something of the
 same thing, although in Emerson™s days, as 
you might have been able to tell from the excerpts 
I offered you, the word
 religion
 did not have 
the negative meaning that proverb seems to imply. I
n fact, in those days, the word ?religion,? 
used without any modifier, meant almost exactly all
 the things which folks today mean when 
they use the word ?spirituality.? 

 
The English language in Emerson™s day diverged from
 modern usage in other ways too. When, 
in his summer graduation address, he uses the word 
Reason, as in his watery metaphor ?each 
individual is an inlet into the deeps of Reason,? h
e is not talking about Reason as the later 
Humanists would speak of it, meaning rationality an
d logical thinking. He was using the word 
the way some of the ancient Greek philosophers used
 the word, to mean something which in 
other places he calls ?soul? or ?spirit? or even ?G
od.? 
 
Now, even though Emerson is known for his 

philosophical thinking, his essays and pithy saying
s, he was not just some ivory tower  intellect 
hovering above the very real and sometimes traumati
c experiences of life. 
 
Waldo Emerson (and that™s the name he preferred, dr
opping Ralph when he went to college) was 
a man who experienced not just the sublime natural 
world of ?the  refulgent summer? with its 
bees and meadows and  

and spinning stars. He also experienced some of the
 worst sorrows anyone 
can
 experience. 
 
His father died when he was eight. He lost three of
 his brothers way before their time. The great 
love of his life, his first wife, Ellen Tucker, die
d 
when she was a mere twenty years old, and her death
 is probably the most substantial emotional 
reason behind the abandonment of his calling to par
ish ministry. His older son died at age five, 
an event that almost understandably paralyzed the m
an with deep, jagged grief for years. 
 
Oh, he married again, this time to a woman named Ly
dian Jackson. He fathered other children, 
and knew some happiness and even fame in his life, 
but later, after traveling around the country 
and offering over 1500 lectures, his life of loss c
ontinued. His well-loved house burned to the 
ground. And from that day on, Waldo began to lose t
he most precious thing of all, his memory, 
the identifying script of his own soul. He finally 
died of pneumonia in 1882. 
 
Waldo Emerson was a man of sorrows. But he was not 
known for his tears, but for his lectures. 
And for a man of that era, he was a well traveled l
ecturer indeed. He spoke at my former church 
in San Francisco, and also in the Oakland church ac
ross the Bay, only a few blocks from where I 
used to live. Just getting to California in those d
ays was no mean feat. He even visited Yosemite, 

 5 which is four hours from Oakland by car even now, s
o I can™t imagine how long it took him to 
get there by stage. He lectured in Canada too, and 
all around the nation, although he always 
remained a New Englander, through and through. 

 
People liked the way he spoke. They didn™t always u
nderstand his arguments or follow his line 
of thought, but he seems to have had a completely e
ngaging speaking style, which drew in 
sufficient crowds to provide him and his family wit
h a pretty good income. 
 
Emerson, along with Thoreau, and Margaret Fuller, a
nd George Ripley and Bronson Alcott was 
what we learned in High School to be  

a Transcendentalist.  It™s a fancy word to be sure,
 with five syllables, and to my mind, the word 
?transcendent? is not often the clearest of words. 

 
But for the Transcendentalists, the meaning was bas
ically this. Based on their study of 
philosophy, both Scottish, English and German, and 
based perhaps, on their own temperaments, 
as well as their experiences of the freedom afforde
d by the culture of this young land, 
Emerson and his comrades considered the tradition o
f the Christian, that is, dominant American 
Protestant church, to be an obstruction to authenti
c worship and religion rather than a liberating 
source of it. Emerson in particular, influenced by 
the life of the Quaker George Fox and the 
rather fanciful mystical teachings of Immanuel Swed
enborg, came to think of religion as entirely 
an inward event, the fountain of the moral consciou
sness rising from each individual insofar as 
they allow themselves to open up at their depths, a
nd allow themselves to be taught by not just 
the liberally understood ancient scriptures, but by
 the great text of the cosmos itself, the larger 
pattern on which the smaller human community was en
tirely based. And he clearly saw the 
universe as a pattern, a design, although please, p
lease, do not imagine for one moment that the 
Transcendentalists were the earliest students of th
e modern educational distortion called 
Intelligent Design. They most decidedly were not. 

 
But as Catherine Albanese tries to help us understa
nd in the second reading, they 
did
 feel that the 
larger pattern of the universe was itself deeply sp
iritual, and that the spirit of the individual 
conscience might, through what Emerson called ?intu
ition,? experience this sense of the sublime 
design within their own souls, from within their ve
ry depths. There was no need for external 
?forms? like sacraments (which they called ordinanc
es), or prayers, or even the traditional 
theological sermon which lifted up the aspects of C
hrist. The great contribution, Emerson said, 
of the Christian tradition was none of these, but r
ather, only two things: the quiet rest of the 
Sunday Sabbath, which he delightfully called ?the j
ubilee of the whole world?; and the personal 
sermon, where the preacher, in Emerson™s words, did
n™t bring up abstract theology, but spoke of 
his or her life ?passed through the fire of thought
.? 
 
Does the Transcendentalist notion of intuition and 
spiritual forms seem difficult to understand? I 
know I sometimes find it very difficult myself, and
 when I read Emerson, I sympathize with the 
folks who found him sometimes difficult to comprehe
nd, argument for argument. 
 
But let me put it this way. If you asked Emerson ab
out Jesus, he would have told you that Jesus 
was a human being who boldly intuited the presence 
of Reason, or what he called the Oversoul, 
or yes, God, within his own depths. But 
not, 
mind you, as someone special, but as an ordinary 
human being. And that each of us, when we give up t
he notion that some people are more divine 
than others, can discover that same divinity within
 ourselves, since each of us, like Jesus, can 

 6 eventually be, in the words of a modern thinker I l
ike, ?remarkably free? persons, (which to me 
is much clearer way of talking about inward ?divini
ty?).  
 
Emerson was worried that religion was degraded when
 people simply moved like crowds, 
thinking that theologians and synods have authority
 over them, and are wiser than them by 
nature, and can tell them what to think, do and fee
l. ?The base doctrine of the majority of 
voices,? he famously wrote in his address, ?usurps 
the place of the doctrine of the soul.? 
 
Now by doctrine of soul, he is not talking about th
at theological doctrine of ?the soul? as sort of 
the ?real me? that simply wears the body like cloth
ing.  Rather, I think his usage was closer to 
the modern African American idea of ?soul?–not some
 
thing
, but rather a pervasive quality of 
liveliness, richness and depth.  

 
But what does Emerson the Transcendentalist have to
 do with me and you?  Yes, he is by far the 
most well-known figure, I think, associated with ou
r heritage (with the only possible exception 
being Rod Serling of Twilight Zone fame, who™s only
 known worldwide because the near-
universal reality of television). Most of us, I™ve 
discovered, had to read Emerson in high-school, 
usually his essay Self-Reliance. And his pithier sa
yings are found threaded through sermons and 
essays everywhere. 

 
But where Emerson touches 
my
 life, at least, has to do with his humanity. The d
eath of his father, 
wife, son, brothers, the loss of his beloved house–
these are what connect him to 
my
 soul, 
at least in 
this
 refulgent summer, 169 years after his famous addre
ss. Since I spent the summer 
facing the sure coming loss of my parents, the seve
re illnesses of beloved colleagues, the social 
calamities of dear friends out of work, out of home
, out of hope, I am connected to Emerson 
more by the ligament of grief than by any philosoph
ical agreement. What I do note about 
Emerson is that all of his life, he wrote and thoug
ht and preached and lectured with intellectual 
rigor, yes, but always rooted in the shaking ground
 of human loss. He was some-times numb 
from grief, but in the end, that grief made up part
 of that ?soul? that deepened him day by day.  
 
The Transcendentalist idea of the soul, of the corr
espondence of the external universe of stars 
and flowers with the inner cosmos of conscience and
 creativity was Emerson™s way of making 
sense of these realities of life. 

 
We might each be different in many ways, but as Eme
rson finally figured out, we are all at least 
united by the reality that life and loss are a seam
less whole, and that somehow, we have to come 
to terms with that, so that we might live a life of
 joy, courage and compassion, despite the 
shifting ground of our days. 

 
Transcendentalist responses to this question shone 
forth from a surprisingly small room in 
Cambridge MA in 1838. Unitarian answers came forth 
in 1819 during W.E. Channing™s sermon 
in Baltimore, and Universalist answers came forth f
rom Hosea Ballou in Gloucester MA in that 
same year. The Humanists responded to this same rea
lity in the 1920s and 30s, the religious 
feminists and African-American liberals in the 1970
s. In our own days, responses have become 
more eclectic. The words ?spiritual? and ?religion?
 have taken on new meanings and nuances. 
But still, like Emerson before us, we flow in the s
tream of a great living tradition that encourages 
us to face the realities of life with answers that 
make sense to us in our deepest and most fiercely 
honest soul. What makes sense to you? What grounds 
you? What empowers you? 
 
 7 I assure you, whether or not you agree with Mr. Eme
rson, you are no less important to this living 
stream of spiritual life called Unitarian Universal
ism than he was. 
 
Offering 

 
There is no sky without an earth. 

There is no ocean without a bed. 

There is no river without a bank. 

There is no house without a foundation. 

There is no congregational home 

with the reliable, firm support of those 

who make spiritual community here. 

The offering for that home will now be given and re
ceived by the pledging community. 
 
Aestival Prayer
  
Clouds floating in a pond, salve my wounds. 

Sparrow bobbing in the grass, soothe me. 

Warm air draping my arms, comfort me. 

Buzzing bee singing amid Queen Anne™s lace, 

sweeten my days. 

Consciousness of destitution and want 

made more visible in the summer sun, 

challenge my more comfortable inner soul. 

Summer sun, bright and beautiful, 

shine on all things, flood my whole 

being, get in my eye and wring out the tears, 

and in this warring world, 

reach inside me, and offer a glowing portrait 

of peace that will illumine me night and day. 

