When Everything Changed, November 1963

When you peel back all the layers, layer after layer, when you finally get back to the reason Pammy feels like poison, the reason she feels unworthy, the reason she feels the voices are right, you find yourself back at President Kennedy's death.

The girls were 11 when the "strangeness" began for Pammy, when she first heard the voices, and when Lynnie got so mad at her sister's odd behavior.

For Pammy, John F. Kennedy was more movie star than president. When his son Patrick died, she wrote a poem about it and mailed it to the White House. She received a form letter back, but it had President Kennedy's signature and Pammy showed it all over the neighborhood. The White House knew Pammy Spiro.

She was in art class when her teacher, dabbing her eyes with a tissue, told them. "Girls ... There's bad news. President Kennedy has been shot. In Dallas."

"Yeah, sure," Pammy thought. This was an adult's idea of a joke, though she didn't quite get it. Nothing that bad could happen to JFK.

But when Pammy began to see that this was no joke, she felt herself sinking into a different reality. A realm of heightened sensitivity where the world shimmered and everything took on a vibration of signi-ficance.

As she left art, turning to go down a hallway back to her regular classroom, the principal's voice came over the intercom announcing that President Kennedy was dead. Her knees buckled and it seemed people were whispering her name, like they did on the television show "Password."

When she got back to her classroom, she started crying and couldn't stop. She began to understand that the scary voices were blaming her. Saying that she had killed Kennedy. Not that she had actually pulled the trigger, but that she was responsible. She couldn't disagree.

Her teacher tried to calm Pammy and finally called her mother, Marian Spiro, who came to take her home.

All weekend, Pammy cried. She couldn't tell anyone what was wrong - that she was to blame - and no one could understand. Often her emotions were bigger or different from others. Excessive, her family would say. They would say she was pulling "a Sarah Bernhardt."

Lynnie grew steadily more irritated with her sister. "So the president died. Presidents are old. Presidents die - what's the big deal?" is how Lynnie remembers her feelings. She knew Pammy was just scheming to get attention. Didn't Pammy already have ALL the attention?

Marian says now, "It was very surprising that [Pam would] be so upset ... but watching Pam overreact was not a new thing."

All weekend Pammy heard the voices blaming her. When Jack Ruby killed Lee Harvey Oswald, she thought, OK, they killed the wrong person. "They killed the trigger man, trigger man, trigger man," the voices said.

She had no idea why she'd done it or how she'd done it. But she knew that in some way, the blame would be laid at her door, as she would say later, "like the butterfly who flaps its wings in Peking and starts a storm in LA."

That was when she first felt like poison, when she wanted to disappear, when she wanted to take up as little space as possible until she died.
