Fireworks, July

From the moment Carolyn enters Pam's apartment, Pam seems on edge and irritable. She has been out of the hospital for a few weeks now, but isn't quite stable. Neither the fasting she did nor the juggling of medications has reduced her weight, and she is deeply frustrated by this.

She doesn't want to see people who knew her at 100 pounds. "I know what their first thoughts are: `Holy shit, is that Pam?' They don't know why, they only know, `holy shit,' and I can't exactly go up to everyone and say, `This isn't really me.'"

The sisters begin work on their book when the discussion turns to Pam's use of her old autobiographical manuscript as the framework for their new book. In the past, the sisters have agreed that their book should be a new creation - not simply Pam's manuscript with Carolyn's add-ons.

No one seems angry until Pam tells Carolyn, "What makes you angry is when I talk about having written a book before!"

Carolyn, who wasn't upset, but is starting to heat up, asks, "Is this THAT book or is this a DIFFERENT book?"

"This is THAT book with your parts put in," Pam says.

This ignites Carolyn, who abandons her role as sisterly shrink for pure sister: "That's what I figured. That this is really about you."

Pam pulls her black straw hat down low over her eyes and folds her arms. Shutdown. Carolyn turns away, her eyes glistening, and walks into the kitchen muttering expletives.

Carolyn calls from the kitchen: "I don't understand ... What do you want?"

Pam explodes, "YOU WANT ME NEVER TO HAVE LIVED!!"

"Oh, I see. I see," Carolyn replies. "It's all or nothing. It's either you're alive or I'm alive. Is that what it is?"

Pam: "According to you."

Carolyn: "This has been my dilemma. I have to go into the f---ing background so that YOU can be alive."

"No, Lynnie," Pam says, "who's been in the background?"

"I've been in the background my entire life - it doesn't matter what I do," Carolyn says. "Martha talks about you. Chipper talks about you. Mommy and Daddy talk about you."

"They don't talk to ME!" Pam says.

"Yeah, they talk to me about you," Carolyn says.

There are a few more exchanges, a long pause and then, somehow, calm is restored.

"Anyway," Carolyn asks, "you want to talk about writing?"

"Yes," Pam replies. "I want to talk about writing."