VALENTINE’S DAY
[if !supportEmptyParas]   [endif]
All holidays up to Valentine’s Day since the beginning of my episodes in October had been always highly anticipated events, since I always saw them as days that Amelia could definitely reveal herself. Now I was upon the highest steps of euphoria I had ever been, and it was the worst possible holiday. (Meaning best or my euphoric state) The night before Valentine’s Day, I laid down praying and crying quietly, and encouraged myself to just go to sleep. Someone earlier in the day said something to the effect that one day I’d wake up and my robin would be singing in my window. (Used to incite hope that one day I would find love) This helped me sleep I think.
The next morning as I got up, I looked towards the awninged window above my bedding . . .no robin. I happily jumped out of bed, figuring that of course they would want me to wake up first before they put the robin in my window. Matt had stayed at his girlfriend’s  house because of the holiday, so I had the apartment all to myself. I sat listening to my albums, interpreting the lyrics to the songs, and being lavishly happy that it was Valentine’s day. About 1:00 that afternoon, still alone in the apartment, my robin showed up. I was looking out at the top of one of trees in view next to one of the windows, (waiting) and a little singing robin appeared, flitting and hopping on the branches. Tears of joy ran down my face, I leaned my head back on the couch and closed my eyes, listening to the robin singing. Simultaneously, footsteps starting walking down a tile floor on the album I was listening to. I turned up the volume on the stereo. The footsteps were feminine in their gait and I imagined Amelia being the one walking in the recording. This was definitely the trigger-sign that I was supposed to receive from the real world outside my coma-induced world of programmed life. I replayed the last song on the album and  listened to the segment where I believed  Amelia was being recorded walking for about 20 minutes; rewinding and playing out the excerpt of only her. Finally, it started to depress me, so I turned on the radio. Pearl Jam was playing the song “fly” which made me wonder if maybe I should buy this album, since it had just come out in stores. This band had been very lyrically important to my beliefs during my first episode. Within minutes, I got into my Jeep wagon and headed for Target to buy the CD.
I bought the CD, stopped awhile to inspect the significance of titles and pictures on all the other  CD’s I could take the time to study, (anxious to get home) and went home. After listening and analyzing the lyrics for about 2 hours, I couldn’t find one thing to help me in finding any more information about when or how I would see Amelia again. The song, “fly” meant something, but I couldn’t make it out yet. I turned off the stereo, and told myself that all of this wasn’t real. There could not be any truth to my beliefs. I began trying to dismiss any new thoughts that would lead me to think about Amelia anymore. This actually worked for about two more weeks, although I still missed her terribly.
The main reason I think that it was possible that I was able to come close to forgetting about Amelia is that there was a new and more powerful resource to occupy my mind. I had begun working closely with a devoted Christian at work. This Christian, Chris, had been inviting me over for bible-studies and he mentioned that I could move into a small utility room that was not being used and I said I would have to think about it. After I went back to Matt’s, I went to the laundry mat. There was a pinball machine in the back.
