  HEROES
[if !supportEmptyParas]   [endif]
After I had started believing that the guitarist I started playing with was actually Vince Gill, I began trying to figure out who everybody else was in the ward. All the actors and musicians, and anyone else that wanted to enter my computer—world had to put on a different face on the real outside-world so that it would not be so shocking to me when I met them. Faces that even resembled even slightly someone I liked in movies or music, became those people in my mind. Fellow patients started catching on to my belief that they were actually disguised celebrities and started helping me believe it even more. One old sweet woman I had befriended when I had first been admitted, started telling me that she was mother Theresa, (although I think that she believed she actually was) and this almost brought me to tears in relief because I had been grieving on mother Theresa’s recent death for weeks. (Princess Diane’s too.)
Over the next few days, I found out that Tom Petty, Dwight Yoakum, Nicole Kidman, and many other stars were in my ward. Everyone I met was a new star, or actor. The nurses, the patients, the doctors, everyone was here, but Amelia.
One morning, as I was looking out the lobby’s large windows onto the parking lot of the hospital many stories below, I saw Amelia. Our girl was with her. Her hair was braided and folded on top of her head just as she always used to wear it. She took the girl the hand, and knelt beside her. They talked below in the parking lot for a few minutes, while I struggled to keep composure around the other patients where I was standing. She looked up directly at the building, and then walked her child inside. I went silently back to my room and laid down, crying and praying in whispers to Amelia to release me from this hell and reunite us again. I fell asleep, and when the nurse came in to tell me it was dinnertime, she noticed my depressed state. “Don’t be so sad, if Eddie Vedder showed up for lunch, would that cheer you up?” I sat upright immediately; Eddie Vedder was one of my favorite singers. The nurse laughed, “ See? I knew that would perk you up.” I got ready for dinner, but I never did recognize who in the lunch room was Eddie, so I figured that he must have lust been watching me from some kind of camera somewhere.
