51st Birthday, Nov. 17

It's the twins' birthday, and each is marking the day in her own way.

Pam is OK about being 51. She is glad to be out of the hospital, happy to be home. Ever since she put the Bio-Haz-Mat man in the box, he hasn't returned. In fact, she's been hearing no voices, seeing no hallucinations.

It's tempting to ask questions. Did the electroshock help put him in the box? Does she actually believe he's locked in the box or was it a mental device or metaphor? But asking might undo the magic of this remedy.

The burns on Pam's forehead have healed, leaving a scar that's barely noticeable. Soon after her arrival home, Pam took down the baby photos and gave them to Carolyn. At first, Carolyn was concerned. "Does this mean you're intending not to be around?" she asked. No it didn't.

"She wanted them and I didn't need them," Pam says today. She's left up the schoolgirl photos.

Her apartment is immaculate. Martha visited a few days ago and cleaned it up. A visiting nurse suggests covering up the tinfoil with fabric. Pam thanks her for "the fashion tip."

Pam's memory - except for parts of her hospitalization - has returned and she is back to writing and editing. She is hoping to stay well.

A birthday is a victory for her. "I'm happy to have made it. It's another milestone. I might not have made it this far ... Why would I want to go back to so many years of misery?"

The signs of aging don't concern her, either. "I like my wrinkles, I like the drooping jowls. They don't bother me in the least."

Carolyn has been less fond of birthdays, particularly last year's. She considers visiting Pam on their birthday. Pam is ready to work and the two could edit side by side, but ultimately she decides not to. She has a two-hour ballroom lesson with Tim and then two hours more of practice, and it's dreary and raining.

Pam is not surprised: "I know she's avoiding her birthday. She thinks I'll make something of it - and I will, little as it is."

As Pam settles down in her recliner with a large mug of tea, the phone rings.

It's Carolyn, singing into the phone: "Happy birthday to me, Happy birthday to you ..."