Dancing through Mid-Life

Carolyn and her boyfriend, Tim Pritchett, are caught up in an intense discussion with their dance teacher, Terri Boucher. At their last competition, a couple had hindered their performance by crowding them.

"You two need more competitive experience - as frequently as possible," Boucher tells them.

Tim also needs a new tuxedo - custom-ordered from the West Coast or England. The world of ballroom dancing is acutely appearance-aware.

"He did not look as nice as I knew he was dancing," says Carolyn, smiling at him.

"You have to dress and dance like you want first place - not like you've just come to participate," says Boucher.

But enough with the talking, Carolyn says. "Hey, Tim, we can talk or we can choreograph!" At $30 each an hour, they start dancing.

Tall, blond and with ramrod posture, Tim sweeps Carolyn into a head-snapping tango under the watchful eye of their teacher. In a T-shirt and black spandex capris, very thin but also very strong, Carolyn dances with the suppleness of a much younger woman.

The pair found each other through ballroom dancing. Tim said there were lots of possible partners, but that Carolyn was the only one who wanted to work as hard as he did.

The art fosters closeness between them, but can also strain. To dance smoothly, Carolyn must be moving backward just as Tim steps forward. The steps are exacting and tempers can flare if one partner isn't there for the other.

"A couple can dance only as well as the weakest partner," Carolyn explains.

They take ballroom dancing on Sundays and Mondays - alternating weekly between Brookfield with Boucher and a teacher in Maryland near Tim's home. About every month or two, they compete in a weekend contest - usually somewhere between Boston and Washington, D.C.

Besides ballroom, Carolyn sandwiches five ballet lessons a week between therapy sessions, often sponging off to rush the quarter-mile from ballet studio to office.

She'll finish at the office by 3 and get home the same time her son, Jeremy, 16, returns from high school. Her daughter, Allie, 20, is a New York University student studying in Prague.

While Carolyn's routine may seem exhausting to the average person, it has helped her navigate difficult middle years.

Three years ago, Carolyn ended her troubled marriage of 18 years. That meant leaving a four-bedroom colonial with a swimming pool and an office across the breezeway. She now lives in a condominium near Wilton Center.

When Carolyn met Tim two years ago, she found in him not only a dance partner, but an introduction to his religion, Catholicism. Raised a Unitarian, Carolyn had always felt left out. Her Catholic friends had First Communion and Jesus and Mary and heaven - what did Unitarians get? Not much, certainly no answers to her questions about God.

This discovery of the church has marked her midlife - which seemed to be about things falling apart - with the sense of a new beginning. (She was baptized last Easter.) She calls it a "wonderful blessing" and says that even if she and Tim were to part ways, she would remain a Catholic.

Her parents, siblings and kids are a bit puzzled by her conversion, but Pam says, "I think it's amazing what it's done for her ... She's a nicer person."

Carolyn says religion is something she's done for herself. "So much of my life had to do with what Pam was or wasn't."