     THE NOTE
[if !supportEmptyParas]   [endif]
The first mental ward I was admitted to was very nice. The interior was lush with furniture and aesthetic lighting, and the nurses and doctors were extremely attentive and caring. I don’t mean to say that the doctors and nurses in the other wards I visited were not, but I do believe that since this ward was not state-funded, but an actual place where the doctors are paid by insurance or family funds. The care was indeed better. One perk of this ward was that once admitted, you received a small plant with a little name card included. I had been looking for more clues ever since I got there and the main ones so far had only been the way the news—people and commercials were still continuing their encouragement for me to hold on and that help was coming. Two things I remember specifically as clues was that CBS or NBC, I don’t remember which, had a new way of inviting the viewer by having movie—stars saying “Welcome Home” with a sincere smile on their face. The other clue was that the views of the morning traffic were announced as being from the top of the hospital that I was staying in. This was because the world wanted to see exactly what I was seeing from outside my own window.
I was walking by the front—desk and a nurse said “Hey, you got something here.” I was given the plant, said thank you, turned away, and read the card. It was my name, but the penmanship was Amelia’s... I stopped, turned around, and with what must have been a surprised questioning face, peeked slowly around at the nurse who handed me the letter. She was grinning to the point of almost laughing because of my obvious surprise, and said, “You like that, huh?” I said, almost crying, “Thank you”~ and sprinted to my room to lay and stare for the next two hours crying and dreaming over my new message from Amelia.
Then it was time for what the ward called “quiet time” and all of the patients were taken to a media—room where we watched a nice film that was just  footage of nature and animals in the wild. While I watched this, I noticed that the piano playing in the soundtrack of this film was played well, my dad played the piano well, and it occurred to me that this was the new role my dad must  have in his own secret life in the real world, he  was a well—known composer, and they were letting me hear it so I would know. I hid my emotion as usual and after the film I asked for one of the radios you could get at the front desk and went to my room (which at the time, I was the only occupant) to listen to the radio.
