Recovery
During the last electro-shock treatment I asked beforehand already quite interested, what devices that were. Oxygen! Really? I got again a narcosis. I believe, I had slept 2 days after it. They wanted me already almost on the drip. It was Saturday morning. I looked around and stated that I was in a hospital. The people around me I all still knew from somewhere! I remembered only vaguely the last time. What I all had imagined myself! All it was humbug! If I were in a hospital, I must have been probably ill. I had slept fantastically and had an excellent mood. With the male nurse Timmi I played table tennis and joked with the female nurses.
On Monday at the round I said: "I feel a new man, the whole world around me is as new. I could tell you several-day-long, what I all had imagined myself. In the end it was quite bad. Then the syringe was the release."
At the beginning of January the patient developed a catatonic symptomatology in the sense of a catatonic stupor. With use of altogether 6 electroconvulsive therapies the catatonic stupor could be broken through. He offered now again a productively psychotic status picture. He felt changed. Everything that occurred on the ward, had a special meaning...
I told the physicians still that the processes on the ward and the personnel played a role in my fancies. With the next rounds I told then already as well as nothing at all about my terrible fancy time, because it came me again into memory that a patient had advised me to tell not too much. Otherwise they keep yourself only longer in the hospital. At that time I wove this advice into my delusion, but now I could judge it more rationally. That was perhaps quite good so, as it turns out now subsequently during the reading of the hospital report . I was healthy again. I knew that. But what the physicians thought, there I was already distrustful. Apart from the electro-treatment they had left me alone with my illness the whole time. I asked the ward lady doctor, what I would have had. She was gently to me and said only, it would have been a serious endogenous psychosis. (The correct medical term I learned only much later, in the course of the study of this illness. The physicians don't tell it the patients necessarily on their part.)
I got prescribed 3 time 2 Sonapax (Melleretten) and was knoting again wall-hangings in the occupational therapy. Now the radio did not disturb me any longer. At the lunch I always got second helping, so an appetite I had. Once two attendants wanted to have a man on ward into their power, in order to bring him to the locked. He began to rave: "I am a skilled worker!!" But that concerned me already no more. It was only no beautiful sight. From the end of January up to the dismissal at the end of March I was day care patient. On the parting day Rainer from the locked station signed down: "Hello Bodo! Good-bye!"
The further treatment took place with Sonapax. Under this treatment the productive psychotic symptomatology faded away gradually. The dailyclinical guidance as well as the application in the occupational therapy ran complicationless. After mental stabilization the pat. on 22.3. could dismissed home able to work. We ordered first a light job for 4 weeks with a daily work time of 5 hours.
Well, that were still times! I could get used gradually over several months again to work in the company. The GDR had a good integration of patients and disabled people. At today's time I would have lost my job, after all I was 5 months unable to work!
