Reclaiming a Mind

There is a sparkle of glee in Pam's eye as she opens the door to her 12th-floor apartment on a wintry day last February and pulls out her latest project.

She has enlarged and laminated copies of The Nation cover - the one with George Bush pictured as MAD magazine's Alfred E. Newman with a pin on his lapel that exhorts: "Worry." And, she has purchased a few dart guns.

"Would you like a set?" she asks. They are for target practice.

It's only relatively recently that Pam - a fierce critic of Bush and his war plans - has been well enough to have political opinions. It's because of Zyprexa, she says. Before then, she could barely read at all, let alone maintain an interest in politics.

The most she could do was read poetry - because it was short - and occasionally write it because she could get down the skeleton of a poem in one sitting.

"It really has given me back a life that I thought was lost to me forever," Pam wrote in an e-mail. "Just the notion that I can get up in the morning and EXPECT that I should be able to read and write rather than wonder if I shall."

For Pam, writing has long been "the life's breath. ... When I get a poem right, it feels like the top has come off a champagne bottle. It's just this incredible, bubbly, fizzy sensation of just: Wow!"

She first noticed that she could read again when she picked up a copy of The Nation. "Hey, this is good," she told the librarian. She would have figured she'd be a "lefty," but her eyes used to glaze over when anyone talked politics. Since then, Pam says, "I am gorging. It is like the movie `The Awakening,' it really is."

Her friend Joe, who lives two floors down from her and is visiting this morning, agrees that she was a different person before Zyprexa. "Yeah, you were struggling with your poetry and everything was difficult," he said.

The evidence of this breakthrough is everywhere in the tiny apartment: the shelves filled with poetry, literature, history and mythology, and the floor piled with copies of Scientific American, The New Yorker, The Atlantic Monthly and other magazines. She has educational tapes in physics and economics and a huge collection of videos ranging in topic from "La Bohème" to plant life. Affixed to her curtain rods are pull-down maps: the world, the Mideast.

This is clearly home to a formidable, eclectic intellect.

Pam feels the medication has also made a difference in her relationship with Joe, who asked that his last name not be used.

A decade ago, Joe met Pam when they were patients at Hartford Hospital. Pam was doing a lot of angry screaming at the time and Joe, a truly gentle man, admired her spirit. He thought: "That's the girl I want to meet."

A Cornell-educated engineer, Joe also has schizophrenia, but not as severely as Pam. Every morning he can, he comes up to Pam's place for their ritual: watching "Dr. Phil." He is more friend than boyfriend.

Pam and Joe's illnesses are very different. Pam is far more often psychotic and subject to mood swings. Unlike Joe, she has been self-destructive: Her mottled arms bear witness to the times that she has burned herself with cigarettes or cut her wrists. She has tried suicide, just a year ago almost managing to hang herself. Only the thought of Carolyn stopped her.

"I think schizophrenia is a wastebasket label," Pam said, "for things they don't know how to define."

Her health is further complicated with narcolepsy - the sleeping disorder- and a case of Lyme disease that affected her neurologically.

Pam needs help with the little tasks of daily living. While she won the 2002 BBC World Service Poetry Competition, she has trouble getting the dishes washed, the laundry done, picking up the mail. Simply brushing her teeth or taking a shower can be overwhelmingly difficult.

To help her take her medication, she has a nurse who comes twice daily; an occupational therapist helps her devise plans to get chores done. A housekeeper comes when she can get one.

Joe and Pam also have very different ideas about the roots of their illness. Joe tends to talk about who did what to him, while Pam sees it as her psychiatrist, Dr. Mary O'Malley of Fairfield, does.

"She says, `Pam, you think this way because your amygdala or something is firing off a message to be afraid,'" says Pam. "`We need to get this under control because your brain is sending off the wrong message.'

"She just neatly, you know, separates the illness from the person. And doesn't blame me and so I can't stand it when Joe wants to say this person's to blame and that person's to blame because if they are to blame, so am I!

"The only thing I've ever blamed my parents for at all is for rejecting me because I was ill - not because of the illness."

On Pam's suggestion, O'Malley vastly increased her dosage of Zyprexa a couple of months ago. The voices have been quieter since then, and most significantly, she doesn't now have the urge to go off the medication - despite her weight gain.

"I take it simply because I realize I need it. No matter how fat it has made me. Fat is just fat. But insanity, psychosis, is unbearable."

But then Pam moves into her bedroom to watch "Dr. Phil." And there, above her bed, is a canopy: a metallic blanket and tinfoil. The silvery cocoon protects her from the mind readers, the CIA, the deadly radiation. But wasn't she talking about Bush and foreign policy and war in Iraq?

Pam's fantasies remain part of her reality, even when she seems so lucid. As she explains it, when she is well, she is able to put various paranoid beliefs "on the shelf," but on some deep level, she still holds them.

So though she has been well and productive lately, the tinfoil stays up.

And though she realizes, when she really thinks about it, that she didn't kill Kennedy, the feeling that she is evil remains.
