Unfavorable symptomatology
It was 4 weeks after hospital check-in and approx. 6 days after stop taking Sonapax. Several phenomena accumulated, which I could not assimilate rationally at all in my status:        1. Additionally to the existing pains in the heart area, heart flutter came by Sonapax withdrawal. 
      2. In the dark light effects were assumed, produced by the brain - after Sonapax withdrawal        3. A special (magnetic?) sensitivity of the brain surface, a kind of recovery reaction 4-6 weeks after excessive brain straining with information. My assumption: You feel then the magnetic field of the earth in your head. A probable cause are iron-binding proteins in the liquid surrounding the brain.
It was Sunday night. I wanted to fall asleep. Suddenly I saw a lightning with my eyes. What was that? I put on the light. On the bed edge was somewhat, which looked like a burnt wood shaving (who knows, what it was - any crumb). I was convinced, they were after me. I should die of fear, almost killed from "lightning"! It came from the ceiling. There above in the neighbour apartment a test party must be. They had certainly perforated the ceiling! Since I did not find a hole, I tried to fall asleep again. I saw suddenly strange things in the dark as drawn with a laser beam. And yellow, green and pink lightnings. That was the combat ship "Galactica" with the Star Wars, I understood. Above in the apartment were the Americans! They had aligned a brain manipulation device to me! My heart was affected with cramp and was quite weak. If I remain lying here, I would die and the Americans would have won, I thought. I heaved my bed around, so that I was lying with the head elsewhere. Perhaps above they could not align their machine so fast. But there wasn't much point. The Star Wars continued in my head.
I had fear, my heart would stop, so unwell it was in my chest. I had to go into another room! I went into the living room. Any force tried to steer my head into a certain path. Above this room the Americans must have structured another device! They tried to position my head, probably to "suck off" my brain data . I couldn't permit that! I ran like a crazy person in the room back and forth, always abruptly changing the direction. But the uncanny force followed me with each movement. I imagined, this is a stamina test again - however, deadly seriously. If I stop, the force overwhelms my brain!
I don't know no more, how long I was running in such a way in the room. Anyhow after one while a solution occurred to me. So it could not continue. I got my digital quartz bell and cowered in the moon light at the balcony window, the view not turned away from the number display. If they have my brain under control, I said to me, then they see only an insignificant time-of-day. Sometime this test had to be an end. No, not looking high to the moon! Otherwise the American computers calculate the place from time-of-day and moon angle, where I was! I wasn't allowed to betray myself. Above perhaps only American devices were installed and run by the good ones - an East-West test agreement! After 2 o'clock I meant, the test was over. I also no more force felt at my head. I went into bed again and fell asleep undisturbed.
On Monday again in the hospital, I noticed, if I went along under the fluorescent lamps that then a force affected my head. These lamps operate still with thick magnetic coils! It became clear to me that my head was magneto-sensitive! Also at the aquarium I noticed it quite clearly, was it from the lamp or the humming pump. I was feeling bad and dizzy. The nurses didn't react to my hint to the aquarium. I fell down. I was carried by patients into the watching hall. Cold sweat was on my forehead. (the night before was probable too strenuous.)
The chief doctor and the ward lady doctor came to my bed. I tried to describe to them my magnetic sensitivity. I pointed to the lamp at the ceiling and how the field went into the head at the one side and outside at the other one. The physicians did not react at all to my hints. They weren't interested in that at all. They were probably only the pure managers of the test course and were not allowed on their part to intervene, I imagined. I got another bed and from the nurse each day an injection into the butt.
At the end of November 1988 the pat. became increasingly restless, the contact ability was clearly reduced, the pat. seemed to be distracted. He appeared affectively rigidly, he spoke loudly for himself, reached into air after invisible things, so that we assumed that the pat. was at the impression of acoustic and optical hallucinations. The treatment was continued with Haloperidol... By this the acute psychotic symptomatology faded away rapidly.
I was quite weak and shaky. When eating in the watching hall in opposite of me sat a badly injured man with a thick bandage. A force drew me to him. He should be the allegory for my status, I suspected. If I were lying in bed, I noticed that I had in the dark again light effects in the head. Above in the locked ward they must have aligned also such a brain influence device to me! This time certainly an east device, because the pictures were friendlier - no Star Wars. It was certainly a high-sensitive device, if it could assume and influence my electrical brain impulses over a distance of several meters, even trough the ceiling! It was certainly from Ardenne! I wanted to disturb the device, perhaps I could it even paralyze. Like already in the bad night I pressed myself with the fingers laterally into the eyes. By this the retina was pressed and it developed shimmering light effects. Also general eye pressing didn't help.

By the Haloperidol I became again very fearfully. At the opposite watching hall wall was a door not used any longer. The upper door square was divided into 4 smaller squares. If you omitted ever a half side length in the mind, so occured the figure of a swastika. The door made so much fear to me that I referred the nurse to it. Also on the green-black-cross-hatched blanket I discovered swastikas. Completely scared I asked for another blanket. The new blanket was spotted more pleasantly - red and brown. I was lying so there and stared high to the ceiling. There above was the device and monitored me! I got a compulsion, to write my name with my eyes at the ceiling. I was still in the test and was not allowed to tell about myself! In the middle of the first name I always strangled the process.
With the time the injection effects diminished and I had also no more fear. I had an undershirt, in that it rustled quite amazing electrically, if I took it off over head. I wanted to set the sensitive device above out of operation and let the sparks flew powerful at my head. I heard, how someone cried out loudly. That must have worked! Everything I wouldn't stand for any longer. But in the next night pictures were in the head, of which I meant, it would be again from the machine above. This had also effects on my sexual feeling and experiencing.
