The First Dr. Spiro, October

There is a knock at the front door of his New Haven townhouse and Dr. Howard Spiro jumps up. With white hair and a goatee, he is distinguished at 79. Who could it be, he wonders. He isn't expecting anyone just now.

He opens the door and a man with dark curly hair is there. Oh, you want the newspapers, Howard says. He hands them over and reminds his caller that he'll be abroad for three weeks.

It's the young man Howard has been helping out. He is the son of a colleague. A young man with schizophrenia who doesn't get along with his own father very well. Often it is this way with mental illness. The disease exhausts and splits families in ways other illnesses don't.

So Howard has stepped in, has lunch with him, tries to help him.

"It's useful to me to help him," Howard says, after shutting the door. "It gives me a chance to feel that I'm helping someone."

So why can't Howard talk to his own daughter? Why hasn't he had a real relationship with Pam for decades?

"This is making me very uncomfortable," he says. But these are questions that gnaw at every member of the Spiro family; everyone would like to see a peace of some sort between father and daughter.

A few months ago, Howard said that his retreat from Pam began at the beginning, when he drove her from Brown to Yale and realized, then, that she had schizophrenia.

As a doctor, he knew it was an illness that could consume not only her, but the entire family. "To myself I've used the word `encapsulate,'" he says, "so that it doesn't too much affect the way everybody lives. It may sound hard-hearted, but you have to understand, I knew it was a lifetime illness."

Could he explain why he hasn't reopened communication since then? Howard said his feelings would remain secret. "It's not helpful to get into it. I would like to draw a veil over it. It was self-protection, but denial is a pretty good thing."

But Howard's account is not consistent with Marian's. Marian says neither of them saw how serious Pam's condition was. If they had, they would have reacted differently. They would have treated Pammy as a person with a devastating lifelong illness, rather than as a child who was passing through a troublesome adolescence. If they had understood the seriousness, Marian says, Howard wouldn't have treated Pam as if she could snap out of it at will.

Howard nods now and says that Marian is also right. He did feel - on an emotional level - that Pam had some control over the illness. That somehow her illness was a rebellion against him, even though he also understood that the illness is biochemical.

He says that a year or so ago, he thought he and Pam were moving toward a kind of rapprochement, but then there was an angry call from her.

"I'm clearly woven into her psychosis. I was the center of her aggressions as far as I could see."

Marian and Carolyn have told him that they too have been the target of Pam's ire, but that often it is not Pam talking; it's the disease. Howard understands that, but "the reality is I get attacked."

Howard says that if he had been treated differently by Yale doctors way back in the '70s, if he hadn't felt blamed for Pam's illness, family history may have gone differently. "Both of us [his wife and him] would not have suffered so much. It left us with the feeling that the family was responsible. If the family was responsible, then we could cure her.

"I didn't know what to do. I felt absolutely powerless and paralyzed."

Howard says he is grateful to Carolyn and to his wife for taking care of Pam when he could not. "I owe it [to them] for complete protection from the depredations of the disease. I believe Lynnie has extraordinary strength to function as a psychiatrist, to be aware of the genetic influence and parallels and the dangers of having a twin with schizophrenia, the risks of having children.

"I had my work - work is a great panacea," but "my wife and Lynnie are the heroines."

Howard says he is convinced that the twins have a "mystical connection." He likens them to the twin stars, Castor and Pollux, "continually circling each other, continually influencing each other."

If he wasn't their father, he would like to write about them, he says. "Write a story about hope," he suggests. "That Lynnie has not lost her hope and Pam has not lost her hope. Leave out the anger and the sorrow. Focus on the heroines."

But what about the question. Will he see Pam again?

He doesn't know.
