Changed perception and new insights
I asked myself, that should have been it all now? What was that for a feeling to her? A feeling, how to a girlfriend? No, that with this heart pain had to be more! She had mentioned, she had relatives in the place, from which my mother comes. I groped into the trap. She must be a relative of me somehow, I imagined myself. Yes, only this way this feeling could be explained, what had overwhelmed me. She had to be a kind of sister of me.
I had met unknown relatives of me, what a providence of fate. I was overwhelmed. I wrote for hours at several pages a long letter for my "sister". I stated all my feelings and new realizations and brought coincidentally fitting observations also in the play (e.g. "the church to the Father's House strikes twelve in this moment."). I linked my considerations with church things, because I knew from her that her father was a pastor. I put still collected multicolored autumn leaves and other insights about he world, from wich I believed to have to tell her absolutely in the letter so e.g. about the Indians and the Biblical messages Salomos. I stuck the thick pile personally into her mail box and drove late on Saturday to my parents.
On the following Sunday I hardly ate something. I was so much excited from my discoveries. In the west television a series came named "Oh God, Mr. Pastor". It was spoken about celibacy. Yes, took exactly reference to my "realizations". With the parting I tried my mother to it to refer, but she did not understand. In the rapid-transit railway I passed out . A man brought me on the platform. I chewed then something bread, which I had with me and from the supervision I got a glass of water. Bread and water! It becomes slowly Biblical, I thought. At the station Lenin avenue I did not go past. Here she lived. My heart drew me to her. I stepped out. Ahead a black-dressed young woman ran. She ran suddenly. Strangely enough I also had to run, my heart it otherwise would not stand. This reaction to colours I had then only four days later. I rang at her. She looked only from the window down above however did not open. And I seemed myself like a crazy person.
The following day was a real "black" Monday for me. I was at the end. At the end with my nerves. But that I needed urgently medical assistance, I could not imagine myself. On the work I helped a colleague to enter data. Number for number flickered green over the display. Each number means a people fate, I thought. Am I God? This allegory came into my mind. I felt the colleagues at one time quite strangely. Each represented a certain nature, e.g. the thoughtful one, the crafty customer, the naive one. That had to be everything like that and I believed suddenly in the prediction. At the night I thought, my heart stops. I had large fear. Saved me a few sip Gotano Vermouth.
On Tuesday Marianne had birthday - a nice colleague. There was as usual a large breakfast party. I ate filled fresh rolls and cakes, drank fruit punch and liquor. The liquor did to me well, but I was totally shattered. They had to see that I was sitting there looking only a picture of misery, I thought. But nobody noticed. The colleagues did to me well. How we sat there in such a way, I thought, that's the birthday of Holy Maria. When the boss sat down to us, he got only a wobbly chair. The devil gets,I thought, what he deserves. It was for me Godservice on Tuesday. (German: Gottesdienst am Dienstag)
The Wednesday (German: Mittwoch) had also a meaning for me. Anyhow I believed now in kind of predetermination. At lunch-break (German: Mittagspause am Mittwoch) I drove too HER and I put for her a small note into the mail box with an apology for my excessive fancy letter. Nevertheless I warned her: "Sister, take care on you! Do not forget to eat!" I believed, something similar would happen to her and she would pass out too. At work I stayed into the late evening at the computer. However, I did not accomplish as well. I was completely blocked. Only a programmed random number movement play kept me apparently active. With a colleague, he was working also longer (because of me?), I returned from the cafeteria. He said to any circumstances: "that is not also the true Jacob." I was not any longer over the things. Thought with me, thus he meant certainly the general manager (was called so), in allusion to the "bad" area boss, who had weared me out in such a way at that time in the personnel discussion.
