A FRIEND MOVES IN
[if !supportEmptyParas]   [endif]
           About noon, after the vampire nurse had visited, I was  informed that I would be getting a roommate that day. Since
I believed that the circumstances of already having to stay in a mental ward was bad enough, I went to the front desk to complain that I did not want a roommate.
Amusingly, they did not think that having a roommate to share my room was not such a bad idea. One hour later, he arrived.
Randy at first impression to myself was no more than a cowboy with whining complaints when I first met him, and I went to the front desk again to ask if I could be moved so that I could have my own room. Nope, sorry. I resigned myself to the table with color books and crayons to inwardly suppress my own whining complaints. (My grandiose delusion was making me quite the spoiled brat by then) As Randy came into the lobby and recognized me sitting there, he immediately sat down and started talking to me. (the poor man was scared then, but I was oblivious to it, something I wish I hadn’t been now) He was asking questions, and spouting his anger that he didn’t belong in here, and more comments about he belonged at home. I told him that it wouldn’t be long and then all of us would be out of there. He said he hoped so. Randy lived in a small town, and his family had put him in here, and he sure as hell didn’t know why, because he wasn’t crazy. (And to the best of my knowledge now, he really didn’t show any signs of mental illness) and was a loud person, which only made me not like more.
After he went back to our room, I quickly went and talked to my favorite male nurse, Jerald, and told him that I had to have my own room. Jerald, a large black man with a wonderful sense of humanity said, “Give people a chance, Mick? He’s not so bad, you’ll see.” I suddenly remembered that all the people I came in contact with were only people that wanted to be close to me. Randy must be somebody. I play banjo and love bluegrass music. It was obvious. Randy must be a famous bluegrass musician. I went back to my room to see Randy with my new perspective. He was sitting on the bed and smiled when I came in. “So you decided to come talk to me huh?” he said, shrewdly aware that I had at first avoided him. I apologized and remarked that sometimes I forgot how grateful I should be for the company of people. He accepted the apology. I began talking about how much I loved bluegrass and he seemed to perk up almost immediately, especially when I mentioned that I play banjo. He began to feel more comfortable.
The more I talked with him, the more his sense of humor began to blossom. He was full of funny stories and jokes, and we quickly became inseparable. When Randy and I returned into the lobby acting as old friends later that day, Jerald walked up to me and whispered, “See? I told you.” I smiled back and felt deeply happy. I hugged Jerald and thanked him for his wisdom. Jerald just smiled and said, “You’re welcome.”
The next morning, the nurses were giving Randy the full slate of medical testing and physicals, more than I had ever received. After being gone~ most of the morning, he entered our room, angry as ever. “Those god—damn nurses have been poking and sticking me with needles all morning, and guess what I got to do now, Mick?” He held up a plastic container. I guessed that he had to give a urine sample. “No... They want me to shit in the god-damn thing!” I began laughing uncontrollably. He started being infected with the laughter himself.
“I get up in the mornin’, they won’t let me eat breakfast, and poke me so much I feel like a pin—cushion, and now I got to shit in a god damn box!” We both started howling with laughter when he said that until we were almost crying.
