The hospital
The chief doctor was a Russian! It had to be still an east west story and it continued thus nevertheless! "No fear!", he said. He examined me, however asked no questions, from my mother already before-informed. (no word of the fact that I had perhaps an acute nerve overtaxing, which cause certain symptoms, e.g. heart pains. Perhaps I would have understood, what was the matter. About a nervous disease he would have had to talk not directly.) A little nurse took me with her and led me to my bed in a large hall. At lunch I should take two white tablets (Haloperidol). I didn't want - swallow tablets - that's all I needed, I was still healthy - however the nurse couldn't be outwitted.
In the watching halll a strangely impulsive young patient welcomed me. His name would be Rainer, he said again and again to me. Rainer - that was the first name of a football player, Rainer Ernst from the BFC Dynamo. I concluded from this greetings that it was an absolutely serious story with me - pure seriosness (German: reiner Ernst). Further in this view another patient encouraged me. Diagonally opposite there was situated an old bearded dishevelled looking, very unpleasant man trembling in bed - half to rise half lying. That could be only the allegory for the death, which threatens me, I imagined. The trigger for this whole story had to be this meeting with this woman. That I imagined myself, because I had still these strange heart aches. If I were lying in bed, I couldn't (or wasn't allowed?) to turn to the left side because of these pains. I was lying at a wall. Behind it certainly again this ray device was aligned to me, I assumed. They monitored me somehow.
On the next day my parents came to visit. I complained loudly and hurt to my mother, how she only let me bring here. Whether she wouldn't have seen the show "Oh God, Mr. Pastor!" , tried I her instruct into my observations. Suddenly it became uncomfortably. Many people in the anterrom of the ward ran by us at one time. I aborted the conversation abruptly and disappeared into the watching hall.
During the next days I got a cramp in the face. The whole head was pulled by a mysterious power to the right and I couldn't close the mouth any longer. They tormented me obviously. Was that again a test? (nobody had cleared me up over the possible side effects of Haloperidol!) I inquired with a nurse, who was there for education, what that would be with my face. "Perhaps it is from the teeth cleaning", she said grinning. Teeth - mouth? Therefore! I had talked the last days too much about my realizations! Therefore the punishment with face paralysis! I decided not to talk no more about my realizations with nobody - that is probably the test agreement! I would have otherwise disappointed the East.
Everything was strange on the ward. Strange people, the patients. They all were still only actors! Why only I got Haloperidol? I was convinced, the others would only simulate - because of me. The station should be so a kind of shelter for me. At home with my parents would be it too dangerously because of the bad western, who were looking for me. Also the morning round was strange. Red chairs were set up in a cycle. The patients was said, what they are to be supposed. And I knew the psychologist of the ward from the school. Everything only a show because of me! Strange it was also that we had to stow our personal things away in a lockable box, in a narrow separate room. Into this room the nurses of the ward always went and locked behind theirself. Did they check our things? (whether they checked the things, I don't know, maybe. Anyhow they also got changed there.)
At the night I had always to stand up, to moisten my eyes and my mouth, because they were drying. That comes from the tablets, I thought. This was probably a stamina test again.
On Monday at the chief doctor's round I described him my pains and side effectst, however, I said nothing else. He did not ask questions about any observations of mine. I imagined, that must so be - the wise marabou says nothing to. The head nurse sat there and looked at me expectationful. I thought: No, I say nothing, otherwise I would be punished again with face paralysis.
Process: In the first days of the ward stay the pat. had substantial contact disturbances. He was affectively reduced oscillationable. There was a clear lack of drive. Perception disturbances could not be proven. Meaning and impairment experiencing, as the pat. described in the accommodation discussion (a woman had looked at him, and he knew immediately that he was connected with her intimately), were negated by the pat..
I came into a new room with only 4 beds and made occupational therapy - fretsaw working with wood. Once in the evening a new patient was brought into the ward. He was buckled onto a bed and raved. I got fear. Wanted he to stab me, he was looking like a food-pad? Strangely - after a few days he looked quite normally and also was no more strapped. My bed neighbour was a large fat monster with a loud trap. On the other hand another man was running around always at night and smoked. Once at night, when I returned from moistening, were a lot of crumbs and dirt in my bed. That is harassment, I thought. They wanted to provoke me! But I didn't let show anything. For nights I had bad nightmares. (in the sort of: skull skeletons are following me in the lanes to pour over around me with acid.) Starting from this point I wanted absolutely to go out of the hospital.
I came home over the weekend. But I was not feeling well. I was lying on the sofa fearfully and everywhere where I saw, I found references to myself. Also the picture with the young man with red cap, which hung in the hospital corridor, hung in miniature form also at home. Should I that be? Everything made fear to me, even the fly at the wall. At the Mondays round I trembled at the whole body. I said, I would have fear and the whole world would refer to me. Haloperidol was stopped. But I got Sonapax. (Sonapax = Melleretten; Retrospectively regarded I have to say with all caution,: In my case the Haloperidol treatment was something like mental torture.)
My dreams became better. In the occupational therapy I worked now with clay, which was very difficult for me, particularly since I felt observed by the other patients. On ward a patient asked me, why I actually was there. Because of a woman, I said partly truthfully. The East-West test seemed to me already finished. Also I did not want to talk about it. It would have sounded improbable for not initiates. I still was no crazy person! He would be there because of five women, meant the patient. And I should tell the physicians not too much, otherwise they kept me longer there. Oh, I thought, knew he something about my test? No, I don't say anything, I imagined. I wanted to live as fast as possible again a normal life, only out of the hospital!
I had probably still pains at the heart and described that to the chief doctor at the Mondays round. You see, that is your illness, he said, sooner or later I would have gotten it and it is not impossible that I get it sometime once more. Illness? Not on your life! I still was fit as a fiddle! (no word of the physician about nerve weakening and its symptoms and hallucinations. Indeed I believed that the doctor's round would be there only for the fact that the other "patients" reported about my behavior on the ward.) I imagined in such a way: They named me as ill, in order to protect me in this hospital from the other side, the West. Sooner or later I would have gotten it? That was still because of the meeting with this woman, this heart pain, I thought. Or was it predestination? And it could happen again? About that I was strongly concerned. Anyhow, I was promoted to day care patient, i.e. I was allowed to go home every day.
We treated the pat. first with Haloperidol. However, it didn't came to a definite change of the mental status, so that we changed him to Sonapax. Under this therapy the pat. altogether seemed more relaxed. The contact ability was clearly better, the drive was situated in the standard area. The occupational therapy ran without complications. We could have the pat. as day care patient.

In the occupational therapy, when I was drawing from a pattern, I felt observed again. The radio was on - RIAS 2 (Radio-station In the American Sector). That was still a west station! Belonged that to the test? I drew my multicolored lines on paper and noticed, how the music or the speaker reacted to my drawing movements. I looked at the ceiling. Here a camera had to be installed somewhere, which transmits live to Berlin! The test still continues, I imagined. In a part of the pattern you could see with good will a key. And it was a mirror-image. That was East and West and it was about key technologies, I assumed. Thereby also Manfred von Ardenne (a German inventor) came somehow into my mind. It was certainly about a revolutionizing discovery for the East. They let the West participate only apparently in the test. The West should certainly be presented as stupid, so that they would be black-annoyed. And I played a kind of main role therein because I had this fateful meeting with this woman.
On one day I came in the morning with the bus to the hospital. There were many Soviet military and their wives in the bus. Oh, I thought, that the "friends" had well organized. That gave the West no chance to approach to me. A railway barrier was closed. Traffic accumulated. That is a hint to me from the National Railroad, was clear to me spontaneously. I should step out one station earlier. I mingled with the people. So found me no American satellite!
At everything that seemed to me strangely, I believed in a special meaning. The hospital area with its old houses and trees seemed to me like a kind of holy swearing place from earlier thousands of years. I believed to have to run in lunch time determined distances. Looking from above it was certainly an oracle and the Russian satellites were recording it. Thereby I discovered that on the adjacent old Jewish cemetery all gravestones were aligned in east west direction. Did the old Jews know in the last century already from the forthcoming East-West test? Impressed me very much. When I looked to the sky, suddenly a sunbeam came through the clouds. That was a hint to me! From Petrus? Even the clerk of the weather didn't let me down!
At home I had - caused by my hypersensitivity of the perception - already noticed since longer that the television moderators were looking at me directly and dealt with my behavior. Could they really see me? I found an explanation for it. Somehow one must have given us special televisions. These were equipped with mini cameras and must have sent back probably always to the currently adjusted station, possibly over satellite. A few outstanding pixels obviously showed their position in the glass bulb. Refined made, I imagined. But could they also observe me, if the television was off? As a precaution I always had to be careful, what I said or did, when I was in the television view. That was arduous!