A Shrink with Insight

Almost 15 years later, Carolyn sits on her couch in her elegant, spare living room - with a friend's orginial artwork on the walls and the coveted spinning wheel nearby.

While her Harvard professor's diagnosis of Pam was unquestionably correct, his assessment of her life prospects was overly harsh and angers Carolyn to this day.

If there is anything she has learned from her work as a psychiatrist and her lifetime as Pam's sister, it is that there is far more to a patient than a diagnosis. "From my point of view, I'm not just dealing with depression and anxiety: I'm dealing with a person who's experiencing this illness or that condition.

"The person who says: `I'm the devil' - that's obviously not the whole story."

Through her experience with Pam, Carolyn knows about the importance of involving a patient's family in their care. She talks scathingly of the era when parents - her own parents - were blamed for a child's illness.

"Unfortunately, I think my profession has done significant damage ... around this issue," says Carolyn. "There's no question that families contribute in positive and negative ways to pyschiatric illness, but they don't cause schizophrenia."

Of her father's reaction to Pam's illness, she says, "He was terrorized beyond coping to see his firstborn this way."

Carolyn also makes it a point to listen to her patients and make their care a collaborative effort.

"When a patient comes in and says she is gaining weight on a medication, I'm not inclined to argue," Carolyn says. "It's not whether the issue is right or wrong, it's can we do anything about it?"

Carolyn also knows - personally - how much the right medication helps. Since childhood, she has found it difficult to sit still and read or study. Often, she daydreamed or even drifted off to sleep. For years as a young adult, she ignored the problem. It was the way the world was divided: If Pammy was sick, then Carolyn had to be well. Her attitude was: "Hey, I'm OK, I can handle it."

But a few years ago, Carolyn decided to see a psychiatrist. She wanted to write and she was having trouble concentrating. She was diagnosed with the "inattentive" form of attention deficit disorder and was prescribed medication. She says it helps her writing and her focus in dance. It's also given her a shade more understanding of Pam and her patients.

When she is asked why she became a psychiatrist, Carolyn says it wasn't because of Pam, at least not consciously. She didn't know how sick Pam was when she made the decision. Rather, it was because she found it fascinating.

(Her father tried to talk her out of it. Psychiatrists were not "RD's" - real doctors - in his mind, Carolyn says, but she was hooked.)

Carolyn was at first hesitant to get involved in Pam's care - not wanting to "blur boundaries" or step on professional toes. But she came to see that she could really help Pam and has been instrumental in linking her to excellent care - which Pam appreciates.

"I mean look, you are singlehandedly responsible for everything - I mean everything good in the past 10 years," Pam told Carolyn one afternoon. "You rescued me."

Often people ask Carolyn how she can stand to listen to people's troubles all day, but she has learned to keep a certain distance from her patients. She also knows to take a break from Pam.

"I don't have to live with her illness," she says. "I am able to hang up the phone, shut the door, drive away."
