UConn Med School, 1978

Pam is sitting on the examining table at UConn when the doctor notices her arms. The scarring from all the burning and cutting is obvious. The doctor doesn't ask Pam where the scars came from. She simply observes, "You must be in a lot of pain."

A decade after her suicide attempt at Brown, Pam is making a go at the life that had not seemed possible. She is a student at the University of Connecticut School of Medicine.

But it's not going well. She can't look anyone in the eye, she feels as if she'll be electrocuted if she touches anyone. The voices have been telling her to hurt herself and she has.

That she was admitted to the medical school - despite a second hospitalization and many ups and downs - is remarkable. Through it all, she tended to her academic life, graduating with honors from Brown in 1975. The medical admissions people told her they were willing to take a risk on her because her verbal scores were so high.

Carolyn, now at Harvard Medical School, is happy for Pam, but also worried. Howard and Marian are hoping that perhaps, finally, Pam's life will straighten out.

For years, Pam's relationship with her father has been poor, but her illness has driven them farther apart. She feels that he sees it as a rebellion against him - that somehow she is acting sick to provoke him.

Because of her anger at her father, Pam has recently changed her name. No longer is she Pamela Spiro. She tells a judge in New Haven that she wants to change to her mother's maiden name - Wagner - because, with her father and sister, there will be too many Dr. Spiros. But whether there will ever be a Dr. Pamela Wagner is doubtful now.

A minor health problem has brought her to the doctor and her secret is revealed. She is referred to a psychiatrist who gives her medication, but her troubles soon overtake her.

On the night before she is to give a physical to another medical student, she can't sleep. How can she give someone a physical if she can't touch them? In the morning, she marches into the dean's office and demands: "Get me out of here!"
