SURFACING TO REALITY
[if !supportEmptyParas]   [endif]
My delusion of my computer-world and world—fame, and Amelia waiting for me was still as strong as ever in my mind, but my caseworker informed me that my stay at the ward was about to end. This confused me and scared me because this didn’t coincide with what I had understood was supposed to happen to me. Amelia hadn’t shown up, and I had done everything that I was supposed to so that I could see her. I began to feel very agitated and cheated, and my once—euphoric dream was becoming a frantic hangover of reality. I told myself when feeling the biggest doubts attack my mind that they were still just testing me, so all I had to do was keep playing along.
My friend Jackie came and took me home. She was the only one not at work at the time, and was quite depressed about my being in the hospital, and dropped me off without coming in. Once back in my living room, everything had been cleaned and put in order. Sally had come and cleaned the whole house and took care of my two dogs, Kenji and Kaylee. (I was closer to these animals than I was even to my own family.) I sat on the couch for hours in silence, no TV, no music, nothing. I reached into my pocket and pulled out the name-card that I believed Amelia had written, and just stared at it. After a long time, I started crying, laid down on the couch, and went to sleep.
As the days went on, and the medications began to finally work, I began to come aware that I had been deluded after all. I didn’t believe my doctor’s diagnosis that I was schizo-effective; I told myself that I had just had a nervous breakdown, and now everything would be fine. I believed schizophrenia only attacked people when they were in their late—teens, early—twenties, and I was 35. Unfortunately, I didn’t believe my doctors, and to make matters worse, I didn’t believe I needed my medications either. (Schizophrenia, I have since discovered from doctors, can happen to anyone at any age, and the only way to hold back the disease is to always take your meds.) The new reality I had would be fleeting. In just three months, I would begin having my second episode of schizophrenia. The first episode was euphoric, somewhat uncomfortable, but nothing compared to the horror and torture of the second episode. The first episode was also short, only lasting 3—4 weeks... the second episode lasted 7 months...
