Writing Partners, Last Winter

As soon as Carolyn enters Pam's tiny one-bedroom apartment, the banter starts.

"You stole my spinning wheel!" Pam accuses her. It's a ritual that Pam, especially, enjoys. "Every time we meet, the first thing we do is fight over the spinning wheel."

"What about this carpet?" asks Carolyn, pointing to a small Oriental rug on the floor.

"Mommy gave it to me from Turkey," says Pam. "But I didn't get a thing when my parents moved out of our childhood home."

"What did I get?" Carolyn asks.

"Well, you got whatever you wanted."

"Well, I don't know that I got anything of mine."

"But you could have."

Pam is in fine spirits today, and Carolyn, too. It's not always easy for the sisters to work together. There are times when Carolyn's schedule won't permit it, times when Pam's illness is talking. And even when both are available, the process of dredging up the sediment of their lives can be painful.

Often they rely on e-mail or phone, but today they lean over each other's manuscripts. Pam is in the dark green velvet-soft recliner that dominates her living room, a kind of command central with coffee and Carltons balanced on the arm; Carolyn folds herself into a fold-up rocking chair.

Several years ago, Pam wrote her autobiography and sent chapters to nationally known Virginia psychiatrist E. Fuller Torrey for his opinion. Torrey knew of Pam's sister and suggested that it would be far more powerful to include Carolyn's perspective as well. Early this year the sisters got a contract from St. Martin's Press and a deadline: Jan. 1. They hope their book, which they have tentatively titled, "Solo for Two," will help people understand mental illness.

So Carolyn has been writing and Pam has been rewriting. Each chapter is divided between their life stories, but Carolyn is planning to include some expert information about mental illness - she is, after all, a psychiatrist.

"Actually, that would weaken your chapter when you include all that stuff," says Pam, the expert on writing. "I can show you how and why. It slows down the action every time you interject an editorial comment."

Carolyn suggests that Pam can also write as an expert on the patient's point of view. "You know how psychiatrists used to say: `Well, she's refusing to take her medication,' like `she doesn't want to get better.' They don't say: `It causes this intolerable grogginess - and no wonder she doesn't want to take it.'"

The sisters dive into their reading, and Carolyn reaches the part where Pam writes about how hard she tried to be happy when her twin got into Harvard. Instantly, Carolyn dissolves into tears.

"No, no, no, you can't," Pam commands.

"I can't?"

"You said to be honest," says Pam. "All right, now STOP it. Your nose is getting red."

"But it's true," says Carolyn. "You know, I'm not hurt. I'm moved. It's true, this whole thing about me going to Harvard Medical School."

"What about it?

"Just how painful it was," Carolyn replies. "To tell you, to want you to know, but to know that I would hurt you."

"But you didn't hurt me," Pam says.

This doesn't stop Carolyn's tears, and Pam looks concerned. "I'm OK, you're not hurting me," Carolyn tells her. "My crying is not because you hurt me. My crying is because I'm remembering."

Pam leans back into command central and covers her face with Carolyn's manuscript. "Geez," she asks, "How can you be a freaking psychiatrist?"

"I don't know. I cry," says Carolyn.

"You do?"

"Oh yeah."

"Geez," Pam sighs.

"Stop covering your face," Carolyn instructs.

"I'm afraid I'm making you feel bad," says Pam from beneath the manuscript.

"You're making me feel bad," Carolyn says, "because you're writing well enough to make me cry."
