THE  BOX
[if !supportEmptyParas]   [endif]
  I suddenly knew why I had found the box of old things at Shari’s.  The box was from my past.  The box over wrought with love and grief over a woman I had loved in 1989.  The things in the box were Amelia’s.
Back in 1989, Amelia and I were living together at the time, and I had just found out then that she intended on leaving me before she returned from college in Costa Rica, where she was finishing her degree.  Being the only one living in our place, I took it upon myself to pack up her things and kick her out.  She heard of this news from her friends.  I never spoke to her again, even though I desperately tried to reach her.  I still love her to this day.
Back in 1997, I flew off the couch and ran and kneeled at this now precious box.  Everything was as it was then.  Blue glass plates that we had ate off together, her old electric mixer that she so proudly used to make her buttermilk pancakes, more plates and glasses of ours, and silverware.  All the old feelings of our times together in the kitchen were here.  We loved to cook with each other, always complimenting each other on our prowess.  ( We met in a restaurant where we worked as cooks.)  I grabbed the box and ran into the kitchen and arranged all of the items onto my table. It was all so very clear, Amelia had been waiting all this time for me, waiting for this very day to come back into my life, our life. I shouted to her as loud as I could, “Where are you?? Amelia!? Amelia!? I love you damn it! Get your ass in here NOW!” I ran to the door, waited minutes, and started crying. Why was she waiting when she knew that I finally knew? Why was everybody waiting? The TV reminded me. I had to still unbury my past and come forward into the light of the world.
I was ready. Almost. There was a strong wind storm outside, and I had been smoking cigarette butts all night because I was too excited to take the time to do anything but search for answers. Now that I knew the answers, I needed a smoke. I knew that I was out of cash though, and hoped to use my credit card to obtain some. I went out into the new world, scared to death of seeing anyone, since I was still not used to anyone knowing me that well, especially since I had only known few people for the past 6 years. I got to the store and there were two Vietnamese girls waiting insides who told me that they do not accept credit cards. They kind of saw my desperation and laughed nervously. On the way home, I realized that this was because they were in awe that I was starting to realize what I needed to do.
As I pulled into the driveway, too scared to go anywhere else for cigarettes, a long white car violently turned the corner next to my house. There was a white-haired man in a cowboy hat looking at me as he went around the corner in the car. I went inside, gathered my courage, and began to call friends. My friend in Tulsa never knew exactly what was going on, but I thought he was just playing dumb. I noticed that while I was on the phone with him, the live audience on TV was getting more excited. I knew that I was supposed to act fast, since everyone was waiting for me to get this over with, so I hung up with my friend in Tulsa, and decided to call the one friend I had that had experience with how to find a psychiatrist.
After 30 minutes of pleading, the friend I called agreed to come over and see what I was talking about, and yes, she would bring some cigarettes.
When she arrived, she wasn’t any help. She could not agree with me on anything, or believe anything either. This only made me silent after a while, knowing she was just playing the role like everybody else in the world, waiting for me to give up and go to the shrink. So, she called her doctor for me and found out where I could go to get help. Since I was too scared to drive, she escorted me to the emergency room. On the way there, I just read signs and billboards to ease my anxiety on the way to finding Amelia and my world-known fame. I had a vision of people standing on both sides - of the road, cheering me on as I got to the hospital. I wasn’t sure if I was really here  suddenly. Maybe I was the fat man at the arena on TV. There were many lyrics which referred to myself being in a comatose condition, where for years they had been trying to bring me to speak, but nothing was working, they were reaching me through some sort of dream—state, where they constructed all of what I saw and experienced as part of a self—sponsored project, meaning that without me knowing, they were allowed to use my wealth from fame to financially support this magnanimous psychiatric company that has been trying to revive me. Who gave them permission to use my money, since I was incapacitated? Then it came to me, it was my love. It had been Amelia who gave the go-ahead.
While being interviewed by the emergency room psychiatrist, the white-haired man in the cowboy hat that I had seen earlier looked inside. He was handsome, and even though the man looked older, I knew that it was my step-father.(but it actually wasn’t) After the brief interview with the doctor, I was allowed to leave with my family for several days. I stayed with my family, explaining and joking about how I knew that the joke was on them, and that I was onto everything they had been doing. Then I took on a more depressing state, as I realized more and more that I might not ever get out of this. Since I was in some sort of coma, it was clear that they didn’t know how to get me out. Of course Amelia was waiting to be in my arms, but she couldn’t do it while I was in this dream-state world, then I wouldn’t want to leave it. She was only trying to show me that she was standing by my bedside, crying and holding my hand, and overjoyed that I finally knew at least that she had always loved me.     
The reason I believed I was so rich was because the whole world had been inspired by Amelia so bravely waiting trying to save me from my coma, that they had made movies, and songs, and used many of my own designs that they had somehow gotten from my subconscious mind, and I made millions from all the publicity from all the countries of the world. While home, sitting in my dream-state body, I wrote my last will and testament, in case I really didn’t get out alive. I donated 97% to Billy Graham, to help the world with the money, since he is the only man I trusted to use all that wealth without corruptly using it for his own gain. The rest I left to Amelia and my family. (3% of my estate, I estimated to be worth near the sum of 300 million.
When I was alone at night, before going to bed, I would talk to Amelia in a whisper, telling her that I loved her, and our children, (who were born by embryo transplant) and that if I didn’t make it out of the coma, that I wanted her to go ahead and let me die, and to go on with her life. I was scared of losing all this new life, but decided it wasn’t even worth living if I could never see the woman who had already wasted 6 years of her life praying and crying over me by my bedside. With this beautiful woman waiting, and millions of dollars and world—wide friends sitting beside her, I would laugh one moment, and then cry uncontrollably the next, over and over, walking back and forth and lamenting to my family, “what if I don’t make it out?”
The Rolling Stones were coming to a town very close to mine, and they were offering free tickets on the news and I thought that the Stones themselves were here to welcome me to my new dynasty.
The day before I was to be admitted for observations, I called my employer and proudly announced that I appreciated everything he had done for me, but now that I knew how wealthy I was, I didn’t need his money. He seemed quite accepting of this, and said good luck. I asked him if he would allow me the honor (even though I considered it be honoring him, since my genius of design was already well-known) of working together with him on designs for houses in the future. He at first became very annoyed that I had said this, but then later, probably realizing I was not sane, said that it might be possible.
The next day, before I was taken to the psychiatric ward, I was to see one doctor at another clinic before going there. On my way inside I passed a woman going out, and for some reason, she looked as though she were dead, she was well groomed, and had a decent body, but her face had the look of post-mortem. I gestured a hello by nodding to her, and she replied, much to my horror, in a morbid sounding low voice.. .“Hellooo”. Whether she was a patient I’ll never know, but now I think she was just a stroke victim or something. I never thought of this woman again until late in the second episode when walking dead women and other ghastly thoughts were more common.
After this, we went to the psychiatric ward and I was admitted. I was elated to go in, since at least it wouldn’t be long now before I got to see Amelia. Group sessions and single observations began immediately. I was diagnosed with schizo-effective behavior. (my current doctor’s diagnosis is paranoid schizophrenia)  The doctors couldn’t understand why this had happened so late in my life, and continued to ask a complete retrospective to exactly what had happened in my life in the past that might explain why I was here. They still don’t know why. The only theory that seems to be the answer to all of us  is that schizophrenia can happen at any time in a person’s life, if that person has any hereditary history. 
