FEBRUARY 1998
[if !supportEmptyParas]   [endif]
My friend Matt had a lung condition, and tried not to smoke a lot. I on the other hand (especially when excited about something) smoked like a chimney, so we decided that all smoking would be down in the garage below the apartment. Most of my time after I became euphoric again was spent in the garage. Matt had stored a wonderfully comfortable rocking chair in the garage, so I could relax in comfort and think, which is the worst thing that a schizophrenic can do.
Amelia started obsessing my thoughts, and I began talking out loud in a whisper to her and the people who helped us communicate as in the first episode. Where was she? Tears only answered my pleas to see her again. One of the days while I was sitting at my desk at work looking for signs of her, I imagined that a beautiful mantel of bound red roses descended upon my desk and surrounded around me. I cried inside horribly, but no one ever saw my expression, I was determined not to show them how incredibly sad I was. I smiled outside when I cried inside, and could carry on conversation while feeling this sadness without any expression of the pain I felt. Amelia was now showing herself in my computer—world as someone only I could see, although the workers around me knew that she was there. She began sitting on my counter space, and leaning back against my divider wall of my cubicle looking right at me. I would stretch my hand out towards where her hand was, and her eyes would fill with tears as she squeezed my hand, and tell me to stop making her cry. I began feeling stronger for her, and only would stay happy with the thought that finally she was at least still here.
The next morning after I had the vision of the roses (which I could ask for at my request to come and cheer me up when Amelia wasn’t sitting with me) the co—workers near where I was sitting came up and started chatting. Before they sat down, one of them fixed my collar and straightened my tie for me lovingly. The other one held out a bag of cookies that his wife had made, and said, “Take one, my kids love these, these cookies are what we make for when Santa comes.” I took one, and sat down at my desk. The workers were trying to bring me out of my depressive state, so I believed  they did see how sad I was. Now I could finally let one of my true emotions out to them. I still had to stay happy for Amelia though, so they still didn’t see how sad I was, but it let off a lot of pressure anyways.
