THE VAMPIRE NURSE
[if !supportEmptyParas]   [endif]
The next morning, I was lying in bed and thinking of how and when Amelia would show up, and there was a knock on the door. I answered for them to come in and an attractive blonde nurse entered carrying a package for taking my vital signs. She asked me to sit up in the bed and take off my pajama top and then began taking my blood pressure. She smiled curiously at me as she did this, seeming amused as she noticed how I had decorated the walls of my room with my drawings, and commercials that I had cut out of magazines that I thought important to my mission. “You been here long?” she asked. I said no and that soon all of us will be out. (By that, I was saying in signal-speak that all of the people involved with the project will be able to stop visiting my computer-world whenever I finally got out of the cyber-world or died.) “Well, that would be really nice wouldn’t it?” She smiled again. I nodded and waited for her to finish so I could go back to my thinking.
She set up her blood-work equipment on the desk by the bed, and began tying up my arm to bring up a vein to probe for blood. As she prepped the needle, she remarked,  “ohhh, this is gonna be fun...” and began filling up vile samples of my blood. “mmmmm, I love seeing blood.” she said. I asked why. She replied. “ It makes me thirsty...” I looked at her and laughed and asked her if she was a vampire. She said “I could be..” We laughed some more a little and then after she was done, she left the room and I never saw her again. The words we had never frightened me because the first episode was completely euphoric (the thought of dying in a coma never frightened me except for the fact that I would never see Amelia) but once inside the second episode, she would haunt me near the end of the episode again. In after thought, I really question if the woman nurse was only trying to be light-hearted, or that she really was trying to mess with my head. Possibly I just remember this in a distorted manner, but I think it happened. Since it was a psychiatric ward, it did seem a bit unprofessional to me, but it really doesn’t matter though now. I only hope that nurses aim to encourage healing their patients in mental sickness, and that they are attentive in every respect to the sensitivity of the schizophrenic mind.
