Pam-dora's Box, October

Pam is worried that her memory is deteriorating. She has had six electroshock treatments.

She has taken to keeping a list of what's important: her name, her doctors' names, that she is writing a book and will be in a Northeast magazine story.

Today, Carolyn has come to visit, bringing chocolate chip muffins, fruit salad, scones and sticky buns.

"I don't remember anything," Pam says.

"Do you remember that I am Martha?" Carolyn asks with a wry smile.

"Martha - who's that?" answers Pam, deadpan.

"Your memory will come back," Carolyn tells her "but this gives me license. I can tell you anything I want."

"You can say you brought me scones and fruit and muffins."

The conversation turns to weight, as it so often does. Carolyn tells Pam she looks as if she's lost 30 or 40 pounds. "Just from being in here?" asks Pam.

"And from not being on the Zyprexa," Carolyn tells her. It has been an unusually onerous last few months for Pam. While fluctuations are routine, she had never been catatonic for so long, she's never needed electroshock.

But this news that she has lost weight brings a fresh smile to her face. "That makes it all worthwhile," she says.

Carolyn sighs and asks Pam if she's still seeing the Bio-Haz-Mat Man. "Do you actually see him as real as I am?"

"Almost as real as you - yeah," says Pam.

Pam says an occupational therapist has given her an oversized silver Altoids box and suggested that she catch "Mr. Bio-Haz-Mat in that box."

"The problem is, he won't go in there," Pam says, seemingly serious. "If I caught him, I could just chop him up and put him in there ... Will you help me get the guy into the box?"

"How can I? I don't see him," Carolyn asks. "Can you see him?"

"No, he's not there," Pam replies, and then she ponders, "I wonder if I already got him in the box."

Carolyn suggests she go get the box in her room, which Pam does, and then confides: "I can't believe this is happening. If this were a movie, I'd say this isn't how people with schizophrenia behave."

Pam returns and Carolyn points to a slight bulge in the box and says, "This is a real Pam-dora's Box."

"I feel like he's in there," Pam says. "I need to tape it up and make sure he's in there. How did I get him there? Promise you won't open it."

"Me? Open this?" asks Carolyn. "Nothing I'd like better than to have this guy locked up. We're talking multiple boxes, chains, bicycle locks ..."

"You won't untape it, just to see if it's real?"

"Pammy, I want you better," Carolyn tells her. "I'm the one who wants you to get out of here!"

As if suddenly remembering, Pam asks, "So we can write a book?"

Carolyn: "You forgot?"

Pam: "I forgot, but now I remember."