The Hospital, June

Pam seems frightened, lying in her hospital bed, with the covers pulled up almost to her eyes. Her dark glasses, she believes, protect her from evil influences, while also shielding innocent people from her. The burn on her forehead - which she has seared with cigarettes - is a fierce pink. "The devil's mark," she calls it, and hopes it warns people away.

Her sister, Carolyn, composed and caring, perches on a chair at the foot of the bed and they talk about why Pam has landed in the psychiatric unit again. The voices are back - the voices that never really disappear despite the myriad medications.

The voices have been telling her she's no good, she's fat, she should burn herself, should kill herself.

"Why don't you say, `Go f--- yourself, I'm not going to do anything you tell me to do'?" asks Carolyn.

"I feel like I deserve it." Pam says. "The carping, the yelling, as soon as they start with `Burn, baby, burn' - that's the point of no return."

Twins. For more than 50 years, their lives have been as inextricably linked as they have been drastically different. That's part of what concerns Pam about this story and about the book she and Carolyn are writing about their lives: No matter how you try to avoid it, twins invite comparison, contrast, juxtaposition.

Pam is nervous that their lives will be reduced to this: the good twin and the evil twin. That's how she often sees it.

Carolyn Spiro - Lynnie to her family - is the twin who went to Harvard Medical School, got married, had two children. She is the psychiatrist in Wilton and is a dedicated ballet and ballroom dancer.

She has strawberry blond hair, stylish clothes, eloquence, sensitivity and humor. She has a good relationship with both her parents and is now divorced.

Most important, in Pam's eyes, she is absolutely reed-thin. She is the good twin.

Pamela Spiro Wagner is the twin who went off to Brown University, brilliant and promising, but became depressed, suicidal, psychotic during her freshman year. She has been in and out of hospitals for much of her adult life - diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder, a mix of schizophrenia and what has been known as manic depression.

Even so, she graduated Phi Beta Kappa, completed more than a year of medical school, writes prize-winning poetry and essays, and lives in a high-rise in Wethersfield. She is the twin who hasn't spoken to her father in years, her illness wedged between them.

When she is feeling well - and often even when she's not - she is witty, acerbic, insightful. She has shoulder-length dark graying hair, and often hides herself beneath roomy thrift-store purchases and floppy hats.

For seven years, she has been on a drug called Zyprexa that has done more than any other medication to free her of voices and enable her to write, read and think. But the drug comes with a side effect that would be troublesome for anyone, but is excruciating for Pam. It has added dozens of pounds to her once tiny body, the body she has wished would vanish.

She fears people will see her as the fat twin, the evil twin.

Only a few months ago, Pam was convinced that the 70 or so pounds she had gained were, if not acceptable, at least a bearable price for sanity. But the extra weight is proving too great a burden.

That's why she has landed in the hospital again. She has been tinkering with her medications hoping she might lose weight. But instead, the voices returned, calling her "Fatso! Pig! Lardass!" and goading her into harming herself.

"Why would you think that anybody would have a right to tell you to hurt yourself?" asks Carolyn.

Pam answers, "Because they are very authoritative in some ways ... I feel that I will be gotten back at if I pull anything."

"You do it to yourself," asks Carolyn, "because you know the consequences?"

"Absolutely," Pam answers. "I don't know that there's ever been a time when they said, `Burn, baby, burn,' when I haven't actually done it."

The conversation turns to the clothes Carolyn has brought for Pam - tunic tops and pants. Pam may be unable to ignore the disparaging voices, but she doesn't forget the niceties.

She rolls out of bed to try the clothes on and suddenly they are sisters anywhere. She thanks Carolyn and says the colors are just right - dark shades, not red or pink. She slips them on and loves the shirts, but the pants, alas. They are capris and Pam is not a capris sort of person. Carolyn promises to exchange them.

Then Pam says that she is convinced the nurses and aides are out to get her, planning her demise.

"You should have heard me last night," she says, back on the bed, but sitting up straighter. She was tied down and fought back the only way she could. She yelled every obscenity she knew: "Bitch, prick, mother- ... "

"They came in and said, `If you don't quiet down ... if you don't quiet down ... "

"What?" asks Carolyn.

"They're going to kill me?" Pam asks, with a twinkle in her eye. "Unfortunately, it's never as funny when it's happening. When it's happening, it's not funny."

"I'm aware of this," says Carolyn. "I have seen you."

"Not when I'm tied down, you haven't."
Twin Beginnings Our first word, after `mama' was `we,' which meant `I': we weren't merely similar and separate: we were, we knew, one. -From "Solo for Two," by Pamela Spiro Wagner
Ever since the beginning, Carolyn and Pam say, it has been as if they have occupied one space in the universe. They

weren't two beings stuck together. No, it was as if they had one place and therefore had to divide up the territory.

And from the start - as with many twins - it was somehow important that Pammy was the older and slightly bigger twin. Older by minutes. Bigger by 6 ounces.

Such family folklore can shape expectations, can set the stage for what is to come.

In this case, Pammy was "the smart one," the golden girl who wasn't quite sure herself why she always got A's. She was the one for whom her parents had the highest hopes, the one her father called his "most intellectual child."

Both girls were shy, but Pammy was the leader and Lynnie would hide behind her. She would push Pammy ahead of her into the room when her parents had guests. At nursery school, where the theory was that the girls should not be in the same class, Pammy was put in the class with the slightly older kids.

As Lynnie viewed it, Pammy won every award imaginable: She was an excellent writer, musician, artist.

Lynnie saw herself in cutthroat competition with Pammy, while Pammy had no idea that Lynnie lived in awe of her. All she experienced was simply being twins and being the best at whatever she tried.

On an exam, Pam might get 99.99 while Lynnie got 99.98. "Of course that meant that she was second rate in my family," said Pam. "`Lynnie, you're just no good - forget it. You're all washed up. You only got 99.98 percent.'"

Carolyn says now, "I idolized her, obviously, but I also got to hide behind her: Everything was expected of her, and as far as I knew, not too much was expected of me."

Still, the girls loved being twins. They loved wearing the same clothes and having people mix them up. But sometime around middle school, things shifted.