IGNORANCE IS BLISS

 

Up until the last time change of 1997, near the middle of October, I was 35, heavily under financial pressure, working days and nights, and forlorn over having been able to find happiness in love from my past relationships.  This moment in time was when the first episode happened, but back in 1993 was when it began.  There were signs even then, signs that I was bordering towards a loss of reality, but the signs were always just thoughts I was either able to talk myself out of, or they simply remained in my mind as things that I could never figure out completely.

The first sign that I could remember was when my former employer was robbed.  He was and still is quite wealthy, and the robbery has occurred when he was off on vacation.  The robbers has gotten away with two metal safes that he bought linked together so that they would be harder to transport in case they were stolen.  The first day back at work he was obviously very upset over the robbery, and he, I thought, was suspecting everyone outside of his family at this stage to be possibly involved.  Due to the state-of-the-art security technology installed at his house, (telephone lines were under the slab of the house to prevent them from being cut, etc.) and since my boss hardly ever went anywhere, the idea of someone he knew could have been responsible for the crime was understandable.

My problem was that until these last six months of sanity and clear retrospect, I had believed that he always thought that I had been in on the crime.  Three incidents began the paranoia that stayed with me right on into my first major episode, which didn’t happen until four years later.  The first sign was when my employer decided to be a nice guy and let me have the old company microwave when he bought a new one for the office.  When I was in the break-room, he just gave it to me, his expression I remember was simply one of anticipation to see how happy it made me, but at the time, that face of his only looked ominously hateful.  I believed at that moment that the microwave was “bugged” with a hearing device, which surprises me even at the time that I’m writing this because this was four years early to my first full episode.  A sentimental visitor who came by my house and said he just wanted to look inside the duplex because he used to live there caused the second incident that marks the beginning of paranoia.  I believed that he had actually come in disguise.  I thought that he was a private investigator looking for evidence of me stealing from my employer.  He said that he didn’t want to come in at my asking so I figured he was secretly letting me know that he thought I was the thief. 

Over the next few years, I began talking to the microwave that I thought was “bugged”, begging my employer not to throw me in jail or sometimes just talking about how sorry I was that he was robbed.  Meanwhile, at work, I just acted like I didn’t think anything was wrong. 

By this time, the paranoia and the isolation I had surrounded myself with for years were finally coming to fruition.  Before I has started seeing Shari again, I was already believing again that not only was my present employer after me, but also that he was allies with my former employer, who was also a millionaire that I believed to have ill wishes for me due to his own suspicions about me being involved in the robbery.  Every harsh word that I had ever had with fellow employees, every cold shoulder I passed at work, all the over-worked hours and fretting over bills had taken it’s toll.  I was being set up by men with big money for a life in prison, and now everyone that I knew was making money or harboring vengeance by waiting for enough evidence against me, and enough time for me to fall into their trap.

One night, it began.  I had stopped eating because I thought that it was going to be any day that They were going to take me into the police station, and when that happened, I wanted to have a head-start on starving myself so that I could die before They had the satisfaction of seeing me in prison.  The next day, I was fully paranoid, and by the time I had got home from work, I fell on my knees and cried because I knew that Shari, my girlfriend, was in on it too.  Then to reaffirm that, she called me, asking me as usual, if I wanted to come over and watch a movie.  I was furious because I felt betrayed, and as time and time again would show in the future, I never made known what I believed or how emotional I really was.  So I went to Shari’s.

When I got there, her and two roommates, one male and his girlfriend, were getting ready to watch the video, and Shari wanted to know if I wanted to get her some ice cream.  Being sure that this was a trick to tempt me to finally start eating because they knew I loved ice-cream, I said I would go get it, but I sure wasn’t eating any.  She picked up on this and asked why and I told her I was fasting.  She and I went to get nice-cream, and I could see that she was beginning to be kind of uncomfortable with my mood.  At the time, I believed that this was because she was only nervous because I was beginning to know about her horrible betrayal to send me to prison, which stirred my anger even more. When Shari and I went to the store, there was a brand new red dodge pick-up behind me on the road. It kept revving it’s engine loudly at the stop light and I imagined that it was Them or somebody working for Them. I didn’t mention that I was afraid to Shari.

When we returned to her place, she again teased me with the ice cream to see if I would succumb, which in an act of defiance I did not.

Days before this visit to Shari’s, I had called to see if I could come over, and Shari’s brawny male roomie had answered the and said, “No she’s gone out to Venture, (a retail store) but she’ll be back soon.”  I heard him kind of groan suddenly, and envisioned Shari giving him fellatio while he was on the phone with me.  I kept calling back after that just to agitate them, since I thought that they were having sex to enrage me.

Returning to the night in progress, we all sat down to watch the movie, and Shari politely asked the male roomie to  pass her the ash-tray, since I was sitting between them, he handed it to me to give to her, (I took this as a joke on me for knowing about what they “did” on the phone days before), I said to the male after he handed me the ash-tray, “you can give it to her if you want, I don’t care…” This just brought a questioned look on his face (and a hint of anger when I thought he got my suggestion) but inside, I reveled in my brilliant gesture to anger him, (and the attempt to shame Shari). I continued through the evening’s movie making what I thought were relevant jokes and remarks to try to outrage them into saying something, but ofcourse, they had no idea what I was even suggesting, so it never amounted to anything but shrugs and questioning frowns.

When it was bedtime, Shari and I retired to her room I didn’t say anything, but I do remember sensing that she was becoming very uncomfortable by my actions. I laid down, while she tried to sleep beside me, although I think that she was too disturbed to sleep. I sat up  and listened to the other tenants outside yelling and laughing, but decided that they were actually being proud that I finally knew about Their plan.

After about two hours, I just got up and started to get dressed, awaking and scaring Shari at the same time. She asked where I was going, and I said something like- “there’s too many jerks around here for me to sleep.”

As I left, Shari bitterly argued in confusion that I shouldn’t leave. I remembered a news story I had read as I left her apartment to go to my car. It was about a man who was raped by two men when the man had pulled over on the freeway to repair a tire. I began thinking that this story was actually put in the paper as a threat to what was about to happen to me as I crossed the parking lot. I prepared to think how I would kill the men who were  about to try and rape me. Nothing happened as I got in my car, but I supposed that They were only letting me know that They could have if They wanted. I pulled out and headed for the freeway. I noticed a champagne suburban in a vacant parking lot and as I passed , I realized it was Them. The suburban pulled out and followed me on the highway. I started singing to the radio at the top of my lungs, being adrenalized into action by the underground pursuers. I sped at least 85 on the road, believing that if I made it home, I would be safe. When I finally closed my front door behind  me at home, I ran  and jumped on my bed and screamed, “Thank You, Jesus, Your heart is white!!” After crying and praying for what seemed a long time, I fell asleep.

The next day, somehow I didn’t feel the fear like I did the night before.  When I got to work, it was uneventful since I never talked to anyone there anyways; I finished the day and went home.  Shari called again, and I went over again, anxious to see what would happen next.  Her female roomie was getting ready to move out and there was a box of assorted appliances, junk, and books in it.  I rummaged curiously through it because the roomie said she was going to through it all out.I noted enough in the box that I felt was worth saving, and agreed t o take it home with me.

Once home, I found an antique book, hand-dated in eloquent penmanship that it was offered to a friend in 1920-something.  Immediately I remembered that my employer collected writing pens, and presumed it to be actually his writing.  I turned to the microwave as I saw this and said, “thank you, Keith.”  Just to show him that I wasn’t afraid of him anymore.  The book was a classic called “Kim”.  Later I theorized in belief that this actually spelled Mik backwards, therefore proving that it was indeed for me, since that was what I went by at work, and my boss always misspelled Mick, as Mik and now I was sure why.  As I read the book during the next day and a half, I kept making connections and theories over the story line that I don’t remember now, but I do remember that it was the turning point from paranoiac to euphoric delusion.

Tonight was the time change, and I saw this as a portent of good will for me from them.  They were letting me know that this new time change was for me, finally being let in on their secret.  This was due to the fact that I deduced that the man “Kim” was well respected and liked; therefore, I was also liked in my employer’s eyes.  The next day was Friday, payday.

I went to work feeling like it was a whole new world, and I had no idea how new this world become, yet.  As I sat with great renewed relief to work at my desk, I wrote a note to my boss in huge letters on the desk, “thank you Keith, I have always loved you too” so that the hidden camera that he had would over me would read the words.  A half and hour I got his reply.

I had been waiting for a raise almost a year and a half and asked more than a few times for a raise but was always denied.  When I came back from getting coffee in the break room, my check was on my desk, face down.  I turned it over just to make sure that there wasn’t an increase, (a ritual that I did without real hope, but did always) and there was an “increase”,  thirty-five cents an hour.  I bowed my head and sobbed as silently as I could.  My employer did love me.

I became so euphoric at this point, that for the rest of the day I could barely stay at my desk, always going to hide in the back rooms of the office to cry with relief that I had been so wrong.  My employer noticed this after several hours.  After giving a man a raise, he was wondering why I wasn’t hard at work to show my gratitude.  I just told him that I was overwhelmed by how pleased I was and I’m sure he didn’t understand that.  Nobody knew yet just how delusional I was at this stage, and six months later when I was fathoms below the surface of reality, no one would know either, until I was ready for them to know. 

I remained in the back room for the rest of the day, smoking and crying when I could, and at one point, I said out loud “you got to be kidding me?” to the hidden cameras.  This was the second question I asked that day to Keith.  It was also the one that sent me into the heights of euphoria when I would get my answer later that night.

This is the nature of how I understand schizophrenia, for every new question, there was always an answer, and for every answer there is a new question, and this was mental quid-pro-quo process is the staircase that descends into madness.

That night, I went home to my sister’s house to visit her family, and relayed my ideas to her and her husband about how crazy I felt, and even though they later told me that they suspected something was happening to me, they didn’t say anything then after talking to them.  I believed everything was going to be fine now, and during that last visit with my sister  and her family, it was.  After I left there, the episode soared away from reality like an eagle that is told to fly to the sun.

On my way home that evening, I was almost to the city, and there on the west side of the highway, lit up in purple and gold, was an answer that I didn’t ask for.  It just was.  It was a huge billboard that said “No Kidding.”  There wasn’t anything else on the billboard, and to this day I wonder why someone would just put those words on a paid ad without any relevance to anything else.  I slowed down to make sure that there wasn’t anything suggesting the sponsor of the message.  Nope.  Nothing.  I drove home knowing that this was bigger than just my employer liking me, the whole world loved me.  I went home and got busy on trying to figure out just exactly how and why this was happening to me, and I could stay up as late as I wanted, it was Friday.  I didn’t sleep until Saturday night.

I am a musician, and most of my free time, although scarce, has always been used by either listening to music, or playing it, and tonight was no exception.  As soon as I got home, I started thinking that if the world truly did know all about me, they would especially know that I loved music.  That meant to me was to start reading lyrics to songs.  All night and all through the morning of the next day, each album cover I read pointed out in everyway that I was right.  They were not after me, They knew every secret issue I had hidden,  wanted me to face them with a counselor, and then it would be time to celebrate.  All I had to do, according to my interpretation of the songs, was confess to some authority that I had issues inside that I should confront and work out.   This secret or secrets, had to come out, if I wanted to be let out, or rather let in.  To do this, I realized that it  would be easy since everybody already  knew everything about me anyways.  But then I did something that showed me just how hard it really was when everyone in the world knows your secrets.  I turned on the TV.  The party had begun.

In one of the inside covers of the CD’s I had studied the previous night, there was a picture of the back of an obese man in what looked like pajamas; pajamas that looked hospital issue.  There on the TV screen, as I turned it on to an arena full of people, behind the curtains of the stage, was the same man slowly as if he were in a trance.  I changed the channel.  One of the music channels was having an all day tribute to love songs.  Every song was about the deepest love.  A love that was long since over, but one that still burned in memory of that person who wrote it.