Twins Undone, 1983

When Carolyn looks back, the time she probably most longed for Pam to be well was when her daughter, Allie, was born, in 1983.

Carolyn had called Pam soon after the birth, wishing her sister could hop in the car and visit, but the news left Pam in tears. "She thought Allie replaced her," is how Carolyn remembers it. "But a daughter doesn't replace a twin. How could she think that?"

Pam remembers it differently. "I was crying because Lynnie had everything, including a daughter, which was what I desperately wanted: a daughter. It was never anything I could even begin to have.

"It was the icing on the cake ... It was just a really difficult thing for me to accept that my chance had come and gone and would never come again."

Carolyn is left wishing her twin were there. Isn't this the promise of twin-ness? A life-long duet of shared birthdays, of having someone just like you beside you for each milestone. A mirror in which you see yourself reflected.

Pam looks in the mirror and sees all that might have been: a doctor, wife, now a mother. Carolyn looks in the mirror and wonders: Why Pammy, why not me?

The milestones they should have shared are pushing up between them. Carolyn's wedding - Pam wasn't there. Every step forward for Carolyn takes her farther from Pam, every gain for Carolyn illuminates Pam's losses.

Carolyn and Pam believe they are identical twins, but have never wanted to take the genetic test to know for certain. If one sibling has schizophrenia, there is a 10 percent to 15 percent chance the other will. If one identical twin has it, the chance the other will rises to 40 percent to 50 percent.

Like hypertension or coronary heart disease, schizophrenia seems genetically predisposed, but genes alone do not determine who gets it. What activates the disorder in one twin and not another is unknown. The catalyst could be insufficient nutrition, a virus or other factors that might intrude as early as in the womb or later, during childhood. Like many diseases, there is a time-release element. The disease doesn't usually surface until the late teens or 20s.

When imaging is done on the brain of the twin with schizophrenia, abnormalities are apparent. The well twin's brain usually does not share those anomalies but may not be completely normal either. Not much research has been done on the topic, but often it seems that the well twin - and other close relatives of people with schizophrenia - are likely to experience milder forms of dysfunction: attention deficit disorder, depression or simply eccentricities.

Carolyn never worried about developing schizophrenia, but it did cross her mind to worry about having children. If she were an identical twin, she would have the same chance of having children with schizophrenia as Pam would have: 15 percent. For ordinary siblings of someone with schizophrenia, the chance is much smaller, 2 percent to 5 percent.

Soon after Allie's arrival, Pam declines and is hospitalized. Both sisters believe it is because of the birth. Aunt Pam won't be able to visit for several months.
