Our Saint is the last of the Azhvars—the Vaishnava Saints. He was born in 397 Kaliyuga, year Nala, month Kartika, and in the Krittika Asterism, at Tirukkurai­yulur, near Tiruvali, which is about eight miles from Shiyali. His biographer writes: "Legends tell us that this Saint, who was also called ‘Nila’ or the 'black', owing to his birth in the fourth or Sudra class, was no other than the Brahmana Kardama of the Krita age, the Kshatriya Upari-Charavasu of the Treta age, the Vaisya Sankhapala of the Dvapara age, and made to take birth in the Kali age as Nila among the Sudras; so, thus to spread knowledge among all mankind, that all may, without distinctions which society makes, merit Heaven. Not one method but diverse, doth God employ for salvation of mankind; one of them being that of our Saint having in each age been made to appear in one certain grade of society and work there for the time being." His life is, therefore, very instructive in these days of communal feuds and bickers. 
The father of our Saint was the commander-in-chief of King Chola. The son also became a commander and became celebrated for his martial qualities. He was also made the viceroy of 'I'iruvali-nad. He became an expert in music, dancing, drama and poetry. He married the divine Kumuda-valli, the foster daughter of a Vaishnava physician, on condition that he fed every day 1008 holy Vaishnavas (followers of Vishnu). He was practically the king of Ali-nad and had to pay a tribute to the Chola King. He made default in the payment of the tribute, as the daily feasting of a large number of people depleted his treasury. 
*Continued from August 1939 issue

THE VAISHNAVITE SAINTS OF SOUTHERN INDIA 
He was taken prisoner, and was in prison for three days without food. Through the grace of God, it is said, he paid the amount and was released. The Chola King thought that Tirumangai-mannam, our hero, was no ordinary man. He sent for the latter, and despatched him loaded with money and honours. He used the money for feeding holy Vaishnavas. The time came. Our hero saw the vision of Him who is the Lord of the universe. He became a. full bloom Saint, and sang his six Prabandhas: 1 Periya Tirumozhi 2 Tiru-kkurund-Andagam 3 Tiru-nedund-Andagam 4 Tiruv-ezhu-kutr-irukkai 5 Siriya-Tirumadal 6 Periya Tirumadal 
These are said to be the six Angas to the Four Vedas of St. Nammazhvar's Four Prabandhas. He travelled far and wide—even to Bdarik-Ashrama on the Himalayas, singing soul-stirring spiritual songs. He met on his return journey the famous Saiva Pandit Sambandhar at Shiyali. Our Saint, called Saint Parakalar (enemy of heretics), held a debate with the Saiva Pandit, and the latter confessed that he was defeated. At last he reached Srirangham. He contrived to get a big golden image, and with its sale proceeds got built the formidable towers and ramparts of Srirangham temple. 
Our Saint Tirumangai-Azhvar alias Parakalar did many so-called heinous things in his lifetime. To us they are heinous, but are they really heinous when they are connected with Saints? These Saints have no self-interest. Says the biographer: "If it pleased God to effect human salvation by curious modes and methods, who to question Him? If it pleased Him to constitute this Saint different from others, and work His ways through a bravo and a desparado, who to prevent Him? God Himself works out salvation by pain and misery, by fire and water and hurricane, by catastrophes and cataclysms. What then can we say against His ambassadors of the type of our Saint? Indeed His ways are mysterious and His plans inscrutable. Modern-day moralists might be inclined to put our Saint for a sinner; but 

without regard to such irresponsible opinions, all the same, the ancients had sufficient reasons for them to canonize him a Saint and idolize him in all the temples." With due respect I say this: Many ignorant persons said so many things against our dear Baba. I gave this explan­ation to them, and it silenced them. Let us see these important things with the glass of reverent Faith, and seemingly difficult points will be easlly solved. 
St. Francis de Sales said: “Love God and do anything." That is disinterested love. In Butler’s Lives of Saints we this about the Saint: “He (St. Francis de Assisi) was endowed with an extraordinary gift of tears. His eyes seemed two fountains of tears, which were almost continually falling from them, insomuch that at length he almost lost his sight. When physicians advised him to repress his tears, for otherwise he would be quite blind, the Saint answered: “Brother physicians, the spirit has not received the benefit 
of light for the flesh, but the flesh for the spirit. We ought not for the love of that sight which is common to us and flies to put an impediment to spiritual sight and celestial comfort.” Again it is said about St. Eprem: "We cannot call to mind his perpetual tears without melting into tears. To weep seemed almost as natural to him as it is for others to breathe. Night and day his eyes seemed always swimming in tears. No one could meet him at any time who did not see them trickling down his cheeks." 
As the Gita says: "That which is night to all beings, in that the self-controlled man wakes. That in which all beings wake, is night to the Self-seeing Muni." (II, 69) 
The ways of Saints are at times mysterious and inexpliable. And those who scoff and criticise them without sincerely trying to under­stand them are fools. 
Blessed be Saint Tiru-
Mangai-Azhvar alias 
St. Parakalar. 
