


Sikhism in Light of the Bible
Video
June 14, 2015

 Matthew chapter number 7. The part that I wanted to focus on is in verse 17 where the bible reads, ??Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit, but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree that bringeth forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire.??

A couple of months ago I preached a couple of sermons. I preached on Hinduism in light of the Bible. I preached on Buddhism in light of the Bible. More recently I covered Islam in light of the Bible. Today I??m going to preach against the 5th largest religion in the world that??s a false religion, which is called Sikhism. The title of my sermon this morning is Sikhism in light of the Bible. Part of what the devil wants people to believe today is that there are just so many different religions in the world and how do you know which one is right? Have you ever heard people say things like that? There are so many different religions. People believe so many different things. How do you know that your religion is the right religion?

Honestly there really aren??t that many religions in this world at all once you break it down. In fact I??m going to give you the breakdown real quick. In fact I??m going to write it over here on this board so that those of you that can see, otherwise you can just listen in. first of all, the largest religion in the world, if you were to just break it down into giant categories like, Christianity ?¦ Not to distinguish between all the different types of Christianity, but to just say, number 1 Christianity is basically about 2.3 billion people would claim to be a Christian. Then secondly you??d have Islam which is 1.6 billion people that would claim that. Then you have thirdly Hinduism which would be about 1 billion. Then you have number 4 would be Buddhism which is basically a half billion.

Then fifthly of the world??s organized major religions you??d have Sikhism which drops all the way down to only 30 million people, which is a lot. I mean, 30 million people is a lot of people. You can see you??ve already dropped a lot here. Then once you get down below this it gets even less to where these religions have 6 million people, 5 million people, 3 million. It gets smaller and smaller. When you look at these religions, this is not even really 5 different religions. Because what you have to understand is that this religion right here, Hinduism, these 2 are just spin-offs of Hinduism. Buddhism and Sikhism are just spin-offs. Really you can lump all 3 of these into the same category of having most of the same believes when it comes down to the core of what they believe in.

Then when you look at this religion right here, Islam, all it is just a corruption and a pervasion of Christianity. Something that came later and claim to follow in the footsteps of Jesus, claimed to follow in the footsteps of Moses, denying all the teachings of Jesus and Moses, teaching things that were completely different than what the new testament and old testament taught. This is just a corruption and a pervasion of this. Then you have these 3 right here.

Really, there aren??t just a ton of choices and I??m so confused and I have no idea what the truth is. It??s not really that hard to find the truth in this world. Because you can easily rule out these 3 which is what I??m going to do in a moment and then you can easily show this to be counterfeit and fraud that it is of following the false prophet Mohammed. Then once you get into the realm of Christianity it??s pretty easy to figure out who actually believes the Bible and who doesn??t. It??s pretty easy to figure out who??s just giving lip service to the Bible and following a bunch of traditions and putting on a bunch of funny hats versus people who actually are believing in the word of God for what it says.

People who want to know the truth in this world are able to find the truth and it??s not that complicated as people would make it, is it? The reason I showed you that scripture in Matthew 7, is because it clearly tells us that a corrupt tree is only going to produce corrupt fruit. The reason I point that out is that because Sikhism is a spin-off of Hinduism, is a derivative of Hinduism and we know that Hinduism is satanic and corrupt, Sikhism must also be satanic and corrupt. It??s that simple. If you don??t know that, you could go back and listen to my sermon on Hinduism in the light of the bible, where I showed that it??s a religion of serpents and it??s a religion of demonic beings that they worship and all the different human sacrifice and all the Pagan wicked ?¦

I??m not going to re-preach that sermon where I exposed all that. Once you realize that Hinduism is the mother of Buddhism and Sikhism. It all comes from that same corrupt tree. Here are the similarities that they have. Number 1, Sikhism like Hinduism believes in this endless cycle of life, death and rebirth. Being reincarnated over and over again millions of times. Number 2, this thing of karma from your past life affecting where you??re born and so forth. Number 3, Sikhism affirms all of the Hindu gods and says that, ??Well, there??s only 1 true god but he created all these Hindu gods.?? It affirms their existence, basically pandering to the Hindus, by mentioning all their gods and saying, ??Oh yeah, they??re created beings but they??re real.??

Then fourthly they both cremate their dead and fifthly they both do meditation and chanting, et cetera. What does the Bible teach on these subjects? Well, the Bible says it has appointed on to man once to die, but after this the judgment. The Bible teaches that the Hindu gods would be demons or devils. According to the Bible all false gods are devils. They??re not just, ??Oh yeah, they??re good guys. They??re not the Supreme Being but ?¦?? No. They??re devils. That??s what the Bible teaches. Go to 1 Corinthian 15. Because the Bible teaches that we are to bury our dead not cremate the dead. It??s disturbing today how in our once Christian nation a lot of these eastern practices have come in and now people are opting for cremation in order to save money.

Now I understand that people want to save money. They??re losing a loved, they??re already going through enough and they don??t want to be saddled with that additional financial burden. I wish that our society would make it cheaper and easier for somebody to just bury their dead. Something so simple and every day has become expensive and complicated in a lot of places. You know what? I think it??s just the devil??s plan to get us on this heathen pagan practice of cremating the dead. It is not biblical. The Bible teaches the burial of the dead. We could go to many scriptures on that subject. I??m not going to for the sake of time.

In 1 Corinthians 15:42 it says, ??So is also the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption. It is raised in corruption. It is sown in ?¦?? Wait a minute. What does it mean to be sown? To be sown is a seed that??s planted. A seed is buried in the earth and then a new plant grows up. It says this is the resurrection. It is sown in weakness. It is raised in power. It is sown in dishonor, it??s raised in glory. Look at verse 44, ??It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body.?? There is a natural body and there is a spiritual body.

What does it picture when we bury our dead? It??s a picture of the fact that they??re going to be bodily resurrected one day. This is what Christian people have done throughout history. They bury their dead and it is symbolic of the fact that they will bodily rise again. Well, what would cremation symbolize? What do saved people have as their destiny? Being resurrected to be caught up in [inaudible 00:08:32] meet with the Lord and to be forever with Him in heaven. Whereas, what is the fate of the unsaved? To burn in hell. Isn??t that what would seemingly be pictured by cremation?

Obviously whether a person is buried or cremated it has nothing to do with their salvation, but it is symbolic nonetheless. Why would we want to symbolize burning up of the body when we should be symbolizing that the body is planted and will rise again? That is the Christian teaching of the Bible. This thing of cremation is not godly. Like I said, these eastern religions do meditation and chanting. The Bible says on the other hand in Matthew 6:7, ??But when you pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do; for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.??

It??s not hard to figure out when you put the Bible and these eastern religion side by side that these eastern religions are under demonic influence. Even when you study the Bible, the children of Israel when they started to worship the devil. What did they make as images and idols? They made 2 golden calves. The children of Israel had them in place for 390 years in Dan and in Samaria, these golden calves. What do the Hindus revere and lift up and make images of and treat as a sacred animal? Do you think that??s a coincidence? Do you think it??s a coincidence that the Hindu gods hold pitchforks and surrounded by flames and serpents?

Do you think it??s a coincidence that pictures of the Hindu gods look like Baphomet and Satan? It??s not a coincidence my friend. It??s not that confusing, ??All these different religions in the world. I??m so confused.?? No. Hinduism the satanic religion gave birth to other false religions, Sikhism is one of them. All the things I just are things that Sikhism has in common with Hinduism. You say, ??Well, Pastor Anderson, maybe one of these just really small religions is right.?? Think about it. Why would God only reveal himself to some tiny group of people or an ethnically isolated group? Even if we were to take a bigger religion like Sikhism. Why would the true nature of God only be revealed to these 30 million people, the vast majority of which are all from 1 place? They??re all from one Punjab, India. They speak Punjabi.

They??re all from this one place, the Punjab. This religion is 500 years old. I guess God just 500 years ago decided to reveal Himself to this tiny group of people. Here??s my question. What??s so special about them? What about all the rest of us? What about the whole rest of the world? Why would this 1 ethnic group have the corner on the market of the knowledge of God? It doesn??t make any sense. The true God would reveal himself to all people of the earth, because we??re all human. We??re all of 1 blood. We??re all the same. It wouldn??t make any sense for Him to just single out a certain group.

Even in the Old Testament, when God chose the nation of Israel, he said, ??I??ve chosen you to be a light on to the heathen. I??ve chosen you to be a light on to the gentiles.?? He chose them to teach the whole world. All throughout the Old Testament as you read the Bible you will see constant reference being made to all nations hearing about the glory of God. You??ll see the prophets of God traveling to all nations and the word of God going forth unto all people. The true religion has never been this exclusive to a certain group type of a religion. It doesn??t make any sense that only they would know.

Listen to these scriptures. You turn to Roman 1 if you would. Romans chapter 1. Galatians 3:8 says this, ??And the scripture foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith preached before the gospel unto Abraham saying in thee shall all nations be blessed.?? We see how Christianity is something that??s for everybody, which is why the Bible has been translated into every language, which is why there are believers in Jesus Christ in every country, every language group in this world. It??s not just isolated to this one group of a certain nationality where that??s the people who believe in it. No, it??s in all nations. You can??t even really associate it with a certain group. You couldn??t even say, ??Hey, it??s the white man??s religion.??

Because there are so many black people and Asians and so many people of all nationalities who embrace the word of God and Jesus Christ. Even amongst fundamental Baptists there are so many different nations and countries. The Philippines has a huge number of soul winning type Baptist Christians and so forth. It??s everywhere. The word of God has gone everywhere throughout history.

Look what it says in Romans 1:1, ??Paul a servant of Jesus Christ called to be an apostle, spirited under the gospel of God which he had promised before by His prophets in the Holy Scriptures concerning His son, Jesus Christ our Lord. Which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh and declared to be the son of God with power. According to the spirit holiness, by the resurrection from death. By whom we have received grace and apostleship for obedience to the faith among all nations. For His name, among whom are you also the called of Jesus Christ? To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called to be saint. Grace to you in peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.??

Notice, over and over again mention is made like in verse 5 where it says, ??By whom we have received grace and apostleship, for obedience to the faith among all nations.?? He says in verse 8, ??First I thank my God through Jesus Chris for you all that your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world.?? Go to Romans chapter 16. Look, the whole Bible is like this, Old Testament, New Testament. It??s always for all men. ??The grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared on to all men,?? the Bible says.

Look at Romans 16:25, ??Now to him that is of power to establish you according to my gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ. According to the revelation of the mystery which was kept secret since the world began. But now is made manifest and by the scriptures of the prophets according to the commandment of the everlasting God made known to all nations for the obedience of faith. To God only wise, be glory through Jesus Christ forever. Amen.??

That right there should tell you something about this religion when 97% of the people who follow it are all from 1 place, Punjab, India and speak 1 language and have 1 culture. It just doesn??t seem like it has appeal on to everybody. Why would God not reach out to everybody with the truth? Well, the true God has reached out to everybody throughout all time. That??s why the gospel of Jesus Christ is preached and taught in all nations. Now, let??s talk about some of the false teaching that are unique to Sikhism. First of all, one of the big things that they go on and on about in Sikhism ?¦ Who has ever met a Sikh [inaudible 00:16:04]? Yeah, lots of people.

They??re easy to spot because they wear a turban. Not everybody who wears a turban is a Sikh, but everybody who??s a Sikh pretty much wears a turban. It??s a different style of turban, they also have a really long beard. It is easy to spot them. I definitely run into them out on [inaudible 00:16:29] and talk to them and I tried to give them the gospel before. I know my wife ran into one in [inaudible 00:16:35]. One of the things that they really emphasize is the name of God. They say, ??Oh man, it??s all about the name.?? In their language it??s the norm. You can tell it??s pretty much the same thing, the norm. It??s all about the name. One of the things they practice is remembrance of the name. Then they say, ??Hey we got to meditate on the name. Oh, man we just want it say the name over and over again.??

You??re like, ??What is it? What??s the name??? ??I can??t tell you.?? What in the world! This is the major teaching of their religion is to remember and meditate on this name. They??re like, ??Well, god, he predates human language so you can??t express it in language.?? ??Then how am I going to mediate on it? How am I going to remember it??? ??Oh, you silly white man, you just can??t understand.?? No, if you??re going to make a big deal about a name, I want to know what that name is. Until you can tell me what that name is I??m not interested. That doesn??t make any sense my friend. It??s bogus, it??s what it is.

The teaching s of Christianity on the other hand make real clear what the name is. Don??t they? Philippians chapter 2, ??Where for God also hath highly exalted Him and given Him a name which is above every name. That at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of things in heaven and things in earth and things under the earth. That every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father.?? I can tell you what the name is, it??s Jesus. Neither is there salvation in any other for there??s none other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved.

You look at their holy book of Sikhism and over and over again they talk about the name, the name, the name, the name, over and over again. Listen to this. I was just leafing through it just looking for mentions of different things. Here??s a quote from their holy book in Sikhism. ??The insect loves the milk weed plant. Patched on its branch it eats it. It becomes good and pleasing to its master if it chirps the name of the lord.?? I??m assuming we??re talking about a monarch butterfly, since it??s eating milk weed. How is it going to chirp the name of the lord if we don??t even know what the name of the lord is? It??s just this mystical ??The name.??

What it is, is it??s just shrouded in all this mystery because there??s nothing there. That??s why it??s shrouded in mystery because it??s not a name that can save. It??s this impersonal god they make a big deal at it, ??We believe there??s only 1 god.?? A lot of people think, ??Hey, if you believe in 1 god you??re saved.?? There are people who think that. ??Hey, as long as you??re worshiping 1 god, we all believe in the same god.?? ??No, we all believe in Jesus and it??s not the same god.??

They believe in this impersonal god. Our God is a personal God. He has gender, He, Him and He has personality. Their god is without beyond color ?¦ Listen to this weird quote that I found in their book, ??God is beyond color and form,?? yet he is an elephant with eight arms. Folks I don??t know what to say about that quote, but that??s from their book. Here??s what they??ll try to say when you point out all these weir quotes and stuff, ??Oh, you just don??t get it because it??s English.??

Well, listen. The true word of God should make sense in any language. I??m tired of Muslims telling me, ??Oh, if it??s not in Arabic, it??s not the real word of god?? or ??Hey, if it??s not Punjabi it??s not the real word of god.?? No, the true word of God can be translated into all languages. I??m sick of Christians trying to tell me it has to be in Greek and Hebrew. It makes no sense friend. You can read it in English, it has the same power, it has the same majesty and greatness. It makes just as much sense in any language. It doesn??t have to be in a certain language. That elephant with 8 arms thing doesn??t make sense in any language my friend. I don??t know all language, but I think it??s a pretty safe bet.

Go to 1 Corinthians chapter 11. Let??s talk about another one of the strange teachings of Sikhism. Sikhism teaches that if you??re going to be Sikh. Some people will pronounce this as ??seek??, but it??s actually pronounced ??sick??, like when you??re not well you??re sick. That??s actually how it??s pronounced. The 5 K??s that you have to wear if you??re going to be a Sikh is ?¦ I??m not going to give it to you in the original language. Sorry, I??m going to give it to you in English because that??s what we speak here. Because in God??s house I??d rather speak 5 words with my understanding than 10,000 words in an unknown tongue.

Basically the 5 K??s, they don??t start with a K in English, are number 1, uncut hair. This is what distinguishes Sikhs physically, is that they have uncut hair, just never cut it. Just let it grow forever as long as it will grow, the beard, all of it. Number 2, a wooden comb. You don??t see this under the turban but they have a wooden comb stuck in there. Listen. When I was in high school there were some black kids that I think must have been a Sikh in another life, because they had the afro and then they had the pick. Who knows what I??m talking about? You remember that style? Are they still doing that or no? Is it still cool? The pick was just sticking in there.

You know what? That proves reincarnation. These people were reincarnated from India. No, I??m just kidding. Anyway, they had the wooden pick in the hair and then number 3 is the sword. They always carry a sword with them. I think to fit in in certain places they do a real small one just to not just have a big sword or whatever. Then special underwear, little cotton shorts. The [inaudible 00:22:51] didn??t make that up. A cotton short, same for both men and women and then a little steel or iron bracelets. These are the 5 K??s.

Let??s talk about this thing of uncut hair on a man. Is it Biblical? Look at 1 Corinthians 11:13. The bible says, ??Judge in yourselves. Is it comely that a woman pray unto God uncovered? Doth not even nature itself teach you that if a man have long hair, it is a shame unto him? But if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her for her hair is given her for a covering. But if any man seem to be contentious we have no such custom neither the churches of God.??

Let me point out a few things about this passage. First of all it makes it clear that if a man has long hair, it??s a shame unto him, pretty clear. If a woman has long hair it??s a glory unto her. There??s a difference between how men and women should wear their hair according to the Bible. Now, when it says that not even nature itself teach you that if a man have long hair it is a shame unto him. That should show you right there, that this isn??t some new teaching that??s being revealed in the new testament in 1 Corinthians 11. Because if nature itself would teach you then that would show that the same thing was true in the old testament as the New Testament. If it??s just something that??s just part of the natural order of human beings. That means that men should always shave had short hair and that women would always have had long hair.

Which is why even in Ezekiel you??ll find a scripture about the priest and it clearly says that they should not grow their hair long and neither should they shave their heads completely bald, but that they would pull their heads or cut their hair short. Old Testament, new testament, same thing. Then in verse 16, some people will try to use verse 16 to just negate the whole passage. Here God spends a bunch of verses all the way from verse 4 all the way to verse 15 teaching on this thing of men having short hair and women having long hair. From verse 4 to 15, half the chapter and then they expect us to believe that God is just going to come in and say, ??Oh, but if you don??t like it just forget it. Forget I said anything.

When it says, ??If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither churches of God.?? He say, ??Look. If anybody argues with this, remind them that we have never had this custom of having long hair. This is not a custom that we have as the churches of God.?? That??s what He??s saying. He??s not saying, ??Hey, if any man seem contentious run away scared and don??t face them with the truth.?? It just doesn??t make any sense.

Anyway, Jesus did not have long hair. People would say, ??Oh, what about Jesus??? They??ll point to a picture that was painted 400 or 500 years ago. How could somebody painting a picture 400 or 500 years ago know what Jesus looked like 2,000 years ago? The Bible is careful not to give us a physical description of Jesus, because the Bible prohibits idolatry and images. God did not want us to make an image of Jesus if there were a description of what he looked like, what his skin color exactly was, his hair, his height, his build. Then people would have made images of it and he didn??t want that. Of course they make images of it anyway and they just make up some dude.

When you look at a picture of Jesus and say that, you??re just pointing at some random dude. It??s just a picture of a random dude. Then you just say, ??This is Jesus.?? On what authority? None. There??s no evidence that he looked anything like that. In fact there??s evidence in the Bible that he didn??t have long hair, because the Bible says it??s a shame for a man to have long hair. If the Bible teaches short hair on men and long hair on women, then why would He have long hair? Not only that, you could say, ??Well, but Jesus was an exception.?? Here??s the thing. Jesus was not an exception because when He was in the garden of Gethsemane being arrested He had to receive that kiss from Judas for them to know that it was Him.

Why didn??t they just say, ??Hey, it??s the guy with the long hair? Get the guy with the long hair.?? Because Jesus looked like everybody else, that??s why. He just looked like an ordinary person. He did not have some distinguishing character. They say, ??He was a Nazarite.?? No he was not, he was a Nazarene. That??s a misunderstanding of the language. He was from a town called Nazareth; difference there. He did not have long hair. The Bible teaches against having long hair on men, that is. This Sikh teaching that, ??Hey, men need to let their hair grow and it??s supposed to be there, just let it grow.??

You know what? Your fingernails keep growing too. Are we not going to cut them? We??re going to let them become like bird claws or we??re going to cut our fingernails? It??s just part of what we do as men to cut our beard, cut our hair, cut our finger nails. It??s funny. There??s this guy on YouTube, because I was researching this Sikh religion. There were ?¦ It??s what it??s called friend. I was researching it on YouTube and there??s this white Sikh. Basically, like I said, the vast majority are from India, but there??s a movement of some white people who have gotten into this religion. He has this channel called Sikh Net, like Sikh network. He??s on there and he??s basically promoting the Sikh religion on there.

I clicked on this video about why he wears a turban, because I was like, ??Why do they wear the turban??? it??s not one of the 5 K??s. They do have that real long hair. They wrap up all that long hair into the turban. I was trying to see, is there something more to it then? This guy is talking about his journey to becoming a Sikh, this white dude. He??s in New York and he would ride the subway every day. He??d already started growing his hair real long and growing his beard real long and didn??t really know why. I know why, because you??re a hippie. Then he realizes because he was a Sikh in a past life. I think he??s just probably a hippie and growing your hair real long.

He ride the bus every day, and this is what he said. He said, ??You know, I was trying to be peaceful, trying to think good thoughts?? and he said, ??I was sitting on the subway and just these real perverted thoughts would come into my mind. Just these really sick perverted thoughts.?? He was like, ??Where is this coming from? Where are these sick perverted thoughts coming from??? then he said, ??I would look up and see a weird looking guy across the train and I??d say, ??Oh, that was his thought.?? You can??t blame your perverted thoughts on some guy you don??t even know. Think about that. He??s sitting on the subway thinking about perverted stuff and then he??s just, ??Oh, it??s him.?? What did that poor guy do for you to throw him under the bus? He said, ??Oh, it??s him.??

Then he figured out that once he started wearing a turban it blocked all that. Maybe you should line your turban with aluminum foil. Maybe that will block out even more of these. Because he said, ??Our hair is like these antennas.?? He wrapped it all up, put it ?¦ Look. Just get shorter antennas bro, and you won??t need that turban. He wraps up in the turban and he said he didn??t think these perverted thoughts. You know here those perverted thoughts come from according to the Bible? Out of the heart of men. Here??s the thing. Everybody has evil thoughts or sinful thoughts. The Bible says, ??Out of the heart of me come thoughts of foolishness, adultery, theft, blasphemy, foolishness, pride.?? Those types of things come from within, from the heart of men.

If you??re thinking really perverted stuff, it??s probably because you??re a reprobate. If you??re thinking stuff that??s that perverted where you??ve been given over to vile affections and things that are against nature and so forth. I wouldn??t put it past this guy, especially when you see how he panders to the sodomites trying to act like, ??Oh, sodomy is not that bad?? and everything, on his Sikh channel.

Anyway, here??s another thing. Go to John Chapter 13. That guy??s name Guruka Singh. I don??t think that??s the name his parents game him, because he??s a white guy from New York. I think that??s his honorary Sikh name. Anyway, let me show you some differences between Jesus and the founder of Sikhism. Jesus in John chapter 13 washed the disciples?? feet. It??s a very famous story showing Jesus being humbled. While you??re turning there, I??ll read for you from Philippians 2. The Bible says, ??Let this mind be in your, which was also in Christ Jesus. Who, being in for of God ?¦?? Listen to me. Jesus was in the form of God and thought it not robbery to be equal with God.

Jesus was equal with God. He was God in the flesh, He was the word made flesh. In the beginning was the word, the word was with God, the word was God and so forth. It says, ??Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God. But made himself of no reputation and took upon him the form of a servant and was made in the likeness of men. And being found in fashion as a man He humbled himself and became obedient unto death even the death of the cross.?? Look at John 13:4, ??He riseth from supper and laid aside his garments and took a towel and girded himself. After that he poureth water in a basin and began to wash the disciples?? feet and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded.??

??Then cometh he to Simon peter and Peter saith unto Him, Lord dost thou wash my feet? Jesus answered and said unto him, what I do thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know hereafter. Peter saith unto him, thou shalt never wash my feet. Jesus answered him, if I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me. Simon Peter saith unto him, Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head. Jesus saith to him, He that is washed needeth not save to wash his feet, but is clean every whit and you are all clean.?? Goodnight, I??m sorry I??m misreading. And ye are clean, but not all. For he knew who should betray him; therefore said he, ye are not all clean.??

??So after he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and was set down again, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done to you? Ye call me Master and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am. If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one another's feet. For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you. Verily, verily, I say unto you, the servant is not greater than his lord; neither he that is sent greater than he that sent him. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.??

That was an example of Jesus Christ humbling himself and being a servant by washing the disciples?? feet. Now let??s look at the founder of Sikhism, Guru Nanek. This is the guy who founded Sikhism 5000 years ago. Here is a reading from the life of Guru Nanak chapter 12. Listen to this, ??Saido and Gheho, a third Jat called [Saiho 00:34:42] accompanied him thither. On seeing them ?¦?? They??re going to some island to evangelize people with the Sikh religion. It says, ??On seeing them, the tyrant?? the guy who rules over this island. ??The tyrant resolved to put them to death for trespassing on his domain. He sees the Guru as the first victim of his rage.??

The Guru fell into a trance and sang the following, ??He to whom the lord is compassionate and merciful will do the master??s work. That worshiper whom god calls to abide by his order will worship him. By obeying his order man is acceptable and shall then reach his master??s court. He shall act as pleaseth his master and obtain the fruit his heart desireth and he shall be clothed with the robe of honor in god??s court.?? It is said that on hearing this hymn the tyrant desisted from his intention and prostrated himself before the Guru. Saido gave him water to drink in which the Guru had washed his feet and thus made him a Sikh and endured him deliverance.??

Yeah, that would make you a Sikh. I??m feeling sick. I drank this water that??s from the Guru??s feet. Here??s the thing, it doesn??t just stop with that story, where the Guru washes his feet and then gives it to somebody to drink. It says here, this will make you a Sikh. Not only that it said it made him a Sikh and ensured him deliverance. You want to get saved? Here let me wash my feet in some water and then you drink that water. Then you will be ensured salvation. Listen, it??s not just this 1 story. This is a ritual that he instituted for all Sikhs to drink the water that he washed his feet in. they would all drink it.

The Sikh religion as developed over the course of a few hundred years, from the very end of the 15th century into the early 1700s. It was a succession of 10 Gurus. This is the first Guru, the guy who started it, Guru Nanak. Then there are these other Gurus that followed him over the course of a couple of hundred years. Then the 10th final Guru he did away with this thing. For a couple of a hundred years they were all drinking foot water. After a couple of a hundred years they finally got rid of this. Here??s the story about the 10th Guru changing this. Since the time of Guru Nanak, Charan Pauhal had been the customary form of initiation. People were to drink the holy water which had been touched or washed by the Guru??s toes or feet.

The Guru proceeded to initiate them to his new order by asking the 5 faithful Sikhs to stand up. He put pure water into an iron vessel or bowl and stirred it with a [inaudible 00:37:44] the 2 edged small sword. Instead of putting his feet in the water now he changed it to stirring it with a sword. Then sugar crystals, which incidentally the Guru??s wife, Mata Sahib Kaur had brought at that moment were mixed in the water. Conveniently his wife showed up with some sugar to make some Kool-Aid. Instead of drinking foot water, they said ??We??re going to stir it with a sword,?? but then it??s like, ??Well, that??s just plain water.?? ??Oh, here. Dump in a little sugar.?? What is it with cult leaders serving Kool-Aid? Sugar water.

Anyway, that??s when they changed it. Thank God. I??d rather drink Kool-Aid than foot water. Look at Ezekiel chapter 34. The Bible has all the answers friend. Go to Ezekiel chapter 34. Believe it or not, this is in the Bible. A condemnation of it, that is. Look at Ezekiel 34:1, ??And the word of Lord came unto me saying, Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel.?? Shepherds is another word for pastors. These are the religious leaders of Israel. He said, ??Prophesy against the shepherds of Israel, prophesy, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God unto the shepherds; Woe be to the shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves! Should not the shepherds feed the flocks???

Ezekiel 34:3, ??Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the wool, ye kill them that are fed: but ye feed not the flock.?? Verse 18, ??Seemeth it a small thing unto you to have eaten up the good pasture, but ye must tread down with your feet the residue of your pastures? And to have drunk of the deep waters, but ye must foul the residue with your feet? And as for my flock, they eat that which ye have trodden with your feet.?? Watch this, ??And they drink that which you have fouled with your feet.?? There it is my friend, in the Bible right there. Talks about false prophets having people drink their dirty foot water. Either spiritually or literally. There it is in the Bible. Everything is there, isn??t it?

Not only that, but you will find all kinds of passages in their holy book, such as the Guru is god and god is the Guru. Oh, Nanak, there is no difference between the 2, oh siblings of destiny. Only by serving the Guru is god obtained and the true gate of liberation found. Just a lot of deification and exaltation of the Guru, even though he??s just a human being who has no authority? By the way he didn??t rise again from the dead. On the other hand Jesus, it says, even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister and to give his life a ransom for many.

Now, lastly let me just mention the difference between their book and the Bible. Their book is called Guru Granth Sahib. The reason it??s called Guru is because they teach that there was this succession of 10 Gurus and that the book is the 11th Guru. Now, you might just think that they mean that in a figurative sense, but no they mean it quite literally that the book is the 11th Guru. In fact they treat the book as if it were a person. The Bible teaches of course, in the beginning was the word, the word was with God, the word was God, the word became flesh and dwelt among us and so on. Jesus said, ??The words that I say unto you they are spirit and they are life.??

Jesus Christ returns, comes on a white horse and his name is called the word of God. We do believe that the words of the Bible, the words of God are God. Because the bible says, ??In the beginning the word was with God, the word was God, the word became flesh.?? We??re not talking about the physical book. We??re talking about the word of God. God created all things by the word of his mouth and the word of God Jesus Christ was the word made flesh and the voice of God walking in the garden, et cetera. God??s word is God, no question about that biblically. Is this physical book God? Not the physical object. God cannot be confined to a physical object.

Not only is the Bible not God, the Bible is not any person. This is a book. This is not a living person. They treat the book as a person. For example, many Sikhs don??t have a copy of their scriptures, because if they do they have to have a separate room in the house for it. Many of them just don??t want to buy a bigger house to have a separate room so that that Guru Granth Sahib can have his own room. Not only does he have to have his own room, they have to go in there and open him up in the morning and put him to bed at night. Literally, they have to get him up in the morning and put him down at night.

Not only that, but when the Guru Granth Sahib, when copies of it were shipped overseas by airplane, each one had to get its own ticket and its own seat on the plane. Not even like a lap child, but that literally each book ?¦ Because they only print a certain number of copies each year. Each book when it was transported, so they had an airplane full of these things and just 1 in each seat. Did the stewardess come and offer it a beverage? What in the world! It??s strange superstitions about a physical book. I don??t want to take away from our reverence for the word of God, but it??s not for the physical book. My reverence is for the word. The words that are written in the book.

There??s a huge difference between the word of God and their book. One is that we don??t exalt the physical book, we exalt the words of the book. Another thing is that they pull this thing that I mentioned earlier where, ??Hey, you can??t translate it. It??s got to be in the original language.?? Then basically it can??t stand up to scrutiny. Because what happens is you??ll try to show Muslims the garbage in the Quran and then they??ll just, ??Oh, not translated correctly.?? You try to show Momins ?¦ The cult that tries to claim that they??re Christian. You try to show Momins, ??Hey, here??s where your teachings contradict the Bible.?? ??Oh, the Bible is not translated correctly.??

You try to show Sikhs how weird their holy book is and how it says a bunch of weird stuff that doesn??t make any sense and it??s like, ??Oh, it??s got to be in the original language.?? Look. If it??s the true word of God it should be able to go into all tongues. The God of the Bible created a miracle in Acts chapter 2 where his word went forth in all languages. Men [inaudible 00:44:50] God??s word as they were moved by the holy ghost in other tongues. Did it lose something in the translation in the translation if the Holy Ghost was doing the speaking in all tongues? The true word is just as powerful, just as amazing, just as wonderful in any language. The reason that these other religions that are false religions have to come up with this thing of, ??Oh, it??s got to be in the original language?? is because their book can??t stand up to scrutiny from a logical person.

A logical person would read it and say, ??This is nonsense. This is a lame book. This doesn??t make any sense.?? They just hide behind it. Here??s the thing. If it??s in a pretty other language anything can sound good in other language. Have you ever heard somebody speaking a foreign language and just thought, ??I have no idea what they??re saying, but that sounds really cool.?? Have you ever thought that before? Wow that sounds cool. Basically these people come in, they sing the Quran, the Muslims that is. They sing the Quran and make it sound so beautiful in the original Arabic, but if you knew the garbage that they were saying it wouldn??t sound cool anymore. That??s why most Muslims don??t speak Arabic.

A vast majority of Muslims don??t speak Arabic. ??Oh, it??s got to be in Arabic, it??s got to be in ?¦ God??s word isn??t just a pretty poem that sounds pretty in 1 language. No, it??s the content that matters. It??s what the word is saying, it??s the good tidings, it??s the gospel of the word that has the power. It??s the truths that are taught by the word. It??s not just, ??That sounds pretty.?? No, the Bible does sound beautiful, but it also has a powerful message. It also has powerful words on every page and every verse in any language, it sounds amazing. They say, ??Well, you can??t translate it because god has no gender?? they try to say. ??If you translate it into English it??s got to be he or she.??

That??s a great thing about the English language. I wish we would keep our language that way, where we keep gender, he/she. By the way the 2011 NIV, the biggest change from 1984 to 2011 was to make the Bible gender neutral. They??re trying to pervert the Bible now as of 2011 and make it more gender neutral in the most popular if these new perversions that they??re coming out with, the NIV, gender neutral. No, God is no gender neutral. He??s always male. The god they believe in is just this impersonal ethereal haze that??s neither male nor female. There are a bunch of other missile, I don??t have time to go into all the false teachings of this Sikh religion.

I??ll just throw out a few things in closing, is just that obviously they teach that salvation is by good deeds, good works, just like every false religion. You??re saved by your works. They teach that all faiths lead to God. Christianity, Islam, Hindu, it all leads to God, according to these people. Well, they??re going to be primed for the anti-Christ. They teach that god doesn??t hate, god doesn??t hate anyone or anything. Of course the Bible talks a lot about God hating certain people and certain things. They also teach against eating meat. They send mixed messages on this. It??s hard to figure out in this book that they have, whether eating meat is acceptable or not. Some of them say there??s certain meet you don??t eat and blah, blah, blah.

People over there have this thing about not eating meat because they think we??re all reincarnated from animals. They have this thing about, ??Oh, man. We shouldn??t kill animals.?? Whereas Christianity teaches arise [inaudible 00:48:45] and eat. That??s what the Bible teaches. I found this quote though in their book, the Guru Granth Sahib. Listen to this, ??Oh, human being, whatever you can see with your eyes shall perish. The world eats dead carcasses.?? Yeah, we eat dead carcasses. So what? ??The world eats dead carcasses, living by neglect and greed. Like a goblin or a beast they kill and eat the forbidden carcasses of meat. Control your urges or else you will be seized by the lord and thrown into the torches of hell.??

According to this particular verse, you eat these dead carcasses also known as meat, you??re going to be thrown into hell. I don??t know if that ?¦ Some people would say, ??Oh, you can??t eat the Muslim meat, the halal meat or you can??t eat any meat. Look. Is God really going to seize you and throw you into hell because you ate a cheese burger? Because that??s for sure something they don??t want you to eat, is beef.

You say, ??Why preach this sermon??? Look. There??s nothing confusing about the world we live in. Jesus saith unto him, ??I am the way, the truth and the life. No man cometh under the father but by me.?? Don??t let these atheist and people try to tell you, ??Oh, well. Who??s to say that the Bible??s right. How do you know that the Quran is not right??? we already showed how ridiculous the Quran is a few weeks ago. ??How do you know that Hinduism is right, how do you know that it??s not [inaudible 00:50:28] or Buddhism or Sikhism??? Because if you just would take a few minutes to look at the holy books of these religions, you??re going to be face-palming immediately and just shocked that anyone believes these stuff.

Wake up people. There is not counterfeit even, that??s even close to the Holy Bible, the word of God. There??s nothing that can even come close. This is the word of God. It??s true, it??s powerful. It??s the gospel. We need to get this out to the heathen, because of the fact that the reason people are confused today I because they haven??t heard this. Anybody who reads this book and reads any of these other books is going to walk away seeing a gigantic difference in quality between the word of God, the Holy Bible, the most powerful amazing book ever written. That??s wonderful and powerful in all languages, powerful stories, powerful statements versus just these other books that are just ?¦ I don??t even know what to say. They can??t even be compared.

How do we feel about the Sikhs? Here??s the thing, today this sermon will be labeled a hateful sermon. What??s hateful about this sermon? If we love people we got to tell them the truth. People call you a racist and hateful for preaching this. Because what they try to do is they try to associate the religion with the culture. Well, that??s just the devil??s plan to get everybody sucked in to the false religion. It??s like, ??Hey, if you??re going to be true to your culture you have to be this religion. You have to be catholic, you have to be Sikh, you have to be Islamic, you have to be whatever.??

You know what? There??s a difference between our religion, what we believe and our nationality. Because you can be a Christian and be any nationality. We don??t hate Arabs, but do we hate the religion of Islam? Of course, it??s a wicked religion. We don??t hate the people that are deceived by it. Just for example, we love Indian people, but that doesn??t mean that we respect worshiping Satan. We don??t have a problem with the food. The food is great. If you want to wear a turban, go for it, but get a haircut first. There??s no reason to stick a pick in your hair because you need to have shorter hair and then that wouldn??t even be an issue.

The point is that people will try to always play this race card or, ??you hate other cultures.?? I??m not expecting everybody to wear a suit like me and dress and act like me and eat cheese burgers and French fries and apple pie. Everybody has got their own culture. Everybody has got their own language. Everybody has got their own nationality. That??s okay. People can keep their nationality in there. I want to keep my culture. Thank God that when I believed in Jesus Christ I didn??t have to put on some special outfit and change my whole clothes and language and food. Christianity is believing on Jesus Christ and following the word of God. The morals of Christianity they transcend nation, they transcend culture.

This is not a bashing of anybody who wears ?¦ I??m not going to sit here and bash people, because they have a different culture or wear a ?¦ I will say, ??get a haircut,?? because that is Biblical. I will say to men around the world who don??t wear pants, put on a pair of pants. Get out of that dress or skirt or whatever stupid thing you??re in and put on pants. They don??t have to be the same pants that I wear in America but put on a pair of pants. Whatever pants you want. You want to wear baggy, bright colored pants or pants that go to your knees, pants that go to your ankles, but put on a pair of pants of some shape or form.

Jesus Christ is the way the truth and the light and this Bible is the only true word of God, everything else is easily recognized as a fraud. Let??s rise and have a word of prayer. Father we thank you so much for your word Lord and I just pray that you would just help us to understand the great treasure that we have in your word even though we don??t give it its own room and treat it like it??s a human being. Help us to respect your word, love your word, read it every day and just to realize the amazing treasure that we have Lord. Help us to go out and reach the lost with the gospel Lord. If we??re out knocking doors and we run into one of these Sikhs Lord, I just pray that you would just fill us with your spirit to preach unto them the good news of the gospel of Jesus Christ and pray that we would be able to get them saved just like everybody else who is without Christ and without hope and without God in the world. In Jesus name we pray. Amen.
 
 
