Ques.—What is the difference between Destiny and Chance? 
Ans.—Destiny is the divine law which guides us through our numerous existences. Every soul must experience happiness and unahappiness, vice and vice and virtue, from the commencement of evolution upto that goal which is the Realization of God. 
Chance is based on Karma; that law of Cause and Effect which governs the events of our present life as well as those of our future lives. Through evolution the soul receives, by means of the spirit, 
• 
the impressions or Sanskaras. The processes which create the experiences and later the elimination of these impressions, can be called Chance. Destiny, or the goal that souls have to attain, is Realization of God; but actually Chance is different for every individual. We can compare Destiny to a load of (let us imagine) seven hundred tons of happiness and unhappiness, vice or virtue, which every soul has to carry throughout its existence. One soul carries seven hundred tons of iron, 

another soul the same weight in steel, others—lead or gold; the weight is always the same. Only matter changes. The impressions of each individual vary and the acquired Sanskaras from the structure and the condition of the future life of every individual. 
Ques.-What is the difference between the exterior and interior work of an Avatar? 
Ans.—His interior work is executed for the good of humanity by the means of his spiritual body and divine will, on the spiritual and the subtle planes directly, or through the intermediary of his agents. The exterior work is accomplished through his physical body by personal contact with individuals. By passing through different countries, he turns their minds towards spirituality, he enhances their progression towards their subtle planes and from these towards the spiritual planes.* 
Ques.—Why were certain Avatars married and why was Jesus not married? 
Ans.—The exterior way of living of an Avatar is regulated by the habits and the customs 
• 
of the times, and he adopts that attitude which is most suited to serve as an example to his contemporaries. But, in essence, all the Avatars incarnate the same ideal of life. At the epoch of Mohomed the Arabs were very sensuous and it was not considered bad or illegal to live with several wives. If like Jesus, he had not married and had advocated celibacy, or if he had imposed absolute continency, it would have produced dangerous and inevitable reactions. Few people would have followed his teaching and fewer still would have been attracted toward such an ideal. Mohomed had nine wives, but he had no physical contact with them; it was legal to have several wives. 
At the time of Krishna, the Hindus were fighting amongst each other. Envy and greed were predominate; the real conception of spiritual life and love was unknown to them. Krishna based his teachings on the laws of love and pure and innocent merriment. Human beings were directed joyfully towards a disinterested ideal of love. 

QUESTION BABA ANSWERS 
At the time of Zoroaster, humanity was hesitant and lacked equilibrium. They were neither complete materialists nor really attracted towards the spiritual light. He taught them to be good householders, to marry, and to abstain from desiring the wife of another, and to worship God. His own life was based on this principle, “Good thoughts, good words, good actions". Zoroaster was married. 
At the time of Buddha, humanity was deep in materialism. In order to demonstrate that their conception of values was wrong and that they were victims of the goddess Illusion, or Maya, Buddha renounced his wife, his family, the riches of the world in order to establish his teachings on Sannyas, or renounce­ment. 
At the time of Jesus, arrogance, imperiousness, pride, cruelty were the characteristics of the people. Nevertheless they possessed a conception of justice regarding women and marriage, and it was not necessary, as it was in Arabia, to make marriage an example. Jesus lived the life of humanity, simplicity and poverty, and he endured suffering in order to direct humanity towards the purest ideal—God. All the prophets were the incarnation of God; therefore they stand beyond desire and temp­tations, they were the manifesta­tion of the same divine element. 

THE SAYING OF MEHER BABA 
The highest divine knowledge is attained through love (which has in it the spiritual faculties, intuition, and inspiration), and is opposed to the intellectual faculty. It is love that makes one transcend the dominion of intellect and gain the state of complete self-annihilation. It is this state that ends with union with God. 

