

PRINCESS NORINA MATCHA-BELLI—under the 'nomd'art' of Maria Carmi, obtained interna­tional fame as the spiritual interpreter of the 'Mother of Christ' in the great Pantomime 'The Miracle'. This unique spectacle— the only one of its kind as artistic beauty and success, was for the first time staged in London in 1912 by the world famous Producer Max Reinhardt who through his genius revived for our modern age and made immortal the great classics of all times. A group of English capitalists who produced 'The Miracle' as a revival of the traditional spiritual Christmas Pantomime, made a condition that the holy part of the 'Madonna' should be interpreted by someone who was not an actress, someone, who did not belong to the professional world of the theatre, but a spiritual type as personality and in appearance. This they found in her Florentine 
• 
type. Due to her innate spiritual gifts she made of this role of the 'Divine Mother' the unique performance which remained unforgettable in the hearts of those who have seen it. Throughout all her life she was known as a deep worshipper of beauty, art, and progressive ideals, and lived in close contact with the prominent personalities and leaders of the cultural Western world of this time. Thus lived an international life of worldly glamour, wealth and fame. 
In 1916 she became the wife of Prince Georges Matchabelli who was well known as a distinguished diplomat and hero to his country, Georgia (Caucasus), Russia, and shared the ups and downs of those turbulent times. 
In 1924 she was invited to per­form 'the Miracle' in United States and altogether personified this role over 1,000 times in Europe and America. Since that time Prince and Princess Georges Matchabelli have lived in U.S.A. They have acquired the American citizenship and chose as their domicile New York. Prince Matchabelli established in U.S.A. an industrial concern "The Prince Matchabelli Perfumery Inc.", which after a few years came to be one of the five greatest Perfumeries of the world. After the Prince's death, Princess Norina became the executive President of the great and flourishing establishment. 

During the fifteen years of their life in U.S.A., Prince and Princess Matchabelli were admired and loved for their courage, their initiative, and character to face the struggle for the reconstruction of their material life in the 'new world'. 
When their good luck mate­rially had reached the prime, Princess Norina Matchabelli contacted Meher Baba who came to U.S.A. in 1931. The meeting with the Master marked the complete 'turning point' in her life. Although having been an old seeker of Truth and having tried to find help and guidance through teachers, Yogis, well-known spiritual leaders,  none was able to give her the strength and confidence as to forsake the world for the Spiritual Path. 
Prince Georges met Meher Baba in 1934. This meeting of only two minutes with the Master brought about in him a most unexpected change which deter­mined an entirely new outlook on life, remarkable to all his friends who witnessed it. At the moment of his death he had the experience of reincarnation and transmig­ration of the soul—a standpoint which he definitely denied before he had met the Master to whom he owes this change of consciousness. Through this vision his Crossing of the Threshold was blissful and fully conscious—an experience rare indeed for an ordinary worldly minded human being. Prior to his death he remarked to the Princess, "You are right, Meher Baba is real." 
The Princess came to India for the first time in 1933 together with the group of Western disciples of the Master and participated in a tour to the Himalayas with him. She was sent back to the West on a special mission for the Master's spiritual work. She returned to India in 1936 and stayed 8 months together with the group of Western disciples at the Nasik 'Meher Retreat' of which she was made the 'managing mother'. In 1937 after a short sojourn in the West with Meher Baba, she returned to India and stayed at the Ashram at Meherabad, Ahmed­nagar. Having fully surrendered her life to the Master, she is at his service and command for any duty and work he may demand in his great Cause for the spiritual upliftment of mankind. 

