I—FROM DAY TO DAY BABA was in seclusion in the month of March and saw none except the few who had previous appointments. In spite of this apparent cessation of his external contact with the outside world, his activities, though confined to his intimate group and to the masts inside, continued, besides his internal work in seclusion. A long tour extending over six weeks had been contemplated, and arranged. It covered a thousand miles of journey by road in a big bus with a party of about 40 and with halts at several places. This required a lot of details to be looked into and these were worked out by certain members of the group, every detail had to be finally confirmed by the Master himself. 
Besides the allocation of dif­ferent duties to members of the group staying in Bangalore in charge of different working departments, personal and indivi­dual instructions were given by Baba to each one concerned. 
During the month of seclusion, Baba also observed a long fast for 21 days, for the first week on liquids, the second on tea without milk, and the third absolutely on water. Besides, on the last day of his fast—the 20th of March—the entire group of his disciples, both male and female, also observed fast at Baba's orders for a significant event of world importance on that day, as was already referred to by the Master. 
This breaking of Baba's long fast during his period of seclusion, on the 21st of March 

coincided with the Nature's New Year Day when the Sun enters Zodiac—and one of the famous holidays observed since the time of the Emperor Jamshed of Iran, from whose name the day is known as the "Jamshedi Naoroz". 
*** 
On the 22nd of March a grand­child of one of Baba's oldest Hindu disciples was initiated at the august hands of the Master in Bangalore in his small hut at the 'Links '. 
*** THE BYRAMANGALA CENTRE 
After the materials (stones, lime, cement, etc.) were collected, the construction work departmentally under the direct supervision of Baba's own group started from March. 
MANDLA 
Simultaneously, the construc­tion of a special structure on the grounds gifted to Baba at Mandla on the banks of the Narbada in the Central Provinces, has been started and is being carried on under the supervision of two of Baba's spec­ial emissaries specially deputed and sent from Bangalore. It proceeds well ahead from reports received. 
*** 
THE DEPARTURE The Master and the group left Bangalore promptly on the 1st April. Their first halt was at 
Arsikere, about 84 miles from here. 
BABA AND HIS GROUP AT 
SHIMOGA 

Next morning the party left for Shimoga in the Mysore State, another distance of about 100 miles. Here the Master and his group were the guests on special invitation of the well-known Zamindars (lords) Messrs. Syed Amir Ahmed and Syed Mahmood, both brothers. They have been the residents of the place for years and are very well-known as society figures in Shimoga and Bangalore. The two brothers, having come into contact with Baba during his stay at Bangalore, had spontan­eously extended a cordial invitation to the Master and his party to sanctify their place of resi­dence with His august presence. The Master had promised accep­tance of the invitation long ago and had Shimoga included in the itinerary of the present tour. 
True to the spirit of Indian hospitality, the family had made all adequate arrangements for 

the party, lavishly entertaining all for two days, at Shimoga on the 2nd and at Gersoppa Falls on the 3rd. They had entertained very distinguished guests for years, but it was a unique experience for them to entertain a spiritual Master and his group of Eastern and Western disciples. It may be said to be a rare privilege for the family since Baba had been nowhere during this eight months of stay in Bangalore and his present tour has also been strictly private. 
Although strict instructions had previously been given that Baba would see none during this private tour, his visit to Shimoga somehow aroused a great deal of interest in the local residents, and in response to the earnest request of the hosts, Baba allowed only Darshana to a good many people drawn from all walks of life. 
II—INTERVIEWS WITH THE MASTER 
We give below some of the interesting questions Baba answered during interviews at the 'Links', Bangalore. 
Ques.-What is true spirituality? 
Baba.—Spirituality truly means the life of the spirit. It is to be lived and experienced. It makes you firm like a rock and neither wordly sorrows nor pleasures upset you. You attain to the state where desires end, and you want nothing. When you do not want anything, you have everything. Look at this mast (Chatti Baba). He is so innocent, always so happy and so loving—for the simple reason that he wants nothing; and strange as it may seem, he has everything—happi­ness, eternal peace of mind and contentments. 
The state of desirelessness or of wanting nothing is a faculty latent in everyone. It is within you and you must find it out. I have found it and experienced it. I know that everyone has this faculty, but being latent, it has to be found and experienced. The difference between you and me is that although this faculty within me is also present within you, I have actually experienced and felt it, while you have yet to experience and feel it. I see myself in you all as palpably as you see all these material things with your eyes. It is a fact for me. 

With your eyes, you see every­thing external. At the back of this external aspect, there is not mere hollowness or spacelessness, but also pure nothingness. When you realize this pure nothingness, you see how it has come out of everything which is in you. When this experience is gained, the faculty of wanting nothing is developed and you begin to experience it. 
Ques.—How could a confirmed sinner be redeemed? 
Baba.—From my point of view, no one is so bad as not to improve and become good. Everyone, however depraved, can improve and become better till he becomes the best example for mankind. There is always hope for everyone. 
*** 
Ques.—Why do the ways of Masters at times appear to be harsh and cruel? 
Baba.—Masters have to save ''drowning people" from the sea of Samsara (worldly life) and to that end, use different methods similar to an expert life-saver using different devices to save a drowning person. It is a well-known fact that that a drowning person tries to cling to anything that comes within his grasp and unless the person who wants to save him is careful enough, both would be drowned together. In fact the expert has often to hit the drowning man hard on the head, rendering him almost unconscious so that he may not grapple in an awkard manner the very person who tried to save him, thus making the rescue work dangerous and perhaps impossible. Similarly I have at times to treat certain persons in such an apparently cruel manner that the onlookers who have no idea of the real situation are led to think that I am unduly harsh and unjust with them. As a matter of fact as in the case of the expert life-saver, I do everything to save the life of the particular person whom I know to be drowning in the world of Maya. I do all this for his own good and spiritual emancipation. 


