THE portrayal of the god, Diony­sus, by Euripedes, in his well-known tragedy, "The Bacchæ" would indicate that he was not unfamiliar with the truth underlying the work of the God-man. There was a community of thought between the greatest souls in the ancient world, and links between Greece, Egypt and India, which the culture that has survived, reflects after thousands of years. There is little doubt that the effect of the life of Buddha, a living memory in India at the time Euripedes' reputation as a drama­tist was its height, may have reached the Western Empire of Greece. 
Some of the symbolism employed in this play, 2,500 years old, may not be readily understood. Pentheus is described as having sprung from one of the dragon's teeth sown by Cadmus, and as such, he would be born of desire, in contrast to Dionysus, the mani­festation of Divine Love. 
• 
Sir Gilbert Murray, from whose translation have been taken the following extracts from the play, presents in his introduction to Vol. III, on the Athenian Drama* the point of view of the scholar. His appreciation of the dramatic quali­ties and poetic aspect of this masterpiece of Euripedes, is shown in the translation, although there are other scholars who have challenged his work, but he has explained that a literal translation, verbally exact, may fail to convey the atmosphere and intention of the original, when a different language is employed. 
In spite of the translator's faithful interpretation through the rhythm employed, and the beauty of language, which cannot be gainsaid, his attitude towards Dionysus' words at the conclusion of the play, ignores the possibility of a mystical interpretation, and entirely 

overlooks the truth which Euripedes reiterates throughout, and which the opening words of Dionysus, himself, express:— 
Behold, God's Son is come into this land Of Thebes, even I, Dionysus, whom the brand Of heavens hot splendour lit to life, when she Who bore me, Cadmus' daughter Semele, Died here. So, changed in shape from God to man. I walk again by Direce's streams and scan Ismenus shore. 
The reference to his own previous life in this place, hallowed in mythology by its association with Apollo at the time the play was written is an indication to us that Dionysus identifies himself as the God-man, Apollo, in that earlier epoch when he had also been there. 
The tragic death of Pentheus, after he had profaned the mys­teries of Dionysus, which Sir Gilbert Murray cites as evidence of Dionysus' cruelty, would hardly have appeared in that light to a Greek audience of the fifth century B.C. as the penalty of death was even then enforced on all who profaned the mysteries practised at that time, and a thousand years earlier, when the scene of the play is said to have been laid, the same rule would have been as strictly adhered to. It is, of course, more general, in this age, to regard the death of the body, as a final drama, whereas those who instituted the mysteries, regarded it as a stage in the life of the soul. Similarly, certain inner aspects of the spiritual journey of the soul, which the meagre surviving records of the "mysteries" of the ancient world, indicate, would be withheld from a theatrical performance, such as "The Bacchæ" and so the work of the God-man on that plane of inner consciousness, would be given, only to the extent to which it could be presented symboli­cally. Without such a clue, the words and actions of Dionysus are incomprehensible and misleading, as an intellectual explanation is incomplete unless all the facts are considered in their true relation­ship. 
Actually, Euripedes has dram­atised what is in itself a "Universal Divine Drama" the return of the God-man to carry 

on His Universal Work. The scene is depicted in relationship with the accepted form of Greek Drama by the Author, who utilises the Chorus, as witnesses of the unfolding theme, to comment upon the astounding sequence of events, their final words being equivalent to an ordinary external opinion:— 
There be many shapes of mystery, And many things God makes to be, 
Past hope and fear. And the end men looked for cometh 
not, And a Path is there where no 
man thought. So hath it fallen here. 
The fate of Pentheus, which to Sir Gilbert Murray reflects on the character of Dionysus, is a parallel in some respects, to that of the disciple, Judas, whose end was directed if not hastened by Christ, when after the last supper, he bade him "do quickly" what it was in his mind to do. So also Dionysus, whose warnings to Pentheus served but to strengthen the king's purpose against the God-man, eventually added to his delusion step by step, culminating in his death. In the divine drama of the God-man oppositon must play its part, and in placing himself under the apparent triumph of the oppo­ser, the Christ, bears the burden of humanity, transmutes its ignor­ance and lifts its consciousness higher. Like Christ, Dionysus bore the "agony" of suffering, of which the mockery by the king, his physical binding, the deprival of his staff, and shearing of his hair which was "vowed to God", were all symbols of the inner "agony" inseparable from the life of the infinite One, within the limitations of human surroundings and con­sciousness which he thus shared. 
Like Judas, Pentheus afterwards repented, but in the latter case it was because he was faced with death, whereas it was Judas' own conscience that drove him to suicide. The reason for the part Judas and Peter took in the life of Christ, has been explained by Shri Baba thus: to complete the Mas-ter's work it was necessary that He should be betrayed, and Judas, one of the twelve disciples did his part unknowing its full implication whereas the disciple Peter did his, because Christ had asked him to sacrifice his own feelings 

to the extent of betraying the One he loved more than life itself, out of love for Him, so that the Master might accomplish His Work fully. 
It is because the "Perfect One" is able to use both the good and evil of the world, for the purpose of his Work for humanity, without affecting the infinite state of His own perfected consciousness, that the consideration of His Work in both aspects presents a difficulty to human understanding, which makes a merely intellectual understanding of the position impossible, for such heights of truth are beyond the mind, limited by a consciousness of the "pairs of opposites". But it is those "pairs of opposites" which the Master utilises to free humanity from its toils. 
From a superficial standpoint, there is an apparent contradiction between the words of Dionysus before Pentheus, his cousin, the king, who opposed the God-man and the description of the same event when related by Dionysus to his own devotees. The king had sent his soldiers to capture Dionysus whose work amongst his people had been told to him and when apprehended and cross-examined and held to ridicule by his captor it was some of his human attributes that he disclosed, such as his suffering at the treatment he was receiving. To his devotees he reveals the spiritual aspect of events: "Fell ye so quick despairing, when 
beneath the gate I passed? 
Should the gates of Pentheus quell me 
or his darkness make me fast? ... 
I had no pain or peril; 'Twas mine own 

hand set me free… Nay no gyve no touch was laid on me." 
Already the inner "spiritual upheaval" has affected the soldiers who but carried out their king's command. Returning with their prisoner they say, as they deliver him to their master:— " Our quest is finished, and thy prey, O 
King, Caught; for the chase was swift, and this wild thing Most tame; yet never flinched nor thought to flee, But held both hands out un­resistingly— No change, no blanching of the wine-red cheek. He waited while we came, and bade us wreak 

All thy decree: yea laughed, and made 
my hest Easy, till I for very shame confessed And said: 'O stranger, not of mine own 
will I bind thee, but this bidding to fulfil Who sent me.' '' 
King Pentheus is warned by his grandfather, Cadmus, and by an old prophet, Theiresias, who are going as pilgrims to the shrine of Dionysus to offer themselves and their lives to his service, but their words have no more effect than others, nor is he sobered by the destruction of his castle by fire and earthquake, and he still thinks he can fight against the God-man. Now, the "spiritual upheaval" takes a different aspect, and his fury is fed by "dreams" from Dionysus, who leads him on and on in his delusion that he shall approach the God-man’s devotees at their sacred rites. Assuming the dress and outer forms of a devotee, the king persists in his foolhardy sacrilegious project, and the tragedy of his fearful death at the hands of his distraught mother is a dramatic horror which conveys to an audience the ultimate fate of those who resist the Divine, and have to learn their lesson through suffering, which may involve their own kin and nation as well. 
The Chorus has forebodings of the king's fate, before the end of his life. Even in madness, his egotism is emphasised, and the guise of a devotee which he adopts on his last journey to his destruction would make his position ludicrous, but for the atmosphere of impending tragedy. 
His Mother, in her delusion, sees in the severed head of her son, which she holds, that of a lion, whose limbs have been torn by her own hands, and she calls on her son to witness to the triumph, and calls as well as on her father, and the townsfolk. 
Symbolically, the "death of the lion" in man, is a sign of the transmutation of generative force into spiritual energy, and in that aspect, the death of the opposer, represents the dissolution of those powers who war against God, the energy of their unregenerate nature being transmuted by the spiritual work and life of the God-man. Here, then, in this final tragedy, lies concealed another manifestation of the spiritual upheaval" at work. 

Nor are the followers of Dionysus unaffected; indeed, they more than all are able to respond, and their bliss and spiritual consciousness are in marked contrast to the fate of those who oppose him, or like Cadmus, are on the way to him, and have yet to learn more from suffering before they are ready to receive that closer contact. 
To those over whom the delusion of the reality of the world of the senses, has no power, the death of the body and the dissolution of settled forms and institutions, are, in the work of the God-man the effect of a "spiritual upheaval". Throughout this great drama, the character of Dionysus is consistent, whether in allaying the fears of his devotees, or revealing the inner meaning of the events that disturb and frighten them, increasing their understand­ing, or in his relationship to the ignorant soldier, doing his duty, as he understood it, or, again, with the king, as a blind actor, in the part he was taking; gentle, yet unwavering, selfless and loving, but with deep insight into the different characters before him; unfailing wisdom in the use of those very limitations in their consciousness and at the same time, raising that consciousness higher.
