
THE world is passing through a crisis. The entire humanity is in a chaos. Confusion is worse confounded. Intelligence has ceased to think in the fields of Reformation and Regeneration. The policy of drift is dividing society and man is on the verge of a precipice, his natural instincts and impulses having died out due to selfishness and rank materialism. The world war may start to a finish or may not start; but all of us are dying every moment. Under such a state of things civilization is doomed to finish. 
What is the remedy or is there no remedy? We say there is a remedy and that is the only remedy. It is the spiritual Regen­eration of the civilised peoples of the world. Reason and Science, the handmaids of the Spirit in man must change their courses and the Objective Realities must be adjudged on the subjective Analysis irrespective of personal equations or national inclinations or even international evaluations; in other words, an aggressive spiritualisation of things material must take place resulting in man becoming a spiritual dynamo. Who should bell the cat? Not the kings, nor the politicians; not the statesmen, nor the diplomats; not the Social Reformers nor even the Universities but 

only seers or sages. India has always been the land of seers and sages and we trust that there are such seers even today. They are in the background as in all material advancement of the general communities and history has taught us again and again that dynamic personalities appear on the scene when the entire creation seems to be wiped off under satanic influences. If these two factors, viz., the catastrophe threatening the entire civilization and that sages and seers are the only saviours of the Races, it is clear why we welcome Shri Meher Baba into our midst and hail him as our Saviour. His one Theme of Life is 'Love and Service' and his plane of action is the entire Humanity. 
It is true that spiritual uplift is seen partially amongst mankind at some time or other, but nobody has really identified himself with the entire Races so far in evolving a scheme for the spiritual uplift of the entire Humanity. Shri Meher Baba is really Universal in that, that Brahmins, Hindus, Mohom­edans, Christians, Zoroastrians, etc., are working together under his banner for the Common Cause. 
Perhaps for the second time in world’s history one religious leader or a Sadguru wants to awaken the Humanity to the Consciousness of their pristine purity and spiritual Reality. When that is done successfully, we see only two castes, viz., Caste Divine and Caste Satanic. The former shall absorb the entire civilized races into its bosom and the spiritual Union thus effected shall drive away the devils out of the earth. Thus only, millennium shall set in. 
Here we see the seeds of Universal Religion sown, which shall stand for all times. Meher Baba and Byramangala in Mysore Raj will stand for the founding of the Spiritual Congress on the basis of (1) Oneness of God, (2) God, the means and God, the End, (3) selfless Love and selfless service and (4) equality of the races. These four corner-stones of this wonderful super structure of the Spiritual Congress of the world shall be a welcome thing to the aggrieved peoples of the Earth who shall be drawn together under the Common Banner of Sadguru Meher Baba. 
All hail to Thee, Thou Saviour of the afflicted Humanity! 
