
I FIRST heard of Shri Meher Baba through a letter from a friend in November 1932, asking me if I would like to meet him, as he was then in the United States on his first visit from India. 
The name sounded strange to me, and I wondered what sort of a spiritual being a Perfect Master was, though I did vaguely consider that I might be interested. However, I put the letter away on my desk, and in the rush of New York events, I forgot all about it until one morning early, I received a telephone call from the same friend. Would I come up to Harmon that very day, thirty miles up the Hudson river from New York City? Baba was there and I could see him for a few moments. My mind was crowded with engagements, never had a day seemed so full, and the idea of the country seemed a long way off in the Fall of the year. 
I opened my mouth to make the conventional excuses, and then something happened—and I said "Yes'', instead. I had just been looking at my calendar, covered with appointments, and suddenly it had become blank—only much later did I perceive the symbol of this white new page. What actually took place was not on the calendar, but in my mind as my seemingly urgent affairs passed through swiftly: as a drowning man is purported to review his life. 
Each one suddenly faded in importance—someone else could do this to-day, or I could put that off till to-morrow. How grateful now I am that it was not the meeting with Baba which I put off, for I have since seen the effect of one day's delay resulting in a long period of time before meeting the Master. I have also noticed how the 'call' seems to come when people are busiest; or is 

* First appeared in Occult Review, London, September 1934. 
MEHER BABA JOURNAL 
it that we feel the draw of the world's affairs most when the spiritual impulse calls? 
Imagine, I had only to be gone a day, yet here I was making such rearrangements. My city life had indeed caged my independent spirit! A friend from California, with whom I had an engagement that day, I asked instead to drive out with me to Harmon, and I encouraged her almost apolo­getically by saying that she might be interested in the motor drive up there. I wonder now if it were merely by chance that we had planned to meet that day, for otherwise I never would have thought of asking her to go with me to see a Persian Mystic, because I knew she was not a student of Eastern philosophy nor had she been even brought up with interest in Western religion. I then believed that these were special insignia of spirituality. 
My motoring instructions were to follow up the Hudson river and turn off into a country road shortly before reaching the town of Harmon. After a mile to turn left into a small lane, which led along the sloping edge of the little Croton river. I had to ask for the ''Stone-house-by-the-River" but there was no one of whom to inquire. The adventure now began to seize us; this lane did not look as if it led to any place—would there really be a habitation at that end? 
Tall dark pines grew along the winding banks of the river and the road seemed almost as if it might slide into beautiful green waters below. Somehow there was a distinct Japanese contour to the valley; was it perhaps Nikko instead of the Croton within reach of New York? 
By this time we had shaken off even thoughts of the city and were eager with anticipation. Slowly proceeding on the uncertain road for quite a distance, we suddenly saw before us a most picturesque house built of native stone and wood, the window sills all painted red. Against the dark green pines, this bright note seemed cheering and the house appeared to us like one in a fairy story. Several cars parked at the side told us that we were not the only visitors. 
Upon entering the door, which stood open, we found a stir of people, perhaps twenty, going and coming f'rom various 

rooms. My friend of the telephone conversation, greeted us and informed us that luncheon would be ready presently as his wife and friends were now helping to prepare it. Everyone seemed to have something to do, so we were not introduced to the others until we were all seated together at a long refectory table. Some of the party had been out there since Baba arrived, and others we could distinguish by their city attire, had just come, as we had, for the day. 
We tried to find out what Baba was like, but everyone replied "Wait and see". This only served to quicken our curiosity. But later we understood it, when the same question was asked us, and were at a loss to describe him so that the newcomer could understand. The luncheon consisted of a delicious soup, well prepared salad, with cheese, fruits and nuts for dessert. It was interesting to find that most of the people present were ordinarily vegetarians. I learned through the conversation of the others that Baba and his Indian disciples were dining on rice and curry upstairs. 
When would I meet the  Master? 
For some reason I felt I should not inquire, but wait quietly for the call. I had been told that Baba knew I had arrived with my friend from California, but nothing more was said. I had no idea if there were perhaps a ceremony attached to it, and we would have to wait for the appointcd hour. So after luncheon, my friend and I talked with one of the disciples f'rom England, but still no summons came. A distinct feeling of peace pervaded the house; and we became more and more lost in interest about the English disciple's visit to Baba's Ashram in India. He informed me that Baba was considered by many thousands there to be a Sadguru. I knew little on the subject of Masters, so he had to explain that the nearest interpretation of this spiritual title was "Perfect Guide". 
Suddenly we were interrupted by a message brought by one of the others from Baba, and the English disciple hurriedly left us. 
I glanced out of the window at the beauty of the sun shining on the dark pine trees but hardly had time to rise and follow the vista down to the 
river before the disciple returned. He said abruptly, "Baba wants to see you". I felt not at all prepared at that moment, but rose to follow him upstairs. I had formulated no questions to ask Baba, and walked slowly up the steps, trying rapidly to think of something vital to inquire. No problems in my own life seemed impossible of solution in some way or other through my own efforts, so I tried to formulate some purely spiritual questions, but I reached the door with nothing ready. Then I thought it best to let the Master do the talking, but remembered that he was maintaining silence, which he has kept for "spiritual reasons" for many years. Still in a vacuum of trying to think, I crossed the threshold of his room and felt rather than saw two or three figures in Indian dress on either side of me. Perhaps it was the English disciple leading the way into the room which momentarily obstructed my view of Baba, or it was my own churning brain which clouded my quick perception, for I had taken several steps into the room before my eyes rested on Baba. Immediately 
my feeling was one of recognition. All the way to the end of the room where he was seated, I tried to recall where I had seen him before. The feeling was one of familiarity, like meeting a friend in a foreign land—a friend whom one has known well, like since childhood, only since that earlier period the appearance has changed. 
Still in the process of recalling, I arrived where Baba was seated, with sandalled feet folded in front of him, and the sun shining on his beautiful hair. His remarkable eyes reminded me of a Persian print but they were so alive with a thousand dancing fires in them that I realized that I had never seen anyone like Baba before. Nowhere in my world travels had I seen his likeness, nor did he seemed to fit into a nationality. 
Upon this close observation my recognition ceased, but he smilingly motioned me to be seated by him on the orange­coloured divan. I still felt completely at ease and at home with him. I was unconscious of any personality dividing us— either of his or of mine. I can, now, only liken it to being 
seated by a quiet pool at the foot of a great mountain with only the sense of peace in nature, newly born…… This feeling never left me, although outwardly I was inter­rupted by the English disciple reading from the board to which Baba was pointing. His finger flew gracefully over the letters of the alphabet board, .and the message was that Baba was pleased to see me. I informed Baba that I had tried to recall, where I had seen him before, and the English disciple interposed and said that a 'remembrance' happens to many people who meet Baba seemingly for the first time, because they rnay be old 'contacts' in other lives. I thought perhaps this may happen often, but it was a new experiencc for me to be so familiar with someone so foreign. Then the disciple enquired if I wanted to ask Baba any questions. One did come to me: there was a very dear friend who was suffering from a nervous breakdown, and Baba had previously met her while in New York. I knew no disease had been found, and yet she was critically ill—what could be done? The doctors seemed only to cause the dis­turbance to increase by their treatments. Baba nodded under­standingly, and wrote that she would get well, that I should leave the matter to him, and to bring her out to see him again. It all sounded so simple, but I realized how much opposition would be raised by those who surrounded her to the idea of motoring her out to Harmon, but I promised to do what I could. Then I asked Baba about certain feelings I had all my life, for example: of doing some act in certain surround­ings and suddenly perceiving that I had done that identical thing in the same place and way before—was it in a dream or actually had I experienced these circumstances before? 
There were other experiences too when I had thought of someone at a distance and had pictured them in need or mental distress, although I had no reason to believe that they were otherwise than well and happy; and always if I responded by solicitous word or financial assistance, I was 'just in time'— although it took period of the letter to reach there. What were these feelings and  intuitions? Why could I not 'turn them on', instead of coming in a flash as if by 'chance'? How could this fleeting knowledge become 'permanent'? 

Now my questions tumbled out and Baba smiled comprehendingly. I had the impression of receiving his answer directly in my mind, while the slower communication through his fast moving finger on the board seemed like an echo as it was read out by the disciple. If I think now of the actual replies which reached me through the ear, they seemed very unsatisfactory, because al1 I recall was the disciple repeating that I should wait and in time I should know all. Perhaps to an Easterner who be­lieved in many lives, this would suffice, but I was a Westerner brought up in a modern age, whose motto was, ''Do it now". 
Somehow, though, the inward answer seemed to me completely satisfactory, but as there were no words, it remains today only an impression. At the time I experi­enced the consciousness that all things were possible. I saw behind the veil of physical Iimitations and was satisfied to wait for the spiritual experiences. 
A tap on the board, and the disciple informed me that Baba meant my time was ended—could it be that this timeless session was only ten minutes which was allotted for each interview? Although I was brought back to the remembrance of the clock, I still knew the quiet of timelessness within me. We shook hands and I walked quietly out of the room—so happy, that descending the stairs, my feet did not seem to touch them and my body felt as light as joy itself. 
My friend who had driven out with me, was waiting anxiously below for my impression and I tried to tell her; then I ended by saying, "You will see for yourself." Presently she was called away to see the Master, and others came into the room. To one lady whom I had known but slightly before I found myself talking as if I had known her all my life. Previously I had thought her cold and restrained, but now she seemed glowing and intimate, as one who understands profoundly, for had she not been through the 

same beautiful experience of meeting Baba? I felt a quickening of kinship with all in the room, a peculiar oneness with all I saw. After a short time my friend returned, looking radiant. Never had I seen her so beautiful. 
Then came the moment to leave, and for several miles neither of us spoke. Finally my thoughts of Baba, were carried on aloud, by my friend enquiring, "what did Baba ask you to do? My impression was that he had asked me to leave all to him, for I did not recall any direct intructions, Asking her in turn what Baba had told her, I found her interview had been very different from mine. Baba had given her specific instructions about medi­tation each day and certain words to repeat mentally. At the present, she could not remember the mantram she was to say, and was disturbed at her forgetfulness. For certainty, she had asked Baba to spell out the words twice. Little else was said between us on the journey, but we had a feeling of kindred thought and spiritual rapport. 
Two days later she called me on the telephone: Would I go out to Harmon again? I was surprised, for the first visit seemed so complete. I did not hope for a second meeting with Baba. Yes, she had received a message from Baba to come, just as she was thinking very hard that morning, and trying vainly to recall the words Baba had given her for meditation, and was even considering telephoning up the house at Harmon to enquire, when her telephone bell rang. The American disciple who had originally called me, informed her that Baba wanted to see her again. Surely she must believe Baba knew that she was thinking of him, and she wanted me to return with her to enquire the words. Would I go? Then I rcmembered Baba's instructions to me to bring out my sick friend. So our second visit to Harmon came about through the course of events. It was difficult to get my sick friend to think she was able to ride so far, but she wanted to go, and as good fortune would have it, there were no restraining advisers in the house at the time. In the "Stone-house-by-the-River", we found again the same wonderful atmosphere and returned 

home with a deepening sense of satisfaction and beauty experienced. 
The time came for Baba’s departure for India. He and his disciples had been on a trip to Boston and were now staying at an hotel in New York, and I ventured to call upon him to say farewell. Baba had rooms in the Astor Hotel facing Broadway, and as I waited to see him, I noticed glaring theatre signs across the way. Conspicuous among them was a tremendous advertisement for a play, "Strictly Dishonourable". Then I looked down and saw the throbbing traffic below, characteristic of Western speed. I might have wondered at his choice of this noisy thoroughfare if I had not heard that Baba looked upon the tremendous "energy" of the West, which Americans now express materially as potential spiritual force, which will be awakened by the Perfect Master. 
Presently it was announced that Baba wanted to see me, together with the husband and wife through whom I originally met him at Harmon, and who were now staying at the Hotel. Baba greeted us with that radiance which was more than 
a smile, and gave the effect of sunlight streaming into a dark room. 
Motioning for us to be seated beside him, he desired that we meditate together a few minutes. Instead of going into abstraction, I was aware of tears pouring unexpectedly down my face—tears which seemed to me meaningless at the time, as I felt neither joy nor sorrow. I only hoped I could control them before the others opened their eyes, but was not in the slightest degree aware of the depths within me which Baba was thawing. While I instantly recog­nised him upon meeting, still I was spiritually slumbering, and did not even guess the effect of this encounter upon my life or the awakening change in the recesses of my being. A link, I think, was forged between these two souls meditating and myself for the later performance of Baba's work. At least so it has worked out in the development of later months. 
Three short interviews were all I had with Baba during his first visit to the United States and I was not ordained to see him again for a year and a half, yet his work has become my continuous and chief objective. Spring has entered my soul through the inspiration of Baba, and I cannot yet foresee the unfoldment of summer. The unique part of my experience is that as time goes on, though I may be far from Baba in distance, the impression on my 

life becomes continually stronger. He plants the 'seed' and the flower springs up whether the gardener is there nor not. Life itself cultivates the soil, while the Divine Love which Baba sheds, warms it to grow. Baba always returns to my life, as the Sun returns in its cycles. 
