TO be told by Baba not to worry, may seem a common­place and simple thing. Those unaccustomed to his ways or newly meeting him, might probably wonder why he bothers to mention the obvious, for we have our worries. Especially it might come as a shock to those who desire to hear from him learned metaphysical or philo­sophical discussions. Baba's con­cern is to awaken the love within us how to live and become real human beings. So his appeal is to the heart; directly and simply he gets right down to the very roots of our being. Invariably he says, "Don't worry, I will help you. Love me". These words, like the words of Jesus* are deep and significant, for they are a clarion call to us, to rouse ourselves, to awaken from our smug little outlook on life—to yearn for a richer fuller deeper way of living. 
• 
If we want to understand Baba's ways, we have only to pause and think a little to realize that the fundamental cause of most of the trouble that is shaking the foundations of our world to­day, is worry and its inevitable sister, fear. Everywhere we see peoples and nations in the grip of this worrying business. The life of the individual makes up the life and character of the nation, and they in turn react on other peoples and nations. We worry because we lack health, possessions, money or lands. We poison our lives at the Source, and that affects our adjustments to each other, and then comes intolerance, greed, persecutions. We have not got the right kind of faith—the faith that helps us recognize the rights and needs of all men, to live peacefully in brotherhood, and to know that we are all part of the Whole. If we 
had, we would know, as Hafiz says: 
“The object of all religion is alike—all men seek their Beloved. O, all the world is love’s dwelling; why talk of a mosque or a church . . . ?” 
Even from the purely physical health standpoint, there is abundant evidence of the damage caused by worry. In an article in an American magazine, with the heading, "Worry the direct cause of many physical ailments" George McCray says: 
"Medical men have long called certain ill-understood symptoms 'functional' thereby segregating them from organic diseases in which the ailing organs show anatomical defects. Many a baffled doctor disposes of functional cases with the pronouncement 'You only imagine you are sick. . . Don't worry, go home, forget it.' Such patients drift from one doctor to another, and sometimes are cured by faith-healers. It is only within recent years that the study of the emotions as factors in illness has received serious attention in medical schools and research centres, and it is being discovered that in a wide range of diseases, emotional states show themselves to be a complicating often a controlling influence." 
This shows that worry poisons our systems, and though the doctor knows this and can tell us about it, he cannot cure our worries. Most of us worry about trivial unimportant things that never happen. It goes through our household affairs, our personal affairs, our world affairs. We sap ourselves, our judgment gets warped and we are thrown physically and mentally out of gear. Life goes out of focus, as if we were looking at a blurred photograph. 
Why do we worry so much? With a lot of people, it is because they feel an eternal dissatisfaction. They want things different; something eludes them always. Small wonder that in their desperate desire to be free from worry, they follow false gods, thinking they will be led to Utopia. They are deceived by words and grandiose promises, and are "let down" invariably, for they fail to realise that the remedy lies within themselves, and it is only a Perfect Master, like Baba, that can give them the right answer to all that troubles them and the world-to-day, because he has himself attained freedom, and can help others to this freedom. If we turn to him, he will help us, and in him we can find faith and hope and strength. The very fact of his telling us "Don't worry", helps us and gives us the power for it loosens up within us the causes of our worries. To love him and obey him is the next step—it is so much easier with him behind us, for it is a spiritual solution, and no amount of physical or mental strivings can solve our problems. Baba does help us to change our attitude to life, and it is not merely a negative attitude that Baba asks us to cultivate, but a positive joyful acceptance of experiences, in their right focus. Not to be caught up in the. passing phases of illusion (maya), "To be in the world but not of it," does not mean a shrinking from life. We have our parts to play. And to withdraw from life to practise austerities, to sit in a cave to meditate, does not necessarily mean spiritual advancement. It would not be right for the majority, and Baba seems to pre­fer us to be active and dynamic, though he wants us to accept whatever experience is necessary for our spiritual progress and development. 

Baba helps us in so many ways not to worry or fear, and to develop this right attitude to life. It sounds so simple, yet most of us find it so difficult. "Don't worry" says Baba to someone, and usually, if that person is receptive, he soon begins to realize what a worrier he is; even though it may have been in the deeps of his sub-conscious self, and the measure of the new inrush of life that fills him, is the measure of Baba's help. 
It is a subtle and pernicious foe that we have to fight, but if we follow Baba's advice we soon find that troubles and fears begin to vanish, because the things that were important to us before do not matter any more. Why should we worry when the Master is there, when we can turn to him and love him and serve him? 
We must try to know and understand ourselves truly, for Baba says "Everything is within us, the secret of life, God''. We are part of all; it is the veils of illusion that prevent our seeing clearly. We 

have gradually to shed these veils, to lose our ego to die to the lower self, and we will awaken like a dreamer from sleep. 
Sometime Baba, in order to help us, brings our faults up to boiling point. The person who worries, worries more than ever. A climax comes, an emotional upheaval takes place within the person. Then if they have the courage to face up to themselves, and to realise the fault lies within themselves, in a flash, the whole thing clears up, and they are free from that particular worry. If they lack courage or have not enough love or faith to trust Baba, then they perhaps turn against him or blame him for their own weaknesses. 
Baba is always there, waiting, ready to guide and teach us, and whatever our weaknesses or worries, we can go to him, and with patient love he will help us again and again. 
Baba’s telling us not to worry, had an added significance at the moment, for we are living in thrilling and trying times. The approaching spiritual age calls for our recognition of the Verity of the Brotherhood of Man. All our resources and powers of endurance will be taxed in the struggle. Out of chaos, order comes. Baba stands like a beacon, beckening us on. He shows us by his example the heights we can reach with perfect poise and equilibrium, he walks the earth. His Love is our inspiration, and if there are dark days, and all goes from us, we need not worry or despair. Might he not be saying: *"All which I took from thee, did 
but take, Not for thy harms, But just that Thou mightest seek it 
in My Arms All which thy child's mistake Fancies is lost, I have stored up for 
thee at home. Rise, clasp My hands and come." ... 
