Divine secrets are more arrestive and effective when clothed in parables.” 
It is historically related that Sultan kingdom incognito to acquaint himself Mahmud of Ghazni (Afghanistan) was first hand with the state of affairs and in the habit of going out into his people. One night seeing four 
people moving about in a suspicious manner, he accosted them as to who they were. The reply was that they were thieves by profession and were out on business. 
Sultan Mahmud immediately took in the situation, and assured them that himself having come out with similar intentions, he would like to join them for the night's venture. Agreeing with the proposition and feeling more confidence which very often number inspires, they proposed a daring attempt at thieving in the palace of the Sultan himself. The King readily fell in with the idea, but wanted to ascertain each one's qualification for that risky job. Thereupon the first thief replied: "I can understand the language of animals;" the second one said: "I have very keen olfactory nerves; I can smell the location of any buried treasure;" the third thief explained: "I can open the best or the worst of locks without the help of a key;" and the fourth one affirmed: "If I see a person even once in the darkest of nights, I can recognize him in a million." 
It was now for the King to state his own qualification, and so he said: "I have the power to bring about the release of a man about to be hanged, by merely nodding my head." On this the thieves became highly overjoyed and confessed say­ing, ''Brother, your power is an exceptional one. Now that you are with us, we are afraid of nothing. We can do and dare anything we like. Hurrah, let's go." 
All the five headed towards the objective for the night, i.e., the palace of the Sultan. On the way hearing a dog bark, the King asked the one who knew the language of animals as to what the dog was saying. The thief replied, "The dog is telling that one of us is a king but refuses to say any further." On entering the palace precincts, the specialist amongst them pointed out the location of the treasure, and another one succeeded in opening the lock thereon without the help of a key. Having helped themselves to a large booty, the thieves left for their destination. The King also parted company, having very astutely ascer­tained the names and addresses of his confederates. 
The next day the news of 

the robbery in the royal palace created  of our professional skill, but now when  
quite a sensation in the city and suburbs.  are you going to play your part and nod  
The King issued orders for the arrest of  your head so that we be saved from the  
the four thieves, and further directed  jaws of death?" The King appreciated  
that they be taken to the gallows straight  the pointedness of this appeal, and  
without producing them before him.  ordered them to be released forthwith.  
Further the final act of hanging was not  It can thus be seen that so long as the  
to be undertaken without specific orders  King (Light of Knowledge) was  
from him.  identifying himself with the thieves  
The four thieves, finding themselves  (darkness of ignorance), everyone of  
beneath the shadow of death, the  them was feeling guilty, and every act is  
gallows, remembered their fifth partner  tried to be differentiated into good and  
of the night's venture, One of them said,  bad. But no sooner the King came into  
"The dog informed us last night that one  its own and the knowledge dawned  
of us was a king, and I bet my life the  upon him that the action of the thieves  
fifth one was the King." The fourth one  was in reality the action of the King  
said, “If the new companion of the night  himself, then automatically the problem  
was really the King, I can spot him out  of guilt vanished. In such a state of  
very easily." Thereupon they requested  absolute oneness and identification of  
the executioners, by way of their last  interest, who is really the culprit and  
wish before death, to be taken to the  who goes to the gallows? It is in the  
presence of the King. The King when  domain of duality only that this  
informed allowed their request.  differentiation obtains, but the spiritual  
No sooner they found themselves in  fact is that the doer of the act, the  
the presence of the King, the thief with  prompter thereof and the act itself are  
a memory for faces remarked, "Sire, we  all one.  
four gave practical demonstration  
.  
