On the banks of the river Krishna there is a sacred place called Karvir. From ancient times this place is considered to be sacred, because some of the greatest saints have lived there. At this place there lived a Brahmin with his wife and son who was married to a young girl named Sakhu. Sakhu was very devoted to God; but other members of her family were indifferent about spiritual things. 
The father-in-law and the mother-in-law of Sakhu not only did not love Sakhu but troubled her in many ways. Sakhu's husband did not take active part in tormenting her, but he never prevented his parents from their cruel pursuit. Sakhu had to work all day long, but she was not even given sufficient food to eat. She did not get any time to worship God whom she loved even more than her own life. Her mother-in­law did not hesitate to give her a good thrashing even for the slightest mistake; yet Sakhu never grumbled, and passed her days quietly with the name of the Lord on her lips. 
Once when Sakhu had been to the Krishna in order to fetch water, she saw many pilgrims on the banks of the river. Some pilgrims were bathing in the river, some were washing their clothes, some were cooking food and others were en­gaged in some other items of daily routine; but all of them were uttering the name of God with their lips. Their hearts were filled with great devotion and their eyes beamed with joy with the thought of the Beloved Lord. Sakhu made some enquiries about the place where the pilgrims were going; and when she heard that they were going to Pandharpur, she felt that it was the God-sent opportunity for going to Pandharpur and fulfilling her long-felt desire of seeing the image of her Master Shri Vithoba. 
Pandharpur is situated on the banks of the river Chandrabhaga. In this place there once lived a great devotee of Shri Vithoba named Pundlik. Once upon a time Shri Vithoba came to see Pundlik at Pandharpur. At that time Pundlik was attending upon his parents— who were ill; and as he was engaged in this piece of service towards his parents, he offered to Shri Vithoba a brick which was lying at hand to stand upon, and Shri Vithoba stood there on the brick waiting for a long time until Pundlik had finished his service. In memory of this event a temple of Shri Vithoba has been built at Pandharpur. Every year in the months of "Ashadha" and "Kartik" a great pilgrimage is held at Pandharpur. Formerly, when there were no railway trains, pilgrims used to go to Pandharpur on foot. But even in our times when there are railway trains many pilgrims go there on foot in order to express real devotion and sacrifice. 

For a long time Sakhu had been seeking an opportunity to see the image of her Beloved Master Shri Vithoba, and when she saw the pilgrims going to Pandharpur, she naturally seized the opportunity and decided not to go home but to accompany the pilgrims. As she was anticipating the sight of Shri Vithoba, she was so much filled with divine love and happiness that she spoke about her desire to go with the pilgrims to another woman who had like herself come to the river Krishna for taking water. The woman at once went to Sakhu's mother-in-law, and told her about Sakhu's intention of going to Pandharpur. She further accused Sakhu of having loose character, as she was heed1ess about her husband and was prepared to go to a foreign place in the company of strangers. 
When Sakhu's mother-in-law heard all this, she became greatly excited and at once asked her son to go to the river and bring Sakhu back. All of them thought that the reputation of the family was at stake; and so the son immediately went to the river and brought Sakhu, dragging her by the hand. After Sakhu was brought home she was tied to a post and locked in a room, and as the pilgrimage at Pandharpur was to take place after fifteen 

days they decided to keep her locked in the room for fifteen days without any food or water. 
For three days Sakhu remained without food and water tied to the post. Day and night she worshipped the Lord in her heart and requested Him to take her to Pandharpur. On the fourth day at midnight she felt that some one was unlocking the door. The door was unlocked, and to her great surprise Sakhu saw one unknown woman in the room. The woman at once began to untie her, and she asked Sakhu whether she wanted to go to Pandharpur. Sakhu was so much overjoyed at the idea of going to Pandharpur that she did not even care to know who this strange woman was, how she came there and unlocked the door, and she did not even ask her her name. She only entreated this woman to take her to her Beloved Lord, and the woman then took her to Pandharpur in one night. 
Sakhu had left her home at the awkward hour of midnight without caring for what her people would think about it; but her family members knew nothing about her departure. The next day when 
Sakhu's mother-in-law came into the room, she did not discover anything unusual, as Sakhu's place was taken by another woman who looked and behaved exactly like Sakhu and who was tied to the self­same post. 
Like her family members Sakhu herself was blissfully oblivious of the fact that her place had been taken by some other woman; and she spent her time at Pandharpur in absorbing the divine atmosphere of the place. Even when it was time for her to return home, she decided not to go back but remain with the Lord, and spend her time in the divine bliss of his company till she breathed her last. The same day as she was meditating, her soul went off to the Lord leaving her body dead and motionless. One of the pilgrims was from Sakhu's own place, and when he saw the dead body with its eyes fixed upon the image of Shri Vithoba, he at once recognized her. And thinking that it was his duty he took Sakhu's dead body to the banks of the Chandra­bhaga and burnt it to ashes. Then he went to Karvir to inform Sakhu's father-in-law about 

the death of Sakhu. 
In the meanwhile the woman who had taken the place of Sakhu in her home and looked exactly like her remained tied to the post for several days until Sakhu's husband took pity upon her; and having untied her, he asked her to prepare food for all the members of the family. She did as she was asked to do, and to the surprise of all the members of the family the food seemed to have an exceptionally good taste. The father-in-law and the mother-in-law of Sakhu were so pleased with her that from that day they never thought of getting angry with her, and Sakhu's husband felt so much drawn to her that for­getting his past behaviour towards his wife he actually began to love her ardently. The woman was so very similar to Sakhu in all respects that none of the members of the family could suspect that she was not the real Sakhu, and everything in the family went on smoothly. 
Now the person who was acting as the exact substitute of Sakhu was none other than Shri Vithoba who was pleased with  Sakhu's devotion and took on the appearance of Sakhu in order that the members of the family should not know about Sakhu's having gone to Pandharpur. When Yogamaya Rukmini Mata, the wife of Shri Vithoba, saw that Sakhu was dead and that there was no possibility of her going home and relieving Shri Vithoba, she went to the place where Sakhu was burnt, and looking at the remains of her body with divine sight she brought them to life. When Sakhu was thus revived, Rukmini Mata asked her to go home. Sakhu argued that she had decided not to go home in that life, but Rukmini Mata told her that as this was her new birth, her vow had been fulfilled and that she could go home without any breach of her deter­mination. She also assured Sakhu that she would no longer be harassed by the members of her family. But she did not tell Sakhu how Shri Vithoba had been playing her role, for she knew that if Sakhu came to know about this sacrifice of the Lord, she would immediately break down under the weight of the thought of how the Lord had to suffer on account of her. 

Sakhu then bowed down before Yogamaya Rukmini Mata and went back to her place. When Sakhu went up to the river Krishna, she met the woman who had released her from her imprisonment and who later on filled her place by taking on the appearance of Sakhu. This time the woman was not in the guise of Sakhu. So Sakhu did not suspect anything about what had happened in her absence; but as she recognised the woman as being the same person who had released her from imprisonment, she was filled with the sense of gratitude, and at once fell at her feet. The woman then asked Sakhu to go home with the pot of water which she had brought, and bade her goodbye. Then entering into the waters of the Krishna the Lord went to his divine abode. 
When Sakhu reached home, she found that the man who had burnt her dead body at Pandharpur was informing the members of her family about her death. He was telling how Sakhu died at the feet of the image of Shri Vithoba and how he burnt her dead body on the banks of the river Chandrabhaga. 
But the members of Sakhu's family naturally could not believe in the story. They said that Sakhu had never left home and that it was impossible for Sakhu to have gone for the pilgrimage as she had been locked in a room. 
It was at this point of their conversation that Sakhu reached home, and naturally when they saw her, they all asked her about the truth of the incident. To the surprise of all, Sakhu admitted that some strange woman had released her from her bondage and that she had gone to Pandharpur. On hearing this the members of Sakhu's family asked her about the identity of the woman who was working in her place and who looked exactly like her. It was now that the whole affair became clear to Sakhu. She realised how the Lord himself had first taken the disguise of the woman who released her, and then took on her own appearance to act in her place. She felt greatly grieved at the thought that the Lord had to suffer so much for her in the guise of his own devotee. She told all that the woman who filled her place in her absence was none other 

than Shri Vithoba himself. Having end of all obstacles in Sakhu's seen this miracle of the Lord, devotion towards her Lord and Sakhu's relations repented for their Master Shri Vithoba. Since then all former cruel treatment of Sakhu, the family members lived in love and the event proved to be the and harmony. 
