
“Heart are you great enough For a Love that never tires? O heart, are you great enough 
for Love? I have heard of thorns and briars.” 
— TENNYSON. 
ALL Saints, Mystics and Lovers of God know these thorns and briars, for the path they tread, bears them as a signpost. Once started, travellers on that path cannot, even if they would, turn back, for they are consumed ceaselessly with the love and desire for the Divine, it is a nostalgia or a glimpse that haunts them, and drives them ever on in more Love for the Beloved. If the end be a martyrdom or an ecstacy, both are the same, for they go with the Beloved's name on their lips, and a certainty of knowing that no cruelty of the world can take away. So went St. Joan of Arc to the stake, rather than deny her Voices; so was Mansur Hallaj crucified by the ignorant masses, because he 
would not detract his declaration that He was God. So St. Francis of Assisi turned away from a life of of sin, consumed with love for Jesus, and humbly and willingly endured hardships and poverty embracing the lepers, hailing all as his brethren, "Brother Sun" and "Sister Moon" for everywhere was the face of his Beloved, Jesus. So, Akhenaton, the God-intoxicated Pharoah of Egypt, struggling against the worn out creeds of a corrupt priesthood, sang the praises of the One God, in words that show the strength and truth of his Vision. 
What is this divine fever that through the ages has moved countless men and women to renounce joyfully all the things that the rest of mankind hold so dear? Possessions, fame, security,  family, in fact everything that the majority spend their lives and energies accumulating. Words­worth glimpsed something of the Truth when he said:— 

*“Not in entire forgetfulness 
And not in utter nakedness 
But trailing clouds of glory 
do we come 
From God Who is our home." 
At the first stirrings within of this Divine Consciousness, we are filled with the longing to return from whence we came; coming unconsciously, we must go back consciously. That is the great drama and struggle. God, the Infinite, through us, attains full consciousness of Himself. As drops from that Divine Ocean, we must go through the evolutionary process, from the lowest forms, until as man we attain full consciousness; but as it is the destiny of man to attain God-consciousness (which is the cons­ciousness of his Real Self). Through the process of re­incarnation he takes different earthly forms to gain the necessary experience for this full develop­ment; when he desires the Divine, he takes the first step on the upward path. 
In mystic language, the path is likened to a razor's edge, as the Lover must endure trials and hardships. Maya (illusion) tries to hold him back, but he learns that it is through the unreal  that  he must come to the Real. Now, he knows the Goal, and nothing can hold him back. It is for him, as Hafiz, the great Persian Mystic, said: 
"He who would tread my Path, 
the throng of grief will find 
What pilgrim hath in fear of this, 

his quest resigned. 
Thou knowest well, he who 
attains true perfect love Is he upon whose soul, grief as a 
lamp, has shined.'' 
Also in the words of the Spanish Mystic, Ramon Lull:— 
"Pensively, the lover trod those paths that lead to the Beloved. Now he stumbled and fell amongst thorns, but they were to him as flowers and as a bed of love." 
By himself, man can go a great part of the way, but for the final and blissful Liberation, he must contact a Perfect Master. It is for this reason that Masters take human form, to help others to reach the consciousness that they have attained. 
We are told that there are always a certain number of Masters in the world, but they live and work apart from and unknown to the general public. It is only at certain periods, 

* From Quotations of Immortality—Wordsworth. 
known as Avataric or Messianic, when civilisation has again reached material heights but spiritually is at a low level, that One, comes into the open, and declares—shows Himself as the Avatar (Messiah) in order to give a spiritual push to the whole of humanity. He is called in different ages, by different titles, but His mission is always the same, to show the world, according to the capacity of the period, by His example, how life should be lived. He attracts by Love alone, and to follow Him, the heart must indeed "be great enough for Love''. His is not an easy way but those who love Him, in any age, know that it is the only way, for He awakens Love in them; they are changed in the twinkling of an eye. They know that they must follow His path, do His bidding and endure to the end, with full acceptance of the ''thorns and briars". They bear witness to His Truth, and though in the world and at the service of the world, they are not of it. 
Thus man becomes God, as God becomes man. It is for our sakes He comes and limits Himself to the sorrows and sufferings of Man, and by so doing He shows His Divine Love, and the meaning of life in all its mystery and fullness. 
The most materially minded amongst us must admit that to-day we have need of such an ''One'' to walk and talk with us, to show us anew the way; otherwise where are we going? All around us the world is shaking. Nations are at war, persecutions and horrible crimes are committed on defenseless peoples. Beneath our feet, the things we have valued and accumulated, are crumbling; ideas and standards are changing and shifting, everything seems chaotic. 
What must we understand by these signs? As of old, those who have been watching and waiting, know. The star has appeared in the East. The signs are manifold. The world not knowing, but rent and torn, sends up a cry. "The Man is needed''—"the God-Man", who will once again show us the meaning of a life of Love. Only such an One, who comes with authority, can show us what is real and what is unreal, can awaken us to the Brotherhood of Man. 
We who have already been privileged to contact Shri Meher 

Baba, feel that it is he who will be the awakener of Humanity for this age. He is of the stature of Christ; his overwhelming Love, his human­ity inspires and will inspire, all who come to him. His disciples come from all countries, are of all colours, religions and castes. He works to unite the East and West in love and harmony, so that they will balance and reinforce each other. This is his Mission. He himself  combines 
all qualities that can be acceptable to all men, all races to the farthest ends of the earth. His call is clear and insistent, for it is the call of the Divine within us all. His is the Love that never tires, but we have to rise to the greatness of that Love. 
“Heart are you great enough For a Love that never tires? O heart, are you great enough 
for Love? I have heard of thorns and briars.” 
— TENNYSON. 
