
WHEN the time is ripe the advancement of a person towards self-knowledge comes about as naturally as the physical body of the child grows into the full-fledged form. The growth of 

Progress Towards 
the physical body is worked out 

Self-Knowledge is 
by the operation of natural laws, 

Mostly Gradual and 
whereas the progress of the 

Imperceptible 
aspirant towards self-know­ledge is worked out by the operation of the spiritual laws pertaining to the transformation and emancipation of consciousness. The physical body of the child grows very gradually and almost imperceptibly; and the same is true of the spiritual progress of the person who has once entered the Path. The child does not know how its physical body grows: the aspirant also is, in the same way, often oblivious of the law according to which he makes headway towards the destination of his spiritual progress. The aspirant is generally conscious only of the manner in which he has been responding to the diverse situations in life; but he is rarely conscious of the manner in which he makes progress towards self-knowledge. But without consciously knowing it the aspirant is gradually arriving at self-knowledge by traversing 
326 
the Inner Path through his joys and sorrows, his happiness and suffering, his successes and failures, his efforts and rest, and, through his moments of clear perception and harmonised will as well as through the moments of confusion and conflict. These are the manifestations of the diverse sanskaras which he has brought from the past; and the aspirant forges his way towards self-knowledge through the tangles of these sanskaras like the traveller threading his way through a wild and thick forest. 
Human consciousness might be compared to the flashlight which reveals the existence and the nature of things. The province illuminated by this flashlight is 
defined by the medium through 
which it works, just as a person 
who is confined to a boat can 
wander anywhere on the surface 
of water but can have no access to the remote places on the land or in the air: and the actual working of the flashlight is determined by the accumulated sanskaras, just as the course of the rivulets flowing from a mountain is given by the channels created by the natural contours of the mountain. 
In the case of an average man, the sphere of life and the stage of action are restricted to the gross world because in him the flashlight of consciousness falls on 
the physical body and works 
through it. Being restricted to 
the medium of the gross body 
he can be conscious of anything 
within the gross world but is unable to establish conscious contact with subtle or mental realities. The gross sphere thus constitutes the arena of the average man; and all his activities and thoughts have a tendency to be directed towards the gross objects which are accessible to him. But all the time he remains unconscious of the subtle and the mental spheres of existence since the flashlight of his consciousness cannot be focussed through the medium of the subtle or the mental body. 
At this stage, the soul is conscious of the gross world, but is completely ignorant about its own true nature. It identifies 


itself with the gross body on which the flashlight of consciousness falls and which naturally becomes the only base of all the activities which are within its range. It does not directly know itself through itself but by means of the physical body: and since all the knowledge which it can gather through the physical body points out to the physical body itself as the centre of all the activities, it knows itself as being the physical body which in fact is only its instrument. The soul therefore imagines itself to be man or woman, young or old and takes upon itself the changes and the limitations of the body. 
After several rounds of lives in the setting given by the gross world, the impressions connected with the gross world become weak through long duration of the experience of opposites like great happiness and intense suffering. The weakening of the impressions is the beginning of spiritual awakening which consists in the gradual withdrawal of the flashlight of consciousness from the allurements of the gross world. When this happens the gross impressions become subtle, facilitating and inducing its transference of the base of conscious functioning from the gross body to the subtle body. Now the flashlight of consciousness falls on the subtle body and works through it as its medium; but it is no longer working through the gross body. Therefore the whole gross world goes out of the consciousness of the soul and it becomes conscious only of the subtle world. The subtle sphere of existence now constitutes the context of its life and the soul now considers itself to be the subtle body which becomes and is seen to be the centre of all its activities. But even when the soul has thus become subtle-conscious it remains ignorant about its own true nature since it cannot know itself directly through itself but only by means of the subtle body. However, the change of the stage of action from the gross to the subtle sphere of existence is of considerable significance in so far as in the subtle sphere, the conventional standards of the gross world are replaced by new standards which 
328 
are nearer the Truth and a new mode of life is rendered possible by the dawning of new powers and a freer release of spiritual energy. Life in the subtle world is only a passing phase in the spiritual journey and is far from being the goal; but out of millions of gross-conscious souls only one is capable of becoming subtle-conscious. 
The impressions connected with the subtle world in their turn get worn out through some forms of penance or yoga and thus facilitate and bring about a 
further inward withdrawal of 

Identification with consciousness, whereby the 
the Mental Body flashlight of consciousness 
comes to be thrown on the mental body and begins to function through it. The severance of conscious connection with the subtle and the gross body means that the gross and the subtle spheres of existence come to be completely excluded from the scope of consciousness. The soul is now conscious of the mental world which affords deeper possibilities of spiritual understanding and clearer perception of the Ultimate Truth. In this new setting of the mental sphere, the soul enjoys continuous inspiration, deep insight and unfailing intuition; and it is in direct contact with the spiritual Reality. But though it is in direct contact with God it does not see itself as God, since it cannot know itself directly through itself but only through the medium of the individual mind. It knows itself by means of the individual mind and considers itself to be the individual mind since it sees the individual mind as being the base and the centre of all its activities. Though the soul is now much closer to God than in the gross or subtle spheres, it is still enclosed in the world of shadow; and it continues to feel separate from God owing to the veil created by the impressions connected with the mental sphere. The flashlight of consciousness is functioning through the limitation of the individual mind and does not therefore yield the knowledge of the soul as it is in itself. But though the soul has not yet realised itself as being God, its life in the mental sphere of existence constitutes a tremendous advance upon 
the stage of the subtle sphere; and out of millions of subtle conscious souls only one can establish conscious contact with the mental sphere of existence. 
It is possible for an aspirant to rise up to the mental sphere of existence through its own unaided. efforts. But 
dropping the mental body amounts to the surren­derance of individual existence: and this last and all-important step cannot be taken except 

through the help of a Perfect Master who is himself God-realized. Out of millions of souls who are conscious of the mental sphere only one can withdraw the flashlight of its consciousness from the individual mind. Such withdrawal implies the complete vanishing of the last traces of the impressions connected with the mental life of the soul. When the flashlight of consciousness is no longer centred upon any of the three bodies, it serves the purpose of reflecting the true nature of the soul. 
The soul now has direct knowledge of itself without being dependent upon any medium, and sees itself not as some finite body but as infinite God, and 

knows itself to be the only Reality. 
This major crisis in the life of the 
soul is conditioned by the complete severance of connection with all the three bodies; and since consciousness of the different spheres of existence is directly dependent upon corresponding bodies the soul is now entirely oblivious of the whole universe. The flashlight of consciousness is no longer focussed upon anything foreign or external but is turned upon the soul itself and the soul is now truly self-conscious and has arrived at self-knowledge. 
The process of arriving at self-knowledge throughout the three spheres of existence is attended by 
the acquisition of false self-knowledge consisting in identification with the gross or the subtle or the mental body 
according to the stage of the process. This is due to the initial purpose of the creation which is to make to the soul self-conscious. The soul cannot have true self-
knowledge except at the end of the 330 

spiritual progress and all the intermediate forms of false self-knowledge are, as it were, temporary substitutes for true self-knowledge. They are necessary mistakes in the attempt to arrive at true self-knowledge. Since the flashlight of consciousness is throughout the journey turned towards the objects of the environment and not upon the soul itself, the soul has a tendency to get so much engrossed in these objects that it is almost completely oblivious of its own existence and nature. 
This danger of utter and unrelieved self-forgetfulness is counterbalanced by the self-affirmation of the soul by means of the body which happens to be used as the focul basis of the flashlight of consciousness. Thus the soul knows itself as its own body and knows other souls as their bodies, thereby sustaining a world of duality where there is sex, competition, aggression, jealousy, mutual fear, and exclusive ambition. Self-knowledge of the soul by means of a sign is a source of untold confusion, complication and entanglement. 
This form of ignorance may be illustrated by means of the famous Pumpkin story referred to by the poet Jami in one of his couplets. Once upon a time, 
there was an absent-minded man 


The Story of the 
who had no equal in forgetting 

Pumpkin 
things. He had an intelligent and 
a trusted friend who wanted to help him in at least remembering himself. This friend tied a pumpkin around his neck and said, "Now listen, old man, one day you might completely lose yourself and not be able to remember yourself. Therefore, as a sign I tie this pumpkin around your neck, so that every morning when you wake up you will see the pumpkin and know that you are there." Everyday, the absent­minded man saw the pumpkin after waking up in the morning and said to himself, "I am not lost". After some time, when the absent-minded man had got thoroughly used to self-identification through the pumpkin, the friend asked a stranger to remain with the absent-minded man, take away the pumpkin from his neck during his sleep and tie it around his own neck. The stranger did this, and when 
the absent-minded man woke up in the morning, he did not see the pumpkin around his neck. So he said to himself, "I am lost". He saw the pumpkin on the other man's neck and said to him, "You are me. But then who am I?" 
This Pumpkin story offers an analogy to the different forms of false self-knowledge connected with identification with the body. To know oneself as the body is like knowing oneself by means of the pumpkin. 
The disturbance caused by non-


The Analogy made 
identification with the gross or 

Explicit 
the subtle, or the mental body is comparable to the confusion of the absent-minded man when he could no longer see the pumpkin around his neck. The beginnings of the dissolution of the sense of duality are equivalent to the absent-minded man's identifying himself with the stranger who wore his pumpkin. Further, if the absent-minded man in the story were to learn to know himself through himself independently of any external sign, his self-knowledge might be comparable to the true self-knowledge of the soul which after non-identification with the three bodies knows itself as being none other than the infinite God. Arriving at such self-knowledge is the very goal of creation. 
