I joined the Meher Ashram Institute August 9, 1927. For the first two and a half months I stayed with the grown-up disciples of the Master and could not mix with the boys of the Meher Ashram proper, but on October 25 I was admitted into the Meher Ashram as a student. Besides secular instruction, spiritual instruction was imparted to boys by competent teachers in accordance with the commands of Shri Meher Baba. From about the middle of November the Holy Master Himself began to feed us with spiritual knowledge. Though we were not out of our teens the Master instilled into our minds great spiritual facts of which even yogis of the fourth cosmic plane are unconscious, intellectually acquainted us more and more with the Path, and gradually went on imparting spirituality to those of us who were fit for it. One night, after delivering a spiritual discourse, the Master said to me, "Child, have faith and try your best; I will make 'gold' of you." These words of my beloved Master produced a great impression on my mind-quite out of proportion to what one would expect. The above words were surcharged with spirituality and they made me restless ... A great spiritual longing took possession of me, and every moment of my waking state I said to myself, "When will this dust of myself tum into gold?" 
A great revolution was effected in me. Boys and disciples wondered at my changed state. I myself wondered at it. Sound sleep I could not get, and all relish for any kind of food vanished. One day in the month of December, while partaking of dinner, I felt a sort of great sensation in my body from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet. Tears rolled down my cheeks and I could not restrain myself from crying loudly. Everything around seemed to whirl and then vanish. My blood became extremely hot, and heat pierced my body from inside. Then I swooned. When I recovered I saw my beloved Master sitting near me. I could not help crying and pressing His lotus feet to my eyes. I kissed them now and then. He calmed me and gave me a cup of milk. 
I could now think of nothing and nobody but the Master. I simply could not help meditating on him continuously. Even in school hours when I was apparently reading, my heart was with my Beloved. Sometimes while meditating I used to see Him with my subtle eyes sitting near me with His right hand on my head. Mere sight of Him, whether gross or subtle, used to make me weep. By the middle of December, on account of my devotion and constant meditation, such love took possession of my heart that it made me, so to say, 'mad' for my Beloved. Separation from Him made me suffer intensely. I was contented only when I was with Him. This love was Divine Love, a gift from the Master -the love 
about which Shams-e-Tabriz says: "When Shamsul Hacke Tabriz opened the wings of love, it made the Angel Gabriel run after Him." 
Needless to say that by gaining this love I became entirely free from the snares of worldly Maya. Nothing seemed to interest me, not even my existence. It was through the Divine Love of my Beloved Master that I was transformed into my present state which only a few in the world experience. One day, in January of 1928, when the Holy Master was .imparting instruction to boys and disciples, I began feeling that I was losing my consciousness, and after blurting out, "Oh, Baba," I actually lost it. I became unconscious of everything except the Divine Form of the Master. For four days I continuously remained unconscious of the gross world but conscious of the Master's Divine Form which I was seeing in myself. 
On the fifth day my gross consciousness was restored to me, but with its restoration the Divine Form of the Master which, be it remembered, has nothing to do with His body, did not vanish. Since then I began seeing it in everything, in every body, and enjoying ineffable Spiritual Bliss for which I have paid a heavy price. Before I attained to my present Blissful state I had oft read and heard that this gross world is nothing but Maya. I could not understand properly why it was called Maya, but now I see for myself that it is really so. 
God is Real. Everything else is unreal. Ignorance is the cause of all miseries, of scepticism, hatred and egoism. All the various kinds of impressions, all attachments and errors of man have for their sources ignorance and non­discrimination. Many persons confuse the dream with the Reality, take bad for good, and, forgetting the Soul, regard the gross world as the only reality. Ignoramuses look at the mirage and think they are the body which is a mere instrument and not the glorious 'Effulgent Self' or Atman. When Discrimination makes its appearance, the net of ignorance disappears and the Reality is seen through the eyes of Discrimination. Finally, in the words of the Sages, I say, "Neither despise any being, nor look with contempt on others, but attempt, ·if you can, to give all a helping hand, for Oneness is the secret, and the Journey is towards the same Goal. Believe in the Splendour and Glory of your own Soul. There is the treasure of infinite Freedom, Power and Purity: so avoid throwing an evil thought into the world. Don't think that you are born a bound slave full of impurity– for this thought is forbidden. Weakness never existed–but Strength; darkness never existed–but Light and Love from the beginning and so for ever." 
