   The Bread of Paradise 
November 20, 2011 
Rev. Dr. Mark Belletini 
 Greeting 

Centering 

Kindling 

Opening Words  
  
 
We are here 

to practice the art of thanksgiving 
  
by expressing gratitude for what we can do 

and sharing the good gifts we™ve received, 

in peace, with care, that love may prevail. 

 
And so, without guarantees, we lean into joy, and b
end toward a just way of 
life, both for our own sakes, and for the sake of o
ur children and all beings 
with whom we share the earth. We would engage our m
ission whole-
heartedly, with courage, self-questioning, compassi
on, vulnerability and 
honesty.
   Hermione and the Hogwarts House-elves 
A Harry Potter Parable  
 As the scene opens Hermione, Ron, Harry and several
 friends from Gryffindor are sitting at the 
Gryffindor table. They are hungry. 

 
MC: 
Welcome to Hogwarts, the school for wizards and wit
ches in England. Harry, Hermione 
and Ron are just beginning their 4th year. They hav
e just arrived at Hogwarts for the beginning 
of the year feast. They are sitting very impatientl
y in the vast old hall, under the magical ceiling 
that matches the sky, with the students of all four
 houses. And the feast is late! Where is the 
food?  Nearly Headless Nick, the official ghost of 
the Gryffindor House, has an answer as he 
drifts up to the Gryffindor table. 

 
Nick 
[shaking head back and forth which makes it wobble]
: Peeves, of course. The usual 
argument, you know. He wanted to attend the feast -
 well, it™s quite out of the question, you 
know what he™s like, utterly uncivilized, can™t see
 a plate of food without throwing it. The 
bloody Baron put his foot down. 

 
Ron: 
So what did he do in the kitchens? 
 
   Nick: 
Oh, the usual. Wreaked havoc and mayhem.  Pots and 
pans everywhere.  Place swimming 
in soup.  Terrified the house-elves out of their wi
ts.  
 
Hermione
 at the word house-elves she sits up to attention so
 fast she nearly falls out of her chair 
and Harry and Ron help her
:  There are house-elves 
here? 
Here at 
Hogwarts
? 
 
Nick: 
Certainly! The largest number in any dwelling in Br
itain, I believe.  Over a hundred. 
 
Hermione: 
I™ve never seen one! 
 
Nick: 
Well, they hardly ever leave the kitchen by day, do
 they? They come out at night to do a 
bit of cleaning...see to the fires and so on...I me
an, you™re not supposed to see them, are you? 
That™s the mark of a good house-elf, isn™t it, that
 you don™t know it™s there? 
 
Hermione 
[just stares for a moment]: 
But they get 
paid
? They get 
holidays
, don™t they? And, 
and sick leave, and pensions, and everything? 

 
Nick 
[chortling so much that his head nearly flops off]:
 
Sick leave and pensions? House-elves 
don™t want sick leave and pensions! 

 
[Hermione picks up her silverware and places them a
cross her plate and then pushes the plate 
toward the center of the table.] 

 
Ron: 
Oh c™mon, ‚Er my knee. You won™t win them sick leav
e by starving yourself. 
 
Hermione 
[Shaking her head as if she still can™t believe it.
]
: 
Slave labor. That what makes this 
feast and all the food we eat. Slave labor. 

 
[The group leaves the table and goes onto the chanc
el, standing and sitting around, as if in the 
common room. Hermione has a can and a few badges or
 buttons that say SPEW.] 
 
MC: 
Hermione did not go on a hunger strike but she deci
ded to form SPEW, making badges and 
trying to collect a small amount from each student 
as dues. She didn™t have much luck. 
 
Harry: 
Spew? What™s this all about? 
 
Hermione
: Not Spew. S-P-E-W. The Society for the Promotion 
of Elfish Welfare.  
 
Harry: 
Never heard of it. Sounds weird. 
 
Hermione 
[Goes to Ron and rattles her cup] 
I™ve been researching it thoroughly.  Elf 
enslavement goes back centuries.  I can™t believe n
o one™s done anything about it until now! 
 
Ron: 
Hermione - open your ears. They.  Like.  It. 
 
   Hermione 
[Moving on to another prospect.] 
End elfen slavery. Just two Sickles. 
 
Student 1
:  If we freed the house-elves, then who would clea
n for us? 
 
Hermione 
[Moving on to another prospect.]  
End elfen slavery. Just two Sickles. 
 
Student 2:
  Everyone knows they like to work for us. They™re 
very loyal. 
 
[Everyone freezes, Hermione with her can out.] 

 
MC: 
No luck. Everyone had the same facts Hermione had. 
Well, maybe not in such depth, but 
they knew the important basics and they failed to s
ee injustice that Hermione saw.  
 
This Holiday season you will have an opportunity to
 learn more about people around the world 
that our Unitarian Universalist Service Committee w
orks with to make their lives better. 
Everyone of every age is asked to contribute to UUS
C during the holidays. But then everyone is 
asking for contributions, right? The most important
 reason I can think of to make a UUSC 
donation a top priority is that UUSC is like Hermio
ne. It looks for the injustices, the hurts, that 
everyone else overlooks. Often that™s the children.
  For instance, after the Haitian earthquake 
UUSC helped the children who had been sent by their
 parents in the country to live with and 
work in the homes of city families. They had been a
bandoned by the city families. In New 
Orleans, after the hurricane and flood, UUSC helped
 families with same-sex parents to get the 
federal and other aid they were denied because of w
hom they loved. 
 
Sequence
  
Great Mystery.  Wakan Taka.  Orenda.  Manitu. 

The natives of this land gave you many names, and k
new that all of them were provisional, local 
or ephemeral. They called you grandfather on some d
ays, but knew that even calling you a 
you
 was a convenience for the heart, not a fixed truth 
for the mind. 
 
Things have changed in this land. Now people debate
 you and write books proving you either 
are, or are not, and with great passion too.  

 
You are dressed up in blood-red last judgments and 
the glass beads of tradition, mummified in 
scripture, sliced up by superior sarcasm into somet
hing too thin to offer nourishment, or claimed 
by nation, creed, politics or clan as their very ow
n. 
 
Yet, oblivious to our foolishness, you remain the g
reat mystery, fountain of orange sunsets and 
blue mornings, geyser of lovemaking and justice wor
k, signed by the height of mountains and 
the depth of the sea, summoned by the constellation
s of night, flashing in the moments when 
children are born or loved ones die. Great Mystery,
 woven of a thousand lesser mysteries which 
bend our knees and close our chattering mouths, sil
ence us now so that we might be like our 
ancestors who once roamed these hills before the na
tion of Ohio was born.  

   Silence
  
Great Mystery, open the book of our memories, and r
ead there, through our own mouths and 
minds and hearts, the names of all those we love, r
emember, struggle with or mourn. Our lives 
are bound with them, and there is no present moment
 untied to the experiences of the past. We 
name and embrace within our own lives. 

 
Naming 

 
Great Mystery, no one yet has figured out why music
 does what it does, or how it touches the 
heart and mind with such power. Books are written, 
studies done, but the mysteries of melody 
embrace us in ways we cannot name. I™m grateful for
 that–
                              a n t h e m s 

 
The First Reading 
comes from the personal journal of William Christop
her, the 
?undocumented? spouse of the great American painter
, George Tooker. More about how I got 
my hands on such a precious document, written in pe
ncil, during the sermon.
  
Of a dinner one evening in Alabama, Christopher wro
te: 
?The tall head-waitress glares at us. Two, then fou
r, then six State Troopers came in for dinner. 
She actually goes from one to the other pointing us
 out, that we had been with negroes. It is hard 
to believe, but it happened. They turned their eyes
 to our table, glaring, and kept it up. Then three 
men in jackets came in–un-uniformed; she went to th
em. They glared. What a meal!?
  
Of a lunch they ate at a hotel restaurant
: ?So pleasant, one waitress; the others, so bitter
. What 
are they doing to their lives??  

 
While listening to Martin Luther King™s eulogy for 
the Unitarian Universalist minister James 
Reeb, who was killed with a club by three thugs, wh
ile leaving a restaurant with two other UU 
ministers, Orloff Miller and Clark Olsen, Christoph
er described yet another meal: 
?King™s eulogy is wonderful. What a speaker. The be
auty of Dr. King™s voice, the heat, the 
people listening, looking tired, nuns in muddy habi
ts from sleeping in the streets; but everyone™s 
eyes are alight with the spirit.?  ?We go into a ba
ckroom–we have cool aid (sic) and 
sandwiches. We haven™t eaten all day. There are you
ng and old, blacks and whites coming and 
going, all smiling, all intent on their mission. It
 is extraordinary. Nowhere do any of us find any 
temper, any dislike–but just plain brotherly love. 
I have never experienced this before.  I 
cherished each minute of it. I have never seen so m
any smiling faces filled with radiance than 
this afternoon. The young people are of extraordina
ry beauty, hand in hand, or just sitting and 
listening.? 

 
A page later, he portrayed the conclusion: ?the ent
ire place is in song, the church, the streets, the 
houses, 4000 people singing. All time has stopped. 
All hands are joined. The experience is 
devastating–it forever shatters fear, distress. The
 wall of non-belief is broken down with the 
swell of all these voices.?   

 
   The Second Reading
 is the chorus from a song in the film 
Home of the Brave
 by Laurie 
Anderson
. 
 
Paradise 

is exactly like 

where you are right now, 

only much, much 

better. 
 
Interlude 

 
Sermon 

 
I almost fell to the floor a month ago when Melissa
 Wolfe, the curator of the American 
Collection at our Columbus Museum of Art, a person 
I had never met, called me out of the blue 
at the office and asked me to write an essay about 
a painting. 
 
?For the new catalogue,? she said. ?We are asking p
eople from around the country to respond to 
eight particular pieces in our collection. We want 
you to be one of them.? 
 
Like I said, I almost fell to the floor. She explai
ned further: ?We are looking for folks who are 
not professional art historians to write these essa
ys. A 2000 words essay is what we™re looking 
for.?  Amazed beyond words, I nonetheless managed t
o ask, ?What painting??  And she said 
?George Tooker™s 
Lunch
.?  Again, I wobbled. ?Did someone tell you that Ge
orge Tooker is my 
favorite American painter?? I asked. ?No, but that™
s good, isn™t it??   
 
?I™ll say.?  This prospect excited me more than I c
an explain in mere English. I went over to the 
museum immediately to see the work. Melissa had exp
lained to me that I could come in to the 
curatorial offices and review some materials from t
he papers of George Tooker, copies of 
interviews, journals, that sort of thing. What I fo
und just blew me away. I was a pig in mud, as I 
have said to many. 

 
When I looked at the painting (its egg tempera, by 
the way, a notoriously difficult and slow 
medium), I could see men and women eating single sl
ices of bread. Not looking at each other.  
Not even acknowledging each other. Just eating brea
d. White bread slices to be exact. Only one 
man is drinking from a cup.  There is no evidence h
e is holding the cup–it™s as if someone else 
is, off frame.  The overhead florescent lights are 
dull. The tables have been foreshortened so 
much they are no longer tables but - for all the wo
rld - they look like communion rails in an 
Episcopal church.  

 
And that™s when I began to understand the painting.
 It™s a reflection on eating bread together. 
Bread in its meaning as communion.  

 
The word ?communion? was applied to a revised form 
of the ancient Mediterranean custom 
called ?the breaking of bread? by Greek spiritual w
riters. They also called it the Thanksgiving 

   Meal, or 
eucharist,
 in Greek.  Contrary to the most common present und
erstandings, it was never 
about remembering the death of the Galilean: it was
 about celebrating a possible future for all 
people, based on the egalitarian meal practice of J
esus. The earliest texts we have for its 
celebration do not mention the Last Supper, or bloo
d or body, anything like that. Those later 
additions were an attempt to tie the supper to the 
Passover Seder, the freedom meal, where the 
?body? was the sacrificed lamb, roasted on a spit. 
 Jesus is depicted as breaking bread and saying 
something like–no need for killing animals–this bre
ad will do fine, a ?body? with which to 
celebrate liberation.  But all of this was later, a
nd Pauline.  Originally, the meal was a forward 
looking practice, not a memorial; a rehearsal, an e
nacted anticipation, if you will, of the good life 
to come.  So-called Roman civilization, you see, sy
stematically kept women apart from men, 
slaves apart from citizens, the poor apart from the
 well-to-do, the educated apart from the 
uneducated. The communion supper embodied a vision 
of a future time when all those 
separations would be devastated, and removed by the
 power of 
agape
, or love, and the practice 
of thanksgiving. Not just tolerating differences, m
ind you, but being downright thankful for 
them. Looking into each other™s eyes.  Embracing.  
Sharing gifts.  It was a revolutionary 
practice.  Naturally it got distorted over the year
s.  Civilization doesn™t seem to tolerate too much 
revolution and vision.  

 
The elements of the meal itself varied according to
 geography:  bread, fish, a cup of honey mixed 
with milk, a cup of wine, and a cup of water, all w
ere used, but eventually, they were reduced by 
the power of conformity to bread and a single cup w
ith wine mixed with water, which them-
selves became the focus of the celebration. The hor
ror of Jesus™ death was written into the supper 
over its original celebration of equality and visio
n.  
 
Over the years, there were exceptions to this diffi
cult and slant understanding, stressing the 
remembrance of suffering. Our own ancestors in Pola
nd, Ukraine and Lithuania, the Socinians, 
understood the breaking of bread as both a thanksgi
ving supper, and a promise to live their lives 
in such a way as to create a paradise of peace on t
his, our common earth.  
  

When I read the painter George Tooker™s own underst
anding of his work, I began to see the 
connection of this painting to the ancient custom o
f the breaking of bread even more.  Tooker 
said in an interview: ?In one painting, I™m trying 
to say, ‚This is what we are forced to suffer in 
this life™ while in other paintings, I say, ‚This i
s what we should be.™ I oscillate between the 
earthly state and– paradise.? 

 
His paradise paintings, filled with light, lanterns
, and people of every color making love to each 
other, are clear enough.  But, just as he claimed, 
Tooker never flinched from painting what he 
describes as ?what we are forced to suffer in this 
earthly life.?  Homeless people in underpasses, 
people arguing in rage, frightened people in subway
s– you™re not likely to want to hang any of 
his more disturbing ?earthly? masterworks over the 
couch in the living room. 
  

Lunch
 is one of his ?earthly? paintings. You see some pe
ople eating lunch. But there is no 
nourishment in sight, either food-wise or emotional
ly. They are holding the traditional elements 
of communion - bread and a cup - but they refuse to
 hold, touch, or even notice each other. The 
lines on the folding wall behind them look like jai
l bars.  These lunch-mates are all imprisoned 

   by their unwillingness to communicate with each oth
er. But for Tooker, a devout Episcopalian, 
there are other possibilities hidden in plain sight
. He hints that paradise might still be possible, i
f 
they would but open their eyes. The bread and cup a
re there. They simply have to break out of 
their jail and break the bread and share it, instea
d of eating sanitized factory-sliced Styrofoam 
pieces of white-bread in isolation. Tooker is the o
nly artist with European ancestry in that era 
who routinely painted African Americans and Latinos
 in his canvasses. In 
Lunch
, by showing 
people of color isolated from each other and eating
 the same ?white-bread? food, he suggests that 
everyone of every color in this country was equally
 imprisoned in the same system, the Jim 
Crow system that dominated that era, a system that 
does no one any good 
whatsoever.
  
 
Tooker painted this work in 1964. He was already th
erefore reflecting on the situation in our 
nation. When Martin Luther King called folks of rel
igious conscience to come down to Alabama, 
Tooker and his lover, William Christopher, who knew
 King, went. So did a full third of all 
Unitarian Universalist ministers, including James R
eeb, Clark Olsen, and Orloff Miller. 
 
While Tooker and Christopher were down there, they 
ate a number of meals, which Christopher 
described in his handwritten journal, the one which
 I was lucky enough to read in the curator™s 
office: 

 
?The tall head-waitress glares at us. Two, then fou
r, then six State Troopers came in for dinner. 
She actually goes from one to the other pointing us
 out, that we had been with negroes. It is hard 
to believe, but it happened. They turned their eyes
 to our table, glaring, and kept it up. Then 
three men in jackets came in–un-uniformed; she went
 to them. They glared.  What a meal!? 
  
 
This was no communion supper, just a rancid dish of
 fear and trembling.  
 
At a well-known restaurant, they partake of another
 lunch. 
?So pleasant, one waitress; the 
others, so bitter. What are they doing to their liv
es??
 writes Christopher. What indeed.  Again, a 
meal that disturbs, not nourishes. 

 
At Walker™s Café, a well-known African-American res
taurant which welcomed all colors in its 
door, the three Unitarian Universalists also had a 
meal, a good one with camaraderie. When they 
left the restaurant, four white men assaulted them 
with clubs; James Reeb was hit in the head, 
and died within a few hours.  The others escaped, a
nd after treatment, left the state for their own 
protection, as witnesses to a murder.  (The assaila
nts were eventually acquitted by an all white 
jury, sad to say, despite Clark™s clear witness in 
the courtroom.)  Although Reeb was a UU, it 
was Martin Luther King who gave several eulogies fo
r him. Tooker and Christopher were there 
for one of them. Listen: 

 
?King™s eulogy is wonderful. What a speaker. The be
auty of Dr. King™s voice, the heat, the 
people listening, looking tired, nuns in muddy habi
ts from sleeping in the streets; but everyone™s 
eyes are alight with the spirit.?  

 
Then Christopher describes the meal, awed to the bo
ne: 
?We go into a backroom–we have cool 
aid (sic) and sandwiches. We haven™t eaten all day.
 There are young and old, blacks and whites 

   coming and going, all smiling, all intent on their 
mission. It is extraordinary. Nowhere do any of 
us find any temper, any dislike–but just plain brot
herly love. I have never experienced this 
before. I cherished each minute of it. I have never
 seen so many smiling faces filled with 
radiance than this afternoon. The young people are 
of extraordinary beauty, hand in hand, or 
just sitting and listening.? 

 
Later in his diary, he offers up thanksgiving for t
he amazing effect of this simple supper: 
?The 
entire place is in song, the church, the streets, t
he houses, 4000 people singing. All time has 
stopped. All hands are joined. The experience is de
vastating–it forever shatters fear–.?   
 
Here, finally, Tooker and Christopher had an experi
ence of communion, of true participation in 
community, walls shattered, bars broken, lives chan
ged. It is the exact opposite of his painting 
Lunch. 
The love he describes in Alabama is ?devastating,? 
he writes. This is not a weak and 
fluffy love, but the kind that tears down, brick by
 brick the city of tears, and builds the new 
Jerusalem, embrace by embrace, story by story, meal
 by meal. Sandwiches and paper cups in the 
back room, true emblems of what could be: listening
, the holding of hands, the meeting of ages, 
colors and genders, peace, radiance. In Tooker™s co
ncise word:  Paradise. 
 
Please don™t get all confused and think I am preach
ing some form of pie in the sky.  As 
performer Laurie Anderson puts it so very clearly: 
?Paradise is 
exactly
 like where you are 
right 
now
, only much, much better.?  The bread we break is t
he bread right in front of us, not above 
us. 

 
The Guest at Your Table boxes we distribute traditi
onally on Thanksgiving are a way to enlarge 
the simple sharing of this local table, inviting st
ories from around the world to be told at your 
own home table.  

 
Melissa Wolfe probably didn™t know that when she ca
lled me, she was actually speaking to many 
people. She was calling you too. Calling you to ref
lect on what it means to participate in 
community–the full meaning of the Greek word 
koinonia
, so often translated as communion. 
How do we participate in paradise now, and lift up 
injustices (like Hermione did in this 
morning™s play), so they can be seen, and faced and
 transformed? But the call has indeed now 
gone forth, and the paradise play is now being writ
ten by the choices we make with our lives. 
 
Offering 

 
Investing in the future of our common house, and ou
r compelling vision of life and love for all 
people, we offer this time to bless the choice we h
ave made to participate in this beloved 
community. 

 
The Breaking of Bread: Table Prayer 2011 

 
(Eric) 
Bread of the world, be for us now  
   the bread of paradise. 
 
   First Reader: East 

May this bread be for us our 
joy.
  Joy before the good gifts of sun and soil, seed a
nd water, 
sowing and harvest, kneading and baking. Such gifts
 are the ground and source of our lives, for 
which we are most grateful. 

 
Second Reader: South 

May this bread be for us a 
blessing
. May it speak to us of the sacred meals of our anc
estors when 
the bread they ate was more than bread, signing tha
t they knew in their hearts they were more 
than their separate selves. 

  

Third Reader: West 

May this bread be for us a 
promise.
 May it speak to us of a day to come when we have w
orked to 
see that there is ample healthy food for every huma
n being on earth. 
 
Fourth Reader: North 

May this bread be for us the 
dream
. A dream when all people of whatever gender, color
 or 
culture, and all children shall come from north and
 south and east and west and sit down together 
to eat together in peace, united at last by their d
iversities to work for the common good. 
 
(Mark)
    here, breaks bread 
 
Only bread is for the breaking. The human spirit, a
nd human bodies are not for the breaking. By 
breaking this bread, I issue a call to establish pa
radise
.  A call to share the bread as much as eat 
it. For such bread does not disappear when it has b
een eaten, but remains present whensoever we 
welcome each other with honesty, care, and respect 
and gratitude. 
 
(Jolinda) 
And so, blest are you, Love, our joy, our blessing,
 our promise, our dream and our 
call.  You gather us here at the welcome table whic
h anticipates paradise. 
 
(here, already prepared baskets are passed, beginni
ng with the one in the center of the table. the 
rest will be under the table) 

 
Hymn 
We™re Gonna Sit At the Welcome Table 
 
 
 
 
 
    

 
 
