  June 23, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor   
       JESUS IS ABLE TO HELP THOSE WHO ARE TEMPTED   Hebrews 2:14-18   
  Since then the children share in flesh and blood, He Himselflikewise also partook of the same, that through death He might renderpowerless him who had the power of death, that is, the devil; 15 andmight deliver those who through fear of death were subject to slaveryall their lives. 16 For assuredly He does not give help to angels,but He gives help to the descendant of Abraham. 17 Therefore, He hadto be made like His brethren in all things, that He might become amerciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, tomake propitiation for the sins of the people. 18 For since He Himselfwas tempted in that which He has suffered, He is able to come to theaid of those who are tempted.    
      "You Were Born to Live Forever"    On Wednesday night at the Metrodome Billy Graham took his textfrom John 3:16 and began to talk about God from the two words, "ForGod." But what struck me in that message was how often he spoke ofdeath. He was very blunt and forthright and looked us all in the faceand said something like, "In fifty or seventy years you will all bedead." But then he made clear that he meant we would all be in heavenor in hell. He said, "When you were born, you were born to liveforever, and you will -- either in heaven or in hell." Then he wenton to tell us how to reach heaven and escape hell through faith inJesus Christ.  It seems to me that this was exactly the right way to start hiscrusade: talking about God and death. If there were no God, thendeath would be sad for most people, but it wouldn't be terrifying. Itwould be sad because life is the basis of all our pleasures --family, friends, work, leisure, food, sex, music -- if we lose life,we lose everything that makes us happy --  if  there is not God.So death would be sad. But not terrifying. Falling asleep and goingunconscious and never waking up into consciousness again is a sadfarewell to contemplate. The ending of a long, beautiful summer issad.  But if there is God, if we are created in the image of God, as theBible teaches, and as Billy Graham preaches, and if he is just andholy and worthy of our love and devotion and worship and obedience,and justly angry at our indifference and distrust and our preferencefor other things, and if we are going to give an account to thisinfinite, holy God and be sentenced to heaven or to hell, then deathis terrifying if things are not right with God. And written on everyheart, the Bible says (Romans 2:15), is the law of God testifying toour conscience that we will all give an account to God.    
      Slavery to the Fear of Death    Therefore even for people who deny the reality of such a God,death is terrifying. This doesn't mean that most unbelieving peoplelead consciously terrified lives. It means that they are enslaved bythe fear of death to find ways not to feel the intolerable fear thatthey have. That is, fear of dying is so natural for sinful people whoare not ready to meet God, that it rules them like a silent masterwho takes many forms. The main form is the dream world of denial.Most people simply do not let themselves think about what isabsolutely inevitable, namely, their own death. They are driven,consciously or unconsciously, to shut their eyes and close their earsand blank their minds to every thought that they are going to die andgive an account to God.  And this is a form of slavery to the fear of death. They would saythey are not afraid. But the fact is, the fear has gone undergroundand enslaves from the subconscious. It's like your car's cruisecontrol. The cruise control of your soul gets set at the 55 mph ofcontentment and peace of mind, and if your soul begins to slow downand become pensive and thoughtful and reflective about God and thethings of eternity and the reality of dying, the cruise control kicksin and quickly pushes the speed back up to where you won't thinkabout all that. That's the power of the fear of death functioningsubconsciously like a slave master over what you can feel and think.Or if your soul becomes energetic and active and speeds up to a newlevel of study and inquiry and pursuit of truth and ultimate valuesand you feel yourself driven toward some new height of discoveryabout the meaning of life and death and eternity, then the cruisecontrol kicks in and takes the acceleration away and makes you coastback down to the safe blind contentment of 55 mph enslavement.  My point is that the fear of death enslaves everybody into a dreamworld of denial or escape or narcotic numbness or frenzieddistraction or philosophic negation or paralyzing panic -- unlesssomething happens that deals with the reality of death and God andthe devil and sin as they really are with no evasions or distortionsor denials.  Now that is what this text is about. And what I want to do with itis very limited. One of the great limitations of preaching in thisbrief life we have to live is that almost every word in a book likeHebrews is worthy of several sermons. But if I followed thatprocedure I would preach on Hebrews for the rest of my life. Whichwould be unduly neglectful of other portions of equally worthyscripture. So I have to choose which aspects of any given text tohighlight and focus on. And we need to pray as a people that I besensitive to God's leading and that your hearts be prepared by theHoly Spirit for the focus he gives me.    
      Deliverance From the Fear of Death    I want us to see the flow of thought in verses 14 and 15 about howChrist came to deliver you from the fear of death and make you free,by rendering the devil powerless in his destructive use of death.Then I want to compare that flow of thought with verse 17 to see how  the death of Christ defeats the power of the devil indeath. And then finally to close by asking: what about all thethreats to our faith leading up to death -- the suffering and thelost relationships.  Look with me at verses 14 and 15 and walk with me through the fivesteps that are here in your deliverance from bondage to the fear ofdeath.   Step one  (verse 14a): You are human . "Since the childrenshare in flesh and blood . . ."  The "children" is a referenceback to verse 13 where it refers to the people that God calls tohimself and gives to his Son, Jesus. So he says in verse 14 thatthese "children" share in flesh and blood, that is, they are simplyhuman. They have a human nature. They are not angels or gods.   Step two  (verse 14b): Christ became human. "Since then thechildren share in flesh and blood,  He Himself likewise alsopartook of the same. " The Son of God, we saw back in Hebrews 1:2,did not come into being when Jesus was born. He existed beforecreation, indeed from eternity as the very image of God (1:3) and washimself God (1:8). But since the children whom he loved and wanted tosave were human he took on the same human nature. So Jesus was actualGod and actual man. It is a great mystery, but this is what God tellsus about his Son.   Step three  (verse 14c): Christ did this so that he coulddie. "Since then the children share in flesh and blood, He Himselflikewise also partook of the same,  that through death . .  . " In his divine nature alone Christ's life was indestructible(Hebrews 7:16). He could not die. But a death was necessary to dealwith guilt and the punishment of sin. So Christ became humanprecisely so that he could die. This is what love does. It embracessuffering and death for the life of others.   Step four  (verse 14d): In dying, Christ rendered powerlessthe one who has the power of death, the devil. ". . . that throughdeath  He might render powerless him who has the power of death,that is, the devil ." In dying, Christ defeated, in some profoundway, the power of the devil and took away his ability to destroy bydeath. How did Christ do that? That's what we will see when we lookat verse 17. But for right now it just says that's what Christwillingly died to do. The apparent defeat of death was a knockoutblow to Satan. How? Hold on, and we will see.   Step five  (verse 15): The effect of defeating the devil inthis way is that we are delivered from slavery to the fear of death.". . . to render powerless him who had the power of death, that is,the devil; 15  and might deliver those who through fear of deathwere subject to slavery all their lives ." We are freed from thedream world of denial and escape and distraction. We can live now inthe full stare of death and not be afraid or self-deluding.  That's the flow of thought in verses 14-15. Five steps: 1) you arehuman; 2) therefore Christ became human; 3) so that he might die foryou; 4) to nullify the deadly power of the devil; 5) so that youmight be freed from slavery to fear and live in freedom the rest ofeternity.    
      How Does the Death of Christ Defeat the Powerof the Devil in Death?    Now the question:  How  does the death of Christ defeat thepower of the devil in death. And to see that, let's compare the flowof thought in verses 14-15 with verse 17. I'm passing over verse 16,not because it's unimportant but because there isn't time. In a word,it highlights again that our great salvation (2:3) is great in largemeasure because it shows God's willingness to deal with humans andnot just focus on angels.  Verse 17 says now that since Christ is aiming to deliver humans(children of Abraham) and not angels, "Therefore, He had to be madelike His brethren in all things, that He might become a merciful andfaithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to makepropitiation for the sins of the people." Now what stands outimmediately when you compare this verse with the flow of thought inverses 14 and 15 is that both of them speak of Christ having tobecome like us. Verse 17 says, "He had to be made like His brethrenin all things." Verse 14 says, "Since then the children share inflesh and blood, He Himself likewise also partook of the same." So weknow we are dealing here in verse 17 with the same basic flow ofthought: in order to accomplish something Christ had to become one ofus.    
      Propitiation    But the rest of verse 17 is different from verses 14 and 15, andthe differences show us  how  it is that Christ defeated thedevil by dying for us. Verse 14 says that Christ became like us sothat he could die and render powerless the one who has the power ofdeath, the devil. Verse 17 says that Christ became like us so that hemight become a high priest to make propitiation for our sins. So myconclusion is that Christ rendered the devil powerless in death byhis high priestly work of making a propitiation for our sins.  Those are some big words and big ideas. Let me try to explain.This is not over your head. Verse 17 says Jesus became like us sothat he could be our high priest. Now what the high priest did in theOld Testament was make sin offerings for the people so that theirsins could be forgiven. So why did Jesus have to become a human --like us -- in order to be a high priest for us? Because the offeringhe had to give was the offering of himself. He needed to be a humanhigh priest, so that he could lay down his life not only as thepriest who makes the offering, but also as the offering that hemakes. (See 7:27; 9:14, 25f.)  The writer says this at least four times. For example, in Hebrew9:26 he says, "Now once at the consummation of the ages [Christ] hasbeen manifested to put away sin by the sacrifice of  Himself. "So Christ became human like us in his work as high priest so that theoffering he made could be himself. It's the same as verse 14: heneeded to be human in order to die.  But now notice that in verse 17 the aim of the death of Christ --the work of the high priest -- was "to make propitiation for the sinsof the people," while in verse 14 the aim of the death of Christ is"to render powerless him who had the power of death, that is, thedevil." Seeing this is the key to how the death of Christ strips thedevil of his power in death.  Christ strips the Devil of his power in death by makingpropitiation for our sins. How does this work? That big word"propitiation" simply means Christ takes away God's anger at us forour sins. When Christ dies, he is perfectly innocent (Hebrews 4:15).His death is to bear the guilt and punishment of our sins, not hisown. And when our punishment falls on him, it is taken away from us.That's what propitiation means. God's justice is satisfied. He lovedus enough to put his own Son forward to absorb the punishment wedeserved so that he could demonstrate that he is just and faithful indealing with sin and merciful in dealing with sinners. This is thegreat Gospel. This is our great salvation. Christ dying in our place,and propitiating God -- removing his righteous anger from us. So inhim there is now no condemnation.    
      The Only Lethal Weapon the Devil Has    Now how does that render powerless the one who had the power ofdeath, the devil? It doesn't mean Christians don't die a physicaldeath -- sometimes very painful ones. Nor does it mean that Satancan't kill us (see Revelation 2:10). What it means is that the onlyweapon the devil can use to destroy us in death is our sin. Nobodygoes to hell because they are oppressed by the devil or evenpossessed by the devil. Nobody goes to hell because they are harassedby the devil or get shot at by the devil or given hallucinations bythe devil. These are all smoke screens to hide the one deadly powerin Satan's artillery, namely, unforgiven sin. The only reason anybodygoes to hell is because of their own sin. And all Satan can do isfight like hell to keep you sinning and to keep you away from the onewho forgives sin.  Because if your sin is forgiven, and the wrath of God Almighty isturned away from you, then the devil is disarmed. The one deadly,lethal tactic he has is to accuse you of sin and keep you sinning andto keep you away from Christ who forgives sin and removes the wrathof God. If your sins are forgiven and the wrath of God is removedfrom you, and you stand righteous before God in Jesus Christ byfaith, and God is for you and not against you, then the devil isrendered powerless: he cannot destroy you.  So in sum, the connection between verses 14 and 17 shows that theway Christ renders powerless the devil is by making propitiation forour sins. Which shows that the only lethal weapon in the artillery ofSatan is our own sin. If that is covered by the blood of Jesus, ifthat is forgiven, and if the anger of God against is gone and in itsplace is omnipotent grace working for our good, then we can cry outto any human or demonic manslayer: "Death is swallowed up in victory.O death where is your victory? Death, where is your sting?" (1Corinthians 15:54-55). The body they may kill, but that is all.Instantly we are at home with the Lord (2 Corinthians 5:8).    
      What About all the Threats to our Faith Leadingup to Death?    Which leaves one last very brief observation from verse 18.Granted that the fear of death is taken away and we are freed. Butwhat about the pain and the losses that lead up to death? I heardR.C. Sproul say in Memphis last spring: "Its not death I'm afraid of,it's dying." It's the degeneration, the loss of our powers, thehumiliation of senility, the pain, the breaking away of loved ones.What about all the trials and temptations to give up and despair inthese things?  I think verse 18 is meant to encourage us here. It says, "Forsince He Himself was tempted in that which He has suffered, He isable to come to the aid of those who are tempted." In other words,Christ took on weak, vulnerable human nature not only so that hecould experience death, but also that he could experience dying, andthen sympathize with the temptations that come with suffering anddying. It says he was tempted in that which he suffered -- this isn'tthe temptation of lust or greed. This is the temptation to get angryand to be resentful and sullen and self-pitying and despairing andunbelieving in the goodness of God. "My God, my God, why hast thouforsaken me, is a hair's breadth from blasphemy.  The point is this: not only do you have the word of God thismorning proclaiming that you are free from slavery to the fear ofdeath. You also have a word from God this morning that when the trialcomes in your dying, when you are tempted to despair or self-pity orresentment or anger or unbelief, Christ will come to help you. And hewill come as one who knows, from his own agonizing experience, justwhat you are experiencing. And he will give you what you need toendure to the end.  He is merciful and faithful high priest, and he  will  do it.  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
  
