  February 25, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor      "I AM GOD ALMIGHTY, BE FRUITFUL ANDMULTIPLY" RAISING CHILDREN WHO ARE CONFIDENT IN GOD      Psalm 78:1-8   
  {A Maskil of Asaph.} Listen, O my people, to my instruction;incline your ears to the words of my mouth. 2 I will open my mouth ina parable; I will utter dark sayings of old, 3 which we have heardand known, and our fathers have told us. 4 We will not conceal themfrom their children, but tell to the generation to come the praisesof the LORD, and His strength and His wondrous works that He hasdone. 5 For He established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a lawin Israel, which He commanded our fathers, that they should teachthem to their children, 6 that the generation to come might know, even  the children  yet  to be born,  that  they mayarise and tell  them  to their children, 7 that they should puttheir confidence in God, and not forget the works of God, but keepHis commandments, 8 and not be like their fathers, a stubborn andrebellious generation, a generation that did not prepare its heart,and whose spirit was not faithful to God.  Woe to us if we ever become so fixated on the welfare of our ownchildren that we lose our passion for rescuing lost neighbors andreaching lost nations. It is astonishing, but true that Jesus said inMatthew 19:29, "And everyone who has left houses or brothers orsisters or father or mother or   children   or lands for Myname's sake, shall receive a hundredfold, and shall inherit eternallife." We have to come to terms with the fact that   leavingchildren for Jesus' sake   may not be sin.  Our own children are not our highest value. Christ is our highestvalue. And the call of Christ relativizes two great creationordinances. One is marriage and the other is parenting. In creationGod said, "It is not good for man to be alone . . . a man shall leavemother and father and cleave to his wife and the two shall become oneflesh" (Genesis 2:18, 24). But the apostle Paul said to theCorinthians that he wished everyone were like him -- namely, single-- because it can bring such undistracted devotion to the Lord (1Corinthians 7:7, 35). He concedes, each has his own gift (1Corinthians 7:7). So it is good to be married. Yes, but for the sakeof the in-breaking kingdom of God in these last days, it may be evenbetter to be single.  So it is with parenting. Psalm 127:3 says that children are aprecious "inheritance" and a "reward." Genesis 1:28 says that we areto "be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it." Yes,but this too is not absolute. If marriage is not ultimate, parentingcannot be ultimate either. If the in-breaking kingdom of Godrelativizes the ideal of marriage and makes singleness a crucial,Christ-exalting strategy, so it is with parenting. There will beGod-ordained, Christ-exalting kingdom-advancing strategies forparents that are not built around the ideal comforts and securitiesand earthly possibilities and pedagogical excellence for children.There will be times, Jesus says (in Matthew 19:29), when "for mysake" you will leave children. And no doubt in leaving you will feelthat the ideal home situation is being lost. And it is. But God isable to do more than we ever dreamed with the painful circumstancescreated by following his radical call. "One hundredfold", is the wordhe uses. "One hundredfold" ( hekatontaplasiona )!  I mention this only to say again, Woe to us if we ever become sofixated on the welfare of our own children that we lose our passionfor rescuing lost neighbors and reaching lost nations.  But having said that, let us hear what our God commands concerningour children in the New Covenant community called the church.  There are those who believe that children are members of thecovenant community by virtue of being born into believing families.This is why Presbyterians and others in the Reformed community (withwhich we have so much in common) baptize their infants. We believe,on the other hand, that this is a misunderstanding of the nature ofthe New Covenant community. We believe that the New CovenantCommunity is created by the second birth not the first birth.Therefore the sign of the covenant, baptism, is given to those whoare born of the Spirit into a spiritual family, not to those who areborn of the flesh into a physical family.  John the Baptist commanded those who had already been circumcisedinto the Old Covenant community to be baptized as a sign of enteringa new spiritual community of repentant people. We believe this iswhat Jesus continued and commanded. This is why Peter stood up onPentecost and said to 3,000 circumcised Jews, "Repent and bebaptized." The New Covenant community (the church) is not somethingyou can be born into according to the flesh. It is something you areborn into by the Spirit. The evidence of this new birth is faith andrepentance, and the sign placed upon it by the church in the name ofGod is baptism.  So how then do our children fit into the New Covenant communitycalled the church, if they are not members by virtue of theirphysical birth? The way I would put it is like this: the children ofChristians are beloved  wards  of the New Covenant community.They are kept by a  spiritual guardianship  awaiting the day oftheir awakening to faith in Christ. Their attachment to a Christianfamily at the natural level, obliges a  community foster care at the spiritual level. Very special, clear, biblical, obligationsbind us to our children not because they are covenant members beforethey have faith, but because God gives us a special mandate to leadthem to faith.  To be born into a New Covenant family does not make a child amember of the New Covenant community; it makes the New Covenantcommunity the spiritual guardian of the child.  Which sets the stage now for the mandate of that guardianship.What does God require of us?  What is our calling as parents and asa community of Christians toward our children?   The reason we can go now to the book of Psalms for the answer isthat there is enough overlap between the Old and New Covenants thatthe same crucial things are required in both. So let's outline God'spurpose for parents and church from Psalm 78:4-7.  There are six stages in our calling that I see in these verses.  1. First it begins with  God .  Verse 4b: "We will tell to the generation to come the praises of the LORD , and  His  strength and  His  wondrousworks that  He  has done."  All Christian parenting and Christian education begins with God.There is One ultimate, unchanging Reality, namely, God. All else inparenting and education comes from him. All else is for him. He isthe first and the last and the center of parenting and education. Heis the main thing in how you rear children and teach children anddiscipline children. It all begins with God and it all is built onGod and it all is to be shaped by God. If there is one memory thatour children should have of our families and our church it is this;they should remember God. God was first. God was central. There was apassion for the supremacy of God in all things.  2. The second stage in our calling as parents and as a covenantcommunity is that there is a fixed deposit of God's  Truth  inthe world.  Verse 5: "He established a  testimony  in Jacob, andappointed a  law  in Israel."  God has testified and God has taught. The Hebrew word translated"law" ( Torah ) means "teaching." God has testified and God hastaught. And we have that testimony and that teaching in a book, theBible. The Bible is the way God, the ultimate and all-importantReality, reveals himself to us with clarity and authority today. IfGod is more important than anything, then the Bible is more importantthan anything but God. The implications of this for parenting and NewCovenant guardianship are staggering.  2.1 It means the Bible will be the sun in the solar system of allthat we teach our children. It will not be one among many books. Itwill be the central book, the all-permeating Book. "The other booksare dark planets; the Bible is the light-giving sun. All other bookswill be read in the light of this book. All books will be judged bythis book. All books will find meaning in the world view built bythis book. Which means that this book must be known first and knowbetter than all the other books.  2.2 The second thing it means for us that God has testified andtaught in a book is that there is a fixed deposit of truth to pass onto each generation. Paul tells Timothy to "guard the good depositthat has been entrusted" to him (2 Timothy 1:14). That is the task ofparents as well and or the covenant community as a whole: guard thesacred deposit. Preserve it and transmit it to each generation.  3. The third stage in our calling as parents and community is teaching .  Verse 5: "He established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a lawin Israel, which He commanded our fathers,  that they should teachthem to their children ."  We are commanded to teach the testimony of God to our children. Itis not enough to preserve the deposit of truth in a book, and tellthem it is there. We are commanded to teach it. Ephesians 6:4 says,"Fathers, bring up [your children] in the discipline and instruction    of the Lord." Instruction! We are toinstruct them in the testimony and teaching of God.  Here is a huge educational implication: Since the testimony andinstruction of God is in a book, this means that we will labor toteach our children to  read . In fact, among "readin' writin'and 'rithmetic" reading will be of supreme importance. And reading isno simple thing: it includes recognizing the ideas that attach tosymbols. It includes understanding how those ideas fit together in anauthor's mind to make a message. It includes thinking about whetherthat message is true or not. Learning how to read never stops. Thereis always room for improvement in how we read. And the main incentiveto grow and improve in our reading is that the infinitely gloriousGod who made all things and who loves us and plans our future hastestified and taught in a book.  4. The fourth stage in our calling as parents and church is thatour children are to  know  the testimony and teaching of God --know it well enough to tell it to the next generation. From our  teaching comes  their  knowing.  Verse 6: [We teach] "that the generation to come might know , even the children yet to be born, that they may ariseand tell them to their children."  You might think that this point is virtually the same as the onebefore. But they aren't the same. Teaching is not the same aslearning and knowing. And the distinction is important for at leasttwo reasons.  One is that we cannot make our children learn. We can makeourselves teach. But we cannot make them know. Knowing is a preciousthing. The kind of knowing God has in mind here is more than merememory or raw mental awareness. Knowing is seeing into the realbeauty of truth and embracing it for the treasure that it is. Parentsand church cannot make that happen. We can do our best in putting Godin the center and loving and praying and teaching. But in the endthere is a chasm between teaching and knowing that only God can carryour children across.  The other reason for stressing the difference between our task ofteaching and their responsibility of knowing is that the rest ofGod's purposes for our children grow out of this knowing. The finaltwo stages of our calling are the fruit of this stage of knowing.  5. So the fifth stage in our calling is that our children puttheir  confidence in God.   Verse 7: "That they should put their  confidence in God "  God has testified and taught that there might be a deposit ofreliable truth that we might teach it to our children that they mightknow it and embrace it -- why? So that they might put theirconfidence in God.  The aim of all true education is to deepen and broaden confidencein God. This is what keeps learning from leading to pride -- or should  keep learning from leading to pride. All true learning,all true knowledge reveals that we are dependent on God and mustdepend on him or perish. Knowledge that leads to self-sufficiencyrather than dependence on God is not true knowledge but flawedknowledge. It is like an archeologist who finds a beautiful ancientpainting, but hides it in a locked case and travels around givinglectures on how clever he was to discover it, but never bringing itout for all to admire, lest the beauty of the original treasuredetract from his own achievement in finding it.  The aim of all knowledge is confidence in God. Hope in God. Trustin God. God is the beginning and the goal of all education. But thereis one final stage in our calling as parents and church toward ourchildren.  6. Our confidence in God, rooted in knowledge of God's testimonyand teaching must lead to  a life of obedience.   Verse 7: "That they should put their confidence in God, and notforget the works of God, but  keep His commandments ."  When our children are confident in God they will follow thecommandments of God. Outward obedience will not be legalisticconformity to external pressures and expectations. It will be thefruit of internal confidence -- not self-confidence, butGod-confidence.  The reason outward obedience to God is the final goal of parentingis because it externalizes the glory of God -- and that is why theuniverse was created. Internal states of mind, no matter how good, donot manifest or reveal or externalize the worth of God. But when weand our children are so confident in God that we gladly obey God'sdemands for love and justice, then the beauty and worth and wisdomand love and justice of God shine out in the world. And that is whythe world was created -- that the knowledge of the glory of God mightfill the earth the way the waters cover the sea (Habakkuk 2:14).  Conclusion  I close with one implication for our church. I believe that oneimplication of this six-fold calling is   a new kind ofpartnership between church and parents  . Parents are theprimary agents of God in this calling. But no parents can do all thiswithout the help of others. This is why schools exist and why allother educational efforts in the church exist.  Parents need help in keeping a God-centered vision of parentingalive.  Parents need a deep confidence in God.  Parents need motivation to persevere year in and year out.  Parents need encouragement when everything seems to go wrong.  Parents need relief from time to time from the strain ofparenting.  Parents need help in boiling down the Book of God into essential,transferable, age-appropriate portions.  Parents need help in teaching subjects and skills where they lackexpertise and time.  Parents need community reinforcement of truth and moral standards.  Parents need solutions to tough problems raised by children.  Parents need camaraderie for the sharing of accumulated wisdom.  Parents need correction when others can see that something iswrong and they can't.  Parents need prayer because in the end God is the great Teacher.  Parenting is the main thing for children under God; but God meansfor parenting to happen in a covenant community that helps providewhat parents need. And he means, in turn, for parents -- and singlepeople -- to sustain and shape the ministry of the covenant communitytoward the children.  Parents and singles who teach,  parents and singles who oversee,  parents and singles who sing,  parents and singles who plan and carry out activities forchildren,  parents and singles who open their homes,  parents and singles who model all that we are aiming at ineducational mission.  I invite you to pray with me toward this new partnership atBethlehem -- that the next generation might put their confidence inGod.  Copyright 1996 John Piper  
  
