  The vast majority of great men and women have beenutterly forgotten.  The Latin poet Horace, who died just aboutthe time Jesus was born, speaks about the great warriors of yearsgone by:   In endless night they sleep, unwept, unknown: No bard had they to make all time their own.  (Odes iv. ix. xxvi)   When I was in Singapore there was much talk aboutthird world missions -- that is, missionaries going from ratherthan going to third world countries.  But one of the perceptivethird world leaders there told me over lunch one day that thisreally wasn't all that new.  He said, Hardly anyone knowsabout them because there haven't been any biographers for thirdworld missionaries.  So hundreds of God's great and faithful servantshave vanished from history like Horace's warriors.  They are rememberedby no one but God.  But not all the great men and women of God have beenforgotten.  And there is a reason: God intends for their livesto give us inspiration and guidance.  God intends for memory tobe a great means of grace.    Hebrews 13:7 says, Remember your leaders, thosewho spoke to you the Word of God; consider the outcome of theirlife, and imitate their faith.  Hebrews 6:12 says, Donot be sluggish, but imitators of those who through faith andpatience inherit the promises.  And of course Hebrews 11is a collection of excerpts from the lives of great men and womenof faith.  The author of Hebrews was convinced that the dead canand will go on speaking for our encouragement if someone willtake the trouble to preserve their memory.  Proverbs 13:20 says, He who walks with wisemen becomes wise.  Philips Brooks (an Episcopalian pastorin Boston 100 years ago) applied that Proverb to the reading ofChristian biography like this:  While it is good to walk among the living, it isgood also to live with the wise, great, and good dead.  It keepsout of life the dreadful feeling of extemporaneousness, with itsconceit and its despair.  It makes us always know that God madeother men before He made us.  It furnishes a constant backgroundfor our living.  It provides us with perpetual humility and inspiration.(In W. Wiersbe, Walking with the Giants, p.15)  Isaac Watts, who wrote so many of our great Hymns,loved to read Christian biography.  He said,    The lives or memoirs of persons of piety, well written,have been of infinite and unspeakable advantage to the disciplesand professors of Christianity, and have given us admirable instancesand rules how to resist every temptation of a soothing or a frowningworld, how to practice important and difficult duties, how tolove God above all, and to love our neighbors as ourselves, tolive by the faith of the Son of God, and to die in the same faith,in sure and certain hope of a resurrection to eternal life.   (In James Reid, Memoirs of the Westminster Divines, p. iv)   Jonathan Edwards said,   There are two ways ofrepresenting and recommending true religion and virtue to theworld; the one, by doctrine and precept; the other, by instanceand example.  And probably the most influential book heever wrote was The Life and Diary of David Brainerd.  It has inspiredgenerations of missionaries for over 200 years.    So I am encouraged both by Scripture and by the testimonyof church history that God wills for us to be inspired and guidedby the study of the lives of great men and women.  Specifically,as I have been pondering the people in the book of Acts, Luke(the writer) seems very much intent on calling attention to thecharacter of Barnabas.  So I have decided to spend three Sundaysfocusing our attention on this man -- or, more accurately, focusingour attention on his faith and the God reflected in it.  Our text this morning is Acts 11:22-24.  Discipleshad been scattered all over the Mediterranean coastlands afterthe persecution of Stephen.  Some went about 400 miles north toAntioch and preached to Gentiles.  A great number believed (accordingto verse 21) and this news reached the church in Jerusalem.  Thisis where verse 22 picks up:  News of this came to the ears of the church in Jerusalem,and they sent Barnabas to Antioch.  When he came and saw the graceof God, he was glad; and he exhorted them all to remain faithfulto the Lord with steadfast purpose; for he was a good man, fullof the Holy Spirit and of faith.  And a large company was addedto the Lord.  What we want to try to see today is what makes thisman tick.  It is obvious that Luke admires Barnabas.  After hedescribes his ministry in verse 23 he says, For he was agood man.  We are going to look at his goodness for threeweeks.  Today I want to focus on the root of that goodness.  Wheredoes it come from?  And how does this particular root producethe fruit of goodness we see in this text?  How might it producethe same goodness in us?  Let's make brief work out of verse 24.  It has twoassertions: Barnabas was a good man, that's one assertion; andBarnabas was full of the Holy Spirit and faith, that's the otherassertion.  How do they relate to each other?  Probably fullnessof the Holy Spirit and faith is the root or source of Barnabas'goodness.  Paul unpacks this relationship in Galatians.  He saysin Gal. 5:22 that goodness is a fruit of the Holy Spirit.  Youdon't get the Holy Spirit because you are good.  The Holy Spirittakes over your life and starts to make you good.    But what do we do in that process?  We are not passivein this affair of becoming good.  That's why Luke doesn't justsay that Barnabas was full of the Holy Spirit.  He is full ofthe Holy Spirit and faith.  Faith is what we do.  Now what doesfaith have to do with the work of the Holy Spirit?   Gal. 3:2 tells us: Did you receive the Spiritby works of the law, or by hearing with faith?  The assumedanswer is that we received the Spirit by faith in the word ofGod.  Then verse 5 says, Does he who supplies the Spiritto you and works miracles among you do so by works of the law,or by hearing with faith?  And again the assumed answeris FAITH!  The Spirit is received by faith and goes on being suppliedthrough faith.  So let's put it all together:  At the very beginningof the Christian life we receive the Holy Spirit by trusting inthe truth of the Gospel (Gal. 3:2).  Then as the Christian lifegoes on and there is need again and again to be strengthened andfilled with the Spirit this too happens by faith in the word ofGod's promise (Gal. 3:5) .  One of the practical fruits or productsof this Spirit-filled faith is goodness (Gal. 5:22).  So when Luke says that Barnabas was a goodman, full of the Holy Spirit and faith, my understandingis that   Barnabas had a great faith in God, and that by this faith the Holy Spirit became powerful in his heart, and that the result was a lot of practical goodness in Barnabas' life.  So if you asked Luke what made Barnabas tick, whatwas the key to his life as a Christian leader, I think Luke couldhave said two things.    If he wanted to focus on the divine enabling of Barnabas'slife he could have said, The key to his life was that hewas full of the Holy Spirit.    Or if Luke wanted to focus on the human side, hecould have said, The key to his life was that he was fullof faith.     Now how can the life of Barnabas become living andeffective for us at this point?  How can we get encouragementand guidance from Luke's portrait?  I think what will be most helpful will be to pointout the specific ways that Barnabas' goodness showed itself andhow faith made that possible.  I have seen at least six demonstrationsof Barnabas' goodness in today's text.  Let' take them one ata time.   1.  Barnabas is known for his empathy to outsiders.   Notice from verse 22 that of all the apostles andelders and deacons that the church in Jerusalem could have sentto help the Gentile believers in Antioch, the church chose Barnabas. Why?  Because he had earned a reputation for caring for the underdog. For example, in Acts 9:26-27 after the conversion of Saul --the former persecutor, and Pharisee -- the whole church was soafraid of him that he couldn't even join their fellowship as anew Christian.  Only Barnabas was willing to stand by him andbe his advocate.    In fact, according to Acts 4:36 Barnabas' real namewas Joseph and the apostles called him Barnabas becauseit means son of encouragement.  It's obvious thatLuke wants us to see Barnabas' goodness in his remarkable giftfor encouraging others, especially underdogs or outsiders.  Sothe church in Jerusalem chooses Barnabas to go to Antioch to encourageand establish the new Gentile church.  Now how does faith produce this kind of goodness?    Surely part of the answer is this: faith feels thewonder of being accepted as an outsider to God's blessing.  Faithis the apprehension that we were once cut off from the heavenlyJerusalem and willfully locked in the Antioch of sin.  And faithis the apprehension that God built a bridge between Jerusalemand Antioch constructed with the cross of his own Son.  And thereforefaith has a kind of built in empathy for outsiders.  This was very strong in Barnabas' life for some reason. So of all the apostles and elders who could have gone to encouragethe Gentile converts in Antioch, the church chose Barnabas.  He had the goodness of empathy with outsiders becausefaith still feels the wonder of being accepted by God.    2.  Barnabas yielded to the call of God through thechurch.   Verse 22 ends with the words, They sent Barnabasto Antioch.  And verse 23 begins with the words, Whenhe came. . .  There was a need.  The church saw in Barnabas thenecessary gifts.  They sent him.  He went.  And that was that. In fact, there is no evidence that he ever returned to Jerusalemto live.    At the beginning of chapter 13 Barnabas is prayingwith some of the teachers in Antioch and it happens again.  TheSpirit says, Set apart Barnabas and Saul for the work towhich I have called them.  They fasted, prayed, laid theirhands on them and they were off.  And that was that.  So the second feature of goodness I see in Barnabaswas an extraordinary yieldedness to go anywhere God directed,and to take his cue from the guidance of the church.  How does faith produce this kind of goodness?  Faith banks everything on the missionary promiseof Matthew 28:19-20, All authority in heaven and on earthhas been given to me. . . I will be with you to the end of theage.  Barnabas knew that if he followed the leading of God,he would always be in the presence of omnipotent protection andunparalleled pleasures.  So Barnabas had the goodness of being yielded tothe call of God because he had faith in the promise of Christ'sever-present fellowship and protection.    3.  Barnabas saw the grace of God in an imperfectchurch.    Verse 23: When he came and saw the grace ofGod. . .     It is part of Barnabas' goodness that he had eyesto look beyond the imperfections of a church that had just beenplanted and see the grace of God.  Not everyone can see the tokensof God's grace in the lives of the saints, especially the newersaints.  But Barnabas could and that is why he had such a remarkablegift for encouragement.  He saw living embers of grace that hewanted to fan into flame, where others saw only the ashes of imperfection.  Why did his faith produce that kind of goodness?  Because faith lives by grace.  Faith spends all of its timelooking for grace and locking eyes with grace.  And so faith hasa kind of homing device for grace.  Faith is like a radar screendesigned to pick up the slightest motion of grace.  Its like oneof those little metal detectors that men use to hunt coins aroundLake Calhoun.  If it gets near to a tiny little fragment of grace,the signals go off.  So Barnabas had the goodness of being able to seethe grace of God in the imperfect lives of the Gentile saintsin Antioch, because his faith was tuned in to the frequency ofgrace.  Because faith can't survive without grace.    4.  Barnabas not only saw the grace of God, he rejoicedover the grace of God in the lives of others.    Verse 23 goes on: When he came and saw thegrace of God, he was glad.   Faith not only sees grace, it delights in grace. Faith is not only like a homing device and radar and metal detectorthat spots grace in an instant.  It is also like an addiction. The more grace you see and taste the more you must have.  Andwhen you get near it, you not only spot it, you savor it, yourejoice over it!  And so the goodness of Barnabas was his readinessto rejoice over the grace of God that he saw in the young churchin Antioch.  And the reason he was so ready to rejoice was becausehis faith had in it a deep and thrilling addiction to grace developedover a long period of dependence.    5.  Barnabas exerted himself for the perseveranceof the saints.    Verse 23: When he came and saw the grace ofGod, he was glad; and he exhorted them all to remain faithfulto the Lord with steadfast purpose.   Genuine saving faith has in it an impulse to persevereand to fight for its life every day against all the temptationsto unbelief.  Genuine saving faith feels that it would be utterlyinauthentic if it took off the armor of God, laid aside its vigilanceand acted as though past decisions could guarantee future blessings.  And since genuine saving faith knows that its ownlife depends daily on the word of God and prayer and moral vigilance,therefore faith will produce in us the same vigilance for others. And this is a great goodness.  Barnabas exhorted them allto remain faithful to the Lord with steadfast purpose; for hewas a good man.  His goodness was his exertion for the perseveranceof the saints and it came from the living persevering realityof his own faith.    6. Finally, Barnabas was utterly trustworthy withother people's money.    Notice verses 29-30: And the disciples determined,every one according to his ability, to send relief to the brethrenwho lived in Judea; and they did so, sending it to the eldersby the hand of Barnabas and Saul.   In other words, Barnabas along with Saul, was chosento be trusted with the collection.  Luke seems to want to emphasizethis part of Barnabas' goodness because he gave Barnabas as themain example of generosity in the Jerusalem church back in Acts4:36-37.   Thus Joseph, who was surnamed by the apostlesBarnabas (which means, son of encouragement), a Levite, a nativeof Cyprus, sold a field which belonged to him, and brought themoney and laid it at the apostles' feet.   Barnabas had a reputation for being trustworthy withother people's money because he lived in a way that showed hedid not love money or things.  He was willing to sell his landfor the cause of the gospel.  He was willing to leave his landfor the cause of the gospel.  Money had no hold on him.  He wasfree.  Why?  Because he trusted God, not money, to take care ofhis future.  He was laying up treasures in heaven, not on earth.  He was banking on the promise, I will never fail you orforsake you (Heb. 13:5).    And so again it was his great faith that gave Barnabasthe goodness of being utterly trustworthy with other people'smoney.  So what have we seen in our first look at the lifeof Barnabas?  We've seen that his goodness was the goodness ofa great faith.  As Luke put it: He was a good man full ofthe Holy Spirit and faith.    Barnabas felt empathy for outsiders, becausefaith still feels the wonder of once having been and outsiderbut now accepted by God.   Barnabas yielded to the call of God, becausefaith rests in the missionary promise, I will be with youto the end of the age.   Barnabas saw the grace of God in an imperfectchurch, because faith has a homing device for grace.   Barnabas rejoiced over the grace of God in thelives of others, because faith not only sees but savors grace;it is not only alert for it, it is addicted to it through longdependence on it.   Barnabas exerted himself for the perseveranceof the saints, because genuine saving faith knows the necessityof vigilance for itself and therefore for others.   Finally, Barnabas was utterly trustworthy withother people's money, because the power of greed had been brokenby his faith in the love of a never-failing God.   Therefore I say with the writer to the Hebrews, Considerthe outcome of his life and imitate his faith (Heb. 13:7).  
