  Last week we saw in verse 8 of this chapter thatthe result of priestly failure is that many are caused to stumble.You (priests) have turned aside form the way; you have causedmany to stumble by your instruction.  In other words, whenthe truth and power of God begin to fade from the Christian community,then two other things begin to drain away from the Christian communityas well: namely, 1) the clarity of vision to avoid moral trapsand 2) the strength to stand upright when the whole world woulddrag you down.  When there is a famine of the word of God in theland the spiritual nutrients that enable the eye to spot sin assin is gone.  And the spiritual protein that gives strength themoral muscle of the soul to do what is right is missing.  Thespiritual eye becomes diseased through malnutrition, and the clearlines between sin and righteousness begin to blur.  The moralmuscle of the will atrophies, and weakens, and the result is thatthe beckoning of the world wins because there is no strength tostand against it.  When the ministry of the word goes wrong, manyare caused to stumble.  Today's text spells out for us three areas wherethe people of Israel were stumbling.      In verse 10 it's the general area of personalrelationships: Why then are we faithless to one another? There was widespread dishonesty.  People were not keeping theirword.  Trusts were being broken.  Why are we faithless (ortreacherous) with each other?  That is, Why can we not trusteach other.  Why all this breaking of faith?  In verse 11-12 Malachi gets specific and toucheson the area of marriage to unbelievers.  The last line of verse11 says that Judah has married the daughter of a foreignGod.  That means that many of the men were marrying womenwho were not believers in the true God.  This was a very seriousstumbling in the eyes of God.  In verses 13-16 Malachi deals with the issue ofdivorce.  Verse 16 makes the issue clearest: I hate divorce,says the Lord the God of Israel.   Now we only have 25 minutes to deal with these threeareas. So how shall we limit ourselves?  What I have chosen todo is simply to make as plain as I can the will of God which hemakes explicit in these three passages, and the reasons why weshould obey it.  And so my aim is to strengthen your spiritualability to resist three temptations: the temptation to break atrust in your relationships, the temptation to marry an unbeliever,and the temptation to divorce your spouse.  One or more of thoseapplies to every person in this room from childhood to the oldestamong us.  Now that leaves unanswered a hundred questions. What if someone breaks trust with you?  What if your child marriesan unbeliever?  What if your spouse abandons you and presses youfor divorce?  The Bible has something to say for our guidancein all these areas.  And I pray that God will guide our studytogether over the coming months and years.  I hope the whole rangeof Biblical truth and the whole range of human need will be touchedin a way that only God could design for our good.  As a little part of that life-long goal I want totry to do some back surgery this morning.  Some of you remembermy high school friend Nancy who came to Minneapolis a while agoto have back surgery for sever scoliosis -- that's a distortedcurvature of the spine.  They operated and put steel rods up herback.  The aim was to straighten her posture, and relieve painand strengthen her back.  Well that is what I want to do.  I believe that theword of God in this text -- especially the reasons that God givesfor his commands -- is like steel.  If a person is willing toreceive it, and if the surgery is properly performed, your lifecan be made more upright, you can be spared many pains, and yourmoral backbone can be greatly strengthened.  So let's try it together. You prepare yourself for the surgery and I will try to handlethese steel rods as delicately as I can.   1. Malachi 2:10  General Relationships   First in verse 10 Malachi tells us God's will forour relationships in general, and gives us three reasons why weshould be eager to do it.    Have we not all one Father?  Has not one God createdus?  Why then are we faithless to one another, profaning the covenantof our fathers?  The will of God for his people is plain from thisverse.  He wills that we not be faithless to each other.  Thisword for be faithless or break faith ordeal treacherously is used in all three of the sectionsof our text this morning (2:10-16).  In verse 10: Why arewe faithless to one another? -- referring to general untrustworthinessin our relationships.  In verse 11: Judah has been faithless. . . and has married the daughter of a foreign god -- inreference to the marrying of unbelievers.  And verse 14: Youhave been faithless to the wife of your youth -- in referenceto divorce.  So the sin that runs through each of these areasof life is this failure to keep a trust, the failure to keep acommitment.  It is the breaking of an agreement or covenant orcontract or promise.    So what Malachi does with this key word is to showthat community life is supposed to be ordered by the faithfulfulfillment of promises and contracts and oaths and covenantsand commitments.  But this order has given way to the disorderthat comes when people give in to the power of self-centered emotionalimpulses.   In other words by consistently using this littleword bagad and tracing faithlessness through in all the relationshipsof the text, Malachi makes clear for us two alternative ways forpeople to try to live in a community.    One way is what you might call covenantal order --its what the OT means by shalom.  All relationshipsare made peaceful and pure by the fulfillment of covenants andpromises and oaths and contracts and commitments.  Children toparents, and parents to children.  Husbands to wives and wivesto husbands.  Employer to employee and employee to employer. Citizen to state and state to citizen.  The peace and prosperityand joy -- the shalom -- of the community is held together bythe deep strong spirit of covenant-keeping that pervades the community. The very fabric of the community is the trustworthiness of itspeople.  Do they keep their commitments?  The other way for people to try to live togetherin community is the opposite of covenantal order; it's what youmight call the disorder of self-indulgence.  In this communitythe spirit of commitment-making and commitment-keeping has beenreplaced by a spirit of emotional and physical impulse.  The moralfabric of faithfulness to covenants and promises and contractsis unraveled and what's left are the individual strands of privategratification.  Let me give you a quote from a secular sociologicalstudy of our own day to show you how the ways divide between thesetwo forms of community life.  A woman finds herself pregnant and wants to abort,or a man feels bogged down by commitments to job, spouse and children,and wants out.  A person's aging parents are interfering withhis pleasures, and he wants someone to take them off his hands. A man wants to sleep with his secretary, or is tired of makinga living and desires relief from his commitments.   How we, asa society and as individuals, view the decisions made about fulfillingthese desires is the crux of the problem. (Daniel Yankelovich,New Rules, 1981, p. 248)  Malachi's message to us this morning could hardlybe more relevant or more needed.  Five times in this text he warnsus not to act faithlessly -- or to put it positively,he urges us to make covenant-making and covenant-keeping the fabricof our life together.  He warns against the pseudo freedom ofindividualistic self-indulgence, and he tries to help us see thestrength and beauty and joy and peace (shalom) of being faithfulin all our relationships and all our commitments.   The three reasons given in verse 10 are:    We have one Father: Have we not all onefather? (v. 10).  In other words when we betray a trustwe betray the family of God.  We deceive our own flesh and wedishonor our Father.  We have one Creator.  Has not one God createdus? (v. 10).  If I am faithless to you, and break my commitmentto you, I act as though you and I are accountable to two differentCreators.  I act as though my Creator lets me function on oneset of terms -- like self-indulgence that ignores my commitmentto you -- while I expect your Creator to hold you to another setof terms -- like respect for my rights and stay off my case. But if we are both utterly dependent upon and accountable to oneand the same Creator, that double standard will not do.  The third reason we should not break faith withothers is that it profanes the covenant of our fathers. Whythen are we faithless to one another, profaning the covenant ofour fathers?   What was this covenant?  It was God's commitmentto be Abraham's God, to work for him and bless him and give himlife and hope -- and not only him but all his true offspring,including you and me in Jesus Christ the seed of Abraham.  Inother words whenever you or I lie or fudge on our duties, or betraya trust we act as though God is not able to take care of us andprotect us and give us a fulfilling life if we keep our commitments. And when we act as though God cannot or will not give us whatis best for us on the path of faithfulness, we profane his covenant. We act as though it is untrustworthy and worthless.  Those are Malachi' arguments: we have one Father;one God created us; and his covenant with us in Jesus Christ isthe guarantee of his help and friendship.  Therefore let's bea people of radical integrity and faithfulness in all our dealingswhatever it costs!    2. Malachi 2:11-12  Marriage to Unbelievers   In verses 11-12 Malachi moves from relationshipsin general to the specific issue of marrying unbelievers.  Godregards this as another instance of being faithless or breakingtrust.  He calls it an abomination.  Why is that?  Let's readverse 11:  Judah has been faithless, and abomination has beencommitted in Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah has profaned thesanctuary (literally: the holiness) of the Lord, which he loves,and has married the daughter of a foreign god.   The primary issue here is that the person that theman of Judah was marrying did not love and trust and follow Jehovah,the true God of Israel.  She was not a daughter of the true God;she was a daughter of a foreign god.  So the point of the verse is that when we claim tolove God with all our heart and soul and mind and strength, andthen willfully choose to unite ourselves with an unbeliever inthe most intimate personal union on earth we profane the holinessof God.  We act as though our emotional drive for human intimacyis more important than affirming the preciousness of God's holinessand nearness.  God calls this choice an abomination and he saysin verse 12 that those who walk into it with their eyes open areasking for God to turn his back on them. May the Lord cutoff from the tents of Jacob, for the man who does this, any towitness or answer, or to bring an offering to the Lord of hosts!  Don't hear more than the text is saying here.      It is not saying that it's impossible in everycase for an unbelieving spouse to be converted.  It is not impossible. We have seen it happen and 1 Peter 3 says that we should liveso as to make it happen.  It is not saying that if you are married to anunbeliever you should get out.  Five hundred years later somebelievers in Corinth drew that conclusion and Paul wrote themto tell them precisely not to pull out (1 Corinthians 7:12-13).   Rather what this text is saying to us clearly thismorning is this: if the choice of marriage partner still liesbefore you, settle it in your mind right now never to marry anyone that does not love the Lord Jesus with all his or her heart.You are not to young to do this.  From the time I was 13 yearsold it was one of the settled convictions of my heart: I wouldguard myself from the rising of all romantic affection for anygirl who was not a true Christian.  And by the grace of God Iwas not only spared a life of tragedy, but given a marriage anda family as peaceful and satisfying as any I have ever known.   3. Malachi 2:13-16  Divorce   Finally, Malachi turns to the third and final instanceof acting faithlessly, namely divorcing a spouse.  Verse 16: Ihate divorce, says the Lord the God of Israel.    The versions differ so much on verse 15 that it wouldtake us too long to settle on the best translation.  So I am goingto simply draw out three simple and clear reasons from verses14 and 16 for why God hates divorce and why Christians shouldnever seek to seek to nullify their union with a living spouse.  In verse 13 we learn that God refuses to accept theofferings of the people.  In verse 14 they ask, Why doeshe not?  And the answer is given:   Because the Lord was witness to the covenant betweenyou and the wife of your youth, to whom you have been faithless(bagad!), though she is your companion and your wife by covenant.  The reason that divorce has kindled God's wrath isthat marriage is a covenant.  The life together is rooted notin the sand of emotional satisfaction but in the rock of covenantcommitment.  And two things in this text clarify what sort ofcovenant that is.  One is in the first part of verse 14: The Lordwas witness (to the covenant) between you and the wife of youryouth.    I John take you Noel to by my wife, and I dopromise and covenant before God and these witnesses to be yourloving and faithful husband as long as we both shall live.   COVENANT BEFORE GOD!  That is the essenceof marriage.  And when God stands as witness to the covenant promisesof a marriage it becomes more than a merely human agreement. God is not a passive bystander at a wedding ceremony.  In effecthe says, I have seen this, I confirm it and I record it in heaven. And I bestow upon this covenant by my presence and my purposethe dignity of being an image of my own covenant with my wife,the church.  We know this from Ephesians 5 but there is pointerto it in verse 16, and this is my final observation from the text. Verse 16 says, For I hate divorce, says the Lord the Godof Israel.  This is the only time in the whole book whereGod calls himself the God of Israel.  I don't thinkthat is an accident.  Because the root reason why God hates divorceis that it is fundamentally a contradiction of his covenant withhis wife, his people.    He is the God of Israel.  The fellowship may be broken. There may be exile and separation.  There may be anger and tears. But when whole story is told the sum of the matter is Isaiah54:4-8.  Your Maker is your husband, the Lord of hosts ishis name; and the Holy One of Israel is your Redeemer, the Godof the whole earth he is called.  For the Lord has called youlike a wife forsaken and grieved in spirit, like a wife of youthwhen she is cast off, says your God.  For a brief moment I forsookyou, but with great compassion I will gather you.  In overflowingwrath for a moment I hid my face from you, but with everlastinglove I will have compassion on you, says the lord, your Redeemer.  God will never nullify his marriage to the elect. Christ will never forsake his bride, the church.  He is a covenantmaker and a covenant keeper.  And that is the meaning of marriage.  And wherever you are this morning in your relationships-- and none of us is precisely where we should be -- rememberthese words of the covenant: The Lord, the Lord, a God mercifuland gracious, slow to anger, and abounding in steadfast love andfaithfulness, keeping steadfast love for thousands, forgivinginiquity and transgression and sin (Exodus 34:6-7).  I invite you to turn from all sin. Cast yourselfon the mercy of God.  And in the security and freedom of his unbreakablecovenant    don't back out on your commitments  don't marry an unbeliever  and don't divorce your covenant wife.   
