  November 9, 1997 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor    WORSHIP GOD! (Revelation 22:8-9)    I, John, am the one who heard and saw these things. And when Iheard and saw, I fell down to worship at the feet of the angel whoshowed me these things. But he said to me, "Do not do that. I am afellow servant of yours and of your brethren the prophets and ofthose who heed the words of this book. Worship God."  Reasons for a Series on Worship  I begin today a series of messages on worship. There are tworeasons, at least. One is that worship is what we were created for.This is the final end of all existence: the worship of God. Godcreated the universe so that it would display the worth of his glory.And he created us so that we would see this glory and reflect it byknowing and loving it - with all our heart and soul and mind andstrength. The other reason is that since the last time I preached onworship, hundreds of new people have come to Bethlehem, including anew lead worshipper, Chuck Steddom. So we need to rebuild a commonvision of what worship is and what we are gathering to do on Sundaymorning, and scattering to do on Monday morning. What is it? Why dowe do it? How do we do it? Those are the questions for the nextseveral weeks, and I think you are going to be surprised what we findin the Bible, which is where we will be looking for answers.  Worship God!  I begin with Revelation 22:9 not because I intend to do anexposition of it today, but because I want us to hear the simplecommand, "Worship God!" The angel said to John, when he fell down atthe angel's feet, "Do not do that. I am a fellow servant of yours andof your brethren the prophets and of those who heed the words of thisbook. Worship God." In other words, don't worship angels, worshipGod! Don't worship nothing, worship God! Don't neglect God or despiseGod, worship God! This is the last chapter of the Bible, and this isthe last duty of man: worship God!  What I aim to do this morning is a broad overview of the NewTestament by way of introduction to the theme.  What we find in the New Testament, perhaps to our amazement, is anutterly stunning degree of indifference to worship as an outwardritual, and an utterly radical intensification of worship as aninward experience of the heart.  No Gatherings Called "Worship Services" in the New Testament  Let's begin with a startling fact, namely, that in the epistles ofthe New Testament there is very little instruction that dealsexplicitly with corporate worship - what we call worship services.Not that there were no corporate gatherings for worship: 1Corinthians 14:23 speaks of "the whole church gathering together,"and Acts 2:46 speaks of the early church "attending the templetogether and breaking bread in their homes," and Hebrews 10:25 speaksof "not neglecting to meet together." But this is not much and theremarkable thing is that, even when the gatherings are in view, theapostles do not speak explicitly of "worship."  Let me illustrate this so that you feel its full force. In the OldTestament the most common word for worship is the Hebrew wordhishtahvah (or some related form of that word). Its basic meaning is"bow down," with the sense of reverence and respect and honor. Itoccurs 171 times. In the Greek Old Testament, 164 of those instancesof this Hebrew word are translated by the Greek word proskuneo.  In the Greek New Testament this is the main word for worship -proskuneo. But when you look at its use something astonishingappears. The word is common in the gospels (26 times) - people wouldoften bow down worshipfully before Jesus. And it is common in thebook of Revelation (21 times) because the angels and elders in heavenoften bow down before God. But in the epistles of Paul it occurs onlyonce, namely in 1 Corinthians 14:25 where the unbeliever falls downat the power of prophecy and confesses God is in the assembly. And itdoesn't occur at all in the letters of Peter, James or John.  Now this is remarkable - that the main word for worship in the OldTestament is virtually absent from the letters of the New Testament.Why is this? Why are the very epistles that are written to help thechurch be what it ought to be in this age almost totally devoid ofthis word and of explicit teaching on the specifics of corporateworship?  "Something Greater than the Temple is Here"  Let me suggest a reason. I think the reason is found in the wayJesus treated worship in his life and teaching. His main statement isfound in John 4:20-24. But before we look at that, consider a fewother things he said. For example, his attitude to the Temple - themain place of Jewish worship - was not at all what the Jewish leadersthought it should be.  When he wove a whip and drove out the money changers, the reasonhe give is not for the sake of proper sacrifices but for the sake ofprayer -- in fact prayer for all the nations. "My house shall becalled a house of prayer for all the nations" (Mark 11:17). In otherwords he focused attention away from the outward acts of Jewishsacrifices to the personal act of communion with God in prayer forall peoples.  Then he said two other things about the temple that pointed to aradically altered view of worship. He said, "Something greater thanthe Temple is here," referring to himself (Matthew 12:6), and hesaid, "Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up"(John 2:19). This attitude to the Temple not only got him killed(Mark 14:58; 15:29), but it also got Stephen killed (Acts 6:14).That's how important it was.  What Jesus was doing was identifying himself as the true Temple."Something greater than the Temple is here." In himself he willfulfill everything the Temple stood for, especially the place wherebelievers meet God. So here again he is diverting attention away fromworship as a localized thing with outward ritual to a personal,spiritual experience with himself at the center. Worship does notneed a building, a priesthood and a sacrificial system. It needs therisen Jesus.  True Worship is in Spirit and in Truth  What Jesus was doing to worship in the way he related to theTemple is made explicit in John 4:20-24. Here he uses the wordproskuneo - that dominant Old Testament word for worship - and showsthat it was laden with outward and localized meaning, and transformsit into a concept that is mainly inward rather than outward, andmainly pervasive rather than localized.  The woman at the well said:  Our fathers worshiped in this mountain, and you people say that inJerusalem is the place where men ought to worship." [The word forworship used here is that common Old Testament word, proskuneo; andnote the localized emphasis in her mind.] Jesus said to her, "Woman,believe Me, an hour is coming when neither in this mountain, nor inJerusalem, shall you worship the Father." (John 4:20-21)  Here you can see him loosening worship from its outward andlocalized connotations. Place is not the issue: "neither in thismountain nor in Jerusalem." He goes on,  But an hour is coming, and now is, when the true worshipers shallworship the Father in spirit and truth; for such people the Fatherseeks to be His worshipers. God is spirit, and those who worship Himmust worship in spirit and truth." (verses 23-24)  Here is the key sentence: true worship, which was anticipated forthe age to come, has arrived: "the hour is coming [in the age tocome] and now is [here in me]." And what marks this true futureworship that has broken into the present time from the glorious ageto come is that it is not bound by localized place or outward form.Instead of being in this mountain or in Jerusalem, it is "in spiritand in truth."  What Jesus is doing here is stripping proskuneo of its lastvestiges of localized and outward connotation. Not that it will bewrong for worship to be in a place or that it will be wrong for it touse outward forms; but rather he is making explicit and central thatthis is not what makes worship worship. What makes worship worship iswhat happens "in spirit and in truth" - with or without a place andwith or without outward forms.  What do those two phrases mean: "in spirit" and "in truth"?  I take "in spirit" to mean that this true worship is carried alongby the Holy Spirit and is happening mainly as an inward, spiritualevent, not mainly as an outward bodily event. And I take "in truth"to mean that this true worship is a response to true views of God andis shaped and guided by true views of God.  So what Jesus has done is break decisively the necessaryconnection between worship and its outward and localizedassociations. It is mainly something inward and free from locality.This is what he meant when he said, "This people honors me with theirlips, but their heart is far from me. In vain do they worship me"(Matthew 15:8-9). When the heart is far from God, worship is vain,empty, non-existent. The experience of the heart is the defining,vital, indispensable essence of worship.  True Worship is not Oriented on a Place or an Event  Now let's go back to our earlier question: why is the central OldTestament word for worship, proskuneo, virtually boycotted by Peter,James, John and Paul in the letters they write to the churches?  I think the reason is that the word did not make clear enough theinward, spiritual nature of true worship. It carried significantconnotations of place and form. The word was associated with bodilybowing down and with the actual presence of a visible manifestationto bow down before.  In the gospels, Jesus was really there in visible form to fallbefore. So the word proskuneo is used a lot. In the book ofRevelation the bowing down usually happens to God's manifestation inheaven or to false gods on the earth. So the word proskuneo is usedwidely in Revelation too.  But in the epistles something very different is happening. Jesusis not present in visible glory to fall before. Therefore the wholetendency of the early church - at least as it moved out of Jerusalem- was to deal with worship as primarily inward and spiritual ratherthan outward and ritualistic, and primarily pervasive rather thanlocalized.  To confirm this, and see even more clearly how radicallynon-place- and non-event-oriented the New Testament view of worshipis, consider what Paul does to some of the other words related to OldTestament worship.  For example, the next most frequent word for worship in the OldTestament (after proskuneo) is the word latreuo (over 90 times,almost always translating `abad) which is usually translated "serve,"as in Exodus 23:24: "You shall not worship their gods or serve them."  When Paul uses it for Christian worship he goes out of his way tomake sure that we know he means not a localized or outward form forworship practice but a non-localized, spiritual experience. In fact,he takes it so far as to treat virtually all of life as an act ofworship when lived in the right spirit. For example, in Romans 1:9 hesays, "I serve [or: worship] God in my spirit in the preaching of theGospel." And in Philippians 3:3 Paul says that true Christians"worship God in the Spirit of God . . . and put no confidence in theflesh." And in Romans 12:1 Paul urges Christians to "present yourbodies as living and holy sacrifices acceptable to God which is yourspiritual worship."  So even when Paul uses an Old Testament word for worship, he takespains to let us know that what he has in mind is not mainly alocalized or external event of worship but an internal, spiritualexperience - so much so that he sees all of life and ministry as anexpression of that inner experience of worship.  You see the same thing if you take the New Testament use of theOld Testament language for Temple "sacrifices" and "priestlyservice." The praise and thanks of the lips is called a "sacrifice toGod" (Hebrews 13:15). But so are good works in everyday life (Hebrews13:16). Paul calls his own ministry a "priestly service [of worship]"and he calls the converts themselves an "acceptable offering [inworship]" to God (Romans 15:16; see also Philippians 2:17). He evencalls the money that the churches send him "a fragrant aroma andacceptable sacrifice to God [in worship]" (Phililippians 4:18). Andhis own death for Christ he calls a "drink offering to God" (2Timothy 4:6).  Worship Happens in the Heart, Every Day and all the Time  So you can see what is happening in the New Testament. Worship isbeing significantly de-institutionalized, de-localized,de-ritualized. The whole thrust is being taken off of ceremony andseasons and places and forms; and is being shifted to what ishappening in the heart - not just on Sunday, but every day and allthe time in all of life.  This is what it means when we read things like, "Whether you eator drink or whatever you do, do all to the glory of God" (1Corinthians 10:31). And "whatever you do in word or deed, do all inthe name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks through him to God theFather" (Colossians 3:17). This is the form of worship commanded inthe New Testament: to act in a way that reflects the value of theglory of God - to do a thing in the name of Jesus with thanks to God.That is the basic form of living worship. But the New Testament usesthose greatest of all worship sentences without any reference toworship services. They describe life.  Even when Paul calls us to "be filled with the Spirit, speaking toone another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing andmaking melody with your heart to the Lord; always giving thanks forall things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to God, even theFather," there is no reference to a time or place or a service. Infact, the key word is "always" - "always giving thanks for all thingsin the name of Jesus" (see Colossians 3:16). This may, in fact, bewhat we should do in a worship service, but it is not Paul's burdento tell us that. His burden is to call for a radical, inwardauthenticity of worship and an all-encompassing pervasiveness ofworship in all of life. Place and form are not of the essence. Spiritand truth are all-important.  "A Continuous Act of Worship"  This is what gripped and shaped the reformed tradition, especiallythe Puritans and their heirs. The Puritans carried through thesimplification and freedom of worship in music and liturgy andarchitecture. Patrick Collinson summarizes Puritan theory andpractice by saying that, the life of the Puritan was in one sense acontinuous act of worship, pursued under an unremitting and livelysense of God's providential purposes and constantly refreshed byreligious activity, personal, domestic and public.  One of the reasons Puritans called their churches "meeting houses"and kept them very simple was to divert attention from the physicalplace to the inward, spiritual nature of worship.  My conclusion then is that in the New Testament there is astunning indifference to the outward forms and places of worship. Andthere is, at the same time, a radical intensification of worship asan inward, spiritual experience that has no bounds and pervades allof life. These emphases were recaptured in the Reformation and cameto clear expression in the Puritan wing of the Reformed tradition.  What begs for attention now is the question: what is the essenceof that radical, authentic, inward experience called worship, and howis it that this experience comes to expression in gatheredcongregations and in everyday life? We will turn to that next week.  Copyright 1997 John Piper  
