  We saw last week that in 2 Thessalonians 2 Paul'sconcern for the church in Thessalonica was a personal and experientialone.  According to verse 2 they were being shaken in mind andalarmed.  They were losing the stability and strength and calmnessthat Christians should have in times of trouble.  His first approach to restoring this loss of balancewas to teach the Thessalonians some truth that would remove thedeceit that lay at the root of their instability.  According tothe end of verse 2 they had fallen for the erroneous idea thatthe day of the Lord had come -- the coming of Christ was justover the horizon.  Then, according to verse 3, Paul teaches them, inline with the words of Jesus, that this can't be because the apostasyand the man of lawlessness must appear on the scene first.  Thereis going to be a significant falling away from the faith by professingChristians, and this will be brought to a climax by the man oflawlessness who comes in the very power of Satan and deceivesmany.  The text last week ended in verse 11 with the horrifyingprospect that God himself is going to give people into the handsof the man of lawlessness and confirm their delusion: Therefore,God sends upon them a strong delusion, to make them believe whatis false, so that all may be condemned who did not believe thetruth but had pleasure in unrighteousness (v. 12).  Now the question arises: does such talk settle themind and give stability and strength and calmness?  I stressedlast week that Paul points to the victory of Jesus in verse 8:The Lord Jesus will slay [the man of lawlessness] with thebreath of his mouth and destroy him by the brightness of his coming.  But the question still rises: If the times of apostasyare going to be as terrible as these verses say -- with supernaturalpowers of delusion -- then has Paul said enough to overcome theshaking and the alarm in Thessalonica?  What should give the Thessaloniansstability and confidence and calmness that they too may not beswept away in the apostasy and deceived by the man of lawlessness?  The answer is that Paul is not finished.  In a sensehe has just begun.  Verses 3-12 are intended to dislodge the errorabout the second coming and clarify the end of the age.  But nowthere is something he wants to build in to their minds as wellas something to dislodge.  And this especially is what will givethe stability they need.  Notice verse 15.  So then. . .  Or: Therefore,brethren stand firm. . .  This standing firmis the opposite of being shaken in verse 2.  So itis clear that Paul is still concerned in verses 13-15 to stabilizethe Christians.  His practical soul-concern is still paramount. And we can be grateful for this, because everyone of us is shakenat one time or another.  Now what gives this stability and calmness of soulthat God means for his people to have?  The next phrase givesthe key:   He says, stand firm and hold to the traditionswhich you were taught by us, either by word of mouth or by letter.  So when circumstances arise that alarm you, and whenthe winds of error start to blow you off your stability, the keyis to take hold of something and to hold it fast -- namely, thetraditions that were taught by the apostles.  Most of you heard about the pilot, Henry Dempseywho was flying his 15 passenger Beechcraft 99 turboprop from LewistonMaine to Boston last week.  At 4000 feet he heard a noise in theback of the plain where the rear stairs are.  He turned the controlsover to his co-pilot and walked back.  The plain hit turbulenceknocked him against the door and it fell open.  Dempsey was sucked part way out, fell face down onthe steps and grabbed for something -- anything that might savehis life.  He caught a railing and held on.  The co-pilot thought he had fallen out and divertedthe flight to a nearby airport.  When he landed they found himwith his face 12 inches off the runway and with his hands of tightaround the rails that his fingers had to be pried open.  What I want you to see from this story is that thelife and death grip with which Henry Dempsey held on to the stairrailing at the back of that Beechcraft turboprop is the kind ofgrip we should have on the teachings of the apostle Paul handeddown to us in the New Testament.  The wind and the suction and the gravity and thenoise that swirled around him and tried to pull him to his destructionwas less dangerous than the mystery of lawlessness that is swirlingaround you today and which will someday become even stronger. And the stakes are greater, because the mystery of lawlessnessand unbelief is sucking us not to physical death in the Atlanticocean, but to eternal destruction in hell.  Let's suppose that the railing that Henry Dempseyheld on to was a cable instead of a rod.  And lets say that thecable was made of six strands of steel and that each one of thesestrands is one of the traditions that 2 Thessalonians says wemust hold fast to in order to stand firm when we are shaken andalarmed.  What would these six strands of the cable -- the sixtraditions -- be?  I will try to show them to you very quickly in verses13-14.  These are two of the richest verses in the New Testament. I urge you to memorize them for the sake of your own stabilityand calm.    Strand number one in the cable of hope and stabilityis the love of God.  Verse 13: But we are bound to givethanks to God always for you, brethren beloved by the Lord. ..  I don't think Paul has in mind here the general loveof God that he extends to the whole world corporately holdingthe universe in being, causing the sun to rise, the rain to fall,and the gospel to be preached, and many evidences of his gloryand grace to reach the nations.  I think he has in mind the particularsaving love that Paul describes in Ephesians 2:4-5 when he saysthat God out of the great love with which he loved you madeyou alive when you were dead through trespasses.    In other words the first steel strand in the cableof hope is the active, powerful, pursuing, saving love of Godthat tracks us down in our rebellion until we collapse and thenawakens us new people in Christ.  To know yourself distinguishingly,particularly, personally, effectually, irresistibly, unbreakably,and eternally loved by God is the central strand of steel in thecable of hope.  So Paul says, Hold on to it, and stand firm.   The second strand in the cable is the apostolictradition of election.  Reading verse 13 again: But we arebound to give thanks to God always for you, brethren beloved bythe Lord, because God chose you. . .  This is why I said the love of God was not the generallove that he shows the world.  It was a distinguishing and particularlove -- God chose them.  They are the elect of God.  How does Paul know that they are?  How do they knowthat they are?  Turn to 1 Thessalonians 1.  The same sequenceof thought occurs here.  First in verse 2 Paul thanks God forthe Thessalonians, especially when he remembers their work offaith and labor of love and endurance of hope.  But the basisof that thanks to God is at root their election.  Verse 4: Forwe know, brethren beloved by God, that he has chosen you. Notice the linking together again the love of God and the electionof God.  They are loved with a particular electing love.  Now how does Paul know this?  Verse 5: we know it,he says, . . . for (=because) our gospel came to you notnot only in word, but also in power and in the Holy spirit andwith full conviction. . . (verse 6:) and you became imitatorsof us and of the Lord, for you received the word in much affliction,with joy inspired by the Holy Spirit.  In other words Paul was persuaded of their electionbecause of their response to the gospel!  They received it insuch a way that not even persecution could dampen their joy inChrist and their imitation of godliness.  Why is this tradition that comes from Jesus a steelstrand of hope in the last days of deception and apostasy?  BecauseJesus said in Matthew 24:24, For false Christs and falseprophets will arise and show great signs and wonders, so as tolead astray, if possible, even the elect.   In other words, it will not be possible in thosedays for the man of lawlessness and all the false prophets todeceive the elect.  These are the ones whose love does not growcold, who endure to the end and are saved (Mt. 24:12-13). Hewill send out his angels with a loud trumpet call, and they willgather his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven tothe other (Mt. 24:31).  So I urge you with the apostle Peter (2 Peter 1:10),Be zealous to confirm your calling and election. It is a strand of steel in the cable of hope.  Hold it firm andstand fast.   The third strand of the cable that Paul mentionsin verse 13 is salvation, or as we can call it from verse 14,glorification.  Verse 13: But we are bound to give thanksto God always for you, brethren beloved by the Lord, because Godchose you from the beginning to be saved. . .  Notice here that salvation is something future here,not past.  The way you know this is by noticing the next phrase-- they were chosen to be saved through sanctification.. .  Sanctification is the lifelong process of becomingholy.  If we are saved through sanctification then salvation inthis verse is something that we are looking forward to, not somethingthat has already happened.  And what is it?  Verse 14 makes that plain: Tothis you were called through our gospel, so that you may obtainthe glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.    The third steel strand in the cable of hope is thatwe are destined for glory.  How does Paul say it in Romans 8? Those whom he predestined he also called, and those whomhe called he also justified, and those whom he justified he alsoglorified.   Whatever afflictions and sorrows you must endurein this life don't ever let go of the steel certainty that God'select will be saved -- they will be glorified. . . and thesufferings of this time are not worth comparing with the gloryto be revealed to us in the coming of the Son of Man.  Holdit fast and stand firm.   The fourth strand in the cable of hope is sanctificationby the Spirit.  At the end of verse 13: God chose you tobe saved through sanctification by the Spirit.  There is a holiness, a measure of sanctification,without which we will not be saved.  We are not sanctified ANDsaved; we are saved through sanctification.  As onebook says it recently, no holiness no heaven.    This is not an exaltation of works in which we couldever boast.  It is an exaltation of the Holy Spirit.  It is notsanctification by John Piper.  It is not sanctification by works. It is, Paul says so clearly, sanctification by the Spirit. God's Spirit!  The HOLY Spirit.  This is why it is one of the steel strands of hopein the cable we hold onto.  It is a work of God -- just like everything else in this cable:  God loves, God chooses, God saves,and God, the Holy Spirit, sanctifies and brings us to glory.  And what is our part?  The nest phrase tells us: God chose us from the beginning to be saved through sanctificationby the Spirit and belief in the truth.  And what is this belief in the truth?  It is noneother than clinging to the cable of hope for dear life.  It isnot a pleasant estimation of the cable with a token complimentand stoke every week or so.  It is a desperate clinging to thecable as your only hope.    Or to use the words we saw last week in verse 10,it is a love for the truth.  Paul said you remember that peoplewill perish because they refused to receive a love for the truthand so be saved.  Saving faith in the truth of God includes lovefor that truth.    This is why sanctification by the Spirit and faithin the truth are not distinct acts.  It is not as though our faithin the truth and the Spirit's sanctifying work run in separateparallel tracks and have nothing to do with each other.  No. Saving faith, with all its impulse to love the truth is the powerthat the Spirit uses to make us holy.  This is easy to see in the experience of Henry Dempsey. Suppose as he lay there upside down part way out of the planeat 4,000 feet over the Atlantic with his fingers clinched aroundthe rails and every fiber of his brain devoted to holding fast-- suppose his credit cards and his hundred dollar bills startedto fall out of his pocket.  What would he do?  What would he feel.  We all know what he would do and what he would feel. He would do nothing but hold on to the railing.  And he wouldfeel freer from the love of money than at any time in his life. And what is the lesson in this?  When, by faith you take hold of the cable of God'struth, and you love it because it's your only hope in the world,that faith is the power of God's Spirit to purify your life --your money-life, your sex-life, your professional-life, your leisure-life. God chose you to be saved through sanctification by the Spiritand belief in the truth.   Well, there are at least two more strands of steelin this cable of traditions, but our time is up.  I'll mentionthem and close with an urgent invitation.    In verse 14 there is the strand of God's call and  the strand of the gospel:  To this he called you through our gospel. . .    From all eternity God loved the church at Thessalonica.   He chose them from the beginning from all the sinnersin Macedonia.    He sent Paul to them with the gospel -- the goodnews that Jesus Christ came into the world to die for hopelesssinners.    And in the preaching of that gospel God called hiselect with overcoming power to himself.    And the result was that they believed the truth   and began to be sanctified by the Spirit.   And will one day obtain the glory of our Lord JesusChrist.   And you can be among them.  I hold out to you thismorning the cable of God's gracious truth.  And I pray that Godhimself will call you.  Is he not now moving in many hearts tostir you up to reach out and take the cable of hope?  I pleadwith you.  Take it.  Hold it fast.  It cannot break! 
