



Question Baba Answers 

BY DR. ABDUL GHANI MUNSIFF 

Question 

What is the propriety and signif≠icance of worldly activities in the presence of a Spiritual Masterósuch as schools. hospitals, asylum s, etc. which already are numerous in the world? Answer 

It is true the world abounds in similar institutions, but they are in≠variably philanthropically inspired. Institutions under my care have a spiritual purpose to serve. Worldly ben- efactions are dem anded and created solely by society. My activities are nothing if not an objective m anifes≠tation of that divine dispensation which sustains the phenomenal world. Divine wisdom full of love and com passion has been known to incarnate from time to time in answer to the call of humanity when faced with hopeless unredeemable bankruptcy in all depart≠ments of lifeómoral, material and spiritual. 

   For eyes that can discern clearly un≠mistakable signs of 



disintegration, social and econom ical,  suffered by the universe itself, resulting  

usually preceding the advent of divine  spiritual betterment of the whole.  

manifestation, are in evidence all      Besides moral and spiritual disrup≠ 

around. Rehabilitation of the world  tion, the world today is experiencing  

morally and spiritually, with the  terrible economic chaos. To invite or  

automatic readjustment of econom ic  tempt the world to things spiritual, the  

and social structure, is the av owed  material needs (individual or collective)  

mission of divine manifestation on  must be satisfied before the m ind can  

earth. To achieve th is, universal m ind  dispassionately accept the sp iritual.  

and infinite consciousness does  When I give food and clothing with my  

universal work in infinite w ays.  own hands, it will re sult in the wo rld  

Whatever objective work is done by  gaining its econom ic and m aterial  

one of universal m ind and infinite  welfare. When I wash the God-mad and  

consciousness, affects the whole scope  the lepers, the effect will be that th ose  

of his working. If he fasts, the result of  of sub-normal or abnorm al conscious- 

fasting is felt by the whole universe  ness will be resto red to normal or sub- 

spiritually; if he o bserves silence,  normal consciousness; while the lepers  

characteristic spiritual benefit accrues  will either be cured, or the ir future  

to the universe. Just as f asting and  embodiments will be considerably min- 

silence by an individual results in spiri≠ imized.  

tual gain to the indiv idual concerned,  Accept it as a spiritual fact that every  

likewise fast and silence by one of  living spiritual Master, charged with  

universal mind and infinite conscious- duty, affects his surroundings according  

ness amounts  to an ordeal or penance  to the scope of his work. As the Master,  

so the atmosphere around.  

ï  