 
Notes from My Diary
F.H. DADACHANJI
 

A SILENT RECOGNITION
MASTERS		of	spiritual		Per- fection who are indifferent to all things earthly, however rich or great,		do		prefer	places		and people where their work for the spiritual upliftment of humanity finds		whole-hearted	response. For a great and unique centre as Meher Baba has wanted long since to start for his universal work, the site selected must have, besides unique distinctions in all practical ways, certain definite spiritual	qualities	and		atmo- sphere which aid in creating a response in the people when they find and feel the presence and power		of		august	and	divine personalities		of		Saints		and Masters.	Such	rare	qualities seem to have been found in the recently		selected		site		at Byramangala		Reservoir	in	the Mysore State, where the Master has	decided		to	establish	his Universal Spiritual Centre.
If the Master knows his men and the place where he could get the best and whole-hearted response, it is no small tribute to this model state and those
 

who made it what it is  to-day that he should select this side as best suited for his great Spiritual Centre. It is a silent recognition of something spiritually substan- tial that would help his sacred Cause for the spiritual upliftment of mankind, with a beautiful blending of the ancient and modern in art, science, culture and philosophy that so many of its institutions provide.

AN AUSPICIOUS BEGINNING
Baba's arrival in this State at an opportune time and his august blessings seem to have proved very auspicious, especially for the poor peasants on this side. Due to weak monsoon this year in the Mysore State, as in many other places in India, in the beginning of the season, grave anxiety was felt all over, and many who came in contact with the Master naturally asked him  to bless this side with sufficient rain to avoid failure of crops. In his usual indifferent and light manner, Baba had graciously granted their request.
 

 
True to his word, within a very short time it started raining with   a force and it poured down practically throughout the month of October bringing the average  to more than normal. That was a good omen for the Master's spiritual activities here, his very advent proving so auspicious.
THE FOUNDATION DAY— 17TH  DECEMBER 1939
In the middle of October, a petition was made to Shri Baba through the Amildar (Government Officer) at Closepet, by the peasants of the three villages whose lands were purchased for the proposed Centre, that they be allowed to remove the crops which had this time after years had grown so luxuriant. Although none of these peasants had any legal right or hold on this, and the removal of the crops required more than two months, which would mean another postpone- ment for the laying of the Foundation, in the loving heart of the Master, the question of the poor outweighed all other considerations of difficulties of set programmes and the request was at once granted. The Foundation Day was thus postponed and is now fixed for Sunday, the 17th of December. Series of messages by telegrams and letters had to be despatched all over, intimating all concerned of the very large group of
 
disciples and devotees about this change in date.
THE CENTRE COMMITTEE
To manage and conduct this unique institution of the Masters Universal Spiritual Centre, he appointed a special Committee from amongst the select members of his Eastern and Western disciples—The Meher Baba Universal Spiritual Centre Committee—to work under his guidance and instructions.
MYSORE IN DASARA
Mysore, the "Garden City" is always beautiful, but during the Dasara festival, which is the  year's greatest event, it assumes quite a different aspect. It is a veritable fairyland on earth. The panoramic view from the Chamundi Hills at sunset with its golden reflection on the palacial buildings and also the Maharaja’s palace exquisitely illuminated at night are sights quite un- forgettable and scarcely seen elsewhere in the East. Such beautiful blending of East and West in its planning can hardly ever be found and well may the Mysoreans be proud of this model city. The Brindaban at the Krishnarajasagar Dam is yet another engineering feat—the creation of a genius indeed. When fully illumined, with myriads of coloured lights
 

 
playing upon the endless fountains, it is a veritable Brindaban*  brought on earth.
Mysore in Dasara is really an enviable treat for anyone from any part of the world to see and enjoy. Not only has this "Garden City" a beauty of its own from artistic or engineering point of view but it has also a natural beauty which is most ingeniously utilised by skilful and artistic brains who have taken special care to preserve its traditionally Indian architectural beauty and outlook. Above all it has an ancient culture and spiritual atmosphere, which the Master—the best of any— can appreciate.
During the Dasara festival,  Baba and the select group of about 40 went to Mysore and stayed there for four days—19th to 22nd of October. A large residence—the Yelwal Palace— about 8 miles from Mysore and having the seclusion as required for our group, was placed at the party's disposal through the kind offices of the Dewan (Prime Minister) whose interest in Baba's cause is now very well known and has already been referred to in our last issue. True to the proverbial hospitality of this model State, the executives on
 
special duty during these festivals and other staff of the engineering department left nothing undone to render all possible facilities regarding water, lights and other arrangements for such a large group as ours and at such a distance, and their appreciable services deserve special note. Special arrangements were also made for our large group in one of the most convenient and suitable places to see the famous Dasara procession, on the 22nd, when His Highness, seated in a golden Howdah on a State elephant passed through the city in a grand procession of oriental splendour, while the townsmen and peasants from all over the State came to witness the event .
This gave the Master an opportunity which he likes to work spiritually in the midst of vast crowds, and seems to be one of the principal reasons of his visit to the place on this particular occasion.
LECTURES ABOUT THE MASTER AND HIS MISSION
During the diwali holidays, Dr.
C. D. Deshmukh, M.A., Ph.D., of Nagpur University, who is one of the most ardent disciples of Baba for years,
 




