 1 2006-4-9
 Jesus 
 
Mark Belletini  

 
Opening Words
  
We are here, 

on an early spring day, 

blessed by greening willows, tulips & daffodils, 

to worship, to consider with honesty 

and heartfelt compassion the difficult truths 

which lead us deeper into the world. And so 





?
?à??

?????

 
Sequence: 

 
As we move through the season of spring,  

this at least is clear: 

there is a contrast between 

a snow-crusted oak trunk in December 

and a delicate branch of willow in April. 

there is a contrast between an icy windstorm 

and a scented spring breeze. 

As we move through the season of Passover,  

this is clear: 

there is a contrast between forced labor 

and walking freely in the wilderness. 

There is a contrast between entitlement 

and liberty. 

There is a contrast between giving thanks 

to a power that encourages liberation,  

and giving thanks to a golden calf that just sits t
here.  
As we move through this season of abundance, 

this is clear: 

There is a contrast between ordinary daily 

struggles here in central Ohio, 

and the outrage and bloodshed in Darfur. 

There is a contrast between talking about 

local loved ones as our sisters and brothers, 

and speaking of the decimated villagers 

in East Africa as our sisters and brothers. 

As we move through this season of silence, 

this is clear: 

there is a contrast between this silent pause 

 2 of simple rest and the silence which 

surrounds those who are oppressed and those who are
 in deep need. May this silence serve 
as an invitation to break that other silence, 

and to embrace for ourselves the claim of the  

great Cynic philosopher Diogenes: I am a 

citizen of the world.? 

 
silence 

 
Remembering our interconnection with all that is, w
e set aside this time to remember and 
embrace the memories of our hearts, the people who 
dwell there because we have dwelt in them 
all of our lives: we speak their names in love alou
d or in the silent recesses of our hearts 
 
 
naming 

 
Now let there be music to embrace us with possibili
ties, to celebrate the seasons of our lives, to 
teach us about the goal of harmony and beauty, and 
to lift our hearts on high. 
 
The First Reading
 comes from the Gospel of Mary of Magdala, a text we
 ascertain was written 
sometime in the mid-second century, probably by an 
anonymous woman. It is what is called a 
Gnostic gospel, like the recently discovered Gospel
 of Judas. This means that it talks about Jesus 
in terms of metaphysics and it usually reflects sev
ere conflicts about authority in the church. We 
have only a few pages of the original text, from wh
ich you will hear just excerpts. 
 
The Savior said: 
?Every creature exists in, and with, each other.? 
Then Peter said to him: ?
If that is the way the world is, what is the nature
 of sin?? 
The Savior 
answered: ?
There is no such thing as sin, except for when you 
claim intimacy with other worlds 
than this one. Itôs important to get to the root of
 everything.? 
 
Then he departed from them. Mary tried to comfort t
he rest of them, saying:  
?Do not weep and 
be distressed, for his grace will shelter you. He h
as prepared us, after all, and thus has made us 
truly human.?  

 
Andrew asked:
 ?What is your opinion about what was just said?? 
 
Peter said 
?Has the Savior spoken secretly to a woman so that 
we may not hear what he had to 
say?  Surely he was not trying to show us that she 
is more worthy than we are?? 
 
Levi said to Peter: 
?You are always giving in to your tendency to respo
nd to the world in anger. 
And even now you are questioning this woman as if s
he was your enemy. If the Savior considered 
her worthy, who are you to disregard her? Rather, w
e should be ashamed. We should announce 
the good news and not be laying down any rules, or 
making laws.? 
 
The Second Reading
 comes from the classic New Testament criticism from
 the Mennonite 
tradition, as written by John Howard Yoder over 30 
years ago. I tell you the date especially, 
since 30 years ago long hair in males was still in 
vogue, whereas it is less so now. 
 
 3 One of the inner contradictions of our claim to hav
e left Christendom behind is the peculiar place 
of Jesus in the mind of many young rebels. It may b
e a meaningless coincidence that some young 
men wear their hair like the Good Shepherd of a Sun
day school poster, but there is certainly no 
randomness in their claim that Jesus was, like them
selves, a social critic, an agitator, a drop-out 
from the social climb, and the spokes-person of a c
ounterculture. The equation seems glibñbut 
is it really that simple? Or might it be that, in t
his half-spoofing exaggeration, there is breaking 
into awareness a dimension of truth that we ethicis
ts had been hiding from ourselves? This study 
makes that claim. It claims not only that Jesus is 
a model of radical political action, but that this 
issue is now generally visible throughout New Testa
ment studies, even though scholars have not 
stated it in such a way that others had to notice i
t. Our study then, seeks to describe the 
connection which might relate New Testament studies
 with contemporary social ethics, 
especially as this latter discipline is currently p
reoccupied with the problem of power. 
 
Sermon
  
So here we are. On Sunday Morning. Gathering in thi
s lovely room, under the golden wood of 
our ceiling. Gathering, too, in the very state amon
g the 50 United States which a thousand so-
called Patriot Pastors want ?to claim? for Jesus. ?
Ohio for Jesus? is their slogan. Pastor Russell 
Johnson, of Fairfield Christian Church near Lancast
er, who organizedäwith great skill-the 
Patriot Pastors, preaches openly on his website tha
t anyone who would call his claim 
inappropriate, and even cruel (as I most certainly 
do), is part of one of the ?hoards of hell.? That 
must make me a devil, I guess, in Mr. Johnsonôs the
ology. 
 
Now, I can take a little name-calling. God knows Iô
ve been called names before. Fag. Wop. 
Guinea. Spick. Heretic. Traitor. So being called a 
devil hardly makes me break out into a sweat. 
 
But still, Iôm angry. Iôm enraged. Not because he i
nsinuates Iôm a devil, but because Mr. Johnson 
claims the authority to snatch Ohio for his ?Jesus?
 alone, without caring a whit what Ohio 
Buddhists, Muslims, Jews, agnostics or people like 
me might say.      
 
Now clearly, if I would dare to 
interpret
 his actions, by claiming that his Jesus seems a lo
t more 
like a projection of his own anger and desire for c
ontrol, dressed up in a beard and a bathrobe, 
heôll say that I am just ?persecuting? him with my 
unbelief. Heôll say Iôm trying to force my 
unbelief onto the state of Ohio far more than he is
 trying to force his Jesus on the state. So I 
guess there is no real point in trying to interpret
 his motives: it always gets reduced to the eternal
 
ping pong match in literalist minds: Yes it is. No 
it isnôt. Yes it is. No it isnôt. 
 
And then someone else always comes along who tries 
to make peace by saying, ?Well, Pastor 
Johnson has his opinion, and you have your opinion.
 Everyone has an opinion. Thatôs what 
America and Ohio mean, you know.?   

 
The clear implication to me when I hear people say 
this, is that the whole pursuit of truths deeper 
than superficial or literalist readings, is a waste
 of time, that the scientific method and the work 
of critical historians and archeologists is a farce
, and that the purpose of life is that everyone 
simply chooses their belief and then lives unpertur
bed, side by side, happily ever after, with June 
Cleaver in her apron, Ward in his study, and Wally 
and Beaver getting ready for supper, forever. 
 
But that is not the real world. Organizing literali
st pastors and calling them Patriots and claiming 
Ohio for Jesus is NOT a 1950s sitcom any more. The 
issues at stake here are high, not low. My 

 4 life as a citizen is at stake. My religious future 
is at stake. I dare say your future is at stake, ju
st 
as much. 

 
This is why what people say about Jesus in Ohio is 
not just a game of opinion ping-pong. There 
are consequences that go with stated opinions.   Th
ere is a sharp contrast, after all, between 
proclaiming a Jesus that defines family as ?Leave I
t To Beaver? only, a Jesus who saves the 
blest, once all of them and the planet they live on
 are dead, 
and
 proclaiming a Jesus who was a 
social justice agitator in this world. I cannot let
 Mr. Johnsonôs proclamations go unchallenged as 
merely one opinion among many, all of which are equ
al.  This is why today I must speak of a 
human Jesus who lived and died long ago. I must spe
ak of a man who dreamed of justice in this 
world, not the next. 

 
And, I need to say this: Ohio does not need Russell
ôs Jesus. Ohio needs justice for the poor and 
disenfranchised, jobs for workers that pay a living
 wage, honest politics, and good education. 
Ohio may, in fact, need a modern version of the ena
cted dreams of that ancient Galilean; but 
Ohio does not need more self-serving teachings that
 everyone sitting in this church will burn in 
hell, while all the folks in Johnsonôs church in La
ncaster can look over the edge of heaven and 
say to us forever, ?Tch tch tch. We told you so.? 

 
But, itôs important to point out that even in ancie
nt times, there werenôt many who appreciated a 
social agitator Jesus, a Jesus who dreamed of justi
ce for all, not privilege for the few. Later 
writers buried him in a tomb of miracles and titles
. And Gnostic Christians, like the author of the 
apocryphal Gospel of Mary of Magdala preserve, if n
ot the authentic teachings of Jesus, then at 
least some records of ancient arguments about autho
rity in the churchñcan women speak? Can 
they teach? Does the spirit speak through them too?
  
Jesus seems to have thought so, along with other li
berals of the time. But since that time, as the 
Gospel of Mary suggests, the authority in the churc
h to speak of Jesus has largely been confined 
to men, whether Benedict XV or Russell Johnson, who
 deny religious validity or moral 
grounding to anyone who disagrees with them. The an
cient conflicts around authority are still 
being fought, you see, but now the territory is Ohi
o, not the Roman Empire. 
 
This is why John Howard Yoderôs words are so import
ant. ?Our study,? he writes, ?seeks to 
describe 
the connection
 which might relate New Testament studies with cont
emporary social 
ethics, especially as this latter discipline is cur
rently preoccupied with the problem of power.? 
 
Ah yes. Power. The ethics of power in our day being
 no less problematic than IN the days of 
Jesus. For there are modern Herodôs, modern Pilates
. There are ranking prelates right now, who 
donôt want anyone to know what hard working scholar
s 
have been saying for a century now,
 indeed, long before the famous Jesus Seminar, namel
y, that Jesus had a social message to bring 
to both religion and politics, teaching that powerñ
whether from temple or governorôs palace or 
even from this churchñ
 must be used to make more justice for everyone on 
earth, or else it is 
just unholy oppression and abuse.   

 
So this is why, on this Sunday before Easter, I wan
t to talk about Jesus. Not just my little 
idiosyncratic opinion, mind you, but the developing
 consensus of scholars, both Christian and 
Jewish, believing and unbelieving, male and female.
 Not just my opinion, no. Hardly. But please, 
itôs hardly an irreligious story Iôm telling here. 
Perhaps Pastor Russell will tell you that since I 

 5 am the devil, everything I am saying about Jesus is
 evil incarnate. Let him say what he wants to 
say. He has a right, still, to say so. 

  

And I have a right still, and every intention of ch
allenging every single thing he says about Jesus, 
from beginning to end. Everything. 

 
This is the life of Jesus. 

 
First, Jesus is a late English form of a Greek word
 which clumsily represents the Aramaic 
Yeshuô, a form of the name Yehoshua, or Joshua, as 
we say it in English. Yeshuô was a common 
male name back then, like Michael or Jeffrey is in 
our own day.  
 
What did he look like? We can hardly know, except t
o say that undoubtedly, he was a lot shorter 
than most of us, since the whole human race has sho
t up about ten inches in the last 2000 years. 
He 
was
 from the Eastern Mediterranean, however, so on the
 cover of your orders, youôll find a 
typical representation of an Eastern Mediterranean 
man from Jesusô time. Itôs an actual portrait 
of a 30-year-old found on his coffin lid in Fayum, 
Egypt. The style of hair and shape of the face 
was very typical for that era. So think of it as a 
clue if youôd like one.  
 
When was he born? Most likely in the last years of 
the reign of the paranoid King Herod the 
Great, who died in 4 BCE.  And surely Jesus was not
 born in Bethlehem, because the Christmas 
stories were designed, not to explore biography, bu
t to depict Jesus as a clear, but non-violent 
rival to Caesar from the very Beginningñ
 after all, Caesar, too, was called Savior, Lord, a
nd 
Son of God. Caesar, too, was born of a virgin. And 
Bethlehem was the birthplace of David, the 
?anointed one,? the original Hebrew Caesar, as it w
ere. 
 
Surely Yeshuô was born in the tiny village of Nazar
eth, up in the Galilee, a four-dayôs walk north 
from Bethlehem. There were no more than twenty-five
 families in that hamlet, built literally into 
the side of a hill. Because the word ?family? then 
meant extended family, not nuclear family, 
there may have been 250 people tops in town. Many d
wellings there were simply faced caves 
hollowed out of the limestone. There was one abunda
nt spring for fresh water.  
 
About a forty-minute walk away, you would find the 
capital city of the Galilee, Sepphoris, with a 
Greek theater, a stadium, and an acropolis behind i
ts high walls, as well as a significant market 
place.  If, as the gospels suggest by calling Jesus
 a ?tekton? or house-framer, Jesus came from a 
family of itinerant builders, then perhaps this gro
wing city was the place where Jesus found most 
of his day-to-day work. In any case, as a Galilean,
 he undoubtedly knew enough Greek to get by 
in that territory, even if his ordinary family lang
uage was Aramaic, a Semitic language related to 
both Hebrew and Arabic. The Galilee was a very Gree
k place, 
after all. 

 
His mother was named Maryam, or Mary, and he seems 
to have had many brothers and sisters 
and uncles and aunts. He may not have been first bo
rn, as the text insists, but born second after 
his brother Yacov, or James. We will never know for
 sure. Certainly his mother was hounded by 
innuendo, and there are many suggestions that Jesus
 was rejected as ?illegitimate? when he was 
an adult. We cannot be sure what happened for sureñ
the texts are too sketchy, too apologetic. 
But in those patriarchal days, when a Roman recruit
 could have his way with a young woman 
anytime he wanted, and women were still always the 
ones blamed for their out of wedlock 
pregnancies, these stories may reflect some sad fam
ily truth. 

 6  
Jesus grew up without a synagogue as a separate bui
lding. None were built until after the temple 
fell in the year 70. But people did call the large 
rooms of their houses ?synagogues,? that is 
meeting places, which also, sometimes, served as sc
hools, using whatever scraps of scripture the 
town may have possessed. Written materials were exp
ensive in those days, remember. So itôs 
possible that Jesus may have participated in such e
vents, and even learned to read and write a bit. 
But most likely he was illiterate, in the modern se
nse of the term. Still, as part of an oral culture,
 
he knew the literature of the day by always hearing
 it recited aloud in home and village. 
 
We can never know why he permanently left home, alt
hough it was a rare enough event in a 
clan-centered culture. Perhaps his constant itinera
nt work helped him to enjoy rootlessness. 
Some folks have playfully speculated that Jesus him
self was the ?prodigal son? of the story the 
kids heard this morning, and he himself left home t
o find himself only to return to a grouchy 
older brother. But such novelistic speculation can 
never be proved. And ancient writers just 
didnôt explore the ?inner life? of their characters
 anyway. Thatôs a modern, post Freudian idea. 
 
So Jesus went south when he left home. The gospel w
riters are all embarrassed about telling us 
that Jesus allowed himself to be ritually cleansed 
in a 
mikvah
, or purifying ritual bath near the 
Jordan River, presided over by a sage  named Yohana
n, or John, the Dunker. John was much 
more famous than Jesus in the day, because he furio
usly critiqued the economy- destroying war 
that King Antipas was then fighting against the Kin
g of the Arabians.  
 
Eventually, however, perhaps after a long time by h
imself, Jesus came back north to lease out a 
home-base room in Kefar-Nahum-By-the-Lake, a fishin
g village of some size at the top of Lake 
Kinneret, called the Galilean Sea in the gospels. 

 
During a few yearsñas little as one, as many as fou
r or fiveñ Jesus, while plying his itinerant 
building trades, seems to have told stories that ga
ined the interest of both the disenfranchised and 
the very poor in society, which were plentiful in t
hat era in the Galilee. The stories were very 
often told over the supper table. What made these s
upper stories so unusual is that people who 
were rarely together suddenly were eating at the sa
me table. Merchants and tax-collectors,  the 
sick and healthy, the homeless and well-to-do, the 
deeply religious and pious skeptics, women 
and men (who never, but never, ate together in anci
ent times), Greek pagans and Galileans who 
worshipped down at the Judean temple, the old and t
he young, even children, who were really 
never seen nor heard in most ancient societies. The
y all reclined at table with Jesus. Apparently 
at his invitation. 

 
These cross-cultural meals became what he was known
 for. And his stories almost always 
featured people in a pickle, people who were resent
ful because of injustices, or worse, resentful 
because of encroaching justice. They addressed the 
economic hardships of the time, the systemic 
oppression that had developed in the most recent de
cades. Some folks thought of Jesus as some 
sort of a prophet, because he, like Jeremiah before
 him, taught that any religious life, where 
justice did not come first and foremost, was not re
ligion but banditry. Either everyone had a 
place at the power table of society, or no one shou
ld have one. Others thought Jesus was a sage, 
like that Greek Cynic guy, Diogenes, who used to wa
nder about the countryside, homeless, 
taking ethical pot shots at his critics, and inviti
ng people to ask questions for themselves. 
 
During this time Jesus seems to have developed a re
putation as a healer. There were many other 
teachers in his day who also had that reputation, s
o itôs hard to tell if any of the precise stories 

 7 which have come down to us are historical rather th
an emblematic. Certainly, many of the stories 
told about him are entirely symbolical, according t
o the literary practices of that time, if not our 
own day. The story of the feedings of the thousands
, the stories of him walking on water, these 
are all stories interpreting him from a post-Easter
 understanding. But clearly, some at least 
experienced his presence and care as healing.  

 
His family, however, seems to have been embarrassed
 by him. Maybe they feared because he 
was going around preaching, in a Roman colony, of a
 society based on principles of justice, not 
entitlement, and on principles of welcome and hospi
tality, not principles of exclusion, division 
and class, that his days were numbered. If so, they
 were right. Also, a fair number of students, 
both male and female, seem to have helped him in hi
s teaching and healing work. 
 
He brought his observations about justice to Jerusa
lem one fine April day in what we now call 
the year 30. Joining the throngs of pilgrims for th
e celebration of the great religious holiday of 
liberation, Jesus took the opportunity to organize 
a counter-demonstration to the military parade 
of the Roman Governor then entering the same city f
rom the other direction. Basing his theatrical 
entrance on a passage from an ancient prophet, Jesu
s thereby proclaimed the coming of an age of 
peace and justice, an Empire, not of Caesar, heavy 
taxes and oppression, but of liberation. The 
next day, he staged another theatrical demonstratio
n, accusing the monopolistic temple system of 
collaboration with the oppressors, a collaboration 
that destroyed, not encouraged, the justice and 
peace and economic parity taught by the Hebrew prop
hets and the Torah, especially in the 
passages about the Jubilee Year. Nevertheless, the 
demonstrations were non-violent, because one 
of the surest things we know he said was ?Love even
 your foes.? 
 
These two demonstrations upset the Roman Prefect, P
ontius Pilatus, a man famed for his 
efficient but brutal governorship. It also seems to
 have threatened the collaborationist priests of 
rank from the Hanan clan.  They joined together to 
find out where this strange man from up 
north was hiding out among the already testy crowds
.  Upon finding him, perhaps with the help 
of the temple police force, Pilatus had him summari
ly crucified, the usual Roman treatment for 
non-citizens accused of sedition. Itôs even possibl
e that Pilatus did, as the gospels suggest, put a 
sign on top of the stake which called Yeshuô Bar Ma
ryam ?The Emperor of the Judeans,? since 
they clearly crucified him for political not religi
ous reasons. But there was probably no trial per 
se. He was simply whipped, according to Roman pract
ice, forced to carry a beam of wood to the 
stake already in place at the rock quarry outside t
he walls, called Skullhead because of the shape 
of the outcroppings. Then he was nailed to the beam
, which was then nailed to the post along 
with his ankles; and there he hung, asphyxiating, u
ntil he died a half a day later. All of his 
friends, and even his family, abandoned him, althou
gh a few may have watched from afar. They 
were all fearful, understandably, of being tarred b
y his brush. When he was dead, the soldiers 
took his body down and threw it into in a lime pit 
as was their practice. No one ever knew what 
happened to his body, which was the intended practi
ce of the Roman occupation ñcomplete 
humiliation and destruction of a person, without so
 much as a grave to visit afterward. 
 
I wonder. What would happen to Ohio if it went for 
the dream of 
this 
Jesus, the historical sage, 
instead of Pastor Johnsonôs demonizing Jesus, aflam
e with hellfire and a desire to control? 
 
I canôt help but wonder. 

 
 
 
 8  
Offering
  
Knowing with certainty that the responsibility for 
this place resides with no one else, let us 
gladly pay our pledges, offer our gifts, and 

bless the grace and work of our principled and root
ed community. 
 
Short Prayer
  
Justice.  

For everyone.  

Nothing less than that. 

But at least that, O Love. 

And involve us completely. 

Amen. 

 
 
 
