
  We are here
on this day of shorter hours
  to worship, to celebrate our lives
in this difficult, tender world.
  Blest are the men and women
who by their lives and words
  paved the road of love and truth
on which we journey. 
  Now it's our turn. And so we pray
  
And at celebration's end, may our reason and our passion keep us true
  to ourselves, 
  true to each other, and true to those shared visions of what we can together
  become.

  Spring, you have come despite the cold clinging of winter.
  Forsythia and scilla, 
  magnolia and tulip 
  you all look like so many church bells, ringing the hour of some great festival.
  Maybe it's the exact birthday 
  of the cosmos itself so many billions of years ago.
  
  You open your mouths
  like singers in a choir
  trembling at the edge of ecstasy.
  
  Your colors are unashamed
  and profligate.
  
  You come up despite
  the sandy wind in the distant desert.
  
  You send up your joy despite the sad deaths in a distant land.
  
  You take no notice of a strange illness in Asia and Canada.
  
  You pay no attention to either
  wealth or poverty, belief or unbelief,
  politics or religion.
  
  You simply open 
  under the powdery sky and say,
  
  "Here I am for but a while. 
  
  Drink in my red and my yellow
  my white and my purple as the medicine of life that suspends you 
  between yes and no,
  sigh and silence.
  
  Be refreshed by my dewy nectar 
  that was sweet long before sadness existed on earth,
  and remains sweet in the midst of your deepest present resentment, and which
  will pour its sweetness out year after year without concern for either your
  worry or wonder."
  
  Be blest, blossoms that rise from the earth. For you return us to that which
  is larger than our sorrow and our worry?the universe that is our common
  home, our shared shelter,
  our heart's own hearth and health.
  
  Before the wonder of the irrepressible spring, our silence?
  
  {silence)
  
  Remembering that human hearts are connected to each other as surely as
  pollinating bees are bound to spring's open flowers, we remember in this
  sacred time our brothers and sisters whom we love, and who have loved us
  till we reached this day.
  
  We name them into the common air or in the silence deep within.
  
(naming 9 AM)

  They live in us, the great multitude of those who brought us to this
  day.
  With their power in us, joined to us,
  may we come to believe that there is no mountain we cannot try to climb,
  and no child we cannot try to save,
  and that the spirit within us is
  a spirit of compassion and strength.
  
(11 AM)

  "God bless the child," the song says, and so it may be that each of us has
  our own blessing?the blessing of the spring, the blessing of our honest
  feelings, the blessing of overcoming struggles, the blessing of this music,
  the blessing of each other.
  

SPARECHANGERS

  20 on a block and by the time
  you get to the end of the block
  your innocence is gone.
  
  You're a horrible miser
  who lets people starve in front of you;
  you're guilty of the hawking cough
  and the plastic bag raincoat
  and the broken shopping cart
  packed with all that's left.
  
  It isn't much and it's getting wet
  and it's your fault it's raining too.
  
  If you looked in a mirror
  it would break with disgust,
  you couldn't spare a quarter?
  
  You were just walking down the street
  minding your own business,
  maybe thinking about someone you just met
  and the light on their hair
  and wondering if they liked you as much
  when all of a sudden there's this empty hand
  in your path and you're a mass murderer and there's no excuse.
  
  You can buy spare parts of your self-respect
  back from the spare changers
  but the motor's broken for good.
  
  You can call the garage and get them
  to tow your conscience away, 
  it doesn't work anymore.
  
  Nothing works anymore.
  
  And you want your innocence back.
  
  You have a right to the self you were
  before you walked down the block,
  you spent a whole life working at it,
  it's yours.
  
  And the homeless want their homes back,
  they have a right to the selves they were before,
  it's theirs. Whole lives broken. Whole lives blaming. One block.
  

  There once was a wealthy absentee landlord who employed an accountant, a
  steward (Gk.: ekonomikos) to manage his holdings. Someone accused the steward
  of squandering, and so the landlord said to him, "Close out your books by
  the end of the day, for you can't work for me anymore."
  
  The steward said to himself, "What am I to do now that my boss has fired
  me? I am totally ashamed. I am not healthy enough to dig ditches.
  
  Then he brightened up and said, "Oh, I know what to do! And if I do what
  I plan, doors will open to me once I leave this office."
  
  So he called on a few folks who were in debt to his boss. "So how much do
  you owe my boss?"
  
  "A hundred barrels of oil."
  
  "Let's change that. Put down fifty instead"
  
  He called on another debtor. "How much do you owe my boss?" he asked. The
  man replied, "A hundred bushels of grain." "Bring that number down to a mere
  eighty on your record," said the steward.
  
  And when the landlord found out what had been done, even he had to admit
  that the steward was a prudent and most clever fellow.
  

  When I moved here from the West Coast, folks both here and there used to
  ask me questions. They would ask me about any differences I noticed that
  distinguished the two places? Central Ohio and the San Francisco Bay
  Area.
  
  Now people asked me these questions in a way that made clear that they were
  not asking for the obvious. They knew very well the difference between a
  date palm and a maple tree, a corn-field and an ocean, or a road white with
  snow drifts and a road black without them No, when folks questioned me, they
  were clearly asking me questions of social culture. How does the social culture
  of Central Ohio contrast with the social culture of the San Francisco Bay
  Area?
  
  I gave the matter some thought, and, after a time, offered three observations.
  
  First, I noted that a full three times more people smoked cigarettes here
  than in the Bay Area. Clearly, the social norms and expectations around smoking
  were and remain quite distinct.
  
  Second, I noticed a difference in attitudes toward urban traffic. Using a
  stopwatch to prove it, I noted that the signal lights at intersections here
  were two or three and even four times longer than what I was used to after
  24 years in Oakland. I used to tell my Oakland friends that I could read
  whole chapters from Tolstoi's War and Peace, if I wanted to, while waiting
  for certain lights to change around here.
  
  And third, and to my great surprise, I noted that there did not seem to be
  very many homeless people here in Columbus. Homeless people, you know, people
  in dark, tarry rags taking their shelter in just about every open doorway,
  as they do in the Bay Area, their arms outstretched, asking for a dollar.
  Julia Vinograd's poem, written about Berkeley CA, portrays the sober truth
  without the slightest exaggeration. Twenty on a block?yes, and sometimes
  thirty. And each of them asking for spare change, and most of them homeless.
  And there were ten gathered before each grocery store entrance, or around
  the doors of urban churches and synagogues. Consciousness of homelessness
  was a daily meditation for us out in the Bay Area. You always had to make
  a decision. There was always this philosophical self-questioning. Do I give
  money or do I withhold it? Why? Do I walk past and just pretend that I have
  not heard them? Do I get mad when I am walking with a companion, and say,
  "Why have you interrupted my conversation with my friend here? How rude!"
  Am I afraid that someone might get violent if I say No? Do I think a fistful
  of spare change will actually help make a difference, or only make things
  worse for the homeless person (even if it strangely "absolves" my own do-gooder
  soul)?
  
  You would have all of these swift, inward conversations about responsibility
  and guilt and sadness when you walked down the street. Julia Vinograd makes
  that so clear in her poem?you would feel guilty, "like a mass murderer,"
  she writes. Whew! Strong metaphor! But a pretty accurate description of the
  intensity of the sharp feelings, I'd say. When I would walk the streets of
  San Francisco, I would think of Katherine Lee Bates, who wrote the famous
  song "O Beautiful, for Spacious Skies?" Many of us know the first verse
  from memory, but fewer of us know the fourth verse, which has this elegant
  line "Thine alabaster cities gleam undimmed by human tears." Katharine Bates
  supposedly wrote that line remembering a trip to Sausalito, California. And
  the "alabaster city" she saw from that shore was none other than San Francisco,
  pastel white above the turquoise crystal bay. However, other than her accurate
  description of the city, the rest of the line is simply false. San Francisco
  is simply filled with people numb from crying so much, in doorways, in city
  parks, and yes, even down city streets as they argue with themselves about
  whether to give a quarter?or a dollar? or not. Indeed, according
  to certain advocacy groups I checked out, San Francisco joins New York and
  Atlanta as one of the three "meanest" cities in the United States in regard
  to their homeless population.
  
  But here in Columbus I was startled to see almost no homeless people on the
  streets?at least not any that my ill-adjusted, newly-arrived eyes could
  see.
  
  Oh, I knew there were shelters and missions in town. I live only a few blocks
  from Faith Mission, after all, the institution for the homeless which members
  of this church support by cooking meals every other Friday. I knew enough
  about urban reality to know that there had to be homeless people in any United
  States metro area of more than a million population. But I just didn't see
  any visible homelessness here. And that made Columbus appear to be a much
  less painful city to live in than San Francisco ever was, both for those
  with homes and, apparently, for those without homes, since there seemed to
  be less of them.
  
  But after a few months here, I remembered the truth, which some religions
  have preached for thousands of years is a fact in this case?just because
  something is invisible doesn't mean that it is not there. And this is certainly
  true about Columbus. Even when I could not see them, it remained that just
  under two percent of the population of Columbus as a whole was
  homeless?that amounts to about nine percent of the poverty population
  in this city. The poverty I am speaking about is destitution. I am talking
  about something very clear and even objective, based on income per person.
  
  So invisibility really doesn't tell us a thing. 
  
  And frankly, I think you might agree with me that, in the last three years,
  there has been a lot more visibility. You can often see men standing at the
  top of freeway exits, often with scribbled signs explaining why they are
  homeless or why they are after a dollar or two. Some proudly claim to be
  Vietnam Vets. Others simply hold signs which say "Out of work." You can see
  these men even out towards the far suburbs. 
  
  And even if you don't drive the freeways, you can read the newspaper. There
  have been articles in the Dispatch recently about "pan handlers" downtown,
  and how local civil servants are looking to control their activities with
  various nuisance laws and directives. 
  
  And if you look carefully, you can see some of the same homeless realities
  that I used to see in San Francisco. For instance, at the beautiful beige
  stone Presbyterian Church, down on 3rd between State and Town, which I drive
  past every day to get to my own home, there is a homeless man crouched in
  the stone arch of the northside entrance. You can barely see him, because
  he's off the street a bit, and it's dark in the recess of the arch. He is
  never there during the day, only at night.
  
  I see him there when it is 2° F outside, or when it's 78° and raining.
  He is there during ice storms and sleet and during blistering summer evenings.
  Every single night for two and a half years, however, I have driven past
  this man. I do not know his name. But I do know he has a life. And I have
  to assume that his life is just as important to him as my life is to me.
  
  The same is true for every single homeless person. We are always talking
  about a human life with a story. A complex story.
  
  The facts are these about homelessness in Columbus and its environs. These
  facts are emotionally distressing to any human being who hears them. First,
  families are now more typically homeless than single men. In the past, I
  have seen more men, but now families are homeless, too, in increasing number.
  In fact, family homelessness in Columbus alone was up 14% just this winter.
  Second, children make up a huge percentage of the homeless. For example,
  in the United States, the average age of a homeless person is only nine.
  Columbus is not much different than any other city in the States its size.
  
  As Barbara Pratzner, a member of this church, who is the interim president
  and CEO for the YWCA, puts it: "A big part of the problem is the lack of
  affordable housing in this community. The Community Shelter Board has calculated
  that, in order to afford a modest two bedroom apartment here, a person would
  have to be earning $7.50 per hour---which is far, far more than the present
  minimum wage." This is why more and more women with children under the age
  of five are ending up on the streets. In fact, the typical image of the homeless
  person now is a young woman with a child, not a single middle aged man under
  a bridge.
  
  Why are people homeless? Many reasons. Some claim relationship
  difficulties?they have left their own houses to find safety from a brutal
  boyfriend or husband. Others claim difficulties stemming from drugs and alcohol,
  as do so many who still have houses. Others simply do not make enough money
  working at minimum wage jobs to afford safe shelter, or they have been evicted
  for one reason or another. Young teens are thrown out by their parents for
  being gay or, as I heard one young man put it, for being "mouthy." Mental
  illness may be involved too, certainly, and that is something our culture
  has shown a remarkable reluctance to face.
  
  Of course, homelessness is hardly a new phenomenon. The story from the gospel
  of Luke that I read to you earlier, is actually a tale Jesus told about how
  one man struggled to avoid homelessness in his day. Here is a fellow who
  is trying to support his family. He is a middle man, a steward, neither the
  owner, nor a slave. He's an accountant of sorts, a steward. He is not getting
  by very well?it's hard to put food on the table for his wife and the
  kids at his salary. Remember that in ancient times there were no benefits,
  no perks, just a non-negotiated salary.
  
  And the economic situation back then was even worse than what we are seeing
  now in this country. So this character in the story has apparently been
  embezzling some money just to get by. And he is found out. And fired. Most
  would say understandably so. But remember that there was no social net of
  any kind in those days. No special funds to fall back on. So what does this
  fellow do? He admits shame for what he has done. But he knows that with his
  back problems, he can't be much of a ditch digger, the only minimum-wage
  work that will be available to him when he leaves his job. So what does he
  do? Amazingly, he plays with the books some more, in order that his boss's
  creditors will really like him and take him and his family in. He is in desperate
  straits, and he does some dishonest deeds, both before and after he is caught.
  And the strangest part of the story is that his former boss ends up praising
  him for his cleverness, appreciating the sly and manipulative approach of
  his former employee.
  
  When Jesus told this story, he was telling it to people who would have recognized
  this fellow with a howl. All of them had grown up in an age when people had
  enough to eat, owned their own farms and businesses, and when poverty was
  rare. In a mere twenty years, due to government chicanery and irrational
  taxing structures, tens of thousands of families in the Galilee had gone
  from self-reliance into huge debt. Homelessness was everywhere. Folks slept
  in open fields. Jesus even said it clearly once??Foxes have dens, and
  birds have nests, but human beings have no place to lay their head."
  
  The Galileans who heard this strange story would have recognized at once
  the impossible dilemma of the poor chap. Every choice he had before him amounted
  to a "Catch 22." If he kept everything aboveboard, he and his family would
  have starved. If he complained, he would have been fired. He was caught up
  in a network of realities that required bizarre and uncharacter-istic decisions
  of him. What is there left to do? When you are desperate, you will do anything,
  including cheat and lie, so as not to go under.
  
  I think this same reality is true of modern homeless people. I can't believe
  for one moment that women have been dreaming all their life to take their
  children and sleep in shelters, or that men, standing out on street corners
  in the rain begging with signs in their hands, consider this moment to be
  the joyous pinnacle of their lives. Rush Limbaugh and his smirking friends
  will try and peddle us stories that these men on the freeways are bringing
  in $30 grand a year and hoodwinking us all with their aggressive laziness,
  but I have yet to see the documented evidence. And anyway, if a homeless
  person was caught doing something dishonest to fight against a system that
  often seems like massed Catch 22's, then I wonder, what else should we expect?
  That they will just lie down in the streets and die? The boss in Jesus' story
  might praise them too for their shrewdness?their shrewdness in dealing
  with an impossible situation in such a clever way. 
  
  But as I have said, I have not seen any convincing evidence of these charges.
  I have only seen the old stand-by escape of the privileged of blaming the
  sufferer for their own suffering, and listing all the ways they deserve to
  suffer, with smirks of self-congratulation.
  
  For some reason, this topic really gets to me. When I lived in the Bay Area,
  I used to talk to homeless people all the time. It was just too hard for
  me to walk past "twenty on a block" without talking to at least one or two
  a week. I got to know many of them, and I called them by name when I saw
  them, or bought them dinner or lunch sometimes. I listened to a hundred stories,
  all sad, all human, all amazing. I talked to those who had been thrown onto
  the streets by violence, and those who had been left there by layoffs and
  repeated downsizing at work. I talked to those who medicated themselves with
  drugs in ways not much different than many people with homes medicate themselves
  with drugs?to fight off depression, to be able to sleep, to be less
  fragmented. Sometimes I felt I had to do more. When my neighbor Oliver chose
  homelessness over the violence and chaos in his own home, I offered him my
  warm couch on cold rainy nights as a bed. 
  
  But clearly, although this is a subject that compels me, I am hardly asking
  anyone to do anything I have done, or setting myself up as some sort of example.
  My single life has its own freedoms and patterns, which would be fool's work
  in any other case. Nor do I have any recommendations to any of you as to
  whether you should offer a dollar or two in a cup extended toward you.
  
  But there is no harm in being educated about this reality among us all. Educated
  so our eyes can see under the bridges and arches of churches to note one
  or two of the 9,000 odd homeless women and men in our community. And no harm
  in working to support our interfaith organization, BREAD, as they demand
  affordable housing for our community, using an often uncomfortable power
  to demand justice of the powerful for the powerless. And you can do no harm
  in finding out and supporting the work of all those local agencies committed
  to ending chronic homelessness in Central Ohio?the Interfaith Hospitality
  Network of the YWCA, the Community Shelter Board, and COHHIO, a coalition
  of organizations and individuals working on this reality. And if short-term
  concrete and savory contributions delight you more than social education,
  great, you can offer to be part of the team that cooks dinners for the homeless
  here at the church every other Friday. Or part of the team that picks up
  and delivers and serves the food.
  
  My religious faith in the resourcefulness of the human spirit makes me think
  it's possible to go from twenty on a block to no one on a block, or no one
  at a freeway exit, or no one in an almost invisible shelter. No one.
  
  But as Vinograd's poem made so clear, dealing with this issue is not just
  work for the mind, or the ethical decision, but depth work for the soul,
  or the deeper parts of our life, if you will. Vinograd reminds us that everyone,
  the homeless and those with homes, ultimately has a right to their own best
  selves, a right not to suffer blame and brokenness as our daily portion.
  
  And if I can't make such a simple hope central to my religious faith, why
  would I be religious at all?
  

  One day, I pray, in clear and clean windows,
  reflections of families at supper, 
  not mouths open in fear.
  
  One day, I pray, in wide hot streets,
  clean air, not belching oily smoke.
  
  One day, I pray, on warm spring nights,
  the sound of crickets, not wailing or gunshots.
  
  One day, I pray, in human hearts,
  a prayer of thanksgiving for a peace that
  has lasted a hundred years;
  not a truce, mind you,
  but an Era of Peace full and rich and just.
  
  May our children live to see such a world,
  O love, may all children live.
