 November 26, 1989    Bethlehem Baptist Church    John Piper, Pastor    
    
    "JESUS IS THE RULER OF THE KINGS ON EARTH"    (Revelation 1:4-5)    
    Grace to you and peace from Him who is and who was and who is to   come, and from the seven spirits who are before His throne, and   from Jesus Christ the Faithful Witness, the Firstborn from the   dead, and the Ruler of kings on earth.    
    
    The time between Thanksgiving and Christmas is the happiest of   times and the saddest of times. It's happy for millions of people   because it brings a spirit of warmth and love and togetherness and   sharing and good memories, and a whole lot of cozy experiences   like "chestnuts roasting on an open fire." But for others the   season is painful. It is the loneliest of seasons for the lonely.   For millions the beauty of the season makes their pain worse not   better. It makes them ache for what life might have been like if   the marriage had worked out. Or what life might be like if I   weren't so sick. Or what it might be like if my husband were still   alive. Or if I could be home. Or if I had enough money to pay the   rent and buy some toys for the kids. It's the happiest of times   and the saddest of times.    
    And in some years, like this year, the advent season comes with   worldwide upheaval. And if you already feel a little bit anxious   and emotionally vulnerable, maybe because of sickness, or because   some relationship is in trouble, or because finances aren't   working out, then the upheaval of the world may add to the anxious   knot in your stomach. And there is no question that these are   incredibly unstable days in national and international events.    
    In Poland the labor power of Solidarity was triumphant and a new   government is in place. In the Soviet Union Gorbachev's leadership   has brought unparalleled openness and change &#151; at least for   now. In East Germany and now Czechoslovakia immense demonstrations   for freedom and democracy have brought entrenched communist   regimes to an end. These seem like wonderful events. But who knows   where the new military alliances and new economic partnerships   will lead?    
    Meanwhile the rest of the world reels with one blow after another.   In India dozens of people are killed during a crisis election.   Next door in Sri Lanka the Sinhalese and Tamils continue to shed   each other's blood and keep that little land in turmoil. In the   Philippines communist bands threaten the security of the nation   and no one knows what Mrs. Aquino's decision not to run again will   mean. The bloody civil wars in Nicaragua and El Salvador and   Lebanon and Ethiopia, the racial strife in South Africa and   Israel, the economic chaos in Argentina, the oppressive reversals   in China, the destructive drug cartels in Columbia &#151; when we   read of these things day in and day out we begin to realize how   unstable and precarious the world is. The fact is, we don't know   what will happen in any of these political developments in the   world. And the speed of change in these last weeks should make us   realize that absolutely amazing developments are possible in the   near future beyond anyone's ability to predict.    
    This could be for great harm or for great good. So the holidays   come upon us as days of great instability. And that leads me to   the text and the word of hope and encouragement this morning.    
    In Revelation 1:4-5 John, the apostle of Jesus, is writing to the   seven churches of Asia Minor. It is a time of crisis for all of   them. You can see that by reading the seven letters in chapters   2-3. So John begins with a very reassuring, strengthening,   encouraging, hopeful word. There is nothing that has happened   between then and now to make these words of hope any less relevant   or less applicable to Christians today. So hear them from the   apostle for yourself.    
    "Grace to you and peace from him who is and who was and who is to   come, and from the seven spirits who are before his throne, and   from Jesus Christ the faithful witness, the firstborn from the   dead, and the ruler of kings on earth."    
    The phrase I want us to focus on is the phrase, "the ruler of   kings on earth." Jesus Christ is "the ruler of kings on earth."   This is what John means when he says that Jesus is "King of kings   and Lord of lords" (Rev. 17:14; 19:16).    
    This is what I want to declare today in the midst of the amazing   political upheavals of these last weeks: Jesus Christ is the ruler   of all the kings and presidents and chiefs and premiers and   governors and prime ministers. If George Bush says to Jesus, "How   can you be the ruler over me? I have my office by the election of   the people of the United States, a sovereign nation, and by virtue   of a constitutional inauguration and installation," Jesus will   answer, "I have my office as ruler over you by God's election and   by virtue of my resurrection from the dead, my indestructible   life, and my installation at God's right hand."    
    When Jesus rose from the dead God exalted him and gave him a "name   which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee   might bow,' and that includes all the rulers and kings of the   earth. Jesus is alive today presiding from heaven over the rulers   of the earth.    
    Now this is a breathtaking thought. It is something that most   people today do not believe or even think about. But it is at the   heart of Biblical truth. Jesus Christ is alive, and reigning over   all the kings of the earth, all the events of Eastern Europe and   the Middle East and Central America. We need to understand what   this means.    
    1. The reign of Christ today means that he controls who becomes a   king and who doesn't.    
    Daniel 2:21 says, "God changes times and seasons; he removes kings   and sets up kings." When Jesus says in Matthew 28:18, "All   authority in heaven and on earth have been given to me," I his   meaning must include that God's authority to remove kings and set   up kings is given to him. The Father appoints the kings and   presidents of the earth through the Son.    
    This doesn't mean that every king lives an obedient, Christian   life or pleases the Lord. God often ordains and disposes things   that do not please him completely. It means that Jesus overrules   the sinful acts of evil rulers and makes their sin and their folly   a part of his wise plan for history. The ways of Christ's rule are   not simple. We must say again and again, "O the depth of the   riches and wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his   judgments and how inscrutable his ways!" (Romans 11:33). Christ is   ruling in taking down the governments of East Germany and   Czechoslovakia and in establishing for a time the government in   China &#151; like he did Cyrus the king (Isaiah 45:1-6). Don't   read your papers or listen to the news the way non-Christians   listen. Listen with the ears of Scripture and hear the works of   Christ, the ruler of the kings on earth.    
    2. The reign of Christ today over the rulers of the earth means   that he regulates what the kings of earth do; sometimes holding   them back from evil, and sometimes ordering international events   to further his purposes.    
    For example, in Genesis 20 we read about how Abraham went down to   Gerar south of Canaan. To protect himself he said that his   beautiful wife Sarah was his sister. So Abimelech the king took   her into his harem. But God came to Abimelech in a dream and   threatened him with death if he did not give her back untouched.   Abimelech protested his innocence and God said something very   important: "I know that you have done this in the integrity of   your heart, and it was I who kept you from sinning against me;   therefore I did not let you touch her."    
    This means that God has the authority to prevent rulers who do not   even know him from doing acts that are sin. God can and does   restrain evil in the hearts of rulers. And this authority right   now belongs to Jesus Christ. He is the ruler of the kings of   earth. Christ is restraining the governments of Eastern Europe   from harsh and terrible reprisals. And, yes, he did not completely   restrain the crack down in China. He has his wise and loving   purposes when he allows sin to take its course, and he has his   wise and loving purposes when he restrains the Abimelechs of the   world.    
    But not only does he restrain evil, he also orders international   events to further his purposes. For example, since he had promised   in the Old Testament that the Messiah would be born in Bethlehem,   and he chose a young woman in Nazareth to bear the child, he   ordered things so that the emperor Caesar Augustus would take a   census of the whole empire, which caused Joseph and Mary to travel   from Nazareth to Bethlehem just when Jesus was to be born. God   rules the nations to fulfil his saving purposes. And so today   Christ rules over the nations to order events to accomplish his   redeeming work for men. This is the real meaning of what is   happening in Europe today: God is planning new things for the   advancement of his kingdom. We should be praying and seeking to be   alert about how to be right in step with what God is doing.    
    3. The reign of Christ today over the rulers of the earth means   that he has authority to claim citizens for his own kingdom from   all the nations and states of the earth.    
    Notice the connection between Matthew 28:18 and 19. "All authority   in heaven and on earth has been given to me. THEREFORE go and make   disciples of all nations." In other words the fact that Christ has   all authority in heaven and on earth &#151; the fact that he is   the ruler of the kings on earth &#151; means that he can take   their citizens to be citizens of his kingdom.    
    This means that missionaries are rightful emissaries and   ambassadors of the King who is over all other kings, and no one   has a right to keep them from calling all people everywhere to   submit to the King Christ Jesus. The kings of the earth may not   recognize this right and authority of Christian missionaries in   all countries. But at least the missionaries themselves can have a   clear conscience. The authority of the Ruler of the kings on earth   is behind them. And they have a right to go where He sends.    
    4. The reign of Christ over the kings on earth today means that he   will triumph and bring all his saving purposes to victory.    
    1 Corinthians 15:25 says, "He (Christ) must reign until he puts   all his enemies under his feet." In Matthew 16:18 Jesus says, "The   gates of Hades shall not prevail against" his church. And in   Revelation 17:14 the kings of the earth are arrayed in battle   against Christ; but it says, "They will make war on the Lamb, and   the Lamb will conquer them for, he is Lord of Lords and King of   kings." In other words, because he is the ruler of kings on earth,   he cannot be defeated. His cause will triumph.    
    This is the very air we should breath this holiday season. Christ   is triumphant in his reign over the kings of the earth. All the   developments today are steps to a decisive triumph. It cannot be   otherwise because he is risen from the dead. The ultimate weapon   of earthly kings is death. If that weapon has lost its power, then   the kings will be defeated. It is only a matter of time. And that   has been set by the sovereign wisdom of God (Acts 1:7).    
    5. Finally, the reign of Christ over the rulers on earth today   means that Christ is ordering the world for the good of the   church; and that means for your holiness and happiness.    
    You can see this here in the text and in other texts as well. For   example in Ephesians 1:22 it says, "God has put all things under   his (Christ's) feet and has made him the head over all things for   the church." He reigns for the sake of the church.    
    This is an awesome thought. It should utterly revolutionize the   way you watch the news and read the newspaper and live out your   life. If you watch the news with the eye of faith, what you are   seeing played out before you are the divine strategies for the   purifying and expansion of the body of Christ.    
    You can see this good news right here in Revelation 1:4-5. It   says, "Grace to you and peace from . . . Jesus Christ . . . the   ruler of kings on earth." In other words, John wants us to know   that the authority of the Christ over the kings of the earth is   designed to bring grace and peace to his people. That is true   whether Christ is ordering glasnost and peristroika in the Soviet   Union or whether he is permitting the reversals in China.    
    At Lausanne II in Manila the Chinese who wept over the crushing of   democratic life in Tiananmen Square said, "This was in the wisdom   and love of God. The church was not ready for liberty. The church   needs to be purified still further."    
    This too is grace and leads to the true peace of the people of   God.    
    So be encouraged and be strengthened and be hopeful and bold as   you enter the turmoil and upheaval of the world this holiday   season. Remember "Jesus is the Ruler of the kings on earth."    
    1. He controls who becomes a king and who doesn't .    2.He regulates what the kings of earth do, sometimes holding them   back from evil and sometimes ordering international events to   further his purposes.    3. He has authority to claim citizens for his own kingdom from all   the nations and states of the earth.    4. He will triumph and bring all his saving purposes to   victory.    5. Christ is ordering the world for the good of the church.    
    Therefore grace to you and peace from Jesus Christ the ruler of   the kings on earth.       Copyright 1998 Sound of Grace      Sound of   Grace            
