DR. HARRY KENMORE ADDRESSING THE NEW YORK MONDAY NIGHT GROUP, OCTOBER 13, 1969 


The real reason why I wanted to be with you Monday Nighters is the urgent and pressing need to complete a directive issued to me by Meher Baba nearly twelve years ago. Baba had sent His "Yes" cable in October, 1957, to come to Meherazad to treat Him for an injury He sustained in an automobile accident in December, 1956. They proved to be the happiest days of my life. Four days before I left Meherazad for the States, Meher Baba requested that I tell the New Yorkers everything that happened during my visit. Baba: When you go back tell them everything that happened during my visit. Dr. Kenmore: Everything? Baba: Yes, EVERYTHING. Dr. Kenmore: Even about "the promise?" Baba: Even about "the promise." Dr. Kenmore: But that wouId make them jealous! Baba: Then let it make them jealous because they will want to love Baba as He ought to be loved, And that will make them come closer to Baba. 

But in making my full report of my epic-making visitation with the Avatar, I meticulously omitted mentioning "the promise." And throughout the years I have witnessed the regrettable reaction which stemmed from my failure to recognize that His opinion during that conversation constituted an order. Our obedience of an order protects us from the automatic punishment which is built into the order should we fail in any way to discharge it. We are punished by our disobedienceónot by Baba. My rather warm multiple relationship as doctor, companion, friend, entertainer, mandali, etc., to Baba seemed to imply that no order as such had been given. The jealousy I sought to prevent was the jealousy that was created. EIeven years later, I suddenly realized the jealousy that had fallen to me as my "share of good fortune" was the direct result of that omission. 

And what was "the promise?" On seven different occasions Meher Baba promised that in this lifetime I would have a Glimpse of His Real Divinity (seeing, Him as He really is) and that this Glimpse would stay with me. I had gathered from other Mandali that no promise of this nature had ever been given to a Westerneróit was unique, So tonight I am using this opportunity to disclose "the promise" made to me by my Lord and my God, and I do not care whether this promise of the Avatar makes anyone jealous or not. That is how it happened; that is how it was said. The order has been given; the order has been carried out in full. I feel that a great burden has slipped from my shoulders, and it's wonderful to be free of it. 

Therefore, love this Beloved Avatar of ours more and more as He ought to be loved so that one day you will have blessed Union with Him. 

You know, following the Avatar is not an easy thing. It demands the "mostest" and demands the "bestest" of you. And if you don't know what either of them is, Meher Baba will certainly bring them out even as He is nowówithout His Human Form. The Avatar is the only One in the entire universe who can function just as effectively and more so without a physical form. This privilege is not exercised by anyone else, even a Perfect Master (Sadguru, Qutub). Were you to go to the tomb of a Perfect Master asking, beseeching, pleading for some kind of boon or benefit, and were you to receive an answer to your prayer, this answer would not be given by the Perfect Master who lies in the tomb. The material benefit is given to you indirectly through a living Perfect Master who has a human form and who also assumes the responsibility for the followers and adherents of the Perfect Master who occupies the tomb. But where the Avatar is concerned, you can go directly to Himówith form or without formóbecause the Avatar alone is everywhere at once; He's omnipresent. He is every atom of atmosphere. He is in everything and He is everything now and always. The Avatar is the One and onIy Creator of this entire Tamashaóall the Universes within the Universeóthis Infinite shadow known as Maya. This is His game; this is His show.. 

You contact Him directlyóMeher Baba hears every sincere prayer given up to Him genuinely and lovingly. Remember that even Krishna danced to the tunes of St. Mira. If you are touched Baba in your heart, then Baba will be touched in His heart. If worship of Meher Baba is employed as a gimmick, a rabbit's foot, a Santa Claus, a supermarket slot machine with a jackpot, then be prepared for dire disappointment. He has not come to provide you with false every things and false nothings; He has come to release you from all desire for these "nothingnesses." He will surely attend to your "needings," but not to your "wantings." At any time should your mind be weighed down with the desperate frustration born of life's seemingly insoluble enigmas, seek out Meher Baba as your Divine Comforter (from the Latin "com," meaning "with," and "fortis," meaning "strong") from whom you will derive mounting strength and an exhilarating feeling of well being which will lift your heart high enough to shatter your confusion with dispatch. Just as the squeaky hinges of a door need oil for ease and smoothness in their functioning, so should you go to Meher Baba lovingly in your heart to receive His Divine Love. He must give you that pure oil of Love which is the provision of your real need. Be mindful of the fact that He took human form because of Love for His Creation. He put on this heavy coat of suffering to ease your own portion of suffering in His Tamasha. And for our sake He became the Divine Cushion who absorbs the sharp pangs of pain which would otherwise be unbearable for us had He not been amongst us in human clothes out of Love for His Children. Again, as the Divine Cushion, He cushions the shock and strain of our suffering as we traverse the road with Meher Baba and to Meher Baba who is the Way and also the Goal. 

When the pioneers went west to blaze a new civilization, their nearest neighbor might be twenty to one hundred miles away. There was no one to impress with sartorial splendor. The hair of the head and the beard were allowed to grow rampant, and the observance of rigid rules of cleanliness needed no strict adherence. The animals in the trees need not be impressed. Admittedly, today's social attitudes and behavior in business, politics, economics, etc., still resemble the ruthlessness of a 

jungle. The younger generation astutely perceived this analogy and unconsciously, in overt opposition and protest, assumes the garb of a human-like jungle creature. Youth is acutely conscious of the stink generated by a deteriorating society, but this should not give it the pardonable excuse to physically outstink the social stink of which it is critical. The better way to remove the nauseating stink of the socio-political double talk is for youth to create its own example of observing cleanliness in body, mind, heart and purpose. Our youth today exercises a perceptive acuity which was lacking in previous generations. Therefore, this discerning younger generation also should perceive that setting a better example in constructive behavior and conduct would set a more workable pattern of socialmores which their children would follow and excel when they take over the reins of society. The disorder, corruption and imminent social collapse cannot be halted until order, integrity and a sense of urgency are first registered within thehearts and minds of those who comprise our society. That's the reason for Avatar Meher Baba's Advent on earth today. His leaving the human form did not end the residence of Meher Baba amongst us. This constitutes only His initial introduc≠tion into our lives and affairs, and the power of His Advent will accelerate until it reaches the massive crest of great power lasting for about two hundred years. Now we are going through that period of Humiliation He warned us about and His Humiliation will end in His Glorification, and then all of us wiII feel that glorious and wonderful Manifestation. The whole world will know that Meher Baba was God in Human form; that Almighty God had come in Human Form to deliver it from its protracted ignorance. 

Meher Baba is now the new Pulsation of our lives, who will quicken all. of our hearts. We are going to make a genuine spontaneous response to His residence in us and this wiII change the Values in our lives. What good is knowing Meher Baba unless our lives are made different and better? This world belongs to God who "whimmed" it into being. We, all of us, are His puppetsópuppets of the Divine "Puppeteer." The very first Whim, that Lahar, that made this whole "shebang,í also made the very response, this very re≠action we experience at this present moment in our lives in coming to meet Him, to hear about Him, to know about Him and in becoming finer people because of His concern for our Awakening. 

In the summer of 1968 at Guruprasad, Baba told the Mandali that everything that has happened in the past has happened absolutely because of the Will of God,and everything that is happening now only because of the Will of God, and everything that will happen will absolutely happen only according to and because of the Will of God. It is so very difficult for us to digest this. We didn't go through an interminable evolutionary trek wending our way through seven kingdoms of evolutionary forms to finally 'make it' in the human form and proceed forward and upward through the experience of in≠numerable human reincarnations to arrive finally at that point in our development ofconsciousness where it is incumbent upon us to make that one transcendent decision: to take a pill or not to take a pill,. to get the needle or not to get the needle. Be certain of this: If we think that the ingestion of a pill can bring God into ourconsciousness, then, as Meher Baba said, "This God is nothing but a worthless piece of junk." It's just that the West unfortunately lives in even more abysmal ignorance about such things as God Consciousness, 'Perfect Mastership,Avatarhood, God Realization, etc. Such concepts about the ultimate destiny of man have had little place in our Western culture. Since we are not heirs to the awareness of our ultimate destiny, our younger generation has a tendency to goderelict when subjected to hangups and confusion. Consider this carefully: The only effect of the drug we may take is to irritate the irritation we already have. And this compels us in our desperation to do something, anything to ease the pressure of our hangups. People in trouble often unconsciously choose the fire after the frying pan. I have found that once we choose the path of self-destruction, we find it difficult to reverse or slow down the increasing momentum racing in thedirection of further degeneration. It is as though there is "'something" in ourselves that drives us head on toward self-annihilation. But Avatar Meher Baba says that the self to be annihilated is not the physical self but the little false selfótheego-mind selfó which constitutes the barrier between us and our Real Godhood Self. 

Avatar Meher Baba has come to give us the secret that man can become God. He indicated it "loud and clear" so everybody can hear, everybody can know. He didn't dare do it two thousand years ago. All He would say then was that He was the Son of God, and He was slaughtered for saying so. But now the conscious≠ness of man has developed to that point where we feel that with our minds we can do almost anything. Heavens! Weíve already walked on the moon with our technologyó whereas with His technique Peter only walked on the water! Well, a fourth plane man in the sub-superconscious≠ness state of Real Illusion has at his disposal the entire Infinite Power of God. 

The consciousness of man has been so developed that Meher Baba can let out the secret for which Perfect Masters for centuries have been excoriated and skinned alive. And their disciples were warned again and again,"No matter if you are skinned alive or drawn and quartered, do not let out the secret." Well, God Himself in human form, as Meher Baba, has come to earth in our era and He Himself has released the secret man can become God. 

Now all a psychedelic pill can do is simply irritate certain undeveloped and dormant centers located in the great "silent area" of the brain which will give you a shadow, the most shadowy of shadows, of the subtle sphere. And this phony lift-up only precipitates a phonier letdown, leading to a crackup. Remember always; a drug is a poison no matter what you think you get from it, and its continued use will certainly initiatea process of deterioration, atrophy, degeneration. Know that you're taking this drug into a body composed of organic tissue, and organic tissue is subject to injury and irreversible damage in the hands of the marijuana user, the heroin user, the LSD user. All of these so-called "consciousness-expanding" drugs (the only thing expansive about them being he title) expand nothing because when you come down, you come back to your own low-down miserable self. Actually what you've had is a "consciousness-contrac≠ting," "consciousness-crushing" experience. This "expansion" resembles a blown-up balloon,When the pin punctures the balloon, you find there was nothing in it anyway. 

In order to attain that really high 

feeling that stays high, ever 

replenishing itself, ever sustaining

itself, let an open heart embrace and 

hold on tight to that Divine Love-

feeling Meher Baba is here to give 

you. Why? Because He alone is the 

only incarnation of pure Love in our 

time who continuously generates and

pours His Love into all the vessels who 

feel the need for being filled. Your 

questioning search for a sharper pene≠

tration into the source of conscious≠

ness demands a truthful answer 

infinitely more authentic than a drug.

This Love of Meher Baba is ever fresh, 

ever cIean, ever pure. Therefore, hold 

on to the damaan (the hem of His 

garment) of Meher Baba Who entreats 

us repeatedly to love Him more and 

more, and still more and more until 

one day we become worthy of Union 

with Him. And we should always 

remember His ringing declaration to 

mankind: "I am the Highest of the 

High, I am the One who Loves you 

more than you can ever love yourself. I

am the Ancient One." 