
  We are here
(after a week of winter contrasts
  when balmy, sunny hours
pierced the gray slate sky,)
  to worship, to wrestle with the sacred
and sing for our lives, 
  and keep a silence that heals.
  
  And at the end of our service (together)
  
May our reason and our passion keep us true to ourselves,
  true to each other
  and true to those shared visions of what we can together
  become?


  "Love will guide us," I sing.
  But what do you look like, O Love?
  Are you tender arms, sweet words?
  Are flowers your best portrait, 
  pastel poetry your glowing body?
  
  Have you no fractured bones, 
  no scars, no muscles strong enough
  to unbind the knots that hold me back?
  
  Have you no regret, no sorrow woven into your beauty and ecstasy?
  
  I can only believe that you do, and that the torch by which you lead me and
  guide me through the world smokes, and sometimes flutters and sparks.
  
  Love, you are more than passion, more than sentiment shining in my
  heart?you are tough words and the wrestling with angels along the rocky
  shore. You hold my hand as you tug and lead, your palm is sure and strong,
  and your own fingers are calloused and hard, even though they are scented
  of the flowers you often bear.
  
  Love, you lead me, and guide me through the ramshackle worldly difficulties
  of these present days.
  
  You encourage me to push for the ever-emerging truth, however frayed, instead
  of settling for comfortable and shiny slogans and idolatrous absolutes. Before
  your constancy, I can only be a silent witness, in quiet gratitude for such
  a strong and comforting presence.
  
(silence)

  Love, I see you, as in a mirror, in the faces of my companions in this life,
  the loved ones and soul-partners who move by my side and with whom I join
  hands to make your difference in the world. I miss many of them who have
  gone before me, I struggle with some, I worry about others, and I give thanks
  for many more. I bless them by saying their names aloud, or by letting their
  names reflect in my silent heart, like beautiful winter light.
  
(naming)

  As memory is part of our lives, and as hope is part of our lives, so is winter.
  It makes its presence known in snow and cold, in silver light and sharp stars.
  So now, by music, we stop by winter woods and give thanks for memory, for
  hope, and for this goodly season.

  We forthwith acknowledge our awareness of the sensitive and emotional nature
  of the abortion controversy, of the vigorous opposing views, even among
  physicians, and of the deep and seemingly absolute convictions that the subject
  inspires. One's philosophy, one's experiences, one's exposure to the raw
  edges of human existence, one's religious training, one's attitudes toward
  life and family and their values, and the moral standards one establishes
  and seeks to observe, are all likely to influence and to color one's thinking
  and conclusions about abortion.
  
  The right of privacy, whether it be founded in the fourteenth Amendment's
  concept of personal liberty and restrictions upon state action, as we feel
  it is, or, as the District Court determined, in the Ninth Amendment's reservation
  of rights to the people, is broad enough to encompass a woman's decision
  whether or not to terminate her pregnancy.
  

  I hadn't learned as a child to love myself. Rather, I had been taught to
  be a good Filipina girl and do as I was told? I also had to take some
  time away from my mother, to retreat from her anger and hurt to process my
  own. The first few months after the abortion we didn't speak that often.
  Eventually I entered therapy? Talking about my abortion with another
  woman of color was a relief. I found support and a safe space to open up.
  
  My mother eventually broke down. She called in tears and apologized for not
  supporting me? I knew in my heart that?I must? forgive her.
  She too was wounded and realized that she would not have known what to do
  in my situation. I felt closer to her at that point.
  
  Healing has never been an easy process for me. Something always interrupts
  it-new relationships, disagreements with family or friends, old issues, work
  and school. Denial coats the pain and prevents actual healing. When I become
  scared of my emotions and feel buried, I remember to love myself and know
  that I am not alone. I struggle with my inner demons constantly. Although
  I am only in the beginning stages of my healing process, I feel that I have
  now entered a place of peace? Although my decision was difficult, I
  made the best choice for my circumstance.
  

  Well, here I am, a male human being with no capacity to get pregnant, talking
  about Roe vs. Wade.
  
  It may not make immediate sense to some that I stand up here speaking, for
  that reason alone. Yet during the week, as I have been talking with folks,
  and reading books and papers almost without end, I have found that I have
  been remembering how often this difficult topic of abortion has crossed the
  path of my male life.
  
  When I did my internship in Rockford, Illinois, I stayed with a large family
  with six kids. (Why they wanted another mouth to feed is beyond me, but I
  loved my time there.) The father in the family was a physician who, in his
  practice, performed abortions. He knew that I was for the right of individual
  women to decide in such matters, but he also cannily knew that I felt this
  way, not so much because I had thought a lot about it, but because I put
  myself in the category of "a progressive" and felt I should think that way.
  So, realist that he was, he took me to his office one day, and with the express
  permission of two women, allowed me to follow two whole such procedures from
  beginning to end, from counseling sessions of the women by social workers,
  to post-op recovery. "Even though the decision of Roe vs. Wade is in effect,"
  he said to me, "you will encounter questions about this topic throughout
  your ministry. As a physician involved with this procedure, I think it is
  important that you have some idea as to what it is about medically and how
  social workers counsel women who come in to this office. It will not help
  for you to be ignorant about this at any level." He was right, of course,
  and throughout my ministry I have engaged with women one on one who wish
  to talk about their experiences in depth. It was a profoundly intense and
  deep learning experience that affected me for a long time, and gave some
  ethical density to my so-called "progressive" convictions.
  
  About eight years ago, the senior minister of our Dallas Church, my good
  friend and colleague Laurel Hallman, went on a long, well-earned sabbatical.
  Amazingly, she asked five ministers in our movement to each get a month long
  leave of absence from their congregations and come to Dallas to preach in
  her stead for that time. I thought it was an idea that wouldn't work, frankly.
  But to my amazement it worked beautifully, and my own congregation went for
  it easily. I enjoyed my time in Dallas immensely and have preached there
  many times since.
  
  While I was there, I kept on hearing little snippets about Roe vs. Wade in
  conversations. The frequency of it seemed odd to me. Eventually, I got the
  whole story by asking questions. It turns out that, back in the early 1970's,
  the women's organization in the church, called by the now-dated name Women's
  Alliance, decided to spend a whole year studying the difficult issue of abortion,
  historically, religiously, medically, legally and even sociologically. They
  wanted to interview women who, in those pre-Roe vs. Wade days, had struggled
  to end their pregnancies in back alleys, or tried to abort themselves. They
  heard many stories, also, about physicians who had been reprimanded, placed
  on probation, or lost their license for doing such things.
  
  A lawyer, who had recently graduated from law school, Sarah Weddington, was
  one of the folks they consulted. One day, Counselor Weddington brought Norma
  McCorvey to the church, so she could tell her story to the women. Eventually,
  the stories which this women's group heard so moved them that they helped
  to established an interfaith group in Dallas to try and reform Texas law.
  They worked with the Temple Sisterhood at a local synagogue and with a few
  other more liberal Christians. At the time, they sought only to liberalize
  the then Texas law. Ellen Kalima Lewis, who had been part of the Women's
  Alliance, became president of this reform organization. (Her picture is on
  the cover of your Order of Celebration.) It reminds me, like our children's
  story reminded me this morning, that a few committed people, or even one
  authentic personal voice, has a very real power. I find hope in that.
  
  Things moved swiftly. Working with the testimonies of Ms. McCorvey, who was
  an apartment building manager at the time, as her "Jane Roe," Counselor
  Weddington, even though she was so fresh in her field, worked brilliantly
  through a series of courtrooms, filing briefs and gathering testimonies.
  Eventually to the surprise of many, the Supreme Court of the United States
  agreed to hear the case against the Texas law, which penalized most, or all,
  abortion procedures for women.
  
  Their decision, Roe vs. Wade, came out in January of 1973, 30 years ago.
  Justice Blackmun acknowledged his "awareness of the sensitive and emotional
  nature of the abortion controversy, of the vigorous opposing views, even
  among physicians, and of the deep and seemingly absolute convictions that
  the subject inspires."
  
  He also recognized that there were many different theological opinions about
  this issue, differences which the court was in no position to vote on or
  settle. The majority vote of the Court settled finally on the right to privacy
  in the matter of decision.
  
  "The right of privacy," he wrote elegantly, "whether it be founded in the
  Fourteenth Amendment's concept of personal liberty and restrictions upon
  state action, as we feel it is, is broad enough to encompass a woman's decision
  whether or not to terminate her pregnancy."
  
  Many folks today are simply unaware of how important the clergy was in this
  area, even though in those days, almost all of us were male. Woman after
  woman came to their ministers, rabbis, and yes, even priests, and often found
  that their horror stories of rape, incest and failed birth control were met
  with compassion. There are other "horror stories" to the contrary, to be
  sure, but those are the ones who are greedy for the press bytes, not the
  compassionate ones. The ministers of this particular congregation were no
  exception in those days. One of them helped one women in need in this church
  to end her pregnancy by offering her a sympathetic address in Mexico. Another
  minister helped a woman, who came to him find a place to go in Denmark.
  
  But flying to other countries is the provenance of those who can afford it,
  and not many can. Many women had no such options in those days. And so the
  very real, and almost never addressed, class realities interface with this
  particular issue deeply. As does the color line.
  
  Now look, I personally do not know of anyone who is celebrating the anniversary
  of Roe vs. Wade this week, who is in favor of abortion. That's right, you
  heard me. No one that I know thinks that abortion should be done just to
  do it, or on a whim. There is always a real person's story involved that
  is either difficult or filled with fear or uncertainty. And even so, many
  women decide not to terminate their pregnancy, not for religious reasons,
  but for personal ones. I can certainly understand that. And frankly, abortion
  has always been controversial, even in ancient times, and will always be,
  I suppose. Even the popes didn't always agree as to their own theological
  concept of "ensoulment," that is, the time when the soul animates the fetal
  flesh into humanhood. And many folks are unaware that, although the scriptures
  of the west are against many things, they make no statement against abortion,
  per se. Yet, from very early on, Christian teachers preached against the
  concept. But they preached against it often for very different reasons than
  folks do now. Even many of the great 19th century feminists, like Unitarian
  Susan B. Anthony and her friend, the fierce biblical critic, Elizabeth Cady
  Stanton, were against abortion. But they were against it because they wanted
  men to stop abandoning pregnant women, and they thought this was a good way
  to do it.
  
  Thus, this history of abortion is undeniably complex and startling all around,
  with plenty of surprises. Jane Roe, for example, of Roe vs. Wade, Norma McCorvey,
  is now an evangelical Christian who speaks to Congress against the law her
  story helped to create.
  
  And although studies have shown that the great majority of women,
  internationally, feel relieved after they choose to end their pregnancy and
  do so, this hardly means that miscarriages (which end almost 43 percent of
  all pregnancies) do not deeply grieve women who undergo them. And it does
  not mean that even women who terminate their pregnancies are free from feelings
  of sadness and grief and even regret, as our second reading makes clear.
  Young Patricia stands by her decision, but understands that it was a difficult
  one that affected her family and her own sense of loss. She speaks sadly
  to the spirit of her imagined daughter in Tagalog, her language of heritage,
  Nasaan ka anak ko? Where are you my daughter? But throughout her essay, the
  spirit of her daughter, in her terms, comforts her, and she stands by her
  decision.
  
  No, the whole issue of Roe vs. Wade is not about being for abortion, but
  being for the capacity of a human being to make a difficult, decision in
  the middle of often difficult or even impossible, circumstances. It is about
  safeguarding the heart and minds of women to make such a decision for themselves.
  It is thus a legal decision that, for me, is filled with hope.
  
  A recent president of the United State once said, "I notice that everyone
  that is for abortion has already been born."
  
  But as I said, no one is for abortion. Folks are only for human beings being
  able to be humane, in the terrible tangle of it all. Let me make this clear
  by telling you a true story, written by a member of this church, Joe Davy,
  another person, like me, who will never personally have to make this decision
  for himself.
  
"There once was a woman named Barbara, growing up in a small rural Ohio
    community. She had two brothers and two sisters. She and her siblings lived
    with their parents in a modest 6-room house. They weren't destitute but they
    were poor as their mother did not work and their father was a laborer of
    cement and plaster. It was a simple life and, since it was the 1950's, a
    very different life than we know today. It was a time when controversial
    issues just simply weren't discussed, least of all sex. Barbara received
    no real sex education in school and the topic was strictly forbidden at
    home.

When Barbara was 17, she went to work at the local pharmacy just like
    her brother and sister before her. After a couple years there, she met a
    young man who was stationed at the local Air Force base. They began to date
    and Barbara fell in love. The relationship did not last long, however, as
    the boy met someone else who he married a year later. But Barbara found herself
    alone and pregnant. You see, the "Pill" would not come along for several
    years, so birth control had not been an option for Barbara. And even though
    abortions were available, they were illegal and very dangerous as thousands
    of women were permanently injured or killed from botched abortions.

So Barbara had to tell her conservative parents about the pregnancy. Together
    they decided to keep the baby but it was a very tough decision on the
    family.

Barbara is the reason I work for Planned Parenthood today. It is for women
    like her that did not have options over 30 years ago that I feel a need to
    help. Reproductive rights are being limited by the Ohio legislature every
    day and access to abortion is not a reality in most of Ohio's counties.
    Anti-choice forces have used misinformation and terrorism to limit women's
    access to safe legal abortions. And, in fact, they are now going after the
    "Pill" saying that it too causes an abortion. 

You might wonder why Barbara's story is so important to me, a man. Well,
    Barbara is my mother and I saw what being a single parent did to her life.
    Don't get me wrong, we have a wonderful relationship, and I love her very
    much. And, obviously, I am thankful that she decided to have me. But I also
    saw the sacrifices she had to make for over 20 years of her life raising
    a son by herself because of one night's actions."


  The irony of this true story is forceful to me. It reveals that courage can
  come in many forms?those women who decide to end their pregnancies,
  those who do not, and those who are unable to be mothers, and those who adopt,
  and those who don't. But it also confirms for me why this anniversary of
  Roe vs. Wade is an anniversary of hope. Not because there are not a thousand
  stumbling blocks set before women who face this decision. Not because the
  decision is easy, or ever has been. And certainly not because the law can't
  be etched away, inch by inch, by those who stand against it.
  
  But I live in hope because the justices wrote a law that, although precise
  in language and rooted in good law, respects the spiritual complexity of
  the human condition, and all the pressures and pains and complexities we
  have to live with.
  
  I have hope when human laws are written for human people. And though "I have
  miles to go before I sleep," every step of the way is more sublime when I
  live with my best hope and not my worst despair.

"There once was a woman named Barbara, growing up in a small rural Ohio
    community. She had two brothers and two sisters. She and her siblings lived
    with their parents in a modest 6-room house. They weren't destitute but they
    were poor as their mother did not work and their father was a laborer of
    cement and plaster. It was a simple life and, since it was the 1950's, a
    very different life than we know today. It was a time when controversial
    issues just simply weren't discussed, least of all sex. Barbara received
    no real sex education in school and the topic was strictly forbidden at
    home.

When Barbara was 17, she went to work at the local pharmacy just like
    her brother and sister before her. After a couple years there, she met a
    young man who was stationed at the local Air Force base. They began to date
    and Barbara fell in love. The relationship did not last long, however, as
    the boy met someone else who he married a year later. But Barbara found herself
    alone and pregnant. You see, the "Pill" would not come along for several
    years, so birth control had not been an option for Barbara. And even though
    abortions were available, they were illegal and very dangerous as thousands
    of women were permanently injured or killed from botched abortions.

So Barbara had to tell her conservative parents about the pregnancy. Together
    they decided to keep the baby but it was a very tough decision on the
    family.

Barbara is the reason I work for Planned Parenthood today. It is for women
    like her that did not have options over 30 years ago that I feel a need to
    help. Reproductive rights are being limited by the Ohio legislature every
    day and access to abortion is not a reality in most of Ohio's counties.
    Anti-choice forces have used misinformation and terrorism to limit women's
    access to safe legal abortions. And, in fact, they are now going after the
    "Pill" saying that it too causes an abortion. 

You might wonder why Barbara's story is so important to me, a man. Well,
    Barbara is my mother and I saw what being a single parent did to her life.
    Don't get me wrong, we have a wonderful relationship, and I love her very
    much. And, obviously, I am thankful that she decided to have me. But I also
    saw the sacrifices she had to make for over 20 years of her life raising
    a son by herself because of one night's actions."

  Mindful that our congregations have power in the world to make a difference,
  mindful of bills for winter heat, health insurance payments and cleaning
  supplies, mindful of all that it takes to empower a free faith to move forward
  in the world, we offer the opportunity of the offering so that individually
  and together we may create a world more humane.

  Black branches against red winter sunsets, comfort me.
  Dangling snowflakes the size of domestic postage stamps, delight me.
  Cold, brisk against my cheek, awaken me.
  Hard ground, support me.
  
  Love, let your soothing rhythm sound in the bells of the winter season ringing
  out the seasonal changes, and also in the bell that rings in my heart, the
  bell which keeps time with all the music of the spheres, music it did not
  begin and shall not complete.
  
  Love, sound clear. Sound clear!
