  December 29, 1996 Bethlehem Baptist Church John Piper, Pastor Copyright 1996 John Piper   
       Praying From the Fullness of theWord   John 15:1-8   
 I am the true vine, and My Father is the vinedresser. 2 Every branchin Me that does not bear fruit, He takes away; and every branch thatbears fruit, He prunes it, that it may bear more fruit. 3 You arealready clean because of the word which I have spoken to you. 4 Abidein Me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself,unless it abides in the vine, so neither can you, unless you abide inMe. 5 I am the vine, you are the branches; he who abides in Me, and Iin him, he bears much fruit; for apart from Me you can do nothing. 6If anyone does not abide in Me, he is thrown away as a branch, anddries up; and they gather them, and cast them into the fire, and theyare burned. 7 If you abide in Me, and My words abide in you, askwhatever you wish, and it shall be done for you. 8 By this is MyFather glorified, that you bear much fruit, and so prove to be Mydisciples.   The reason prayer has such great potential for changing things isGod. And the reason prayer is surrounded by such difficult problemsis God. If it weren't for the power of God over natural process andover the human will, there would be no hope in praying for change inthe world or in people. And it is that very same power andprerogative of God that creates the problems we stumble over inprayer.  Two of the biggest problems are: 1) that our prayers, even thosewe have prayed for a thousand times, are sometimes not answered as weask; and 2) why pray anyway, because if God is sovereign and controlsand plans all things, what's the point in praying?     If God is Sovereign, why pray?    Take the last question first: if God is sovereign and governs theworld by his providence, why pray? This question was asked me inAtlanta a few months ago before about 2,000 people after I had spokenon the Providence of God. I gave an answer, and since then have foundthe answer expressed so well by one better than I that I prefer toread you the answer of Charles Spurgeon, which is exactly what Ibelieve. This is from a sermon he preached on Luke 11:9, "Ask and itwill be given you."  It is our full belief that God has foreknown and predestinatedeverything that happeneth in heaven above or in the earth beneath,and that the foreknown station of a reed by the river is as fixed asthe station of a king, and "the chaff from the hand of the winnoweris steered as the stars in their courses." Predestination embraceththe great and the little, and reacheth unto all things; the questionis, wherefore pray? Might it not as logically be asked whereforebreathe, eat, move, or do anything? We have an answer which satisfiesus, namely, that our prayers are in the predestination, and that Godhas as much ordained His people's prayers as anything else, and whenwe pray we are producing links in the chain of ordained facts.Destiny decrees that I should pray -- I pray; destiny decrees that Ishall be answered, and the answer comes to me.  *     This is my faith, and it is rooted in therepeated testimony of God in Scripture that he governs all things inthe world -- from the dominion of kings in Saudi Arabia to the rollof the dice in Las Vegas. Proverbs 16:33 says, "The lot is cast intothe lap, but its every decision is from the LORD." And Daniel 2:21says, "He removes kings and establishes kings." So from the dominionof kings to the roll of the dice, God governs the universe by hiswisdom and power -- including the prayers of his people. Our kneelingto pray is no less God's gracious work than the regenerating of oursouls: he writes his will on our hearts (Hebrews 8:10) and works inus what is pleasing in his sight (Hebrews 13:21), and we do it -- wepray -- freely from our own wills.      Why Aren't my Prayers Answered?    But what about the other problem with prayer -- that we pray andthe answer we long for does not come? The Bible has several possibleanswers.  It says we may not be praying according to God's will; 1 John5:14, "If we ask anything according to His will, He hears us."   Or it could be we have cherished sin that we will not let go fromour lives; Psalm 66:18, "If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lordwill not hear."   It could be that we have man-centered and not God-centeredmotives; James 4:3, "You ask and do not receive, because you ask withwrong motives, so that you may spend it on your pleasures."   Or it may be that we do not believe that God will do it; Mark11:24, "All things for which you pray and ask, believe that you havereceived them, and they shall be granted you."   Or it could be that God wants you to persevere, and is testingyour obedience to his command in Luke 18:1, "At all times [you] oughtto pray and not to lose heart."   Or it might be that God is, in fact, doing far more every time youpray than you can imagine and is daily putting in place a part of themosaic that will in good time be the full answer to your prayer (asin Daniel 10:2,12).      "Praying for All His Purposes, Meditating onAll His Word"    Or could it be that there is a dynamic to prayer that we have notyet learned? Could it be that this matter of praying is so mysteriousand so wonderful that there is a deeper, fuller way of relating toGod in prayer that we have not experienced? Could it be that we arelike children who have been told something by our Father, but we justdon't get it yet? And in his wisdom and patience he goes on loving usand teaching us. Could it be that 1997 would be the year when we getit?  Here is one of my goals for 1997 for Bethlehem. In our  MissionStatement  booklet, two of our values are expressed like this: Wevalue a "growing frequency, freedom, depth and power in corporate,family and private prayer." We value "making prayer the visibleengine of all our efforts in ministry and worship" (page 5). One ofmy goals for us in 1997 is  that we as a church discovercorporately how the Word of God and prayer work together in powerful,life-changing, fruit-bearing ministry.   In our  Mission Statement  booklet, the spiritual dynamicbehind all our ministry goes like this:  We join God the Father in magnifying the supremacy of hisglory through our Lord Jesus Christ, in the power of the Holy Spirit by treasuring all that God is, loving all whom he loves,  praying for all his purposes,   meditating on all his Word,  sustained by all his grace.   My prayer is that in 1997 Bethlehem will learn from study andexperience how those two lines work together --  praying for allhis purposes, meditating on all his Word . What's the connection?How do they function together to make us a transformed, fruit-bearingpeople?  The reason this is so crucial for us is given in our text today,especially John 15:7, "If you abide in Me, and My words abide in you,ask whatever you wish, and it shall be done for you." Do you see theconnection between the Word of God and prayer? "If my words abide inyou, ask whatever you wish, and it shall be done for you." Here is agreat goal for us in 1997: what does that mean? What does it mean inexperience, not just in talk, but in action and life? That is what Iwant us to learn together.  I put it as a question because I am not at all sure I know whatthis text means -- at least not in its fullness. I have the suspicionthat there is a potential here that few, if any, are tapping into. Idon't think I have arrived -- perhaps I have barely begun toexperience this dynamic of the Word abiding in me and releasing sureanswers to prayer. Do I really know -- have I really experienced --what Jesus means by the Word abiding in me? Do I experience -- do youexperience -- day in and day out the dynamic relationship between theindwelling Word and answers to prayer? Do you know from experiencewhat this is?  In Prayer Week of 1987 we did a survey at Bethlehem and asked, forexample, How much time per week do you spend reading the Bible? 255people took the survey. 21% said fewer than 15 minutes (a week!).Another 25% said 15-30 minutes a week. So 46% of our people in 1987were spending fewer than five minutes a day reading God's Word. Whenasked about time spent in focused prayer, 62% said they spent fewerthan 30 minutes in prayer each week -- fewer than five minutes a day.  I doubt that the statistics are very different today. And I wouldventure to say that many of these people harbor some deep resentmentstoward God for not answering their prayers. So the question arises:is there anything in their lives -- or in my life -- that correspondsto John 15:7 -- "If the Word of God abides in you . . ." Is readingthe Word of God five minutes a day what Jesus was referring to whenhe said, "If my words abide in you"? My own suspicion is that Jesushad something in mind vastly more extensive and more life-shapingthan the quick glances that forty percent of our people give to theWord of God each day.     Is This Legalistic?    I know that at this point some people are already throwing updefenses in the name of freedom, and are ready to say that all suchtalk is infected with legalism and a performance mentality. Well, Iplead with you to look at the words of Jesus here in John 15:7 andstruggle with me over this. This is not legalism. We are not talkingabout doing x-number of minutes of Bible reading to earn x-number ofanswered prayers. We are talking about living out what we value.  For example, suppose a coach prepares a steak dinner for hisfootball team every day and spreads it before them freely, withoutcost, and says to them: eat and enjoy this rich meal every day andyou will have strength to win the championship. And suppose that halfthe team instead goes to the candy store and the bakery, and weekafter week eats sweets and pastries. They start to lose games and thecoach finds out they are not eating his free steak dinners andrebukes them. Some of them become indignant and say, "Hey we don'twant a legalistic relationship with you. We want to relate to you infreedom and do what comes more naturally for our appetites."  Now that coach would be justified in saying, "It is not legalismto accept a free gift from me and to trust me that it is better foryou than candy and pie." And so it is with Jesus. It is not legalismto welcome his free gift and infinitely valuable word. It is notlegalism to savor it and revel in its preciousness. It is notlegalism to believe that without it we get weaker and weaker and moreand more worldly.  There are some of you who have built up strong resistance toreceiving the Word of God and letting it abide in you, as Psalm 1says, day and night. And I plead with you to let 1997 be the year youtrust God to change that. There is something here for us that we arenot getting. And I believe that if you would just reach out and tastea fraction of it, you would take heart that there are possibilitiesin your life and prayer that you never dreamed.     If His Word Were Abiding in us,     How Might that Yield Answers to Prayer?    What might John 15:7 mean? Jesus says, "If you abide in Me, and Mywords abide in you, ask whatever you wish, and it shall be done foryou." What are the possibilities of how the Word abiding in us mightyield sure answers to prayer?  1. It may be that the Word abiding in us functions to guide ourprayers. In other words, 1 John 5:14 says, "If we ask anythingaccording to His will, He hears us." Perhaps it is the abiding of theWord of Christ in our lives that directs us to what God's will is inprayer. Then we pray according to God's will and the answer comes.  2. Or it may be that the Word abiding in us functions to build ourfaith, which then lays hold on answers to prayer. Romans 10:17 says,"Faith comes from hearing, and hearing by the word of Christ." And inMark 11:24 Jesus says, "All things for which you pray and ask, believe  that you have received them, and they shall be grantedyou." So if faith is essential for answered prayer, and if the Wordabiding within sustains faith, then maybe that is what Jesus meanswhen he says that if his words abide in us we will have answers toour prayers.  3. Or it may be that the Word abiding in us functions to transformus morally and spiritually so that we are walking in the path of lovewhere God answers prayer, rather than in the path of selfishnesswhere he doesn't. We know from Psalm 66:18 and James 4:3 thatintentionally cherishing or walking in sin cuts us off from answeredprayer. And we know from John 8:32 that the Word of God sets us freefrom sin: "You will know the truth and the truth will set you free."And we know from John 17:17 that the word of God sanctifies:"Sanctify them in the truth [Jesus prays to the Father], your Word istruth." So maybe it's the transforming, sanctifying power of the Wordthat leads to holiness and love and then to answered prayer.     Bearing Fruit for God's Glory is the MainAim    What's plain from the context of John 15:1-8 is that bearing fruitfor God's glory is the main concern -- and it probably means both thefruit of love and joy as well as the fruit of conversions. Verse 2:"Every branch that  bears fruit , He prunes it, that it  maybear more fruit ." Verse 4: "As the branch cannot  bearfruit  of itself, unless it abides in the vine, so neither canyou, unless you abide in Me." Verse 5: "I am the vine, you are thebranches; he who abides in Me, and I in him, he  bears muchfruit ." Verse 8: "By this is My Father glorified, that you bear much fruit ."  So the aim of this passage is more fruit for God's glory, and thepath to that fruit-bearing is our abiding in Christ, and his wordabiding in us. And prayer, according to verse 7, is an essential partof that abiding in Christ and having his Word abide in us, so that wecan bear fruit for God's glory.  How this prayer and this Word abiding in us work together is whatI want us to discover together this year. The very least that itmeans is that we make it our aim to pray from the fullness of God'sword.  Effective prayer is the overflow of the fullness of the Wordof God abiding in us . What does that mean in experience? That isour quest in 1997.  Prayer week begins the quest. The churchwide Bible memorychallenge, that starts next Sunday, continues the quest. I hope youjoin in new patterns of prayer this week, devote a night to prayer onFriday, and come back next week and think with me about the practicalchallenge of letting the Word of God abide in us. The text will be,"Thy word have I treasured in my heart, that I may not sin againstthee," from Psalm 119:11.  Pray with me now that God would go with us into this greatinvestigation of praying from the fullness of the Word.    Copyright 1997 JohnPiper   
  
