 November 18, 1990 Bethlehem Baptist Church Celebration of Thanksgiving (Maranatha Hall) John Piper, Pastor THANKSGIVING IN SUFFERING (Hebrews 4:14-16)  Since we have a great high priest, Jesus, the Son of God, who has passed through the heavens (or gone into heaven), let us hold fast our confession. For we do not have a high priest who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses, but one who in every respect has been tested as we are, yet without sin. Let us then with confidence draw near to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy and find grace to help in time of need.  I want to present Jesus to you this morning as a sympathetic Go-between for you and God. I want you to understand how Jesus, the Son of God, is alive today, and stands ready to serve you as your advocate with God the Father. I want you to see why you can draw near to the throne of God with Jesus as your Go-between and Advocate, and expect to find mercy and grace to help in times of need. If it's true that we can always go to God's throne and find mercy and help in times of need, then there can always be thanksgiving, even in suffering -- and that's my theme this morning, Thanksgiving in suffering. Now when I call Jesus a Go-between for you and God, I realize that I might be creating a false picture in your mind. You might take me to mean that God is the bad guy and we are the victims and Jesus is the good guy, and Jesus comes between us and God the way a level-headed son comes in between a furious father and a helpless child and rescues the child by grabbing the father's arms and saying, Cool it! Cool it, dad. There are three things wrong with that picture. You and I are not victims of God, we are sinners against God. The Bible says, All have sinned and fallen short of God's glory (Romans 3:23). Our consciences tell us plainly that we have not even lived up to our own standards, let alone God's. The second thing wrong with that picture is that Jesus did not intrude himself between us and God. He didn't jump in to wrestle God away from us against God's will. God put Jesus between us and himself. For God so love the world that he GAVE his only begotten Son, that whoever believes on him might have everlasting life (John 3:16). The Go-between was God's idea. He took the initiative to make a way for sinners to come to him through Jesus. The third thing wrong with that picture is that God does not lose his cool. He is not impulsive or rash or reckless. He is perfectly righteous and unswervingly just and infinitely holy and pure. He never plays fast and loose with truth or with virtue. He upholds his law with unimpeachable equity and integrity. No shady deals. No bribery. No skeletons in the closet. God is light and in him is no darkness at all (1 John 1:5). That's why we need a Go-between. The Bible says, Your iniquities have made a separation between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you (Isaiah 59:2). God is like a blazing fire of light and truth and righteousness, and I am like a broken, dark, dead, dry piece of wood. If I get near Him I will be consumed. And so God sends a Go-between -- his Son. He takes on human nature, he lives a perfect life, he dies to bear the sins of many, and he rises to vindicate the saving power of his death. Now Jesus says, I am the way the truth and the life, no one comes to the Father but by me (John 14:6). Jesus is the only true Go-between with God. The apostle Peter said, Christ died for sins once for all, the righteous for the unrighteous, that he might bring us to God (1 Peter 3:18). Only Jesus can bring us to God. The apostle Paul said, We were reconciled to God by the death of his Son (Romans 5:10). Only Jesus can save us from the separation and alienation that cuts us off from the Father. There is salvation in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given among men by which we must be saved (Acts 4:12). It's Jesus or alienation. He came into the world and took on himself our human nature, our weaknesses, our pain and our death. He was tested in every way like we are, and yet he didn't sin. Since he didn't sin, he can be a perfect High Priest -- a Go-between -- for us. And since he suffered and was tested and tempted, he can be a sympathetic Go-between. I say all of this just to lay the foundation for the amazing invitation that God gives to us in Hebrews 4:16. He says, Therefore, let us with confidence (not hesitation, not reluctance, but with confidence let us) draw near to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy and find grace to help in time of need. When Jesus is your go between, the throne of God is a throne of grace, not judgment, and what you find there is mercy and grace to help in time of need. What this means is that when Jesus, the perfect Go-between, has met your need for forgiveness and acceptance with God, he doesn't take off and say, You're on your own now; see you in heaven. Instead, he stands ready to serve you all the rest of your life. The Christian life begins with forgiveness and reconciliation with God. It's like a great homecoming, with tears of repentance and hope and joy and acceptance. For some it's almost too good to be true. But then the Christian life continues, and it's a life of ongoing dependence on the grace of God. We don't escape the pain and stress and disappointments and suffering and calamities and tragedies and frustrations and pressures of life in this world. In fact, sometimes becoming a Christian and obeying the Word of the Lord increases our troubles rather than lessening them. But the difference now is, first, that the outcome of life is settled -- it will be eternal life with infinite happiness (Romans 8:17-18) -- and, second, all along the way in this world God helps us in times of need through our Go-between, Jesus. God's invitation to everyone is, first, come to Jesus for forgiveness and reconciliation with me, and then, second, Draw near to the throne of grace, that you may receive mercy and find grace to help in time of need. I want to illustrate this power and willingness of God to help you in time of need by introducing you to one more person who is living evidence that God gives mercy and grace to help in time of need. This person is Sandra Tarlen. She has been part of our fellowship since early this year. Her story goes like this: My major crisis started when I was four years old! I was burned in a gasoline fire. A little boy threw a can of gasoline into a fire and I was standing on the other side. The gas went through the fire and into my face and the flames followed. My face suffered 1st, 2nd and 3rd degree burns. These burns left ugly, disfiguring scars. When I started school it was very difficult. I felt different from the rest of the children and a lot of them were very cruel to me. I didn't like school much, but I didn't like summers either, because that always meant I would have to have another surgery on my face. My father became an alcoholic and the word love or any action of love was not heard or seen in my family that I can ever remember. An old man who lived next door to us was always very nice and would buy or make me things -- but there was a price to pay for gifts. He fondled and molested me repeatedly. One night when I was 13 years old, I was walking home from the show, and a gang of young men picked me up and raped me. Although these things caused me to feel dirty and empty inside, they also gave me the feeling that at least somebody wanted me for something. I began to fill a lot of loneliness with sexual relationships. My heart began to get hard and bitter and full of hate. The hate began to eat at me from the inside out. I became anorexic, then bulimic. I had chronic migraine headaches, ulcers, a hysterectomy, and other major surgeries. I was in and out of doctor's offices constantly looking for a remedy. I experimented with alcohol, drugs and a couple of times even suicide! By the time I was 17 I already had two children and by the time I was 25 I had been married four times. Life seemed pretty hopeless. I knew there had to be more to life than what I was living. In search for that, I went with my best friend Sherry to a Victorious Christian Living Conference. There I heard David Ritzenthaler talk about Godship. He explained how much God loved me, enough to send His own Son to die for me and save me from my sins. I knew that this God David was talking about was not the God of my life and I desperately wanted to know Him. Five days after hearing this, I called David. I went to his office and he shared with me the Four Spiritual Laws. That night on March 12, 1982, at 7:30 P.M., I prayed and confessed I was a sinner in need of a Savior, I invited Jesus into my heart to be Lord of my life. At that very moment God gave me new life. That was just the beginning of new life for Sandra. We will give her time to tell her story early next year. But there remained 11 more surgeries to bring the total to 32 in her life. She speaks of surgeries and scar tissue on the inside too. Broken relationships and broken dreams being healed. Amazingly Sandra writes, He gave me new dreams as I continued to seek Him. Today after all those surgeries, I can honestly say with a joyful heart that I am thankful for the experiences I've gained as a result of them all. God has used each one to strengthen me and my relationship with Him and when I share my experience, it has helped to strengthen others. The point of Marty Wade's testimony and the point of Sandra Tarlen's story and the point of God's word in Scripture is that Jesus is a very sympathetic, caring, and powerful Go-between with God. Because he loved us and died for us and rose from the dead, anyone -- anyone of you -- who trusts him can draw near to the throne of grace to receive mercy and grace to help in time of need.  Copyright 1990, 1998 John Piper   Piper's Notes    
