INTRO.- The kingdom of heaven is a kingdom.  It is a country, a domain, an empire.  It is similar to our country and yet it is not similar.  Heaven is not America and America is not heavenly!ILL.- When Edward Everett Hale was Chaplain of the Senate, someone asked him, ?Do you pray for the senators, Dr. Hale?? He replied, ?No, I look at the senators and pray for the country.?ILL.- Some Will Rogers? quotes about leaders and government.- Be thankful we?re not getting all the government we?re paying for.- Our constitution protects aliens, drunks and U.S. Senators.- There?s no trick to being a humorist when you have the whole government working for you.- The more you read and observe about this Politics thing, you got to admit that each party is worse than the other.  The one that?s out always looks the best.- I don?t make jokes.  I just watch the government and report the facts.- About all I can say for the United States Senate is that it opens with a prayer and closes with an investigation.- Politics has become so expensive that it takes a lot of money even to be defeated.- The 1928 Republican Convention opened with a prayer.  If the Lord can see His way clear to bless the Republican Party the way it?s been carrying on, then the rest of us ought to get it without even asking.What is our responsibility in this kingdom we call the country of America?  I Tim. 2:1-4 ?I urge, then, first of all, that requests, prayers, intercession and thanksgiving be made for everyone? for kings and all those in authority, that we may live peaceful and quiet lives in all godliness and holiness.  This is good, and pleases God our Savior, who wants all men to be saved and to come to a knowledge of the truth.?  WE MUST PRAY.Titus 3:1-2 ?Remind the people to be subject to rulers and authorities, to be obedient, to be ready to do whatever is good, to slander no one, to be peaceable and considerate, and to show true humility toward all men.?  WE MUST OBEY THE LAWS AND DO GOOD, NOT EVIL.In our text, we have another kingdom, the most important kingdom.  We are a part of this kingdom.  We became a part of this kingdom when we surrendered our lives to Christ as Savior.  And we are trying to get more people to be a part of this kingdom.  WHY?  Because God commands us to and because we care about people!  PROP.- In this parable, Jesus tells us what the kingdom of heaven is like.  1- The kingdom of heaven is like a landowner2- The kingdom of heaven is like men working3- The kingdom of heaven is like getting paidI. THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN IS LIKE A LANDOWNERMatt. 20:1 ?For the kingdom of heaven is like a landowner??ILL.- In a move that shocked anyone who has ever seen "The Apprentice," including Tara Conner, Donald Trump announced Dec. 19, 2006 that he would not fire the embattled Miss USA, despite allegations of drug use, underage drinking and sexual misconduct.He said, "She?s agreed to go into rehab.  She knows that if she makes even the slightest mistake from here on, she will be immediately replaced.  I believe she can do a tremendous service to young people."Fighting back tears, and with her voice shaking, Conner thanked Trump for the pardon saying, "In no way did I think it would be possible for a second chance to be given to me." She then went on to shower the Donald in compliments; "I?ve had a very big blessing bestowed on me.  It truly takes someone with a wonderful heart, a heart of gold and a blessed soul." How could Donald Trump pardon Miss Teen USA and give back her crown?  Because he owns the contest!  And get this: Trump also currently owns over 18 million square feet of prime Manhattan real estate.  No, wait a minute.  I?m wrong.  God owns Manhattan but Trump, along with everyone else, just doesn?t realize this.Psalm 50:9-12 God said, ?I have no need of a bull from your stall or of goats from your pens, for every animal of the forest is mine, and the cattle on a thousand hills.  I know every bird in the mountains, and the creatures of the field are mine.  If I were hungry I would not tell you, for the world is mine, and all that is in it.?  There is only one landowner and it?s too bad that people don?t recognize this.  There is only one landowner and only one God.  And it?s too bad that we don?t realize this. We often think, ?What?s mine is mine and that?s all there is to it.?  But that is not all there is to it!  WHAT?S MINE IS GOD?S AND THAT?S ALL THERE IS TO IT.  And I?m responsible to Him for managing it.  God has just loaned these things to me. It?s called His ownership and my management.ILL.- The Associated Press | Tuesday, Jan 9 2007, MALIBU ? Suzanne Somers? home was one of four destroyed by a wind-driven wildfire that swept through an exclusive seaside neighborhood of multimillion-dollar homes.How sad.  Suzanne Somers? house in Malibu was burned to the ground.  NO.  WRONG.  IT WAS THE LANDOWNER?S HOUSE.  IT WAS GOD?S HOUSE.  Your house is not yours.  And we have a landowner to whom we must give account.  ILL.- I have given money to my kids before when they were little and they have come home with junk in exchange for that money.  I have thought or said, ?What?  You bought that with the money I gave you!?  And then I wonder what God must think of what we do with HIS money?Fortunately, we have a landowner/God who is far more understanding and gracious than I am or you are.  He doesn?t whip us every time we make a bad or silly purchase.II. THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN IS LIKE MEN WORKINGMatt. 20:1-2 "For the kingdom of heaven is like a landowner who went out early in the morning to hire men to work in his vineyard.  He agreed to pay them a denarius for the day and sent them into his vineyard.?ILL.- A new employee had been caught coming in late for work three times and the fourth time the manager decided to read him the riot act.  He said, ?Look here!  Don?t you know what time we start to work around here??  He replied, ?No, sir.  They?re always working when I get here.?I think that most of us realize that God wants us to be diligent and faithful in our work, whatever the job.ILL.- The following notice was posted in a Chicago store in 1858: This store will be open from 6 a.m. to 9 p.m. the year round.  On arrival each morning, the store must be swept, counters, shelves, and showcases dusted.  Lamps must be trimmed, pens made, a pail of water and bucket of coal brought in before breakfast.  After 14 hours of work, leisure hours should be spent in reading.How would you like that kind of job and hours?Proverbs 14:23 ?All hard work brings a profit, but mere talk leads only to poverty.?ILL.- John Wesley was born 1703 and lived to March 2, 1791.  He was 88 years old when he passed away.  It was said that he traveled two hundred and fifty miles a day for forty years; preached forty thousand sermons; produced four hundred books; knew ten languages.  At age eighty-three he was annoyed that he could not write more than fifteen hours a day without hurting his eyes, and at age eighty-six he was ashamed he could not preached more than twice a day.  He complained in his diary that there was an increasing tendency to lie in bed until 5:30 in the morning.We work on earth for an owner/manager and we work for our heavenly landowner who is God.  I Cor. 15:58 ?Therefore, my dear brothers, stand firm. Let nothing move you.  Always give yourselves fully to the work of the Lord, because you know that your labor in the Lord is not in vain.?God wants us to work in His vineyard, His field, His church. What kinds of things can we do to work and serve?  Teach, preach, sing, play, talk, witness, help, etc.  Anything we can think of to serve the Lord.ILL.- I remember one little lady in a church who was small and frail.  She said she felt like she couldn?t do much but she had a large prayer list of people that she prayed for.  We?re all laborers for the Lord in some form.  GET INVOLVED!III. THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN IS LIKE GETTING PAIDMatt. 20:1-2 "For the kingdom of heaven is like a landowner who went out early in the morning to hire men to work in his vineyard.  He agreed to pay them a denarius for the day and sent them into his vineyard.?We get paid on earth for our labors.  We get paid in heaven because of a gracious landowner.  ILL.- A man owned a small farm in South Georgia.  The Wage and Hour Department claimed he was not paying proper wages to his help and sent an agent to interview him.  "You just give me a list of your employees and tell me how much you pay them.""All right," said the farmer.  "I have a hired man.  Been with me for three years.  I pay him $600 a week, plus room and board.  I have a cook.  She?s been here six months.  She gets $500 a week plus room and board.""Anybody else?" asked the agent as he scribbled on a note pad.  "Yeah," the farmer said.  "There?s a half-wit here.  Works about eighteen hours a day.  I pay him ten dollars a week and give him chewing tobacco.""Aha!" the agent roared.  "I want to talk to that half-wit!"  The farmer said, "You?re talkin? to him now.?Brothers and sisters, no matter what we make in wages, most of us would prefer to make more.  I?ve heard it said that no matter what we make we would like to make one-third more. Some of the workers in this parable complained because they felt they should have been paid more or better because they had worked longer.  ILL.- My older brother Larry has been in the grocery business 50 years. He?ll be 66 years old in July.  He is the manager of a large Price Chopper grocery store in Lenexa, KS.  He makes more than twice the money I make in one year.  I went to college and he did not.  I work just as many hours as he does and often more.  Why should he get paid more money than I do?  Jealousy has long been a problem in our society.  We tend to compare ourselves to one another and then think we?re getting ripped off.  For example, I know of some politicians who are getting hundreds of thousands of dollars for their speeches and that?s a whole lot more than I get for dishing out solid spiritual stuff that carries eternal weight.  Why should they get paid more than I do?It?s easy to become jealous of others in this world, but it doesn?t pay.  It?s a cancer that can kill the spirit and soul.The Lord will pay the workers in His kingdom.  And the pay will be better than anything we ever imagined!  Heaven will be far better than anything offered in this life.  Donald Trump, eat your heart out!I Cor. 2:9 ?However, as it is written: No eye has seen, no ear has heard, no mind has conceived what God has prepared for those who love him.?II Cor. 4:17-18 ?For our light and momentary troubles are achieving for us an eternal glory that far outweighs them all.?Our eternal payoff is going to be worth everything we have ever done in this life for the Lord. However, we must ALWAYS remember that our eternal payoff is not because of our hard work, but because we have a gracious God!  He doesn?t owe us anything but He gives to us in abundance because of who He is!We may also be tempted to complain, saying, ?Why should they get to go to heaven?  They?ve done so little and been here such a short time.?ILL.- I remember old Pete in Iberia, MO.  He was related to some people in our church.  In his later years he moved back into that area and started coming to church.  It wasn?t long before Pete confessed Christ and I baptized him.  He told me that he felt like he had wasted his life, doing whatever he wanted, rather seeking to serve the Lord.  Old Pete died about six months after that.  BUT I BELIEVE HE?S IN HEAVEN and it?s all because of the grace and graciousness of God who keeps His Word.Let us never be jealous of others, latecomers or otherwise! The only reason any of us will enjoy heaven is because of God, who is compassionate and gracious, slow to anger, abounding in love and does not treat us as our sins deserve!CONCLUSION-----------------------------ILL.- Dr. W.J. Dawson once visited with preacher Joseph Parker in his garden.  Dawson told Parker that he intended to go visit the Holy Land.  Parker waved his hand to the blue sky above him and said, ?My holy land is there.?  And that is exactly how I feel about it.  The kingdom of heaven is where I want to go.  And it is because of our great and gracious God and His son Jesus Christ that all of us will go there, early or late.  Make heaven your goal in life.  There is no better place.