 Accountable Spirituality                           
                     
October 17
, 2010                                             
                                                   
               
Rev. Mark Belletini                                
                                                   
         
Opening Words
 We are here                                        
                                                   
                                       
after a week of sun and rain, warmth and chill     
                                                   
                       
to note both the flight of a single bird,          
                                                   
                               
and the plight of whole populations,               
                                                   
                         
with eyes of compassion, a heart of imagination,   
                                                   
                                 
and strength for self-questioning and honest love. 
And so, we pledge to journey together along the way
s of truth and affection, 
as best as we can name them now, or may learn them 
in days to come; that 
we and our children may be fulfilled, and that we m
ay speak to our world in 
words and lives of peace, justice and goodwill. 
The Sequence  

 
A lone wild bird against a powder blue sky,  

and a flock of local geese flying south;  

the one and the many are both notes                
                                                   
                             
in the sacred song called 
The Earth is Home
. (sung) 
Choirs singing a Mohawk chant or a Buddhist sutra; 
a recorded 
muzzein
 calling people to prayer 
from a minaret; a mega-church congregation of almos
t 4000 singing a spirited song to Jesus with 
the simple lyrics projected on screens; an atheist 
composing a choral song about the beauty of the 
autumn; eight Quakers over eighty waiting on the Sp
irit in an old rural Ohio meetinghouse..the 
one and the many– everyone of them notes in the sac
red song called 
The Earth is Home.
  (sung) 
 
A man in worn clothes in downtown Columbus sitting 
against a brick wall holding up a clever 
sign; five celebrated opera singers from the Met ha
ving brunch together at the Russian Tea 
Room in Manhattan; a plane over Paris with turbulen
ce and 158 passengers, two of them crying 
newborns; a teenager discovering that welcoming som
e silence inside her heart, even when she is 
in a crowded room, is beautiful–the one and the man
y, each notes in the sacred song called 
The 
Earth Is Home
–(sung) 
silence 

And every person in my life and your lives are note
s in the sacred song sung by our lives as by a 
choir–those we miss, those we love, those whose lov
e for us gets us through the day, those with 
whom we struggle. Each of them is a note in our com
mon song. Now we are free to name them 
to ourselves, privately in our heart, or aloud into
 the safe space of this place, while not forgetting
 
that you and I too are notes on the staff of life, 
and part of the song.                              
                          

 naming
 There are many choirs singing the song of our home 
the earth–the autumn leaves blowing down 
the street, the autumn stars spinning in the sky, t
he choral singers in a great metropolitan 
congregation. 

The First Reading
 comes from the blog of Rev. Michael Spencer, a reti
red evangelical minister 
with a heartfelt and broadminded approach to script
ure. He wrote these words in an essay three 
years ago. 

If a person does not believe that prudence and wisd
om need to accompany generosity, consider 
this situation: John and Jenny are at the movies. T
hey come out and a panhandler asks for $20 
for gas. Jenny gives it to him and they skip dinner
 together. The next day, Jenny and John are 
enrolling in college. A panhandler meets Jenny on t
he steps of the administration building and 
asks for $2000 to fly to his mother™s funeral in th
e Solomon Islands. Jenny has the money in her 
checkbook. Should she write the check? 

If not, why not? If prudence and wisdom should come
 into play with $2000, then it should also 
come into play with $20. 

The Second Reading
 this morning is the beautiful poem Song by Deena Me
tzger, written 21 
years ago. I am going to ask Steve to read it twice
, since it™s short. I am hoping to memorize it, 
myself. 

There are those who are trying  

to set fire to the world.  

We are in danger. 

There is time only to work slowly. 

There is no time not to love. 

Sermon 

My godson Adam has a friend name Kaveh who makes fi
lms. Award-winning films. When I was 
visiting Adam and Kaveh in Montreal a few years ago
, he told us about a project he was working 
on to shoot a documentary about a man who had been 
living in the main Paris airport (Charles 
DeGaulle) for over ten years. This fellow never lef
t the airport, he ate there, slept there, and used 
their bathrooms. Ten years. Unlike the fellow and h
is son in this morning™s story, this man was 
quite open about his situation, and didn™t try to h
ide the fact he was there. 
The short film was completed, and it™s called Sayeh
. Maybe you™ll get to see it sometime. The 
man in the airport whom Kaveh filmed was not an eas
y subject. He was deeply emotional, and 
was beginning to crack apart–living in an airport f
or ten years may keep you warm in winter, 
cool in summer and dry in spring and autumn, but th
is man™s total lack of options was wearing 
him to a frazzle. Yes, his was a political situatio
n, apparently, he was a refugee from another 

 country who had no easy answers to his dilemma. But
 then, I have to imagine that the man in the 
story we heard earlier this morning was not really 
in a situation that was terribly different.  
No, don™t get me wrong. I know people who have chos
en to leave the shelters and homes they 
have lived in for life on the streets. My neighbor 
Oliver in Oakland did it. He felt his mother™s 
house–right across the street from me– was too crow
ded–she was always ?taking in strays? 
as he put it, and felt that privacy under a bridge 
at night was better than the commotion at home. 
I know folks who prefer the street to the shelters 
for other reasons: some of them feel they are 
threatening places filled with desperate and violen
t types. But most people on the street who are 
not professional beggar (and yes, they do exist, I 
know that)–.are 
not
 there because they think 
it™s a better place to be than a nice warm home som
eplace. 
Some are emotionally disturbed folks who have falle
n through the cracks in our system, for 
which the funding diminishes daily, I™m sad to say.
 Some are folks going through a terrible but 
temporary crisis in their lives. Many, like the man
 in the story this morning, actually 
have
 jobs, 
but are not able to afford quarters in a neighborho
od with a good school for their children. Many 
others do not have work, and live on meals such as 
folks in our church cook for Faith Mission or 
another shelter program, then spend the night in gr
oup dorms. 
Some of these folks make their way to our building,
 in the morning, the afternoon, and the 
evening. Our doors are unlocked most of the day. So
metimes folks come in when I am here and 
knock at the office door. Sometimes they come in wh
en Eric is here, and he responds to them. 
Sometimes they come in when you are here, and neith
er Eric or I are. Perhaps someone will 
come into your meeting, your covenant group, your p
otluck supper and talk to 
you
. 
Perhaps this someone may ask for money. What will y
ou do then? Will you reach into your 
wallet or purse or pocket and hand over some change
? Some bills? Why or why not? We say, 
?All are welcome here? often, but does that only me
an people who have divergent ideas as to the 
meaning of God or the teachings of Jesus, or does t
hat mean someone who asks you for some 
cash? 

These, I say, are all spiritual questions. Question
s of spiritual accountability. To be accountable 
is to be 
answerable
–to someone, or some group, or some ideal we profes
s that makes demands 
of us. But is our answer, when we are answerable, y
es or no? Or something else? Why? Again, 
more spiritual questions. 

I have talked with folks in the congregation, and h
ave heard different answers expressed in 
conversations. Some say, ?
Give; after all, it™s better to give than receive, 
and I have more that 
the person who asks, so it™s only fair
.? Some say, ?
Don™t ever give; how can you know if they 
really need something good for them, like food or s
helter, or want money for drugs or alcohol??
 Some say, 
I™m afraid, so I give to make them go away, so I™ll
 feel safe
. Others say, 
?I™m afraid 
for my children when they are here. Who knows if th
ere is danger or not?  I have to protect my 
child.?
  Still others say, 
?There is nothing to be afraid of–those who feel af
raid are really 
saying they don™t like to see people so down and ou
t because it makes them feel uncomfortable.?
 Some say, ?
I feel guilty when someone asks me for money
, 
so I give so as not to feel guilty, even 

 if the story they are telling me is an out and out 
lie
.? Others say, 
?Feeling guilty is a waste of 
time. It™s simply not right to give money away just
 like that because someone asks. If you give 
money to one, they will tell others that this churc
h is an easy mark, and the next day the flood 
gates will be open and all of a sudden we™re a soci
al service agency, without a penny of state 
funding, not a church.? 

This last one is interesting to me because it™s bee
n brought up for almost 1800 years. The ancient 
Roman writer, Lucian of Antioch, wrote a story sati
rizing the renegade Christian Marcion, where 
he depicted him as a devious man who pretended to b
e in great need. The local church 
community he joined believed his stories, and heape
d lavish gifts on him, giving him food and 
money, till, Lucian says, he was richer than all of
 them. When they figured that out, they got 
mad, and they chased him away. Then, guess what?  H
e then became a Cynic philosopher, giving 
away all of his possessions and living on the stree
t. 
And the reading offered us by Michael Spencer is in
teresting to me too. He speaks of 
prudence
 and 
wisdom
 being part of our answer, our accountability, to a
ny request made of us. If someone 
asks us for 20 dollars, and we give it, why won™t w
e give 2000 when someone asks that of us? 
He is comparing and contrasting the two situations,
 and asking them if it™s only the amount of 
the ask that makes the difference. This too is, as 
far as I am concerned, a deeply spiritual 
question.  

I know that when I am asked for money, sometimes I 
am annoyed that 
my 
day is being 
interrupted by someone telling me a story, a story 
I cannot verify. Your car broke down? Your 
daughter needs a meal? You need to go to your mothe
r™s funeral? How do I know that? And yet, 
it could be true, couldn™t it? And maybe I 
do
 have 20 bucks in my pocket at the time. But I have
 
a lot of things to do–a hospital visit, an importan
t meeting, a counseling session for someone 
who is depressed and miserable, or even this sermon
 to compose. Can I take time away from my 
commitments to try and decide whether there is a fu
neral or not by checking records on the 
computer?  

At my former congregation, someone drove up the dri
ve and asked me for gas money to get to 
his mother™s funeral up in Spokane. He needed exact
ly 37 dollars and 26 cents he said, to get 
there and back. He told me he had calculated that i
t would take exactly that much. He didn™t 
want to be greedy, he said, and ask for more.  

So, convinced by his sad story, I gave him the mone
y. Next week, someone else came up the 
driveway.  Mother.  Funeral.  Spokane. $37.26.  Sam
e details.  I didn™t have any cash on me–
 honestly– and told him so. But the week later, same
 story, same details, but another man. I just 
sent him away and said, ?This church has a policy o
f not giving any of our budget away to 
individuals, but only to social causes.?  After tha
t, no one came back to ask for gas money to get 
to a funeral in Spokane. And at that moment, I real
ized that there is some truth in what is said 
about not allowing the beat on the street to be tha
t this church is an easy mark–  ?Tell them a 
sob story, and you™ll get anything you ask for.? Th
is holy hesitation is what Michael Spencer 
calls ?wisdom and prudence.? Sadly, I learned this 
?wisdom and prudence? I think, not at my 
university, but rather at the often far more import
ant School of Hard Knocks. 

 Of course, the needs are real, and not everyone has
 got a con story. Most of the stories I hear, I 
dare say, are real as rock. But am I the best perso
n to respond to individuals? Or should my focus 
be on organizations who help mitigate the terrible 
problems of people who have fallen through 
the cracks of our very well-cracked social system? 
 Again, these are spiritual questions. 
Questions about how I face reality. And I can think
 of no easy answers to any of these spiritual 
questions I have raised. 

The man at the airport in our story this morning is
 a fictional character based on a non-fictional, 
real person. But this week I helped a real person, 
my friend Warren, move into an apartment, the 
first apartment he has lived in for five years. He™
s been on the street for that time. Living in 
shelters, sleeping on couches. And yes, he™s a real
 friend of mine, not a case that I am working 
on, not a charity. I care deeply about Warren, and 
he has stayed in my house many times. He had 
some problems with alcohol for a while, and I had t
o keep him out of my life for a very long 
time, but our friendship is real, and has survived 
this sad, destructive way of coping with his very 
difficult situation. 

Other friends have asked me why I have a homeless f
riend. ?Isn™t that a bit odd?? they ask.  I 
say, ?No. I am friends with Warren for the same rea
son I am your friend–because I love you– I 
love Warren too.?  

It may seem to some to be an over-used word, Love, 
but never for me. 
There is no time not to 
love
, writes Deena Metzger.  No time not to love.  Rev.
 Spencer tells us that love needs to be 
wise and prudent, not profligate and senseless. I a
gree. 
But I like what Deena Metzger says just before she 
tells us that there is no time not to love. She 
reminds us there is danger in the world. There are 
those, she says, who 
are
 trying to set fire to 
the world.  

But I for one don™t think she is talking about the 
folks who might walk into this building looking 
for a hand out. I think the really dangerous ones a
re the people who tell me that they can offer 
me something for nothing, that they can give me a b
ig deal if I will only trust them. I think the 
really dangerous ones are not the ones who need foo
d and shelter and sometimes tell big 
whopping lies to try and get them, but the ones who
 have large homes and plenty of food, but 
who try to tell me that they have the one true sche
me that will make my life 
instantaneously 
better, if only I will give them huge sums of money
 and time. Like the television ads go on and 
on broadcasting–  ?It™s my money and I want it now!
? A thousand get rich quick schemes, 
lotteries, casinos, instant loan sharks, free trips
 to the Bahamas, the TV evangelists who tell you 
that God will favor you by doubling your bank accou
nt if you only plant a three thousand dollar 
?seed? in 
their
 garden. None of these people love you. None of the
m love me. They are not my 
friends, nor your friends. They are not speaking of
 honest needs like food or shelter. For me, 
anyone who preaches that you can get something for 
nothing is the real danger, not the homeless 
people who come into this building asking for food 
or money.   It™s hard for me to get upset even 
if someone comes here trying to swindle me with a t
all tale. After all, the world of Wall Street 
and Madison Avenue and many major Corporations is 
packed 
with far more terrible swindlers of 

 a more voracious and guilt-free sort, as the sinkin
g economy these last two years has proven with 
painful clarity.  

Deena Metzger tells us, 
There is time only to work slowly. 
So it is with the spiritual questions I 
asked earlier in the sermon. If you think I am goin
g to offer any of us a cipher to answer the 
question 
Do we give when asked, or do we not? 
you neither know me well, nor our religious 
heritage yet. Being answerable is not having final 
and universally applied answers; being 
accountable is not setting up account charts of yes
 and no. It™s to be part of a story that is open-
ended, that has elements that will always be unknow
n, but which, Deena Metzger reminded us in 
the Affirmation, can be transformed. How? By our sl
ow work, our patience, our continuing 
conversations about this exact topic. By our willin
gness to be compassionate, not just toward 
those who come to us, but toward 
ourselves:
 when we make mistakes, get taken, or get frustrate
d 
by the whole situation that there ARE two classes o
f people in America, the housed and the 
homeless.  

We can™t know the entire story of anyone™s life, in
cluding our own. There are always new 
learnings, deeper understandings that can break thr
ough if we are open-ended. It™s best NOT to 
know the entire story, says Metzger, because, if we
 think we do, if we think we know the right 
answer in every case, we™re 
outside
 the story. I think that™s brilliant. 
But in our religious tradition, the housed and the 
homeless are both part of the unfolding, 
unfinished story. Warren and I are 
in the same story
. You and I and even the homeless fellow we 
had to ask to leave the building because he blew up
 the microwave in our kitchen, are all part of 
the same story, the story of people yearning to lov
e more, be loved more, live justly, find joy, 
find freedom. Like the bird in the story Jennifer t
old the children this morning. Remember how it 
ended? 

Then I remembered the bird. It took a while, but a 
door opened. And when the bird left, when it 
flew free, I know it was singing. 

I don™t know if that filmmaker Kaveh would ever fin
d a reason to make a documentary about this 
congregation, but I bet if he did, when he heard us
 keeping the conversation going about real 
people, the housed and homeless, the questioning an
d the answering, figuring out how to live our 
common story together fairly, justly and honestly, 
with care and love, I think he™d have a 
bonafide film-festival award winner on his hands. I
 bet you his title would be 
?The Earth is 
Home.? (sung)
 Offering 

Prayer in Times of Less Light 

The light is less now. 

The dark blue of evening comes sooner. 

The chill comes earlier. 

But, you, oh Love, are there, steady, reliable; 

 the small trustworthy star that steadily guides me 

even when the garish sunlight has faded, 

even when the clouds hide you. 

The light is less now. 

Brash voices tell me it™s because they have hoarded
 all the light to themselves,                      
    
but I see no light.                                
                                                   
                                            
I see only you, Love, darker, deep, ever-present su
mmons 
to honesty, tenderness, strength in my vision, 

fire in my heart. The light is less. But it is sure
ly, surely enough. 
 
 
