Sunday, November 9, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels  fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his  angels, And prevailed not; neither was their place found  any more in heaven (Rev. 12:7,8). And it was given unto  him (i.e., the Beast) to make war with the saints, and to  overcome them; and power was given him over all  kindreds, and tongues, and nations." Rev. 13:7.  Well, Beloved, just as we predicted, the foolish, apostate, demon-possessed people of this evil nation have elected Antichrist (i.e., Obama) to be king of the world ­ thus fulfilling the scriptures. The NBC reporter and commentator ­ Joe Scarborough ­ in reporting and commenting on his election last Tuesday, Nov. 4, called him "Saint Obama," ­ (and he was not being critical ­ just reporting events as he saw them) ­ and said that Big Media has canonized Obama. Fits right in with what the Pope said just as soon as the news of Obama's election flashed round the world; to wit: that he (the Pope) was calling upon all Christians to pray for Obama, so that we may have peace in the world.  Beloved, it appears to me that we now have the Unholy Trinity from Hell in place, which counterfeits the Holy Trinity, and which preaches peace while practicing war on God and His church, and which is another sign that we are very near the end of the world. The Holy Trinity consists of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost ­ Three Persons, One God. The counterfeit Unholy Trinity consists of Satan, Obama, and the Pope. I suggest to you, that we, in our day, in our place, now have evidence on the ground, whereby we may discern the signs of the times to identify Satan as the Dragon, Obama as the Beast, and the Pope as the False Prophet. At least this is a good working model until our Father gives us more light on this grim subject, ­ if more light there be. These three characters from Hell have finally been revealed together in one verse in the Holy Scriptures; to wit: "And the Devil (SATAN) that deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the Beast (OBAMA) and the False Prophet (the POPE) are, and shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever." (Rev. 20:10)  And, Beloved, notice how near we are to the end of the Bible and the consummation of all things, when we see these three Hellish monsters finally disposed of by the power of the Lord our God, at Rev. 20:10; to wit: Rev. 22:21. And right up to the end, these three thugs are waging aggressive, bloody war against the church, and only cease their war when fire comes down from God out of heaven and destroys them; to wit: "And they went up on the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp of the saints about, and the beloved city (i.e., the church): and fire came down from God out of heaven and devoured them." (Rev. 20:9)  And, Beloved, all that hypocritical willy nilly peace talk is a dead giveaway that the False Prophet is at work. Make no mistake, this matter is forever settled in Heaven; to wit: "There is NO PEACE, saith my God, to the wicked." Isa. 57:21.  Sunday, November 9, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 2  "I am the Lord, and there is none else, there is no God beside me: ...That they may know from the rising of the sun, and from the west, that there is none beside me. I am the Lord, and there is none else. I form the light, and create darkness: I MAKE PEACE, and create evil: I the Lord do all these things." (Isa. 45:5-7)  The Great God Almighty has declared repeatedly to the fallen sons of Adam that He alone is the One and only One with power to grant peace, and with power to take away peace. THERE SITS THE POPE, at the head of a pedophile machine that he covers up rather than exposes and fixes. Hundreds of millions of pagan people who hang on his every word, and he utters not one word of using his power over thousands of Catholic priest pedophiles around the world, ­ I say, the Pope has power to put a stop to all such abominations ­ and he sits quiet as a mouse about vigorously fixing that worldwide Catholic mess ­ and all he wants to talk about is some nebulous kind of peace, peace, when there is no peace, saith the Lord. It is the mark of the False Prophet; to wit:  "For thus saith the Lord, Enter not into the house of mourning, neither go to lament nor bemoan them: FOR I HAVE TAKEN AWAY MY PEACE FROM THIS PEOPLE, saith the Lord, even loving-kindness and mercies." (Jer. 16:5)  Don't you get it, you ignoramus? Just here is the litmus test of the False Prophet, and since the attributes of the Unholy Trinity are freely interchangeable, it is also the litmus test of the Great Red Dragon (Satan) and the Beast (Obama); i.e., all three members of the Unholy Trinity betray themselves as being monsters from Hell by their practice of promising abominable sinners and nations the world over that they can have peace without repenting and forsaking their sins. Nothing is more detestable to a Holy God; to wit:  "Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Hearken not unto the words of the prophets that prophesy unto you: they make you vain: they speak a vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord. They say still unto them that despise me, The Lord hath said, YE SHALL HAVE PEACE; and they say unto every one that walketh after the imagination of his own heart, NO EVIL SHALL COME UPON YOU... I have not sent these prophets, yet they ran: I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied." (Jer. 23:16-21)  AND THERE SITS OBAMA, THE BEAST, with his hands dripping with the blood of millions of infants, using his considerable, worldwide influence ­ (and now promising to use his tax-paid office in the White House as a "Bully Pulpit") ­ to fight for the so-called "reproductive rights of women" to kill their unborn and partially-born babies. Laying aside his similarly despicable "Bully Pulpit" promotion of same-sex marriage and other so-called "gay rights" in blatant defiance of God's Word ­ and then attempting to justify his smash-mouth sins against the Holy Ghost by further perverting and denying the words of the living God ­ I say, laying all that aside, OBAMA the Beast committed the UNPARDONABLE SIN AGAINST THE HOLY GHOST by denying the infallibility and plenary verbal inspiration of huge portions of scripture, e.g., Romans, Leviticus, and Deuteronomy; to wit:  Sunday, November 9, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 3  "Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men." (Mat. 12:31)  So, then, while the beast and the false prophet, i.e., Obama and the Pope ­ I say, while the Beast and the False Prophet yammer about world peace, duping the masses with the gentleness of the lamb (the phony Pope) ­ on the one hand ­ and the inspiring eloquence of the bombastic beast (Obama) on the other ­ the dominant theme of it all being "peace" ­ he was at the same time making bloody war on the saints; to wit: "And it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them." (Rev. 13:7)  Remember that the False Prophet (the POPE) has the baby horns of the meek and harmless little lamb, but he has the killer voice of the old Dragon; to wit: "And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth; and he had two horns like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon." Rev. 13:11. Notice that this beast arises out of the EARTH, whereas the first Beast rises up out of the SEA, symbolizing the restless, rabble- rousing throngs of humanity ­ (think Obama and his screaming crowds in America and Europe) ­ "And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out of the sea." Rev. 13:1. Notice also that the function of the second beast appears to be to promote and exalt and deify the first Beast; to wit: "And he exerciseth all the power of the first Beast before him, and causeth the earth and them which dwell therein TO WORSHIP THE FIRST BEAST." (Rev. 13:12)  Who can read Rev. 13:1-9 ­ about the Beast (Obama the Antichrist) ­ and not think of Sen. Barack Obama? and his big adoring, mesmerized crowds of hundreds of thousands in America and Europe? The media called them "massive public spectacles." Listen to this description of the beast that rose up out of the sea ­ ("The wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked." Isa. 57:20,21.); to wit: "Upon his heads the name of blasphemy...and the dragon (Satan) gave him his power, and his seat, and great authority ...and all the world wondered after the beast... and they worshiped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the beast? And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months." ­ (3.5 years, or a relatively short time, but which is slightly less than his first 4year term as president) ­ "And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. AND IT WAS GIVEN UNTO HIM TO MAKE WAR WITH THE SAINTS, AND TO OVERCOME THEM: ...And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him." Rev. 13:1-9.  This all sounds eerily-like the strange Obama phenomenon. Our text speaks of war in heaven between Michael and his angels, who defeated the dragon and his angels and cast them out of heaven. The Lord Jesus said that he saw "Satan as lightning fall from heaven." Lk. 10:18. It appears that these fallen angels are now engaged in another spiritual warfare against the saints. The old Puritan preacher, William Gurnall (1617-1679) was most famous for a 1,200 page book he wrote entitled "The Christian in Complete Armor."  Sunday, November 9, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 4  Think of it, Beloved, 1,200 pages to describe and expound the nature of the spiritual war we are presently engaged in! It was the thesis of Gurnall's book that our spiritual war with Satan and his fallen angels is exceedingly fierce and dangerous, taxing our time and strength to the breaking point, and continuing to the end of our lives.  In his introduction, Gurnall writes, "The subject of this Treatise is solemn; A war between the Saints and Satan; and that, so bloody a one, that the cruellest war which was ever fought by men will be found but sport and child's play compared to this. It is a spiritual war, and that, not a history of what was fought many ages past and is now over, but of what is now doing ­ the tragedy is at present acting ­ and that, not at the furthest end of the world, but what concerns thee. The stage whereon this war is fought is every man's own soul. There is no neutral party in this war. The whole world is engaged in this quarrel, either for God against Satan, or for Satan against God." What a profound thought; to wit: "THE WHOLE WORLD IS ENGAGED IN THIS QUARREL!"  This holy proposition is, in the truest sense of the word, the Christian's "World View" of things. When good king Hezekiah "saw that Sennacherib was come, and that he was purposed to fight against Jerusalem...he set captains of war over the people, and gathered them together to him in the street of the gate of the city, and spake comfortably to them, saying, Be strong and courageous, be not afraid or dismayed for the king of Assyria, nor for all the multitude that is with him; for THERE BE MORE WITH US THAN WITH HIM: With him is an arm of flesh; but with us is the Lord our God to help us, and to fight our battles. And the people rested themselves upon the words of Hezekiah king of Judah." 2 Chron. 32:2-8.  Speaking to this inspired incident in the wars of the Lord in which God's elect people ­ as always ­ were victorious, Bro. Gurnall says, "The Christian of all men needs courage and resolution. Indeed there is nothing he does as a Christian, or can do, but is an act of valor. A cowardly spirit is beneath the lowest duty of a Christian, `be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest' ­ What? stand in battle against those warlike nations? No, but that thou mayest `observe to do according to all the law, which Moses my servant commanded thee,' Jos. 1:7. It requires more prowess and greatness of spirit to obey God faithfully, than to command an army of men;" it requires more inner strength and courage to be a true Christian than to be a great military leader highly decorated and widely applauded; to wit:  "Now after the death of Moses the servant of the Lord it came to pass, that the Lord spake unto Joshua the son of Nun, Moses' minister, saying ...Be strong and of a good courage; for unto this people shalt thou divide for an inheritance the land, which I sware unto their fathers to give them." Jos. 1:1,6. (This much for Joshua the great military leader, on the eve of launching the glorious military campaign for the successful conquest of Canaan.) ­ Bang! "Only be thou strong and very courageous, THAT THOU MAYEST OBSERVE TO DO ACCORDING TO ALL THE LAW, which Moses my servant commanded thee; turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest prosper withersoever thou goest. This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth (i.e., not only think about it, but TALK about it); but thou shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do according to all that is written therein: for then thou shalt make thy way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success. Have not I  Sunday, November 9, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 5  commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed;  for the Lord thy God is with thee withersoever thou goest." (This much for Joshua, the humble  SPIRITUAL leader, showing and proving, as we said above, that it requires more prowess and  greatness of spirit to obey God faithfully, than to command an army of men; and it requires more  inner strength and courage to be a true Christian than to be a great military leader highly decorated  and widely applauded.) Josh 6:7-9.  Beloved, we are engaged in a real, gargantuan war against a Great Red Dragon (Satan) and his fallen angels, described by the apostle Paul like this; to wit: "For we wrestle not against flesh and blood (i.e., not ONLY against flesh and blood), but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places." (Eph. 6:12)  Again we are told that although we walk and live in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh; and that the weapons of our warfare are not material weapons such as guns and bombs, but that our weapons are nevertheless very real and very "mighty through God to the pulling down of (Satan's) strong holds;" and that we are to vigorously use these real, mighty and spiritual weapons to cast down imaginations (or, vain and foolish reasonings) "and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God," and that we are to "bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ." 2 Cor. 10:3-5.  "Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil." Eph. 6:10-11. (I repeat, since it is a spiritual warfare against Satan and his angels, we must have spiritual weapons and spiritual body armor.) "Wherefore, take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the EVIL DAY, and having done all, ­ (or, having overcome all) ­ to STAND. STAND therefore, having your loins girt about with TRUTH, and having on the breastplate of RIGHTEOUSNESS; And your feet shod with the PREPARATION of the gospel of peace; Above all, taking the shield of FAITH, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of SALVATION, and the sword of the Holy Spirit, which is the WORD OF GOD: Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all saints; And as for me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the gospel." Eph. 6:13-19. And, Beloved, "we are more than conquerors through him that loved us." Rom. 8:37.  "But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ." 1 Cor. 15:57. And, "Now thanks be unto God, which always causeth us to triumph in Christ, and maketh manifest the savour of his knowledge by us in every place." 2 Cor. 2:14. "But the God of all grace, who hath called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you." 1 Pet. 5:10. "And the God of peace shall bruise (i.e., utterly and completely crush) Satan under your feet shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen." Rom. 16:20. Amen.  
