Sunday, December 28, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other  name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be  saved." Acts 4:12. "Jesus saith unto him, I am the way, the  truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me."  Jn. 14:6. "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with  God, and the Word was God...And the Word was made flesh, and  dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only  begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth." Jn. 1:1,14.  So speaks the Bible, exalting the Lord Jesus Christ as the ONE, AND ONLY WAY TO HEAVEN ­ to the utter and necessary exclusion of all other pretended ways as false and fraudulent. To every other religion ­ and I mean to every Christ-rejecting Jew, Muslim, Buddhist, Hindu, Confusionist, Voodoo-ite, Mormon and Hawaiian worshippers of the dead, etc., etc., etc. ­ call the roll of every son and daughter of Adam ­ to every man-Jack and female-Jill ­ the Lord Jesus Christ said (and SAYS), "YE SHALL DIE IN YOUR SIN: whither I go, (i.e., Heaven), YE CANNOT COME ...for if ye believe not that I am he" ­ (i.e., "THE ONLY BEGOTTEN SON OF GOD") ­ "YE SHALL DIE IN YOUR SINS." Jn. 8:21,24. Period. No exceptions. No excuses. What part of that don't you understand? You Christ-rejecting, Godblaspheming, Son of Belial you!  Nevertheless, notwithstanding, and in spite of all ­ comes now the Antichrist Beast-of-Rev.-13 Obama ­ President-elect of the United States, with his Bully Pulpit ­ and declares to the world that Jesus Christ is a liar ­ and that there are many roads to Heaven, such as: the Jewish Christhaters road, the 1.4 billion Allah-worshipping Muslims road, the 1.2 billion cross-legged bigbelly Buddha idol-worshippers road, the cobra- and cow-worshipping Hindus road, the 1.5 billion Chinese Confusionists road, the African animal-worshipping Witch Doctor Voodoo-ites road, etc., etc. Right after reciting his phony mantra about his so-called conversion experience when he supposedly "kneeled beneath the cross on the South Side of Chicago, and felt God beckoning him, and submitted to God's will, and promised to follow God's Truth" ­ "he then exulted, `That's a path that has been shared by millions upon millions of American ­ evangelicals, Catholics, Protestants, Jews and Muslims alike.'" The Faith of Barack Obama, Mansfield, pp. 54,55.  More solid proof that Obama is Antichrist. Furthermore, Obama has admitted in public print and voice that he does not believe in the verbal and infallible Word of God, namely, the Bible; to wit: "There are aspects of the Christian tradition that I'm comfortable with and aspects that I'm not. There are passages of the Bible that make perfect sense to me and others that I go, `Ya know, I'm not sure about that.'" The Faith of Barack Obama, p. 54. More proof that Obama is Antichrist. TV personality Joe Scarborough, on his Morning Joe TV show, MSNBC, on one occasion said that Obama was "Christ-like," and on a later occasion, (Dec. 22), referred to Obama as "St. Obama." The editors of LIFE Books, in a recent publication entitled, The American Journey of Barack Obama, said, "The phenomenon that is Barack Obama has intrigued us all. Who is Barack Obama? Obama's singularly American life has been characterized by tragedy and triumph, drama and despair, anxiety and anticipation, and, ULTIMATELY, ENORMOUS EXCITEMENT AND THE DEEPEST HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE."  Sunday, December 28, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 2  And, Beloved, just listen to this blasphemous nonsense; to wit: "Increasingly, words such as  CALLED, CHOSEN, and ANOINTED are being used of Obama... Moreover, they are framing  the image of Barack Obama in the minds of millions of Americans." The Faith of Barack Obama,  Mansfield, p. 3. More proof that Obama is Antichrist. And, think about it, Beloved.  If you were assigned to describe a fictionalized account of the concurrence of events calculated to bring that promised and prophesied WICKED ONE ­ ("And then shall that Wicked be revealed." 2 Thes. 2:7) ­ to the domination of the world, arising from the "sea" of filthy, troubled mankind (Rev. 13:1), could you imagine in your wildest dreams anything more fitting to such a phenomenon than the saga of Antichrist Obama, albeit mostly according to Obama? To wit: "At the time" ­ (early `60s, the `don't call me a nigger-lover' genre, ala, the Guess Who's Coming to Dinner? movie) ­ "of the published works of other commentators on racial issues, there was a Kansas-born white couple named Stanley and Madelyn Dunham whose 18-year-old daughter had given birth to the son of the 25-year-old AFRICAN VISITING STUDENT BLACK MAN SHE HAD MARRIED. The young parents' son, Barack Obama, was named in honor of his African father. `That my father looked nothing like the people around me ­ that he was black as pitch, my mother white as milk ­ barely registered in my mind,'" Obama wrote in Dreams from My Father.  Obama has obviously sanitized and glamorized all that stuff he has written and spoken about his American parents and grandparents. Nevertheless, he has revealed much about himself therein, that further stamps and brands him as the final Antichrist. For example, it is evident that his 18year-old mother was a teenage tramp, rebelling against the mores of society and the Methodist/Baptist teachings of her Midwestern parents ­ when she moved thousands of miles away and took up with a worthless, oft-wed black African who married Obama's teenage mother, with one African wife already ­ to whom he returned when Obama was 2. Thus Obama had an absentee, dead beat father, who never supported him, either financially or otherwise. What a mess of a family!  Nevertheless, and dishonestly, Obama spins that mess he grew up in, into something glamorous and wonderful ­ for cheap, tacky political theater and crass political purposes. His worthless father was born a Muslim and graduated into atheism, to hear Obama tell it. His goofy tramp of a mother believed in nothing, but kept books on her shelf, extolling all organized religions, ­ (according to Obama, remember), ­ and she taught Obama that one religion was as good as another ­ which Obama thought was a tolerant and a wonderful thing, and which it is obvious that he himself yet believes and lives by, notwithstanding his claim to be a born-again Christian. This heresy is further dramatic proof that Obama is the final Antichrist Beast of Rev. 13.  Obama says: "I believe that there are many paths to the same place." Again, from page 55 of Mansfield's book: "He first saw this broad embrace of faith modeled by his mother. `In our household,' he has explained, `The Bible, the Koran, and the Bhagavad-Gita (a so-called sacred Hindu text) sat on the shelf alongside books of Greek and Norse and African mythology. On Easter or Christmas Day my mother might drag me to church, just as she dragged me to the Buddhist temple, the Chinese New Year celebration, the Shinto shrine, and ancient Hawaiian burial sites.'"  Sunday, December 28, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 3  What his mother sought to embed in him, ­ and DID EMBED IN HIM, ­ was her view that  "underlying these religions was a common set of beliefs about how you treat other people and  how you aspire to act, not just for yourself, but also for the greater good." Thus, for Obama,  Christianity is but one religious tree rooted in the common ethical soil of all human experience.  Beloved. Could anything be more Antichristic? Could anything be more antithetical to our text,  making our dear Lord Jesus the greatest liar and fraud in the intelligent universe and in the  history of the human and angelic races. Listen up, Obama. We at Westboro Baptist Church will  not sit idly by while you do it ­ while you bastardize our dear Lord Jesus Christ.  Listen up, you Antichrist Beast of Rev. 13! You are going to Hell; to wit: "Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved." Acts 4:12. NONE OTHER NAME. Not Mohamed. Not Buddha. Not Confucius. Not African witch doctors. Not Hawaiian dead people. Not Santa Claus. Not the Oracle of Delphi or any other pagan mythology. And certainly not the hideous Black Jesus whose picture hangs in the entrance of Obama's UCC church on the South Side of Chicago, and who is identified in Cone's A Black Theology of Liberation as follows; to wit: "Jesus is a black man come to destroy white systems of oppression. For too long Christ has been pictured as a blue-eyed honky. Black theologians are right; we need to dehonkify him and thus make him relevant to the black condition."  Now THAT, Beloved, is the evil fruit of the Antichrist Beast Obama ­ i.e., the goofy, souldamning belief that all religions will take you to Heaven. And WE, Beloved, are the Lord's anointed, holy, fruit inspectors. Christ said, "Ye shall know them by their fruits. A corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire." Mat. 7:15-20. We are commanded and commissioned to identify and expose ­ BY THEIR EVIL FRUIT ­ every corrupt tree. We at WBC have hitherto identified ­ and do hereby again identify ­ Barack Obama ­ BY HIS EVIL FRUIT ­ as the Antichrist Beast of Rev. 13. "Jesus saith unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the life; no man cometh unto the Father, but by me." Jn. 14:6. Amen.  As the Bible draws near its blessed close, powerful imagery is employed to convey accurate notions and solid doctrinal truth to the tender minds of God's obedient children; to wit: "I have also spoken by the prophets, and I have multiplied visions, and USED SIMILITUDES," ­ (i.e., metaphors and allegories and similes and other figures of speech), ­ "by the ministry of the prophets." Hos. 12:10. For example: "And there came one of the seven angels which had the seven vials, and talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither; I will show unto thee the JUDGMENT OF THE GREAT WHORE that sitteth upon many waters." (Rev. 17:1)  This Great Whore symbolizes all false religions of all time (i.e., the Eclectic Faith of Antichrist Obama, who says he learned from his tramp mother that all religions lead to Heaven). The Faith of Barack Obama, Mansfield, pp. 54,55. The Beast upon which the Great Whore sits and rides ­ (Rev. 17:3) ­ symbolizes Antichrist Obama, who does in fact support and promote all false religions, utilizing his White House Bully Pulpit, and the Full Weight of the Presidency of the  Sunday, December 28, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 4  United States of America. Antichrist Obama's pitiful attempt to make a silk purse saint, out of  his tramp mother's sow's ear, fell to pieces when the time came to die.  Nor could Antichrist Obama offer her a single drop of solid hope to cool her parched unbeliever's throat; or a single ray of light to relieve her pitch-black sky. In his book, The Audacity of Hope, at page 225, Antichrist Obama wrote: "My thoughts turned to my mother and her final days, after cancer had spread through her body and it was clear that there was no coming back. She had admitted to me during the course of her illness that SHE WAS NOT READY TO DIE; the suddenness of it all had taken her by surprise, as if the physical world she loved so much had turned on her, betrayed her. And although she fought valiantly, endured the pain and chemotherapy with grace and good humor to the very end, more than once I saw FEAR FLASH ACROSS HER EYES. More than fear of pain or fear of the unknown, it was the sheer loneliness of death that frightened her, I think ­ the notion that on this final journey, on this last adventure, she would have no one to fully share her experiences with, no one who could marvel with her at the body's capacity to inflict pain on itself, or laugh at the stark absurdity of life once one's hair starts falling out and one's salivary glands shut down. I carried such thoughts with me as I left the church and made my speech. Later that night, back home in Chicago, alone in the kitchen washing dishes, I imagined my two girls growing up, and I felt the ache that every parent must feel at one time or another. I thought of Sasha asking me once WHAT HAPPENED WHEN WE DIE ­ `I DON'T WANT TO DIE, DADDY,' she had added matter-of-factly ­ and I had hugged her and said, `You've got a long, long way before you have to worry about that,' which had seemed to satisfy her. I wondered whether I should have told her the truth, THAT I WASN'T SURE WHAT HAPPENS WHEN WE DIE, any more than I was sure of where the soul resides, or what existed before the Big Bang."  More solid proof ­ out of his own mouth ­ that Obama, the Beast of Rev. 13 and 17, is Antichrist. He witnessed first hand the soul-chilling fear that struck his tramp mother as she lay dying ­ yet he continues to sing her praises in political spin; to wit: "And yet for all her professed secularism, my mother was in many ways the most spiritually awakened person that I've ever known. She had an unswerving instinct for kindness, charity, and love, and spent much of her life acting on that instinct, sometimes to her detriment. Without the help of religious texts (i.e., the Bible, etc.) or outside authorities, she worked mightily to install in me the values that many Americans learn in Sunday school."  In other words, Obama's tramp mother, from her dying bed, was snatched into the black night of eternity, clad only in her own filthy rags of self-righteousness. It is no wonder she cried out in sheer terror, her eyes flashing with stark fear: "I am not ready to die!" Now contrast Christ with Antichrist; to wit: "Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also. And whither I go ye know (Heaven), and the way ye know... I am the way, the truth, and the life; no man cometh unto the Father, but by me." (Jn. 14:1-6) Amen.  
