Sunday, June 29, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And fear not them which kill the body, but are  not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him  which is able to destroy both soul and body in  hell." Mat. 10:28.  This verse falls logically into two parts; to wit: 1) "And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul:" and 2) "but rather fear him which is able to DESTROY both soul and body in hell." As is usual with the speeches of our Lord Jesus Christ, we have recorded for us the heart of the matter ­ a wonderfully complete synopsis ­ each part of which invites a sermon or a book. Such wonders, that sparkle and shine throughout the Scriptures, from one end to the other, constitute powerful internal evidence of the divine origin of the Bible ­ and I mean POWERFUL evidence, and SUPER-ABUNDANT evidence, and CLEAN, ALTOGETHER SATISFYING, INTERNAL evidence. I was saying to Mom just the other day, at our morning Bible study and prayer time, that, as we have now reached the eventide of our Pilgrim's Progress, I am just so thankful that the Bible is as dear, and wonderful, and precious to us now, (indeed, even more so), as when we set out upon our journey together almost 56 years ago. Such unfeigned love for the Scriptures is also powerful internal and external evidence that one's calling and election is sure; to wit: "Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure." 2 Pet. 1:10. "That is," says John Brown, "get a hold of some undoubted evidence, that you are God's elect." Evidence like that brought to light in John 14:21; to wit:  "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him." (Jn. 14:21)  Note here, Beloved, that the great, teeming masses of mankind live and die in total, blind ignorance, of just exactly what the "commandments" of Jesus Christ are; let alone do they have either the ability or the inclination to "keep" them; nor do they give a rat's tutu about finding out just exactly what those said "commandments" are, and less than a rat's tutu about "keeping" them. Yet, "having" those commandments and "keeping" them constitutes that certain objective evidence ­ that MANIFESTING of Himself to us ­ those "good works" ­ that constitute proof that "our calling and election is sure." And as soon as the Lord Jesus had spoken those profound words:  "Judas saith unto him, not Iscariot, Lord, HOW IS IT that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?" (Jn. 14:22)  Beloved, this is that JUDE (who wrote the splendid little book of Jude, next to the last book in the Bible, Revelation) ­ who is putting this perceptive question to the Lord Jesus. Showing that there is an eternal mystery involved here. A supernatural power is required to first open the eyes of none but the elect of God to reveal just what His "commandments" are ­ i.e., to "have them;" ­ and then, having revealed what they are, another supernatural power is required so that none but His elect can "keep" them.  Sunday, June 29, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 2  I say, it appears that Jude sensed that holy mysteries must be involved here, but that he wanted  the Lord Jesus to verify what he was already suspecting; to-wit: "How is it," asked Jude, "that  thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?" Jn. 14:22. And here comes the  answer from the lips of Jesus Christ Himself; to wit: "Jesus answered and said unto him, If a  man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto  him, and make our abode with him. He that loveth me not keepeth not my sayings: and the  word which ye hear," (i.e., the word which none but my elect can hear, by supernatural  enabling, the effectual call) ­ I say, saith Christ, "the word which ye hear is not mine, but the  Father's which sent me." Jn. 14:23,24. And, THAT'S how it is, Brother Jude, that our Lord  Jesus Christ manifests Himself unto us, and not unto the world ­ to answer Jude's specific  question at John 14:22.  In our text there are two plain commandments given to us by our Lord Jesus; to wit: No. 1) Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; and, No. 2) Fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell. More briefly stated: 1) Do NOT fear man; and, 2) Fear God!  "The fear of man bringeth a snare: but whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall be safe." (Prov. 29:25)  Strong says the word "snare" as used in the verse, means a noose for the neck and/or a hook for the nose, pulling the snared sinner around wherever the Devil wants to take him. "The fear of man bringeth a snare." Prov. 29:25. The most harm that either Satan or man can do to you is to "kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul." Mat. 10:28(a). This commandment of the Lord Jesus not to fear man comes in a most fearful, immediate context. Listen to these words:  "Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues; And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles." (Mat. 10:16-18)  Beloved. By the grace of God this little flock will be publishing the holy message that God has given us ­ and we will be as wise as serpents and harmless as doves ­ and all the while we will accumulate an immense ­ thorough, and well-documented ­ TESTIMONY. Just think. In our 18th year of preaching ­ in this unique ministry that God has given us ­ preaching from Topeka ­ the center of America ­ to the nation ­ to the world ­ from the mean streets of nearly 600 cities and towns ­ in all 50 states ­ some 35,000 distinct and separate and documented pickets ­ yes I said all 50 states ­ including Alaska and Hawaii ­ using our signature signs ­ brightly colored, state-of-the-art signs ­ packed with solid, hard-hitting, impossible-to-be-ignored Bible verses and sentiments ­ all timely and topical and relevant Bible verses and Bible sentiments.  Beloved. I'm talking Guinness Book of World Records-PLUS here. Way out beyond Guinness. Everything Guinness has ever done and included in his world-famous Book is tidbits and chicken feed compared to what WBC has done for the cause of God and Truth in the earth. The mighty United States of America ­ and nearly all 50 of the States ­ have passed  Sunday, June 29, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 3  UNCONSTITUTIONAL LAWS in violation of their cherished and much-vaunted First  Amendment ­ which America brags about to the whole world as that which makes us different  from other governments ­ I say, that these sorry, antichristic, American hypocrites have  conspired together and passed laws to make it a crime for Westboro Baptist Church to preach  the Gospel. Beloved. This is exactly what such passages as the Second Psalm foretold would  happen in the last days of the last days; to wit:  "Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us." (Psa. 2:1-3)  Those idiots in Congress ­ the House of Representatives AND the United States Senate ­ and President George Bush, who had to sign the unconstitutional laws they passed against us to make them effective ­ and the various State Legislatures, and the Governors who signed the State laws to make them effective ­ I say, all those thousands of idiots who think they can change the Word of God ­ and who think they can stop the preaching of WBC ­ are the objects of ridicule and scorn and mockery and derision ­ each one by name and otherwise identified ­ in the courts of Heaven; to wit:  "He (the Lord God) that sitteth in the heavens shall LAUGH: the Lord shall have them in DERISION. Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure." (Psa. 2:4,5)  We at WBC have all your names and we have documented your part in the infamous actions you took against us. And I am here to tell Pres. Bush, all the U.S. Senators and Representatives, all the governors, and all the state legislators ­ who took official action to stop WBC's preaching ­ in flagrant violation of the Constitution and in oppressive denial of WBC's First Amendment rights of freedoms of religion and speech ­ I say, we know your names and identities ­ we have documented your many crimes against our church ­ we are competent witnesses to give first-hand testimony against each of you ­ and we fully expect to give evidence against you, lasting for many days, at the Judgment of the Great Day of God's Wrath. We are not afraid of you, because our Savior told us not to be afraid of you in these words: "Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul." Mat. 10:28(a). We are not afraid of you, because you are not able to kill the soul; and this absence of fear on our part is solid irrefutable evidence and proof positive that we are saved and on our way to Heaven, ­ and is furthermore proof positive that you are NOT saved, and are on your way to Hell; to wit:  "And in nothing terrified by your adversaries: which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God." (Phil. 1:28)  But we are commanded to fear the Lord God, because He has power to directly inflict infinitely superior pain upon soul and body ­ eternally ­ in Hell. For such is the meaning of "destroy" in our text; to wit: "But rather FEAR HIM who is able to DESTROY both soul and body in hell." Mat. 10:28(b). Christ, at the Last Judgment, will command the wicked on His left hand to:  Sunday, June 29, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 4  "Depart from me, ye cursed, into EVERLASTING FIRE, prepared for the devil  and his angels." (Mat. 25:41)  And then we are told concerning the wicked, "And these shall go away into everlasting punishment." Mat. 25:46. And to this knowledge of the meaning of "everlasting Fire," and "everlasting Punishment," John the Baptist adds this: that the avenging Christ, when He comes in Final Judgment, will "burn up the CHAFF with UNQUENCHABLE FIRE." Mat. 3:12. Billions upon billions of what we might call, the Chaff-People. They are all doomed. Gill says, "By the CHAFF, are meant wicked and ungodly persons, such as are destitute of the grace of God, whether professors or profane; being empty, barren, and unfruitful; and so good for nothing but the fire, which therefore he will burn with the unquenchable fire, of divine wrath and vengeance." Beloved, these people who reject Christ and His Word ­ that is to say, the preaching and the holy message of God through Westboro Baptist Church ­ I say, those people are absolute, good-for-nothing trash, fit only to be dealt with by the fiery wrath of God Almighty's indignation. To which, Isaiah the Prophet adds that these Chaff-People are readily identifiable by their words and deeds; to wit:  "Which justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him! Therefore as the FIRE devoureth the stubble, and the FLAME consumeth the CHAFF, so their root shall be as rottenness," ­ (i.e., these Chaff-People are rotten to the very core of their being) ­ "and their blossom shall go up as dust: because they have cast away the law of the Lord of hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One of Israel. Therefore is the anger of the Lord kindled against his people," ­ (Chaff-People) ­ "and he hath stretched forth his hand against them, and hath smitten them: and the hills did tremble, and their carcases were torn in the midst of the streets. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still." (Isa. 5:23-25)  So much for the Chaff-People all around us, Beloved. They are fit for nothing ­ absolutely nothing ­ but the FIRE of God's wrath, which is coming on apace. Fearful samples of supernatural displays of God's fiery and eternal wrath abound in the daily papers and TV ­ as well as in Scripture. Even as we speak, amazing ­ (the Associated Press says, "unprecedented") ­ I say, AMAZING demonstrations of God's fiery wrath are taking place in the godless state of California. Northern California (think, San Francisco and environs), to be exact. The experts are calling it "an unprecedented LIGHTNING STORM...5,000 to 6,000 LIGHTNING STRIKES...`We are finding fires all the time.'" 840-PLUS, and counting; to wit; (from an AP story last Tuesday, June 24) "More than 840 wildfires sparked by an `unprecedented' LIGHTNING STORM are burning across Northern California, alarming the governor and requiring the help of firefighters from Nevada and Oregon." And here is the Bible commentary on these current events; to wit:  Sunday, June 29, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 5  "For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and  unrighteousness of men, who hold" ­ (i.e., hold down, choke, suppress His  Word) ­ "the truth in unrighteousness." (Rom. 1:18)  In other words, God ­ by His amazing demonstrations, and even supernatural displays, of His fiery wrath ­ is revealing to the Chaff-People the true nature of their coming Judgment and their long home in Hell. Now, see how His Scriptures agree nicely with the lying, sodomitical Associated Press, who, despite themselves, have helped WBC publish God's Truth; to wit:  "And Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, took either of them his censer (small bowl), and put fire therein, and put incense thereon, and offered strange fire before the Lord, which he commanded them not. And THERE WENT OUT FIRE FROM THE LORD, and devoured them, and they died before the Lord." (Lev. 10:1,2) Now, Beloved, what kind of FIRE was this, which struck Nadab and Abihu down dead in an instant, leaving no trace of FIRE upon their bodies or their clothing? Consider that solemn question in light of what the AP this week called the "unprecedented LIGHTNING STORMS in Northern California, producing 5,000 to 6,000 LIGHTNING STRIKES, which in turn produced 840-PLUS WILDFIRES," most of which are still burning as we speak. Near San Francisco! Where we were ­ just before the fire fell ­ warning the same-sex perverts about God's coming fiery judgment! The national weather experts don't know what in the world to make of it ­ what are LIGHTNING STORMS, and LIGHTNING STRIKES? WILDFIRES in such numbers that the governor of California is in a state of shock, the AP says, and is pleading for help from nearby states of Nevada and Oregon! But WE know what to make of these things, and sooner or later the stupid governors and other officials will be forced in desperation to listen to us. With respect to the FIRE that went out from the presence of the Lord and quickly killed Nadab and Abihu, Goodwin says; to wit: "The fire was another manner of fire than this our ELEMENTARY COMMON FIRE. This was fire from heaven, and therefore said to be a fire from the Lord that devoured them; it was such a FIRE, AS BLASTS OF LIGHTNING are, which strike, and blast, and shrivel the spirits of a living body in an instant, which is evident by the manner of their deaths. The Hebrew doctors say of it, that it was a fire which burnt their souls, not their bodies; their meaning is, their bodies were not consumed or devoured by it; for Leviticus 10:5, it is said, They carried their bodies and (in their) coats into the tent, as untouched. It was therefore SUCH A FIRE (as LIGHTNING is from heaven) which useth to STRIKE, AND LICK UP MEN'S SPIRITS IN AN INSTANT, when yet in the mean time it consumes not, breaks not so much as skin or flesh, which our elementary fire preys first and most upon. It was therefore a far subtler fire than CULINARY or KITCHEN FIRE, which suitably served as the fittest and nearest type of this fiery indignation, and of the vengeance which it executes. What is the thing or subject devoured by this fiery indignation? It is the immortal souls of men."  Sunday, June 29, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 6  These two boys, Nadab and Abihu, were the eldest sons of Aaron the High Priest; and they  were the beloved nephews of Moses. Their sins that so enraged the Lord as to strike them dead  by a lightning bolt, is not clear. They offered "strange fire" ­ thereby introducing an  unauthorized thing into the worship service, which would inevitably lead to heretical and  dangerous doctrine, as well as practice; and it appears from the context that they came to the  vital priestly service drunk on wine. For whatever reason, Nadab and Abihu angered God, Who  immediately smote them with a lightning bolt ­ leaving not a trace of fire on their skin or  clothes. Their cousins carried their bodies quickly out of God's tabernacle ­ to an ignominious  burial, and their souls went straight to Hell, there to continue to be tormented by this lightning  bolt fire of the Lord. Remember our text; to wit: "But rather fear him which is able to destroy  both soul and body in Hell." Mat. 10:28(b). That same fate met the 250 famous men of  renown who chose to join the rebellion of Korah against the leadership of Moses ­ all as  recounted in Numbers, chapter 16. It was said of these 250 idiots ­ as with Nadab and Abihu  ­ as follows; to wit:  "And there came out a fire from the Lord, and consumed the two hundred  and fifty men that offered incense." (Num. 16:35)  In exposition of which, Gill says, "And there came out a fire from the Lord. FLASHES OF LIGHTNING from the cloud in which He was; and consumed the 250 men that offered incense; not that it reduced them to ashes, but took away their lives, struck them dead at once, in like manner as Nadab and Abihu were, who though said to be devoured by the fire, YET THEIR BODIES REMAINED. Lev. 10:2,4,5. And is often the case of persons killed by lightning." To which Goodwin adds, "What created fire can be conceived more subtle or powerful, than the angels themselves are conceived to be? whom, as in Heb. 1:7, the apostle compareth to flames of fire, that is, in our European language, to LIGHTNING." To wit:  "Who maketh his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire."  (Heb. 1:7(b)) Each one of God's myriads of angels ­ to whom we come in the church, as to "an innumerable company of angels," Heb. 12:22, ­ I say, that each one of those "mighty angels" is, as it were, a bolt of lightning, a flame of fire, flying to do His bidding, striking with death-dealing precision when and where the Lord God directs, to destroy the souls of wicked men. In one night, just one angel struck 185,000 times, leaving only dead, unmarked bodies of Sennacharib's Assyrian host ­ all 185,000 of them ­ and their SOULS all being tormented in Hell by the same fiery, flying angels. Now, let us recall the words of our Savior to Pontius Pilate; to wit: "Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently  give me more than twelve legions of angels?" (Mat. 26:53)  A Roman legion was 6,000+; thus making 12 legions = 72,000+ angels ­ a mere pittance compared to the total number, all of whom are engaged in lightning strikes around the world ­ 24/7, ­ and in tormenting the multiplied billions of the damned already in Hell ­ 24/7. Beloved. Our Father has sent us a joyous message from the sodomite regions of Northern California. Be patient, my loved ones. The coming of the Lord draweth nigh. James 5:8.  Amen.  
