Sunday, October 14, 2007 pg.1  Sermon Outline  The Abomination of Desolation standing in the holy place  Beloved, the Lord has given us an amazing perspective from which to view time and eternity ­ the life which now is, and that which is to come. 1 Tim. 4:8. By God's grace, we have been enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift (i.e., salvation by grace alone, unconditional election, the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputeth righteousness ­ Rom. 4:6) ­ how could the man who killed Uriah the Hittite so he could take his wife, ever, EVER dare to say, "The Lord delivered me from all mine enemies...because he delighted in me. The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness; according to the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me. For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my God?" (Psa. 18:1,19-21) How could he ­ a grievous adulterer and murderer ­ EVER say that? Because he tasted (i.e., experienced) the heavenly gift. That's how. And, he also "tasted the good word of God;" and, especially he "tasted the "powers of the world to come." Heb. 6:4,5. The life which is to come (1 Tim. 4:8), and the world which is to come (Heb. 6:5).  Beloved, shortly now, THIS world will end; and, shortly now, THAT world will begin. The signs are great ­ and they are everywhere. Last Sunday night TV Channel 49 put out a story about Gage Park and the illegal homosexual activity that goes on there. Just as though we had not sent them ­ and every other media outlet ­ a weekly news release ­ every week ­ for 17 years ­ entitled, "Week so-and-so of the Great Gage Park Decency Drive," ­ the latest such news release being sent forth to all media last Friday, Oct. 12 ­ with an opening line for all the world to see; to wit: "WBC observes WEEK 851 (nearly 17 years) of protests against public sodomy at Gage Park, Oct. 14."  Our experience at Gage Park ­ just a few blocks from our church, where we have been located by the amazing providence of God, and where we have preached every week for 52 years ­ I say that our experience at Gage Park in Topeka, Kansas, at the very heart and geographical center of the United States ­ and of the world ­ proves that THE END OF THE WORLD IS NEAR ­ THE COMING OF THE LORD (AND OUR REDEMPTION) DRAWETH NIGH. Lk. 21:28. Here is the verse; to wit: "But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not," the end is near. Mk. 13:14. And the companion verse; to wit: "When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place," the end is near. Matt. 24:15.  "But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not, (let him that readeth understand,) then let them that be in Judaea flee to the mountains." (Mark 13:14)  Notice. Mark says we will see the abomination of desolation standing where it ought not (i.e., running the government); and Matthew says we will see that same abomination of desolation  Sunday, October 14, 2007 pg.2  Sermon Outline  standing in the holy place (i.e., running the churches). The abomination of desolation means  the power of the dog, or the socio-political power of the fags. Psa. 22:16,20. Fags killed  Christ.  "For dogs (fags) have compassed me; the assembly of the wicked (fags) have  inclosed me: they pierced my hands and my feet. Deliver my soul from the sword; my  darling from the power of the dog (i.e., the fag, the power of the fag)." (Psa. 22:16,20)  "There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a sodomite (fag) of the  sons of Israel. Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog (i.e.,  sodomite, fag), into the house of the Lord." (Deut. 23:17,18) Further proof that the abomination of desolation refers to sodomites or fags or dogs or the power of the dog, or the socio-political/socio-religious power of fags, ­ I say further proof is seen in the words of Daniel referred to by our Lord Jesus Christ where He says, "the abomination of desolation, SPOKEN OF BY DANIEL THE PROPHET."  What are Daniel's words? Twice Daniel calls the abomination of desolation, "the abomination that maketh desolate." Dan. 11:31 and 12:11. Sodomites (fags) cannot reproduce. Fag fornicating is always barren fornicating, desolate, totally unproductive, forever sterile ­ there are many kinds of ceremonial and moral abominations; but only one that is always, totally, and forever the abomination of desolation; to wit: fags. In the now-19 year old saga of "THE GREAT GAGE PARK DECENCY DRIVE" ­ we are dealing with "the power of the dog."  Without knowing what we were getting into, WBC has shaken the nation, and, indeed, the whole world ­ in God's amazing providence! In the Gage Park struggle, we see the abomination of desolation standing where it ought not, i.e., the socio-political power of the fagdogs running the government. And, in the Gage Park struggle, we see the abomination of desolation standing in the holy place, i.e., the socio-religious power of the fag-dogs running the churches. Remember, Beloved, when we see that strange phenomenon ­ fags standing in the holy place, i.e., running the churches; and fags standing where they ought not, i.e., running the government in all its branches, including law enforcement and the courts ­ WHEN ­ NOT IF ­ we see it ­ THE END OF THE WORLD IS NEAR ­ THE COMING OF THE DEAR LORD (AND OUR REDEMPTION) DRAWETH NIGH. And, Beloved, we have kept copious documentation of the struggle.  Starting with my letter to the mayor, city council, and chief of police, dated July 18, 1989. We did not know it at the time, but that letter launched the epochal struggle ­ that later became known as THE GREAT GAGE PARK DECENCY DRIVE ­ and, in a way, signaled the end of the world to those with eyes to see, which is the meaning of the parenthetical words of the Lord Jesus, "let him that readeth understand." Mk. 13:14. Listen to these prophetic words in my letter: "To the Honorables, Mayor, Council Members, and Chief of Police, City Building, Topeka, Kansas. Dear Friends: A malodorous sore with the scab off is open and running at the extreme southwest corner of Gage Park. It is a wooded area with foot paths and bush-shrouded coverts affording privacy for indecent conduct. `At any hour of the day or night,' a park official told me, `male couples may be seen entering and exiting the area.' He regularly passes along citizen complaints to his  Sunday, October 14, 2007 pg.3  Sermon Outline  superiors, in vain. My children, grandchildren and I are offended and  embarrassed by this flagrant situation as we bike and jog in the park. Gage Park  is officially touted as a wholesome family place, home of a `world famous zoo' and  a newly-refurbished carrousel. To which we should all say, Amen. Gage Park  also appears on a nationally-circulated clandestine `list' as a homosexual  `rendezvous point' and `safe house.' Out-of-state plates on the cars perpetually  parked by the wooded area testify to the existence of this undercover "list." To  which we should all say, Shame. When President Reagan visited Governor  Landon a while back, his motorcade passed by this wooded area. In preparation  for the presidential visit ­ and lest the national media focus on the shameful  running sore of Topeka's Gage Park ­ the area was purged of its unnatural  visitors for about a month prior to and including the day of Reagan's visit. This  proves two things: Our local leaders know of the situation, and they know how to  clean it up when they want to. State police powers aplenty exist to fix it. My  question: Do you think Gage Park's running sore could be permanently fixed?  Your consideration is appreciated. Sincerely, Fred W. Phelps."  The mayor answered my letter three days later ­ July 21, 1989 ­ and this is what he said; to wit: "Dear Fred: Thanks for your colorful letter concerning Gage Park. We are well aware of the situation. We cleaned it up when I was Park Commissioner, but it was allowed to return over the last four years. We are in the process of putting together a program to bring the situation to a halt. Keep us posted. Sincerely, Harry `Butch' Felker, Mayor."  THE POWER OF THE DOG TAKES OVER THE PARK For about two years we attended city council meetings, talked to council members and city employees, wrote letters, made phone calls ­ in short, we tried every way we could think of to get the mayor to keep his promise and clean up that park. I think he tried to clean up the park, like he did when he was Park Commissioner, like he said in his letter. He said that during the four years 1985 - 89 the fags took over again, but he could fix it as mayor. Logically, he would have more power as mayor than he did as park commissioner. But something happened in those four years. The power of the dog took over the park. The influence of sodomites grew by leaps and bounds.  Fags are everywhere ­ and controlling everything ­ at every level of government: cops, courts, jobs, media, entertainment, churches, schools. Every important policy-making and decisionmaking position ­ scratch deep enough, and you will find some smirking fag, either making the policy or the decision, or decisively influencing the guy who does make the policy or the decision. And THAT'S what the power of the dog means. And THAT'S what the abomination of desolation standing where it ought not, and/or, standing in the holy place, means. Mayor Butch Felker ­ the mayor who said he cleaned Gage Park up by running the fags out when he was Park Commissioner and who promised to run them out again ­ was hounded out of politics, in fact, he was ousted from office. Some say, the power of the dog, the power of the sodomites ­ brought him down. It is of a certainty that nobody has cleaned Gage Park up of filthy fags from that day to this day.  Sunday, October 14, 2007 pg.4  Sermon Outline  Last week, on Fri., Oct. 5, a story in the paper, headlined, "Two Arrested in Sex Sting," said: "two Topeka men were arrested in connection with solicitation of sodomy in Gage Park during a prostitution sting operation by the Topeka Police Dept. Both men were booked into the Shawnee County Jail in connection with the offenses, police said. According to jail records, the men were identified as Jeff J. Montague, 53, and Mark T Hiller, 30." It will come to nothing, if past predictions mean anything. The police department is full of fags and fag-enablers.  Our courts and bar associations are loaded with fags and fag-enablers. Our pulpits and schools are full of fags and fag-enablers. Society ­ at every level ­ up and down, and throughout ­ I say, all of society is full of fags and fag-enablers. So it was at Sodom; to wit: "Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire." (Jude 7) And our Lord Jesus said that when those conditions prevail ­ as they did in Sodom and Gomorrah ­ such would signal the approaching end of the world ­ as when you see the abomination of desolation standing in the holy place and standing where it ought not; to wit: "Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded (a vibrant, thriving society, like the USA); But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed." (Lk. 17:28-30)  The condition of affairs that prevailed in Sodom largely prevails today at Gage Park, which symbolizes America and which stands at the heart of America ­ both geographically and spiritually; to wit: "But before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of Sodom, compassed the house round, both old and young, all the people from every quarter (i.e., every level of society): And they called unto Lot, and said unto him, Where are the men which came in to thee this night? bring them out unto us, that we may know them (i.e., have same-sex sex with them)." (Gen. 19:4,5) Sounds like Gage Park ­ which symbolizes America. Can it be that the abomination of desolation is standing at Gage Park ­ or is soon to stand at Gage Park ­ in Topeka, Kansas, U.S.A., and the world ­ which symbolizes all of America, and the world; and lies at the heart of America, and the world ­ both geographically and spiritually? For 851 weeks + 2 years now (that's almost 19 years) ­ for almost 19 years ­ the preachers have backed fag sex at Gage Park, and have fought with us about it. So, fags run the churches. So, the abomination of desolation is standing in the holy place. Matt. 24:15. For 851 weeks + 2 years now (that's almost 19 years) ­ for almost 19 years ­ public officials (including law enforcement) have backed fag sex at Gage Park, and have fought with us about it. So, fags run the government. So, the abomination of desolation is standing where it ought not. Mk. 13:14. Our duty is to discern the signs of the times. Mat. 16:3. "And when these things begin to come to pass, the look up, and lift up your heads; for your redemption draweth nigh." Lk. 21:28. Amen.  
