Sunday, October 21, 2007 pg.1  Sermon Outline  Hid from the Wise & Prudent, and Revealed unto Babes  There was one occasion in the life and ministry of the Lord Jesus Christ ­ when He was upon earth ­ where it appears that He literally jumped for joy when contemplating a thing. The words are, "In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit." Lk. 10:21. The word, "rejoiced" there is a very specialized word, with five syllables; to wit: ag-al-lee-ah-o. Strong's number is #21, and says this: from "agan" meaning "much" plus #242, and #242 means "to jump," figurative "to gush ­ leap for joy, spring up with delight." So, putting those together, the meaning is, "much jumping, much gushing, much leaping for joy, much springing up with delight."  On any view of this matter, something has caused our Lord Jesus Christ to be exhilaratingly happy, to be thrilled in the extreme, and to exult to the point of leaping for joy. Meditating on a certain thing has triggered this marvelous emotion. What is it? Well, preliminarily I suggest that the thing that has so thrilled the Savior is the absolute sovereignty of God; and that the immediate application of such an incident in the life of Christ is that we should find our own happiness likewise enhanced by an accurate consideration of that blessed doctrine; to wit: The Absolute Sovereignty of God. Look at the context of our text; to wit: "After these things the Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them two and two before his face into every city and place, whither he himself would come. And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through thy name. And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you. NOTWITHSTANDING in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven." (BANG!) "IN THAT HOUR JESUS REJOICED IN SPIRIT, (there you go! Jesus leaped for joy, exulted, gushed with exhilaration)." (Luke 10:1,17-21)  In expounding the passage, Gill said: "`And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven.' In order to abate their surprise, and reduce their transport of mind, he said this, meaning, that this was no news to him, nor any surprising event, that devils should be cast out of men, and be in a state of subjection; for as he existed as the eternal son of God before his incarnation, he was present and saw Satan and his angels fall from heaven, from their first estate, their habitation of bliss and glory, down to hell, upon their sin and rebellion, as violently, swiftly and suddenly, as the lightning falls from heaven to earth; and when he sent out these his disciples, as soon as they began their work, and all along in it, he, by his divine omniscience, saw the powers of darkness falling before their ministry and miracles; and he also foresaw how Satan hereafter, in a more conspicuous manner, would fall before the preaching of his Gospel by his apostles, not only in Judea, but especially among the Gentiles, where he, the prince of this world, would be cast down from his throne, and out of his kingdom; so that what they related, as it was what he knew before, it was but little in comparison of what he himself had seen long ago, and of what he foresaw would be; and even he would give them power to do other miraculous works besides these. `Behold, I give you power to tread on serpents and  Sunday, October 21, 2007 pg.2  Sermon Outline  scorpions,' which may be understood figuratively of the devil, and his principalities and  powers, and all his emissaries, who, for their craft and cunning, and for their poisonous and  hurtful nature and influence, may be compared to serpents and scorpions; `and over all the  power of the enemy;' of mankind in general, and of the seed of the woman, Christ and his  people in particular, Christ has a power over all Satan's power, his whole posse of devils, even  the power of the air, of which he is prince; and Christ communicated this power to his disciples,  even to the seventy; adding, `and nothing shall, by any means, hurt you;' not the most hurtful  and poisonous animals, nor the most malicious persecutors on earth, nor all the devils in hell;  as the former venomous creatures, when took up in their hands, should not hurt their bodies; so  the other, whatever they might be permitted to do with respect to their lives, and outward estate,  should never hurt their souls, and the eternal welfare of them; nor even hinder the work of God  prospering in their hands."  SHATTER SATAN TO SHIVERS & SPLINTERS  Bottom line, so far: What a wonderful thing! The Lord our God has given us power to defeat Satan and his demon spirits; to wit: "Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour: Whom RESIST stedfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world." 1 Pet. 5:8,9. "RESIST the devil, and he will flee from you." Jas. 4:7. "And the God of peace shall bruise (i.e., #4937, completely crush, shatter to pieces, break to shivers) Satan under your feet shortly." Rom. 16:20.  I say again, What a wonderful thing! What a cause for rejoicing, for us today, as well as the seventy disciples, giving their report to the Lord Jesus; to wit: "And the seventy returned again WITH JOY, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through thy name." Lk. 10:17. And THAT'S when our Lord Jesus Christ said, in effect, That's wonderful, but it's NOTHING compared to the joy you should experience in contemplating the fact that your names are written in heaven. Now THAT'S something to rejoice about. And THAT'S when our Lord Jesus Christ experienced His own thrilling emotion of unspeakable joy and exhilaration; to wit: "In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father,  Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the  wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes; even so,  Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight." (Luke 10:21) To some, this is the most delightful and comforting passage of Scripture in the whole Bible. The Lord Jesus has just articulated the glorious doctrine of Unconditional Election (the "U" of the TULIP acronym of the Five Points of Calvinism). A definite and relatively small number (i.e., a remnant) of Adam's race are unconditionally ELECTED to be saved, and each has his name eternally written in Heaven; and a definite and vast majority of the whole of Adam's race do NOT have their names written in Heaven, and are predestinated to spend eternity in Hell. All this was fixed in the Savior's mind, and was the cause of His rejoicing. Furthermore, the fact that this doctrine (Unconditional Election of some to be saved, and most to be lost) is mysterious, hidden, abstruse, recondite, obscure, and not easily understood ­ added immeasurably to the Savior's joy. Virtually the whole of mankind spend their lives under the  Sunday, October 21, 2007 pg.3  Sermon Outline  silly, mistaken notion that God is desperately trying to get every individual of mankind saved  and come to a knowledge of the truth ­ when the exact opposite is true. This verse says that  Jesus was thrilled to overflowing joy in contemplation of the fact that God Almighty has  HIDDEN these things from all mankind, except for a tiny group called "babes." On many  occasions, Christ taught some lesson about the kingdom of heaven, and then wound up the  sermon by saying, "Who hath ears to hear, let him hear," strongly suggesting that most of His  hearers had not understood a thing He had just said.  One time, when "great multitudes were gathered together unto him...And he spake many things unto them in parables... And the disciples came, and said unto him, Why speakest thou unto them in parables? He answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given...Therefore speak I to them in parables: because they seeing see not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand. And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias, which saith, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive: For this people's heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed; lest at any time they shall see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them. But blessed are your eyes, for they see: and your ears, for they hear." Matt. 13:10-16, quoting Isa. 6:9; Ezek. 12:2; and Zech. 7:11.  GOD HIDES HIS TRUTH FROM THE MASSES  And so it is, Beloved. Our Lord Jesus Christ is rejoicing with joy unspeakable and full of glory just THINKING about the doctrine of Unconditional Election (predestination of some to salvation and some to damnation), AND, just THINKING about the fact that this doctrine is completely hidden from all but a few babes. "Don't rejoice," says Christ, "because God's power makes the demons subject to you, ­ as wonderful as that is. Rather rejoice because God has chosen you to be one of those few members of Adam's race to be saved, AND, because God has hidden these truths from the masses of mankind."  In his masterful work, Precious Remedies with The Covenant of Grace, (1676) Thomas Brooks said: "The names of the elect are said to be written in the book of life by a usual metaphor; for we commonly write down the names of such as are dear unto us, that we may continually remember them. So God having in his eternal counsel elected some to salvation, hath written their names in the book of life; as our Savior tells us, `Rejoice, because your names are written in heaven,' Luke 10:20. (The holy God, by an anthropopatheia,­or, better said, anthropopathy ­ speaketh to our capacity; for he doeth all things without the help of books.)  "Some understand the metaphor of the sonship of the elect; so that to be written in the book of life shows that they are heirs of glory; for we know that such are to inherit whose names are written in the last will and testament of men. Now from this book of life, that shall be opened in the great day, when the other books shall be opened, ­ (Rev. 20:12. `And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened...and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works.') ­ every sincere Christian may form up this plea; to wit: `Most holy and blessed Lord, cast thine eye upon the book of election, and there thou wilt find my name written. Now my name being written in that  Sunday, October 21, 2007 pg.4  Sermon Outline  book, I am exempt from all condemnation, and interested in the great salvation; my name being  in the book of life, I am secured from coming into the judgment of reprobation or  condemnation, Jn. 5:14; Rev. 21:27. (`And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that  defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie; but they which are written  in the Lamb's book of life.' Rev. 21:27)."  "Jesus Christ, who hath written my name in the book of life, hath made up my accounts for me; he hath satisfied thy justice, and pacified thy wrath, and borne the curse, and purchased my pardon, and put upon me an everlasting righteousness, and given me my quietus est; he has crossed out the black lines of my sins with the red lines of his blood; he has cancelled all the bonds wherein I stood obliged to divine justice. I further plead, O blessed Lord, that there is an immutable connexion betwixt being written in this book of life and the obtaining of eternal life; and if the connexion betwixt being written in this book of life and the obtaining of eternal life were not peremptory, what reason could there be of opening this book in the day of judgment? The book of life is a book of sovereign grace, upon which lies the weight of my salvation, my happiness, my all; and therefore by that book I desire to stand or fall."  WHY DOES GOD HIDE HIS TRUTH FROM THE MASSES?  "Well, saith the Lord, I cannot but accept of this plea as holy, honorable, just, and righteous; and therefore, `enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, inherit the kingdom prepared for thee.'" Mat. 25:21,34. "I thank thee, O Father," said God the Incarnate Son, while yet in the throes of joy unspeakable, "that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes." Lk. 10:21. But why did God the Father hide "these things" from the wise and the prudent, and reveal them unto babes? Why? Well, our Lord Jesus Christ tells us exactly why in the very next sentence; to wit: "Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight." Lk. 10:21. Such is the only and all-sufficient reason for all such questions about the weighty matters of time and eternity. "Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why hast thou make me thus?" Rom. 9:20. When we have traced all things whatsoever as to cause and effect ­ chain-link fashion ­ to their final and ultimate source ­ we will find that final and ultimate causal source to be "the will of God." We can go no higher ­ nor do we desire to. The absolute sovereignty of God is the only fountainhead of true comfort and security."  "And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing; and he doeth according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth: & none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou?" (Dan. 4:35)  "We know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose." (Rom. 8:28)  "For it became him, for whom are all things, & by whom are all things." (Heb. 2:10)  "Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory & honor & power: for thou hast created all things, & for thy pleasure they are, & were created." (Rev. 4:11)  "Which in his times he shall show, who is the blessed & only Potentate, the King of kings, & Lord of lords." (1 Tim. 6:15) Amen.  
