Sunday, February 15, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers: for  what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness?  and what communion hath light with darkness? And what  concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part hath he that  believeth with an infidel? And what agreement hath the  temple of God with idols? for ye are the temple of the living  God; as God hath said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them;  and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.  WHEREFORE, come out from among them, and be ye  separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and  I will receive you, And will be a Father unto you, and ye shall  be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty."  2 Cor. 6:14-18.  Since President Stupid, the Prince of Darkness, Antichrist Obama insists on pushing his ugly face in the news cameras every day ­ I mean, literally many times each day ­ and often pushing his goofy, heretical religious views into the same news cameras EVERY DAY ­ it is necessary that we answer him. Beloved, we have no choice. Titus, chapter 1 and Jude contain obligatory language from our Father, and binds us to cry out with loud and fiery  warnings to all mankind; to wit:  "Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins." (Isa. 58:1)  And, to wit: "Holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to confute (overwhelm with unanswerable argumentation) the gainsayers (those who dispute, contradict, deny, vilify and speak against the holy messengers of God). For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, specially they of the circumcision (i.e., insincere, rote-religionists who latch onto simplistic mantras = same words, without thought, repeated over and over again = mechanical, routine, marked by unthinking repetition = Obama "preaching" at the phony, idolatrous so-called Prayer Breakfast last week in Washington ­ a cheap, demagogic, political ploy). Whose mouths must be stopped." Titus:1:9-11. And, to-wit:  "Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you that ye should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the saints. For there are certain men crept in unawares (i.e., the Antichrist Beast Obama), who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God and our Lord Jesus Christ (i.e., Obama, who does the clever two-step around the diety of Christ, lest he offend his Muslim and Jewish friends)." (Jude 1:3,4)  Obama spoke at a so-called "Prayer Breakfast" in Washington last week, attended by officials and dignitaries from around the world; at which he announced that he was launching a new  Sunday, February 15, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  church later that day, to be funded by tax dollars, and to be headquartered in the White House,  and to be called the "White House Office of Faith-Based and Neighborhood Partnerships,"  (WHOF-BNappy), called the HO-church, for short.  Any church and any religion is wanted, welcome and invited to join Obama's HO-church ­ EXCEPT, Calvinistic Baptist Churches ­ because, as Obama points out, "Let us remember that there is no religion whose central tenet is hate;" and since Westboro Baptist Church appears to be the only Calvinistic Baptist Church alive in the world today ­ AND OBAMA SEEMS TO KNOW THAT AS A FACT ­ it is as if Obama is saying that any church and any religion (however goofy and heretical ­ think fag Bishop Vicki Gene Robinson), is wanted, welcome, and invited to be a charter member of Obama's brand new HO-church ­ EXCEPT WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH. Then, apparently still talking about why WBC is excluded, Obama makes a rather startling statement; to wit: "There is no God who condones taking the life of any innocent human being. This much we know."  In his eagerness to state the case against WBC, as to why we can't join his HO-church, Obama has made the case against himself ­ in spades, as they say. Obama's hands are dripping with the blood of millions of innocent human beings, slaughtered in Obama's abortion sausagegrinders, and the so-called collateral damage of Afghanistan and Iraq.  As President of the United States, Obama has assumed the official title of the Biggest Murderer in the World. Beloved, it's kind of tricky trying to be the Pope of the World, and, at the same time, being the ex officio, de facto, Biggest Murderer in the World. Then, in further promotion of his HO-church, Obama states the grand theological heart of his new religion, and begs the question, adding it to the list of things that, "This much we know." God does not hate ­ "This much we know." Says Obama! We say, "Not so fast, Antichrist!" "As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated." (Rom. 9:13)  Now for Obama's next fatal mistake, per Antichrist; to wit: "WE KNOW TOO that whatever our differences, there is ONE LAW THAT BINDS ALL GREAT RELIGIONS TOGETHER." (Watch it Sucker. Your big mouth has gotten you in trouble already. And your big mouth speaking blasphemies and lies has already helped identify you as the Antichrist Beast of Rev. 13 & 17. But go ahead. What is that one law that binds all great religions together?) Antichrist Obama; to wit: "Jesus told us to `love thy neighbor as thyself.'" Then Obama says that the Jews, the Muslims, the Buddhists, the Hindus, Confucius, and all other religions, have the same or similar law ­ all according to Pope Antichrist Obama.  Well, beloved, if so, then they are all going to Hell for breaking that law, as that law was uttered by our Lord Jesus Christ; to wit: "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." Mat. 19:19. And the Holy Ghost wrote it down that the only way to obey that law is to warn thy neighbor that his sins are taking him to Hell at the hands of an angry God who hates him; and if you do not so warn thy neighbor, betimes, faithfully, then you hate him. You don't love him. Lev. 19:18. By that standard, Obama, the people of the Westboro Baptist Church are the only ones truly obeying the injunction:  "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." (Mk. 12:31)  Sunday, February 15, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  Your HO-church is a fraud, Obama, calculated only to help get you re-elected. YOU, are a fraud, Obama; which is further evidence that YOU, are Antichrist. You have threatened to kill your own grandchild, if one of your daughters shows up with an unwanted pregnancy. Exactly what Antichrist would do. As to affiliating with your HO-church, God has often spoken expressly, and in a multiplicity of differing ways, making it abundantly and crystal clear, that such a thing is the surest way to incur God's wrath.  Our text is one such passage, which opens with a warning that our ox may not be yoked up with your ass in any way, to do any piece of work or engage in any activity whatsoever; to wit: "Thou shalt not plow with an ox and an ass together." (Deut. 22:10)  That rules you and your HO-church out forever, Obama; per Dr. Gill on 2 Cor. 6:14(b); to wit: "`Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers.' This seems to be an allusion to the law in Deut. 22:10; and to be a mystical explanation of it."  The gravity of the subject is shown by the peculiar manner in which the Holy Ghost, the Author, handled it, from this verse (2 Cor. 6:14), to the end of the chapter (2 Cor. 6:18). Immediately following the unforgettable similitude of the tamed, trained and disciplined, and hard-working, and reliable work-animal, the ox; being yoked up to the wild, rebellious, uncontrollable ass; I say, right after the unforgettable ox/ass prohibition, with its powerful lessons ­ there follow five, rapid-fire, hard-hitting, rhetorical questions ­ all bearing the same mighty message, in only slightly different details. Leading one to believe that something special and wonderful is going on with the blessed Holy Ghost.  What is the mighty message delivered by five rhetorical questions, each one only slightly different from the other? And what has it got to do with Antichrist Obama and his HO-church which he wants everybody but us to join?  Beloved. At our peril do we ignore ­ or temporarily neglect ­ even occasionally the fact that the Holy Ghost considered the matter of sufficient importance to put it succinctly, FIVE TIMES; I say, that fact, standing alone, is enough reason for us to give it extraordinary attention and respect; to wit:  1) "What fellowship hath righteousness (the imputed righteousness of Christ) with unrighteousness?" Answer: NONE.  2) "What communion hath light with darkness?" ("I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life." Jn. 8:12. The exclusivity of the claim rules out all others. There goes the HO-church). "What communion hath light with darkness?" Answer: NONE.  3) "What concord (accord, harmony, as with two different instruments making beautiful music together in a grand symphony orchestra) hath Christ with Belial (i.e., Satan)?" Answer: NONE.  Sunday, February 15, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  4) "What part hath he that believeth (i.e., believeth Calvinism; i.e.,  what WBC preaches) with an infidel (like Infidel Obama and his  infidel family of religious thugs)?" Answer: NONE.  5) "What agreement hath the temple of God (i.e., Westboro Baptist Church) with idols (Roman Catholicism and other false gods included in the Great Whore of Rev. 17)?" Answer: NONE.  Five NONE's in a row! What's the message? Beware of any connection whatever with Antichrist Obama's HO-church. And beware of any religious entanglements of any kind or nature whatsoever with those who are not dedicated to the House of God, which is the Church of God, the pillar and ground of the truth. 1 Tim. 3:15. "For ye are the temple of the living God; as God hath said, I will dwell in them (i.e., dwell among them), and walk in them (i.e., walk among them); and I will be their God, and they shall be my people." (2 Cor. 6:16) The passage is obviously from Leviticus, chapter 26, which is very helpful in deriving the true meaning of our text; to wit: "And I will set my tabernacle among you; and MY SOUL SHALL NOT ABHOR YOU." (Lev. 26:11) The inference seems plainly to be that, except for the little group of God's Elect assembled within the temporary structure of a tent, symbolizing their status as pilgrims and sojourners this side of Heaven. God DOES ABHOR (stronger than HATE) the vast sea of corrupt humanity OUTSIDE THE TENT (THE CHURCH) that threatens to engulf the little tent and destroy those within it.  Even so are we to envision ourselves in the same perilous condition; and, in light of that fact, we must take special precautions not to be entangled in the affairs of this life that we may please him that hath called us to be soldiers for Christ. 2 Tim. 2:4. "And I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my people." (Lev. 26:12) Nor are we to consider it merely a pleasant thing to draw closer to the Lord by distancing ourselves from the World. No. It is a solemn matter of life and death, Heaven and Hell; to wit: "But if ye will not hearken unto me (i.e., in this matter of separation from the world, false religions, Obama's HO-church, etc.), and will not do all these commandments; And if ye shall despise my statutes, or if your soul abhor my judgments, so that ye will not do all my commandments, but that ye break my covenant; I also will do this unto you; I will even appoint over you TERROR, consumption, and the burning ague, that shall consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart." (Lev. 26:14-16)  Beloved, I see clearly a divine truth enunciated in connection with a comparison of 2 Cor. 6:16-18 and Lev. 26:11-16 (just quoted).  Sunday, February 15, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 5  From my days at Bob Jones University I have heard fundamental, evangelical preachers preach stem-winding sermons out of 2 Cor. 6:14-18, all to the effect that we Christians really ought to work harder at being more spiritual, and strive harder to attain higher levels of spirituality, and thereby earn greater rewards in Heaven. The impression was always conveyed that it was all kind of optional, and that, on the whole, it wasn't really too important.  It certainly was not a matter of life and death, Heaven or Hell. Just don't go to picture shows, or dances; don't smoke or drink; try to read the Bible, pray, and witness for Christ more, so as to win souls for Jesus; because when the world sees your dedicated life ­ whether at work or play ­ worldly and unsaved people will say, "I want what that person has;" etc., etc. To them, that's all it means to "Come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord." 2 Cor. 6:17. That is typical of the way so-called evangelicals handle the Scripture ­ simplistic, trivial, deadly Arminianism.  A good rule is that when the New Testament gives an Old Testament citation, both the passage itself and the surrounding context is important in construing the meaning of the New Testament passage. Thus, when the Holy Ghost puts the word "ABHOR" and other words of final condemnation in the Levitical context, that immediately elevates the matter to deadly gravity.  This matter of coming out of unsanctified groups and remaining ABSOLUTELY ALONE (i.e., "SEPARATE") is no longer casual and optional, as it is treated by evangelical Arminianism; to wit:  "And what agreement hath the temple of God with idols? for ye are the temple of the living God; as God hath said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. WHEREFORE COME OUT from among them, and BE YE SEPARATE, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you, And will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughter, saith the Lord Almighty." (2 Cor. 6:16-18)  Now, in light of the Old Testament, at Lev. 26:11-16, we know the following; to wit: If you WILL NOT COME OUT from all worldly groups and remain absolutely separate from them in all respects, God says He will ABHOR you, He will NOT set his dwelling place among you, He will NOT walk among you, He will NOT be your God nor allow you to be His people, He will NOT be a Father unto you, and He will NOT allow you to be His sons and His daughters.  In other words, Beloved, from these passages, we have just described and identified a very popular and well adjusted human being living happily in this evil world ­ BUT WHO IS ON HIS WAY, IRREVERSIBLY, to Hell.  And the last thing in the world we are the least bit interested in is Antichrist and his brand-new HO-church.  I love you.  Amen.  
