Sunday, September 21, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for  doctrines the commandments of men. For laying aside  the commandment of God, ye hold the TRADITION OF  MEN, as the washing of pots and cups." Mk. 7:7,8.  There is a very pleasant, well-spoken, former NFL pro football player­turned-preacher, who might be brain-damaged from being hit hard too many times on the football field; because the big dummy church tramp converted himself from being a reprobate Lutheran, to being a Congregationalist, to being a slick Presbyterian, to being a CATHOLIC !  His name is MARCUS GRODI. He now runs a TV program on the Catholic network (EWTN) ­ called the Journey Home ­ where he tries to talk unhappy preachers from all the other cults on the landscape to come on home to the pedophile church, aka, the Roman Catholic sodomite whore-house and dog kennel, masquerading as a church for mercenary purposes. And I tell you, Beloved, from the looks of things, Marcus is doing a lively business in his spiritual leper colony broadcasting out of Alabama. I watch that TV program for comedic entertainment and relaxation, calling it the Marcus Grodi Comedy Hour. Ol' Marcus has a steady stream of preacher riff-raff up there telling how they have taken the Journey Home to mother church. Baptist preachers, Methodist preachers, Presbyterian preachers, Lutheran preachers, Assembly of God preachers ­ call the roll.  Reminds me of the time evil King Jeroboam made two golden calves and said, "Behold thy gods, O Israel." And then made two houses of idols to compete with the Temple of God in Jerusalem; and then made priests of the scum of the earth, the basest of men, meaning the lowest of mankind; to wit: "And he made a house of high places, AND MADE PRIESTS OF THE LOWEST OF THE PEOPLE, which were not of the sons of Levi." (1 Kgs. 12:31) Well, this week, the guest preacher couldn't make it because of sickness in the family, so the producer of the TV show told Marcus to tell his own story again ­ about how his Journey Home took him from being a Lutheran, to Congregationalist, to Presbyterian, to finally coming home to Catholic. Marcus said the Holy Spirit led him to concentrate on ten verses of Scripture, and he will send you a copy of those ten verses if you write him and ask him for them. Now you must know that Catholics have quite a few doctrines that don't appear in the Bible anywhere; and, in fact, those doctrines directly contradict the Bible in vital ­ life and death, Heaven and Hell ­ matters. Beloved, there is death in that CATHOLIC POT. There is a lap full of wild gourds shredded into THAT CATHOLIC POT of pottage; to wit: "And one went out into the field to gather herbs, and found a wild vine, and gathered thereof wild gourds his lap full, and came and shred them into the pot of pottage: FOR THEY KNEW THEM NOT. So they poured out for the men to eat. And it came to pass, as they were eating of the pottage that they cried out, and said, O thou man of God, there is DEATH IN THE POT. And they could not eat thereof." (2 Kgs. 4:39-40)  Sunday, September 21, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 2  Among the deadly poison wild gourds (i.e., false doctrines) shredded in that Roman Catholic pot of pottage, are these: 1) Divine inspiration of the ORAL TRADITIONS, putting them on a par of equality with ­ or superior to ­ the Bible; 2) Salvation by WORKS; 3) Immaculate conception of ­ and essential DEITY OF ­ MARY; 4) PERGATORY, or, a fancied intermediate state, after death, between Heaven and Hell; and, 5) TRANSUBSTANTIATION, or, the lying doctrine that, when the vile, sodomite priest "blesses" the bread and wine, these two elements are transformed into the literal body and blood of Jesus Christ.  There are many, many more, but these five ­ as I perceive ­ are among the deadliest of the poison wild gourds (i.e., false doctrines) shredded into the Roman Catholic pot of pottage. Now, the question is, how does a smart fellow like Marcus Grodi swallow down all these Catholic lies, and teach others so? And his literature actually brags about his folly; to wit: "The Journey Home. This exciting call-in show examines why so many people from Protestant to fallen away Catholics are being drawn into the Catholic Church. Former non-Catholics discuss their personal conversion stories and reveal how their search for truth has led them home to the Catholic Church. Every week we hear from 2-5 new Protestant ministers somewhere along their journey home. Over these past 15 years, we have assisted nearly 1,600 ministers from over 100 non-Catholic traditions or denominations. We have also assisted many laymen, and do this in partnership with over 10,000 life-long Catholics and converts who support our work through their prayers, fellowship, evangelistic outreach, and FINANCIAL SUPPORT." Uh-oh. Somehow I just knew these heretics would get around to the golden calves; to wit: FINANCIAL SUPPORT. The Savior has these words for these modern TV money-grubbing scribes and Pharisees; to wit:  "Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell than yourselves." (Mat. 23:15)  I, of course, am not privy to exactly how these schemes work ­ these well-oiled Catholic mechanisms, whereby apparently sane people are proselytized to a refuge of lies; to wit:  "Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and with Hell are we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us: for we have made LIES OUR REFUGE, and under falsehood have we had ourselves...Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet: and the hail shall sweep away the REFUGE OF LIES, and the waters shall overflow the hiding place." (Isa. 28:15,17)  Sunday, September 21, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 3  The Roman Catholic church is a REFUGE OF LIES, and the wrath of God like a mighty hail storm will sweep away their REFUGE OF LIES. Now, back to Marcus Grodi and his favored 10 verses that he says the Holy Spirit used to lead him back home to the Catholic church. First comes 2 Thes. 2:15, which he says teaches him that the ORAL TRADITIONS of the church are as divinely inspired and every bit as authoritatively binding as the written Word of God, the Bible.  It's easy to see why this one comes first; because, once that monstrous lie is firmly in place, all the other doctrinal lies rush in like flood waters when the dam is breached; to wit: salvation by works, immaculate conception of Mary, Purgatory, transubstantiation, et al. So, what does 2 Thes. 2:15 say?  "Therefore, brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word, or our epistle." (2 Thes. 2:15)  In a way, all the other lies stand or fall on this one. Gill says of this verse: "These were not the traditions of men or the rudiments of the world, but what they had received from Christ, through the hands of the apostles: whether by word, or our epistle, that is, by our word, as well as by our epistle, and so the Arabic version reads; these doctrines, ordinances, and rules of discipline were communicated to them, both by word of mouth, when the apostles were in person among them, and by writing afterward to them; for what the apostles delivered in the ministry of the word to the churches, they sent them in writing, that they might be a standing rule of faith and practice; so that this does not in the least countenance the unwritten traditions of the Papists; and since these were what were taught them, viva voce, and they received them from the mouth of the apostles, or by letters from them, or both, it became them to hold and retain them fast, and not let them go, either with respect to doctrine or practice."  John Owen, in one of his famous "exercitations, (i.e., extremely rigorous exercises) in his treatment of a subject," says that the ancient Jews, in their blasphemous efforts to escape the rigorous requirements of the law of Moses, developed a vast "Cabala" (an occult theosophy, of rabbinical origin, a stash of secret doctrines) of TRADITIONS, which our Lord Jesus Christ severely denounced; to wit:  "Then came to Jesus scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem, saying, Why do thy disciples transgress THE TRADITION OF THE ELDERS? for they wash not their hands when they eat bread. But he answered and said unto them, Why do ye also TRANSGRESS THE COMMANDMENT OF GOD BY YOUR TRADITION?" (Mat. 15:1-3)  "Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. For laying aside the commandment of God, ye hold the TRADITION OF MEN, as the washing of pots and cups: and many other things ye do. And he said unto them, Full well ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep YOUR OWN TRADITION." (Mk. 7:7-9)  Sunday, September 21, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 4  Beloved. Words could not be plainer; to wit: To hold to the TRADITIONS is to lay aside the commandment of God; and, To keep the TRADITIONS is to reject the commandment of God. In another of Owen's Exercitations entitled, "Of the Judaical distribution of the Old Testament, relating to The original and nature of their ORAL LAW and TRADITION," Owens painstakingly establishes that the Roman Catholic church was and is aping the reprobate Jews in destroying the Word of God by their abominable TRADITIONS.  "But whom in this matter shall we believe?" asked Owen, by a rhetorical question ­ "A FEW IGNORANT JEWS, or God himself, bearing witness that his law is perfect, and requiring no more in his worship but what is in that law prescribed?"  It is no small thing that the reprobate and apostate Catholics are doing here, teaching all mankind and their hundreds of millions of votaries (people who are fervently devoted to Catholicism), from the cradle to the grave, the world over ­ that their damnable, Satanic ORAL TRADITIONS are as divinely inspired and as morally and spiritually binding ­ and more so ! ­ as the written Word of God, the Bible.  Again, Dr. John Owen said:  "And this is the persuasion of the Romanists about their Cabala (i.e., a treasure trove, massive stashes of secret occult doctrines) of TRADITIONS. They plead them to be all of a divine original, partly from Christ, and partly from his apostles. Whatever they have added unto the written word, yea, though it be never so contrary thereunto, still they pretend that it is part of the oral law which they have received from them by living TRADITION ! Let one convention of their doctors determine that images are to be adored; another, that transubstantiation is to be believed; a third, add a new creed with an equal number of articles unto the old; ­ let one doctor advance the opinion of purgatory; another, of justification by works; all is one, ­ these things were not then first invented, but only declared out of that unsearchable treasure of TRADITIONS which they have in their custody. Had they not inlaid this persuasion in the minds of men, they know that their whole fabric would, of its own accord, have long since sunk into confusion. But they highly contend, at this day, that they need no other argument to prove anything to be of a heavenly extract and divine original, but that THEMSELVES THINK SO, AND PRACTICE ACCORDINGLY !"  And so you see, Beloved, from the ancient days of the reprobate Jews, to the present days of the Roman Catholics, the preferred methodology for successfully attacking and invalidating the written Word of God (i.e., the Scriptures), is by the stock-piling (i.e., Cabala, a Treasure-Trove of occult, secret, false doctrines) and selectively propagating such Satanically-inspired TRADITIONS, and publishing the abominable things throughout the whole world. The apostle Peter suggests that all mankind has been infected with the poison of these Satanic TRADITIONS; to wit:  Sunday, September 21, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 5  "Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation" ­ (i.e., your vain manner of life) ­ "RECEIVED BY TRADITION from your fathers (i.e., from your ancestors, clean back to Adam)." (1 Pet. 1:18)  And there are some expositors who say that Isaiah referred to these evil TRADITIONS when he said God's curse was upon the earth because the inhabitants thereof had defiled the earth, by transgressing the laws of God, by CHANGING THE ORDINANCES of God, and by breaking God's everlasting oath; to wit:  "The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, CHANGED THE ORDINANCE, broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men are left." (Isa. 24:5,6)  The apostle Paul ­ certainly an expert on the subject, if ever there lived an expert; to wit:  "For ye have heard of my conversation (manner of life) in times past in the Jews' religion... And profited in the Jews' religion above many my equals in mine own nation, being more exceedingly zealous of the TRADITIONS OF MY FATHERS." (Gal. 1:13,14)  I say, Paul was certainly an expert on the subject of the TRADITIONS of the Jews' religion. And that same apostle Paul called the whole Cabala stash of fraudulent Jewish TRADITIONS nothing but FABLES, AND COMMANDMENTS OF MEN, AND NOT TO BE GIVEN AN OUNCE OF CREDIBILITY; to wit:  "Not giving heed to JEWISH FABLES, and commandments of men, that turn from the truth (i.e., apostates)." (Titus 1:14)  And some of the harshest language from the Savior's blessed mouth was used on those who give heed to the TRADITIONS ­ in the least degree ­ down to the last cup that is washed and bed that is made; to wit:  "For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash their hands OFT, eat not, holding the TRADITION of the elders. And when they come from the market, except they wash, they eat not. And many other things there be, which they have received to hold, as the washing of cups, and pots, brasen vessels, and of tables (or, beds)." (Mk. 7:3,4)  It is hard to imagine anything more trivial than these items enumerated. Washing cups, indeed ! Wash your hands a thousand times a day ­ or what? Go to Hell? But see the high degree of importance the Savior attached, as though He were saying, If you wash your hands a thousand times a day, or only one time a day, as though you were thereby keeping and honoring the TRADITIONS in worshiping me ­ and you WILL go to Hell; to wit:  Sunday, September 21, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 6  "He answered and said unto them, Well hath Isaiah prophesied of you hypocrites, as it is written, This people honoreth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. For laying aside the commandment of God, ye hold the TRADITION of men, as the washing of pots and cups: and many other such like things ye do. And he said unto them, FULL WELL ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your own TRADITION. For Moses said, Honor thy father and thy mother (the 5th Commandment); and, Whoso curseth father or mother, let him die the death: BUT YE SAY," ­ (i.e., in direct, blatant defiance of God's plainly revealed Word, with no authority for such contempt for the will of God, other than the massive Cabala stash of occult, anti-Bible, Satanically-inspired, secret doctrines; I SAY, saith Christ, HONOR THY FATHER AND THY MOTHER, Ex. 20:12) ­ "BUT YE SAY, saith Christ, If a man shall say to his father or mother, It is Corban, that is to say, a gift (i.e., a gift to organized religion), by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me, he shall be free (i.e., free from the duty henceforth to honor his father and mother). And ye suffer (allow) him no more to do ought for his father or his mother; MAKING THE WORD OF GOD OF NONE EFFECT THROUGH YOUR TRADITION, which ye have delivered: and many such like things do ye." Mk. 7:6-13.  Thus did the Lord Jesus reveal to us the exact methodology whereby Satan has most effectively rendered the Bible null and void to the vast majority of mankind. All as described by John Owen (1616-1683), 300+ years ago; to wit: "By this means principally have the Jews, for many generations, both shut out the truth and secured themselves from conviction. For whatever is taught and revealed in the Scriptures about the Messiah," ­ seeing they have that which they esteem a revelation of equal authority teaching another doctrine more suited to their carnal principles and expectations; to wit: TRADITIONS, ­ "they will rest in any evasion rather than give in to truth... And this has been the fatal way and means of the grand apostasy of both Judaism and Christianity; to wit: TRADITIONS. The Jews expressly contend that their oral law, their mass of TRADITIONS, was from God himself. On the strength of their damnable TRADITIONS, they reject the Lord Jesus Christ as Messiah, thereby sealing their doom, and assuring their place and portion in eternal Hell fire and damnation."  Even so, the Catholic TRADITIONS ­ embraced so warmly by Marcus Grodi on The Journey Home EWTN TV show ­ guarantee Grodi that his Journey Home will end in Hell, and that his long home will be the Lake that burneth with fire and brimstone. Rev. 21:8. The case of Marcus Grodi is sad indeed. He is a typical church tramp, jumping from church to church to church to church ­ landing in bed with the Great Whore of Babylon. Look at him, parroting the Roman Catholic jargon about his Journey Home to mother church. He is spoiled through philosophy and vain deceit, after the TRADITION OF MEN, after the rudiments (beggarly pickings) of the world, and not after Christ.  Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. (Col. 2:8)  Amen.  
