Sunday, August 12, 2007 pg.1  Sermon Outline  Ireland is Upset; WBC "Turns the World Upside Down." Two weeks ago, we announced the launching of a new Website; to wit: GodHatesIreland.com, as another facet of our Gospel-preaching and Good-Newspublishing crusade. This is more evidence of our Father's good pleasure in giving to us the Kingdom, ­ "Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom." Lk. 12:32. ­ and more of that "full proof" required to satisfy us that our humble ministry is of God; to wit: "But watch thou in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an evangelist, MAKE FULL PROOF OF THY MINISTRY." 2 Tim. 4:5. You see that these are the words of the soon-to-die Apostle Paul: "Make full proof of thy ministry. FOR I AM NOW READY TO BE OFFERED, and the time of MY departure is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have finished MY course, I have kept the faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing." 2 Tim. 4:5-8. Paul was about to finish his own particular course ­ (course, S#1408 & S#5143, a race, a career, an obstacle course, maybe more like an Olympic Decathlon [ten track & field events]). Paul seems to refer often to HIS COURSE ­ with great affection ­ as a thing to be cherished for time and eternity; as when bidding the Ephesian church a final goodbye; Paul said: "And now, behold, I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there: Save that the Holy Ghost witnesseth in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions abide (i.e., wait for me). But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that I might FINISH MY COURSE with joy, and the ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God." Acts 20:22-24. Beloved, just as we must be giving all diligence ­ 24/7 ­ to make our calling and election sure (i.e., getting ahold of undoubted proof that we are God's elect); even so we must "make full proof of our ministry" (2 Tim. 4:5; i.e., strive diligently ­ 24/7 ­ to get ahold of undoubted proof that our ministry is directly of God ­ i.e., does our ministry conform to the experiences of God's servants as plainly recorded in Sacred Writ?!). As I said, two weeks ago, we announced the launching of a new Website: GodHatesIreland.com ­ As an integral part of our Gospel-Preaching ministry ­ as an integral part of our Good-News-Publishing crusade ­ as an integral part of the course ­ (the race) ­ the Lord God has given us to run. And I must tell you, Beloved, that, sofar/so-good ­ the evidence is all good. It's happening to us like it did to Paul and Silas and the rest of the disciples in the Book of Acts; to wit: Ireland is all shook up. They're all squealing like stuck pigs among the Leprechauns at the old Blarney Stone, and Danny Boy is weeping for his Butt-Buddy who is threatening to divorce him and marry an Irish Lassie.  Sunday, August 12, 2007 pg.2  Sermon Outline  "You People Have Got All of Ireland UPSET" I was on a Radio Talk Show in Dublin last Thursday, and the Host kept saying, "You people have got all of Ireland UPSET." I said, "That's great, that's wonderful, that's what we are supposed to do. That's the effect True Gospel preaching is supposed to have on all people everywhere." Whenever Paul and Silas hit town ­ as in Philippi ­ trouble broke out; to wit: "And they (i.e., the rabble-rousing mob) brought them to the magistrates, saying, "These men do exceedingly trouble our city;" and they threw Paul and Silas in Jail. Acts 16:20-23. When an earthquake from the Lord freed them from jail, the officials of Philippi asked Paul and Silas to leave town because of all the trouble they caused with their preaching. Paul and Silas UPSET everybody in town; to wit: "And they came and besought them, and brought them out, and desired them to depart out of the city." Acts. 16:39. Don't you see, Beloved? Paul and Silas were making full proof of their ministry. 2 Tim. 4:5. The objective proof was, that they were called troublemakers because they UPSET everybody with their preaching. The same thing will happen to us. Therefore we should rejoice that Ireland is UPSET. They ought to be. Ireland ­ Isle of the Vile, Stinking, Feces-Eating, Anus-Licking Sodomite Damned. Lest anybody thinks that the experience of Paul and Silas at Philippi was unique, just look at what happened to them at Thessalonica ­ the city they fled to when they were booted out of Philippi. When they got there, Paul preached for three weeks before the fireworks started ­ Acts 17:2 says Paul "reasoned with them out of the scriptures." "And some of them believed and consorted with Paul and Silas...not a few." Acts 17:4. And then, BANG! Listen to this: "But the Jews which believed not, moved with envy, took unto them certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company (i.e., a rabble-rousing mob), and set all the city on an uproar." Acts 17:5. Do the words Jerry Berger and Vintage come to mind? Mark the words, Beloved. See if our ministry does not comport (i.e., agree, correspond, harmonize) closely with the ministry of Paul and Silas. And what did they say ­ in a hyperbole, to be sure, but very true in a practical sense ­ what did they say about Paul and Silas? and of us, also! BANG! They said: "These that have turned the world upside down are come hither (to Ireland, as well as to Thessalonica) also...And they troubled the people and the rulers of the city, when they heard these things." Acts 17:6,8. Beloved, Paul and Silas UPSET Philippi, and they UPSET Thessalonica, ­ and most everywhere else they preached ­ like we have UPSET Ireland, and America and Canada, and Sweden, and the EU (Europian Union), and the whole world. Praise the Lord! And Ireland is trying to put us in jail ­ with their Satanic law, which they are trying to export to America, as they have to Canada ­ making it a crime to quote Bible verses denouncing sodomites and their filthy, perverted sex sins ­ (E.g., Lev. 18:22: "Thou shalt not lie with mankind as with womankind; it is abomination.") The godless Irish call their Satanic law that criminalizes Gospel preaching like I'm doing right now ­ I say, they call their law, "An Act to Prohibit Incitement to Hatred on Account of Sexual Orientation."  Sunday, August 12, 2007 pg.3  Sermon Outline  "An Act to Prohibit Incitement to Hatred on Account of Sexual Orientation" Beloved, think of it. Isn't that just exactly what Gospel preaching is supposed to do? incite people to hate sin? "Shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord." 2 Chron. 19:2. When I quoted Ireland's antichrist law on that Irish Radio Talk Show last Thursday, the Host was terrified ­ for fear he and his radio station might be arrested and fined, and/or imprisoned, and/or lose their license to broadcast, for allowing me to do all that wonderful Bible preaching ­ live! ­ on their Dublin, Ireland, radio station! I believe he had grounds to be afraid. That law is so long, and so convoluted, that it certainly appears to cover the Radio Talk Show host, and the owners/managers of the Radio Station. All such laws ­ which are proliferating everywhere ­ have a powerful, chilling effect on all free speech and free religious exercise. And mark my word, Beloved, it is just a matter of time ­ if the Lord delays His coming ­ and the U.S.A. will have such laws. The First Amendment is already dead in most sections of this evil, sodomite-dominated country of ours ­ sick, sick doomed America. The Dublin Radio Talk Show host said, "But only 10% of Ireland is Gay, and you've condemned us all." I said, if 10% are fags, the other 90% are fag-enablers; and the old preachers used to say fag-enablers are worse than fags, according to Rom. 1:32, because fag-enablers support the filthy beasts calling themselves gay, and they don't even have the excuse of saying I'm gay and can't help myself. Ireland is a land of vile, feces-eaters and anus lickers ­ all of whom are abominations to God and headed for Hell. Deal with it! And things are worse with Ireland than I originally thought, two weeks ago, when we announced launching a new Website: GodHatesIreland.com. According to "Trinity News," Dublin University's Student Newspaper, all colleges and universities in Ireland provide a vast network of multiple so-called "cruising" locations where the filthiest sexually explicit acts known to mankind go on 24/7 in such places as toilets and libraries. These prime fag-sex locations include such prestigious Colleges and Universities as UCD, DCU, DIT and DBS, as well as colleges around the country in Cork, Belfast and Galway. "Cruising" is a practice where two men meet anonymously in restrooms or other public places to engage in sexually explicit acts, and is said to be, "Rife throughout Ireland." Yes, things are much worse in Ireland than we knew about two weeks ago, and we are being fed information on a daily basis. Such as the sad, sick saga of Father Ollie (Oliver O'Grady), who was deported back to Ireland from the U.S., after spending 7 years in prison for sodomizing hundreds of kids while a priest working with Roman Catholic Archbishop Mahoney of the Southern California diocese, who recently settled a case of Priest Molestation for $640 million (2/3 of a Billion). Father Ollie was transferred from parish to parish for fresh supplies of kids to molest for many years. According to the film, "Deliver Us from Evil," Father Ollie is still a Catholic Priest in good standing, well respected throughout Ireland where he lives on a pension and an annuity ­ a bribe, if you will ­ to keep him quiet about all the criminal molesting of little kids by the thousands of  Sunday, August 12, 2007 pg.4  Sermon Outline  sick priests employed by the Southern California Diocese. You bet Ireland is DELIGHTED to have this old pervert priest living out his retirement years in Ireland, where he is celebrated like a retired rock star celebrity. Jeff Anderson, an attorney representing hundreds of abused kids in litigation for more than twenty years, says in the film, "Deliver Us from Evil," as follows: "Every day, every week, I learn of another child molested by a cleric who hasn't been disclosed before this day, and my belief is, that there are not hundreds, but there are thousands of offenders yet to be exposed and disclosed still roaming the churches in the landscapes in this U.S., and tens of thousands worldwide." And the biggest child-molesting-priest nation ­ worldwide ­ is Ireland. "Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord; shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land; The prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means; and my people love to have it so, and what will ye do in the end thereof?" Jer. 5:29-31. Father Tom Doyle is one of the few Catholic priests attempting to help those whose lives have been ruined by the tens of thousands of filthy, child-molesting, fag-ass priests. Here is a quote from a speech delivered by Father Doyle in Rome; to wit: "Bishops, archbishops, and cardinals have consistently lied to us and to the public and to law enforcement agencies about the cover-up of sexual abuse by the clergy ­ period." And, again, the biggest cover-up of all is the Roman Catholic Hierarchy in Ireland. Ireland ­ Land of Stinking, Sodomite Child-Molesters The Dublin Talk-Radio host, between gasping for breath as I dealt body-blows to his country Ireland ­ said, (with a note of desperation in his voice), "But doesn't the Bible teach forgiveness?" I said, Yes! But only for those who repent; and fags and fag-enablers cannot repent, or blush for their filthy, anal-copulating sins. Ergo, nobody in Ireland can repent, and therefore everybody in Ireland is going to Hell. The prophet Jeremiah pronounced Ireland's irreversible fate 2,600 years ago; to wit: "Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush; therefore they shall fall among them that fall (into the nethermost Hell)." Jer. 6:15. "Now is the end come upon thee, and I will send mine anger upon thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways, and will recompense upon thee all thine abominations. And mine eye shall not spare thee, neither will I have pity; but I will recompense thy ways upon thee, and thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I am the Lord." Ezek. 7:3,4. Amen.  
