Sunday, August 24, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And he that overcometh, and keepeth my works unto  the end, to him will I give power over the nations: And  he shall rule them with a ROD OF IRON; as the vessels  of a potter shall they be broken to shivers: even as I  received of my Father." Rev. 2:26,27.  This rod of iron is highly symbolic, and first appears in Psalm 2, where the Father is speaking to the Son about how the raging heathen are to be dealt with in eternity; to wit: "Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen" ­ (i.e., called `the raging heathen' in verse one) ­ "for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Thou shalt break them with a ROD OF IRON; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel." Psa. 2:8,9. The situation on earth at the time the rod of iron is introduced is dire, exceedingly dire (i.e., dire ­ warning of or having dreadful or terrible consequences; calamitous).  The whole world is in a conspiratorial rage against God and his anointed people. It is a time of great danger for them; to wit: "Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? The kings of the earth set themselves" ­ (i.e., they have a most stubborn mind-set, a determination by the most politically powerful leaders on earth ­ and all of them ­ to subdue and silence the preaching of the Lord's people) ­ "and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed" ­ (i.e., those fools are engaged in a massive conspiracy at the very highest level to suppress the truth of God in the earth) ­ (Beloved, this sounds very much like what is going on here, and now, in Topeka, and Kansas, and America, and the world) ­ "saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us." Psalm 2:1-3. ­ (i.e., some how, some way, pass some laws, do something, anything, stop the preaching of Westboro Baptist Church; our land is not able to bear their words!, (Amos 7:10), which, like bands and cords, bind our vanities, prick our consciences, and inhibit our lusts; to wit:  "Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring upon this city and upon all her towns all the evil that I have pronounced against it, because they have hardened their necks, THAT THEY MIGHT NOT HEAR MY WORDS (i.e., from Jeremiah's mouth). Now Pashur the son of Immer the priest, who was also chief governor in the house of the Lord, heard that Jeremiah prophesied these things (i.e., these words). Then Pashur smote Jeremiah the prophet, and put him in the stocks that were in the high gate of Benjamin, which was by the house of the Lord." (Jer. 19:15-20:2)  And so it is, the pattern holds true in every age, to the last days of the last days: the whole world is in a dreadful rage, leading to a Hellish conspiracy, the substance of which is found at Psalm 2:3; to wit:  "Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us." (Psalm 2:3)  Sunday, August 24, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 2  Meaning, as it pertains to us today: "Some how, some way, pass some laws, sue, do something, anything, ­ but stop the preaching of Westboro Baptist Church! Don't talk to us about the First Amendment, Constitutional rights, freedom of speech, freedom of religion, the founding fathers fleeing religious persecution in England and Europe and establishing a new land marked by religious freedom, call it America, a shining city on a hill ­ we don't want to hear it! Just STOP THE PREACHING OF WESTBORO BAPTIST CHURCH ! Our land is not able to bear all their words!" See Amos 7:10.  In the days of Amos, God's wrath was about to be poured out on the ten northern tribes, called Israel, because of the well-known idolatries and abominations of Jeroboam, who for base political reasons had set up two golden calves to compete with the true worship of God in Jerusalem. Amos was an untutored country boy, a herdsman and fig fruit farmer, neither a prophet nor the son of a prophet ­ BUT AMOS WAS CALLED OF GOD TO DELIVER A MESSAGE OF WARNING TO JEROBOAM AND TO ISRAEL ! And it was to be a strict, uncompromising message, after the symbol of a PLUMBLINE, and the heart of that message was: "I will rise against the house of Jeroboam with the sword." (Amos 7:9)  But many more words of God's warnings and threatened wrath accompanied the strict preaching of Amos; to wit: "Thus he showed me: and, behold, the Lord stood upon a wall made by a plumbline, with a PLUMBLINE in his hand. And the Lord said unto me, Amos, what seest thou? And I said, A PLUMBLINE. Then said the Lord, Behold, I will set a PLUMBLINE in the midst of my people Israel:" ­ (the ten northern break-away tribes, led by the opportunistic idolater Jeroboam) ­ "I will not again pass by them any more (i.e., I will not again delay visiting them in my wrath for their abominable sex sins and their filthy, pagan idolatry); And the high places of Isaac shall be desolate, and the sanctuaries of Israel shall be laid waste; and I will rise against the house of Jeroboam with the sword." Amos 7:7-9. And, Beloved, has not God Almighty called us ­ Westboro Baptist Church ­ to hold His glorious PLUMBLINE of divine truth to this backslidden nation, exposing their abominable sex sins and their filthy Arminian whorehouses masquerading as churches on every corner? ­ and, to mix two wonderful Bible metaphors ­ to find and to pronounce to America:  "Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin...Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting." (Dan. 5:27)  I say, Is it not abundantly clear, Beloved, both from Scripture and from providence, (i.e., the signs of the times), that God has indeed called Westboro Baptist Church to fulfill just such a holy task, and to thereupon make full proof of our ministry? 2 Tim. 4:5.  Now, to continue the remarkable story of Amos, as it illustrates the agitation of the government, organized false religion, and the masses of the popular rabble, to "break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us;" Psa. 2:3. To wit: "Then Amaziah the priest of Bethel" ­ (i.e., the chief scum priest, not of the sons of Levi, as ordained by the Lord; but any old riffraff Jeroboam could hire to do idolatrous service in the two golden calf whorehouses Jeroboam had erected to compete with the Temple and House of God in Jerusalem, for purely political reasons) Amos 7:10; to wit:  Sunday, August 24, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 3  "Whereupon the king took counsel, and made two calves of gold, and said  unto them, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem: behold thy gods,  O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. And he set the one in Bethel, and the other put he in Dan. And this thing became a sin:  for the people went to worship before the one, even unto Dan. And he  made a house of high places, and made PRIESTS OF THE LOWEST OF THE PEOPLE, which were not of the sons of Levi. And Jeroboam ordained  a feast in the eighth month, on the fifteenth day of the month, LIKE UNTO THE FEAST THAT IS IN JUDAH..."  Note: this jackass Jeroboam is shamelessly counterfeiting the one place God had chosen for public worship in those days. Dt. 12:5. "...And he offered upon the altar. So did he in Bethel, sacrificing unto the calves that he had made: and he placed in Bethel THE PRIESTS OF THE HIGH PLACES WHICH HE HAD MADE. So he offered upon the altar which he had made in Bethel the fifteenth day of the eighth month, EVEN IN THE MONTH WHICH HE HAD DEVISED IN HIS OWN HEART; and ordained a feast unto the children of Israel: and he offered upon the altar, and burned incense. " (1 Kgs. 12:28-33)  And so you see, Beloved, what kind of scum high priest of Bethel this man Amaziah was, who went out to contend with God's farmer-preacher Amos, to try and stop the preaching of Amos; to wit: (note his lying tactics, and remember Satan's devices) "Then Amaziah the priest of Bethel sent to Jeroboam king of Israel, saying, Amos hath conspired ­ (yes, you liar, Amos must have conspired with his flocks and his figs, see verse 14):  "Amos hath conspired against thee in the midst of the house of Israel; THE LAND IS NOT ABLE TO BEAR ALL HIS WORDS. For thus Amos saith, Jeroboam shall die by the sword, and Israel shall surely be led away captive out of their own land." (Amos 7:10,11)  Thus you see how the Lord our God causes the preaching of His servant Amos to reach the ears of the king and all his court, and, through them, by a kind of necessary implication, to effectively reach all the land, and further. Jeroboam the king shall die a violent death by the sword! Bang! All the population of the break-away nation of Israel will be defeated, destroyed, decimated, removed from their ancestral land, dispersed, and scattered throughout the world! Bang! Israel (America) is Doomed! Fags Doom Nations! God Hates Fags! Bang! You're Going To Hell! Bang! God Hates You! Bang! Bang! Bang!  Amaziah the scum high priest next deals with Amos directly, saying in effect what a fat lawyer told a court in Topeka a while back: "This city wants Westboro Baptist Church to leave town; the business-men of Topeka could raise quite a chunk of money to move them somewhere else;" to wit:  Sunday, August 24, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 4  "Also Amaziah said unto Amos, O thou seer, go, flee thee away into the land of Judah, and there eat bread, and prophesy there: But prophesy not again any more at Bethel; for it is the king's chapel, and it is the king's court." (Amos 7:12,13)  Are we not in good company, Beloved? Do not these Scriptures support our fondest hopes and expectations that we are in the line of the servants and prophets of God in every age, certainly in what are known as the Bible days? Nobody wanted God's messengers around ­ like John the Baptist, ­ warning them to flee from the wrath to come, or you will certainly end up in Hell. Nobody wants us around, either, Beloved. Praise the Lord for this gold mine of solid evidence that our calling and election is sure (2 Pet. 1:10); whereby also we are making full proof that our ministry is of God (2 Tim. 4:5). And now see the colorful way in which Amos responded to his invitation from the wicked Amaziah that he leave town ­ to get the heck out of Dodge, as they say; to wit:  "Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, I was no prophet, neither was I a prophet's son; but I was a herdman, and a gatherer of sycomore fruit (figs, dates, etc.): and the Lord took me as I followed the flock, and the Lord said unto me, Go, prophesy unto my people, Israel. Now therefore hear thou the word of the Lord: Thou sayest, Prophesy not against Israel, and drop not thy word against the house of Isaac." (Amos 7:14-16)  (DROP NOT THY WORD, means, that however softly, and gently, and kindly, and sweetly, you preach it, is not good enough; we just don't want you saying those words at all. This gives the lie to all these kissypooh preachers and others who are forever saying that they agree with our message, but they don't like the way we deliver it. It's a lie, Beloved. They only give lipservice to our message because they know that our message is solid Bible preaching that cannot be refuted.  Remember that good line by Judge Theis, in his written opinion, largely favoring our right to picket, where he said that if we smiled at everybody, and shook hands with everybody, and pleasantly told everybody to have a good day, and CARRIED SIGNS SAYING THAT GOD LOVES EVERYBODY, and that everybody is going to Heaven, not Hell ­ we wouldn't have all these illegal and unconstitutional laws trying to restrict our right to picket on the public sidewalks. Make no mistake, THEY HATE OUR MESSAGE, Satan hates our message, and all these humans are energized and indwelt by Satan ­ even the Satanic "spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience." Eph. 2:2.  In other words, our enemies are demon-possessed ­ every last one of them. And that is the only true reason that they are now conspiring throughout the nation and the world ­ at the highest levels ­ to stop our preaching, saying, "Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us." Psa. 2:3. But cheer up, Beloved.  Sunday, August 24, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 5  God and all the hosts of Heaven are excitedly and happily looking on this remarkable scene of filthy, raging humanity, all of whom "imagine a vain thing," (Psa. 2:1), stupidly imagining that they can "frame mischief by a law;" (Psa. 94:20), and thereby stop the Gospel message and preaching of Westboro Baptist Church.  I say, all the hosts of Heaven are now, this minute, looking on; I say, Beloved, we are, now, this minute, compassed about with a great cloud of witnesses, (Heb. 12:1), to see how we are doing; happily comparing our exploits with the exploits of other servants of the Almighty, in other ages, who did know their God, and who were strong, and who also did do exploits (Dan. 11:32).  Further cause for our being of good cheer ­ despite the Satanic nationwide and worldwide conspiracy to stop our Gospel preaching ­ is the certitude (i.e., the condition of being certain), that the Lord our God is actually laughing and mocking these deranged sinners all about us ­ ("He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in derision." Psa. 2:4). And, that all of God's dealings with them are in wrath, because of the murderous way in which they treat us on earth; and in vexing them only and always in God's sore displeasure, as only an Almighty Sovereign God can express His displeasure with hateful traitors and rebels against His rules, standard, and authority. Psa. 2:5.  And, further cause for being of good cheer, notwithstanding that Satan is all in an unprecedented rage against us, because he knoweth that his time is short (i.e., "Woe to the inhabiters of the earth and of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, HAVING GREAT WRATH, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time," Rev. 12:12); I say, notwithstanding all that Satanic fury and rage against us, we have more than abundant cause to be of good cheer, because of our Father's good pleasure toward us in guaranteeing us that He, His Son, and we ­ all together ­ shall one day soon, and throughout all eternity ­ rule these godless rebels with a ROD OF IRON AND DASH THEM IN PIECES LIKE A POTTER'S VESSEL, (Psa. 2:9; Rev. 2:27; and Rev. 19:15).  Beloved, there is great comfort for us in reading about and contemplating upon our Father's ROD OF IRON. The subject is somewhat mysterious, abstruse, and recondite (difficult and hard to understand) ­ but our Father will help us if we ask Him, and the sincere effort to take the whole subject in grasp will be well rewarded. Let us look again at our text for this week; to wit:  "And he that overcometh, and keepeth my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the nations (i.e., nations of peoples, multitudes): And he shall rule them with a ROD OF IRON; as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers: even as I received of my Father." (Rev. 2:26,27)  Right off, it is apparent that this ROD OF IRON is symbolic, meaning that it stands for certain things ­ important things ­ and, upon a little reflection, this is obvious. The characteristics, or natural qualities, of a sturdy, heavy rod of iron, are apparent ­ especially when the rod of iron is put into juxtaposition with a small, brittle piece of clay pottery.  Sunday, August 24, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 6  If the two items come sharply and smartly into sudden contact ­ the clay vessel doesn't have a chance. That thing is going to be broken and smashed to shivers. The iron rod is:  1. HARD 2. RIGID 3. INFLEXIBLE 4. STIFF 5. UNBENDING 6. UNYIELDING  Of these six primary characteristics, five are virtually synonymous ­ signifying that a dominant feature of our dealing with impenitent sinners in Hell, to eternity, will be absolute strictness and evenhandedness in handling our case loads, in administering the due punishments of the damned, all in strict and rigid application of the rules and regulations of the King.  In every single instance of the billions upon billions of the damned of all ages ­ I say in every last instance, it will be UTTERLY STRICT, RIGID, UNBENDING, INFLEXIBLE, and of ABSOLUTELY UNIVERSAL APPLICATION (i.e., every impenitent sinner will be treated EXACTLY ALIKE, NO FAVORITISM; i.e., PURE JUSTICE). God's Elect, due to their love for and intense study of the Bible while on earth, already pretty well know a great deal of the laws, rules and regulations of the King governing administration of the punishments of the damned. Nor will the groans and hideous shrieks of those guilty creatures sway the emotions or warp the judgments of God's Elect. We of Westboro Baptist Church might expect our case loads to include many hundreds and even thousands of those who persecuted us on earth. We know many of them very well, and how dreadfully they persecuted us, causing us much sorrow and grief of mind while on earth. With what gratitude and thanksgiving to God the Father and to the Lamb will our hearts swell as we see those wicked people punished with excruciating pain throughout all eternity.  Jonathan Edwards said:  "The misery of the damned, dreadful as it is, is only what justice requires. They in heaven will see and know it much more clearly, than any of us do here. They will see how perfectly just and righteous their punishment is, and therefore how properly inflicted by the supreme Governor of the world. They will greatly rejoice to see justice take place, to see that all the sin and wickedness that has been committed by these rebels in the world is remembered of God, and has its due punishment. The sight of this strict and immutable justice of God will render Him amiable and adorable in their eyes. The holy Rod of Iron secures this. They will rejoice when they see Him who is their Father and Eternal Portion so glorious in His justice. Pure Justice for those who despised His Grace."  Amen.  
