Sunday, September 9, 2007 pg.1  Sermon Outline  Bush, Balaam, Bel-shazzar: Mene, Mene, Tekel, Peres  Pres. Bush is prone to bouts of crying caused by the stress of his job, and claims to have seen ghosts emerge from the White House walls and the Lincoln Bedroom, according to a new book entitled "Dead Certain: The Presidency of George W. Bush," by author John Draper. "I do a lot of crying in this job," Bush said, "I'll bet I've shed more tears than you can count, as president. I'll shed some tomorrow."  Bush claims to have had a "faithful experience," on the telephone, when Billy Graham led him to the Lord. So he appoints out-of-the-closet fags to high places (Michael Guest & "wife" Alex Nevarez [see handout]) ­ a scheme like the false-prophet Balaam's scheme, "who taught the Moabite King Balak to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto idols, and to commit fornication." Rev. 2:14. Bush is also greedy like Balaam; to wit: "Woe unto them! for they ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished." (Jude 11)  While Bush stubbornly sends people to die every day in Iraq, and incurs billions if not trillions in debt prosecuting a bloody war, he is busily planning his own post-presidency future and how to become a multimillionaire, bragging on his failed policies, and bragging on how he brought down the wrath of God on America. Listen to this Hell-bound, shameless, bloody little monster talk. Says, "He plans to `replenish the ol' coffers' by speaking on the lecture circuit, where he says he can make `ridiculous' money recounting his White House experiences." "I don't know what my dad gets," he says. "But it's more than 50, 75 thousand; and President Clinton's making a lot of money," he adds, as he smacks his chops. Such talk ­ such "words" ­ reveals the true nature and motivation of President Bush. And those "words" mark him as a "condemned" child of Hell, according to the Lord Jesus; to wit: "For by thy WORDS thou shalt be justified, and by thy WORDS thou shalt be CONDEMNED." Mat. 12:37.  Said another way, those words mark President Bush ­ even as Judas (Jn. 17:12. "Holy Father...those that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition [i.e., a child of Hell]") ­ I say, those words of Bush about replenishing "the ol' coffers" mark him as a son of "perdition" ­ yes, even "drowned in perdition." Listen: "But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and PERDITION (i.e., Hell)." 1 Tim. 6:9. Further evidence that Pres. Bush is a child of Hell is seen in his claim that he was led to Christ by Billy Graham. Graham brags about compassing sea and land ­ traveling millions of miles ­ preaching to millions ­ winning multitudes to Christ ­ i.e., making multitudes of proselytes. Beloved, here is what our Lord Jesus Christ said about that:  "Woe unto you... hypocrites! for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte, ­ e.g., Bush! ­ and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the CHILD OF HELL than yourselves." Mat. 23:15.  Sunday, September 9, 2007 pg.2  Sermon Outline  Bush: A Dangerous Wizard, A Necromancer,  A Consulter with Familiar Spirits  Pres. Bush and his sodomite ilk have brought down the wrath of God upon America. Bush feigns a kind of mystical, evangelical fervor for spreading democracy around the world ­ using the mighty arsenal of American military power to cram democracy down the throats of weak Middle East and Third World countries. His eyes glaze over when he talks about his worldview vision of nothing but democracies covering the globe ­ thanks to himself and democratic America's military might. O, the glory of it all. Succeeding generations will rise up and praise  George the Great and America the Beautiful.  Beloved, it's a Satanic pipe dream. Pres. Bush is a dangerous Wizard, a Necromancer, a Consulter with Familiar Spirits. According to the new book about Bush ­ Dead Certain ­ Bush claims that the White House is a "creepy place" filled with ghosts that he sees "coming out of the walls" and unoccupied rooms. On one occasion Bush says he "froze in his steps while approaching the Lincoln Bedroom," when he saw ghosts coming out. Such things are an abomination to God, and those that practice them are an abomination to God ­ and all of which are closely associated with and intermingled with the abominations of idolatry and sodomy. See, Lev. 18:22-27; Deut. 18:10-12; Rom. 1:21-32. To wit:  "There shall not be found among you any one...that useth divination, or an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch, Or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer. For all that do these things are an abomination unto the Lord." (Deut. 18:10-12)  No wonder that Pres. Bush is ­ by his own admission ­ a recovering alcoholic. Making one wonder if he sometimes falls off the wagon in the White House and/or on his backwoods ranch ­ well-secured by a small army of federal and local law enforcement agents ­ down in ol' Crawford, Texas. The Draper, "Dead Certain," book says: "Discussing his past battles with alcohol, Bush says he would never be able to make decisions on war if he was still drinking." (Making one wonder how his decisions on war ­ or anything else -- could possibly be any worse. God has indeed cursed America by giving America such leaders. Isa. 3:1-4.) Bush said, "I wouldn't be president if I kept drinking. You can get sloppy, can't make decisions, it clouds your reason, absolutely."  Remember, Beloved, that this is the same Bush who choked and fainted while trying to eat a pretzel, that cries all the time, ­ uncontrollably, ­ who sees ghosts coming at him out of the walls and out of unoccupied rooms in the White House, and who admits he has been a sloppy drunk for years, unable to make decisions, with a cloudy brain, ­ absolutely, he says. Here's another similarity between Bush and Balaam: They are both ecumenical, born-again Christians. (I.e., they both believe in all religions ­ every so-called faith- system ­ equally!) Balaam, for lucre, spoke in the name of the true and living God ­ and he knew and well understood and pretended to believe the 5-point doctrines of Calvinism, as in predestination and election and reprobation; to wit:  Sunday, September 9, 2007 pg.3  Sermon Outline  "God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should  repent; hath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken, and shall he not  make it good? Behold, I have received commandment to bless; and he hath  blessed; and I cannot reverse it. He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither  hath he seen perverseness in Israel; the Lord his God is with him, and the shout  of a king is among them. God brought them out of Egypt; he hath as it were the  strength of an unicorn. Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is  there any divination against Israel; according to this time it shall be said of Jacob  and of Israel, (i.e., WBC) ­ What hath God wrought!" (Num. 23:19-23)  You cannot get any better preaching than that; and you cannot get any better theology than that. Balaam was a fundamentalist, like Billy Graham and all good present-day Christians, and a better theologian than most. At the same time, Balaam was an idolater and, ipso facto, he was a sodomite. Rom. 1. Not only does the Bible declare him to be an idolater, teaching the children of Israel to eat things offered to idols and to commit fornication (Rev. 2:14), but secular history further proves it; to wit: "A fragmentary Aramaic text written on wall-plaster about 700 B.C., recently discovered in the Jordan Valley, relates another story about Balaam. Here he is involved with several gods and goddesses, whose will he conveys to a disobedient audience. This text reveals Balaam's wider fame." (It also reveals Balaam's ecumenicalism, in spades. See, The Illustrated Bible Dictionary.  Any god and any religion was alright with Balaam. Even so, any god and any religion ­ (and, perforce, any filthy lifestyle!) ­ is OK with Pres. Bush. After all, Democracy is the Great god above all gods to Bush. Remember the glazed eyes and adoring smile on his face as he goes forth to crusade for converts ­ make that, proselytes ­ for the Great god DEMOCRACY. But the Bible teaches otherwise. Democracy is NOT the ideal form of government. In fact it is the worst form, and is symbolized by the iron-and-clay feet and toes of King Nebuchadnezzar's image. Dan. 2:41-43. The head of the image was of gold, symbolizing the best form of government ­ on account of which Daniel declared to Nebuchadnezzar: "Thou, O king, art this head of gold. And after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee," (Dan. 2:3739), etc., and on down the body of the image to the feet and toes ­ "iron mixed with miry clay" (2:41) ­ of zero intrinsic value compared to pure gold of the highest intrinsic worth. And, talk about pure gold, can you imagine these words of King Nebuchadnezzar ­ pure Calvinism ­ coming out of the mouth of foot-in-your-mouth Bush ­ pure ecumenical, Arminian clap-trap (clap-trap: pretentious, insincere, and empty language); I say, can you imagine these words of the absolute monarch, King Nebuchadnezzar, coming out of the mouth of the absolute democrat, Pres. Bush?; to wit:  "I blessed the most High, and I praised and honored him that liveth for ever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation to generation. And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing; and he doeth according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou?" Dan. 4:34,35.  Sunday, September 9, 2007 pg.4  Sermon Outline  Did any democratic form of government ever produce any head of state ­ by popular election of  the rabble-rousing citizenry, of course ­ anywhere near capable of articulating such accurate  notions of the living and true God? Just look at this gang of Bible-dumb brutes presently  governing America. Take another example: King Darius of the ancient Medes and Persians,  Father-in-law to Cyrus the Great, who was God's "anointed to subdue nations." Isa. 45:1. On  the night of Belshazzar's great feast ­ which marked the end of Israel's 70 years of Babylonian  Captivity ­ and shortly after Daniel had pronounced the King's and the Kingdom's doom, right  to the King's face ­ we read these words: "In that night was Belshazzar the king of the  Chaldeans slain. And Darius the Median took the kingdom, being about threescore and two  (62) years old." Dan. 5:30,31. Another ancient monarch who ruled the world ­ the direct  antithesis of democracy ­ yet see what kind of man he was from his words; to wit:  "Then king Darius wrote unto all people, nations and languages, that dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you. I make a decree, That in every dominion of my kingdom men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel; for he is the living God, and stedfast for ever, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed, and his dominion shall be even unto the end. He delivereth and rescueth, and he worketh signs and wonders in heaven and in earth, who hath delivered Daniel from the power of the lions." Dan. 6:26-28.  These two mighty monarchs of the ancient world ­ and many others ­ protected and defended God's servants. I put it to you, Beloved: What has American Democracy ­ from the president on down ­ done to protect and defend the servants of Almighty God at the Westboro Baptist Church? Surely, they have done the opposite, in viciously persecuting and afflicting us. Because they are indebted to the rabble mob that elected them. They are indebted to the filthy fags and dykes who elected them. They have absolutely no wiggling room to do otherwise ­ even if they wanted to. If they should lift a hand or a voice to protect us in any way, ­ and do their Constitutional and moral duty toward WBC ­ their political careers would be over.  DeToqueville, in his classic work, Democracy in America, 1840, called this phenomenon the worm in the American apple. He said it was inevitable in a democracy. By and by, the time would come, when good America would no longer be good ­ (which he said was the reason for America's greatness, after he went into faithful churches in those days, and concluded that America was great because America was good.) ­ because bad people would attain majority status and control the ballot box. That bad people would create an evil Zeitgeist, and imagine that by their majoritarian power they could change the very Word of God.  That's the worm in the American apple. That's the fatal flaw in democratic forms of government. And that, Beloved, is how fags and dykes now control America. And that is why America persecutes us, because ELECTED officials are afraid they won't be RE-ELECTED if they protect our Constitutional rights. And that is why America is doomed. Such a thing could never happen in a monarchy, or any other form of government, where the rabble do not rule by their Satanic majoritarian tyranny. The Church has no interest in changing ANY form of government. "I build my church," says Christ, "and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it." Mat. 16:18. We only preach God's Word to all. Amen.  
