Sunday, January 11, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not obey  the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that, when  they have chastened him, will not hearken unto them: Then shall  his father and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto  the elders of his city, and unto the gate of his place; ...And all the  men of his city shall stone him with stones, that he die: so shalt  thou put evil away from among you; and all Israel shall hear, and  fear." Deut. 21:18-21.  In criticizing certain passages ­ and even whole books of the Bible ­ which Antichrist Obama wishes to discard from the Bible entirely, because they condemn sodomy and sodomites, Obama says: "How about Deuteronomy? (Obama sarcastically asks), which suggests stoning your child if he strays from the faith?" By this sarcastic question, (which misquotes Scripture!) he implies there is something wrong with the book of Deuteronomy. By this Satanic tactic this evil man ATTACKS the Bible ­ and for millions of gullible people worldwide, he effectively DESTROYS the Bible. This is that which the Holy Ghost describes as the Antichrist Obama Beast coming "with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved." 2 Thes. 2:10.  Beloved, make no mistake. This is serious business. The Antichrist Beast of Rev. 13&17 is on the scene, and the world is going wild over him ­ to their peril, their everlasting peril. "And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a (the) lie." 2 Thes. 2:11. That is, the lie about Obama. Obama himself is a big, fat lie! "When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it." (Jn. 8:44[b]) "All the world is wondering after the Beast (Obama)...And they worshipped the Beast, saying, Who is like unto the Beast? who is able to make war with him?" (Rev. 13:3,4)  Nobody, can make war with the Beast, because he alone has his finger on the trigger of the stockpile of nuclear weapons of the United States of America, the world's only remaining super power! "And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world." Rev. 13:8. I say to you again, Beloved: Make no mistake; this is serious business. Shortly, now, this Beast will "cause all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads: and that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name." Rev. 13:16,17.  I have thought for many years, that the Final Antichrist, when he should arrive upon the scene, would bring a brief period of fierce persecution to all God's Elect, ­ because they are the only ones who identify him accurately and refuse to worship him in any way. I have an old, old book (1829 a.d.) entitled, Lectures on The Apocalypse, by William Jones, who was pastor of the Scotch-Baptist Church, Assembling for Worship in Aldermanbury, London. I have put the frail old book on the table before you. As a part of expounding Rev. 13:16-17, Jones writes:  Sunday, January 11, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  "And such has actually been the conduct of the Roman hierarchy; insomuch that the  common rights of men and citizens have been suspended on condition of their receiving the  mark of Antichrist, the papal badge. This is the genuine spirit of popery, when allowed to  operate free of all restraint from the civil power; and we can trace it in all its savage and  malignant features in the history of our own country during the middle ages. I will give you,  one single instance of it as a specimen. About the middle of the twelfth century, when  persecution raged dreadfully against the disciples of Christ upon the continent of Europe, a  small company of the Waldenses (Baptists), consisting of about thirty men and women, to  avoid the malice of their implacable adversaries at home, fled from Germany in a body, and  sought an asylum in this country. They took up their residence in the neighborhood of  Oxford, and speaking only the German language, they soon attracted the attention of the  people of the neighborhood, by the singularity of their religious opinions and practices.  Suspected of heresy, they were all taken up and brought before a council of the clergy at  Oxford. When interrogated about their religion, one of them, who appeared to be the pastor  of the little flock, and whose name was Gerrard, a man of some learning, answered in their  name, that they were Christians, and believed the doctrine of the apostles; but that they did  not receive the tenets of the catholic church; such as pergatory, prayers for the dead, the  invocation of saints, etc., etc. They were instantly denounced as heretics, and delivered over  to the secular power to be punished. Henry II, who at that time sat upon the British throne,  at the instigation of the clergy, commanded them to be branded with a red hot iron on the  forehead, then to be whipped through the streets of Oxford, and having their clothes cut  short by their girdles, to be turned into the open fields, all persons being forbidden to afford  them any shelter or relief, under the severest penalties. This cruel sentence was executed in  all its rigor; and it being the depth of winter, the whole company perished through cold and  hunger. This happened in the year 1166 a.d."  Make no mistake, Beloved. This is serious business. And, the persecutions we have endured in this evil place and among these hateful, godless people, leads us to easily believe every word of this event recounted by William Jones in old England under Henry II. And it is likewise easy to believe the short-lived persecutions that await God's Elect under the Antichrist Obama Beast, all as foretold in Rev. 13:16,17. I say, Obama's ability to persecute God's Elect will be short-lived, because the return of our dear Lord Jesus in power and glory to "gather together his Elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other" (Mat. 24:31); and to thereupon cast the final Antichrist and all his sycophants into the Lake of Fire (Rev. 16:11,14:11,20:10); will follow soon upon the heels of the appearing of Antichrist (Rev. 19:20). These teeming millions of fools who gladly stand in line, as it were, to be branded permanently as the slaves, servants, soldiers, and sycophants (toadies) of Antichrist Beast Obama, will be seen then as having done so at an eternally dear price; to wit: "And the third angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, If any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture (i.e., dilution) into the cup of his indignation; and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: And the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever: and they have no rest day nor night, WHO WORSHIP THE BEAST AND HIS IMAGE, AND WHOSOEVER RECEIVETH THE MARK OF HIS NAME." (Rev. 14:9-11)  Sunday, January 11, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  What do you think? A little persecution now ­ if you DON'T take Obama's mark. OR, ­ eternal  damnation if you DO! Dan Thomasson, former editor of the Scripps Howard News Service,  wrote an analysis last month about the phenomenon which is Obama, in which he said some  amazing things about Obama's near-supernatural popularity, calling it "near Messianic in  proportion," and likening it to the multitudes pressing in desperation to merely touch the hem of  the Savior's garment; to wit:  "And, behold, a woman, which was diseased with an issue of blood twelve years, came behind him, and touched the hem of his garment: For she said within herself, If I may but touch his garment, I shall be whole. But Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said, Daughter, be of good comfort; thy faith hath made thee whole. And the woman was made whole from that hour." (Mat. 9:20-22)  "And when the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent out into all that country round about, and brought unto him all that were diseased; And besought him that they might only touch the hem of his garment: and as many as touched were made perfectly whole." (Mat. 14:35,36)  Comparing Obama with Christ is gross blasphemy; but it is further evidence that Obama is the Final Antichrist Beast of Rev. 13&17. Furthermore, Thomasson says that "this soon-to-be first African-American president rides a wave of popularity of historic proportions," and that "more than 70 percent of Americans seem to REVERE him." Reverend is a title and attributes reserved for God alone, (Psa. 111:9; to wit: "He sent redemption unto his people: he hath commanded his covenant for ever: holy and REVEREND IS HIS NAME."), and hence, Obama and his sycophants have slipped over the line again into unforgivable blasphemy of the Holy Ghost ­ more solid evidence that Obama is Antichrist. Thomasson then opines that the adulation and worship Americans have for Obama is "understandable;" and that Obama has brought a "SUDDEN WORLD CELEBRITY" status home to the often lack-luster job of President of the United States. "SUDDEN WORLD CELEBRITY." Indeed. Just exactly what Antichrist, when he appears, must do; to wit:  "And ALL THE WORLD wondered after the Beast ...And ALL THAT DWELL UPON THE EARTH shall worship him." (Rev. 13:3,8)  This universality of adulation is such an essential feature in recognizing the Final Antichrist when he appears, and Obama so clearly has it, that we would be negligent in our work for the Lord, ­ at this hour, in this place, ­ if we did not declare Obama to be the Antichrist Beast of Rev. 13&17; to wit: "Study (i.e., give all diligence) to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, RIGHTLY DIVIDING the word of truth." 2 Tim. 2:15. Now, Beloved, back to our text. Why do you suppose Obama wants to use Deut. 21:18-21, about stoning to death an incorrigible (impossible to correct or reform) child? In certain rare cases, Kansas has laws to execute guilty young people, if the judge binds the child over for trial as an adult, and his crime is adjudicated after trial and affirmed on appeal, to be capital murder with aggravating circumstances. Gill says the Jews never used the law. Obama has no case against our text (i.e., Dt. 21:18-21); he's mad about Dt. 23:17,18, WHICH REFERS TO SODOMITES AS DOGS; to wit:  Sunday, January 11, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  "There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a sodomite of the  sons of Israel. Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a DOG,  into the house of the Lord thy God for any vow: for even both these are  abomination unto the Lord thy God." (Dt. 23:17,18)  Obama would throw the whole Bible away for his fag friends ­ now we know what he means  when he says he's a "fierce advocate" for the filthy fags and the bloody baby killers. What a  wonderful president we've elected; or, rather God has given us, as punishment for our sins. Gill  says sodomites are likened unto dogs in Scripture, and referred to as dogs by the Holy Ghost,  because dogs, like sodomites, are filthy, impudent, and libidinous ­ (i.e., filled continuously with  strong, unlawful, lustful, sexual desires; lasciviousness). There is something deep-down wrong  with a guy who will regularly and congenitally lie, misquote, misapply, and pervert Scripture ­  all in a filthy, unrighteous cause.  Remember the quote from a speech Obama made June 28, 2006, wherein he asked in a sarcastic tone, "How about Deuteronomy, which suggests stoning your child if he strays from the faith." You have read the text of our sermon, where not a word is said of stoning a child if he strays from the faith. Beloved. This is serious business. Why would Obama lie? Because we are dealing with Antichrist Beast Obama, who comes with "lying wonders," "with all deceivableness of unrighteousness," and with "strong delusion, that they should believe a lie: That they all might be damned who believed not the truth (i.e., the truth about Antichrist Beast Obama), but had PLEASURE IN UNRIGHTEOUSNESS." 2 Thes. 2:10-12. Think of it, Beloved. All mankind is now seeking pleasure only in unrighteousness. Seeking pleasure only in sodomy, incest, bestiality, and MURDER. God hates fags, and fag-enablers. All mankind is now divided between fags and fag-enablers; to wit: "Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, BUT HAVE PLEASURE in them that do them." (Rom. 1:32) And now, with the advent of Antichrist Beast Obama, these worldwide Disciples of Unrighteousness have a Satanic Champion, to lead them into World Conquest ala faggot Michael Swift's sodomite Manifesto. The earth will then be inhabited and ruled by nothing but fags and murderers, and their sycophants and enablers. Then shall that filthy earth, filled with those filthy people, be destroyed in the fiery holocaust foretold by the apostle Peter; to wit: "But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the EARTH ALSO AND THE (FILTHY OBAMA) WORKS THAT ARE THEREIN SHALL BE BURNED UP." (2 Pet. 3:10) God's Elect are long gone by then, and there is no hope for the grisly gang of fagsters and murderers that are left on earth ­ THEY ARE FIT FOR NOTHING BUT THE FIERY FLAMES; to wit: "Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness, Looking for and hastening unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat? Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness." (2 Peter 3:11-13) Amen.  
