Sunday, April 13, 2008 page 1  Sermon Outline  "For God hath not appointed us to wrath,  but to obtain salvation." 1 Thessalonians 5:9.  GOD'S HOLY APPOINTMENTS ­ is a wonderful theme. The Scriptures are full of God's appointments, and none is more comforting to God's dear ones in affliction than the one in 1 Thessalonians 5:9.  "For God hath not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ." (1 Thes. 5:9)  This points us right away to the very heart of all the preaching and sermonizing of John the Baptist. He came preaching in the wilderness, and he had nothing. So we are told by the infallible word of the Holy Ghost, who journalized for us the history of the ministry of John. We read, "In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judea...For this is he that was spoken of by the prophet Esaias, saying, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight." Mat. 3:1-3.  Beloved. Don't you love it? Aren't you thrilled every time you read about this blessed man? He had nothing. Yet he possessed in his bosom a divine message straight from God Almighty, for the whole world ­ and that message was pure wrath. Pure, uncompromising wrath. And there was no way they could get at him ­ until that message was delivered. He had nothing. He lived off the land throughout his short life time. When the Holy Spirit tells us that Isaiah prophesied of him, he points immediately to Isaiah 40:3-8; to wit:  "The voice of him that crieth in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a highway for our God. Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low; and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places plain; And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together; for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. The voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field; the grass withereth, the flower fadeth; because the spirit of the Lord bloweth upon it; surely the people is grass. The grass withereth, the flower fadeth; but the word of our God shall stand for ever." (Isa. 40:3-8)  Trapp makes much of the word "crying" ­ "the voice of one crying." He says it means to cry out "loudly and lustily; lifting up his voice as a trumpet, or as the sound of many waters. He must cry and be instant, stand to the work, and stand over it. After all, Ye have to do with deaf men, dead men, living carcases, walking sepulchres of themselves. So must Christ's ministers speak to such as lie rotting and stinking in the graves of their corruptions ­ which they call their bodies."  Sunday, April 13, 2008 page 2  Sermon Outline  The word "church" means a called out assembly, with emphasis on the word "called" which is the  word used here. It is derived from the custom of the Greeks, who, when they had a vital matter to  take up in their assembly, requiring attendance by all the members, sent what they called "criers"  or "loud and lusty" men, up and down the city streets, making sure that everybody heard, and  attended, to debate and cast his votes in the political meeting. Even so, when God calls His elect  to salvation and plants them in His church ­ His "called out assembly" ­ His ecclesia ­ "ek" for  "out" ­ and "kaleo" for "called".  Called out of the kingdom of Satan by the loud and lusty voice of God's ministers on earth, as it were. God's "criers", to awaken them to hear the doctrine of the Gospel revealed from Heaven. Trapp also says that John "entered upon his calling in the year of Jubilee, which used to be proclaimed by a crier with the sound of a trumpet, and that in allusion thereunto, he is called, `The voice of a crier.'" (Trapp: "(Incidentally,) Paul was ordained to be a `crier.' 2 Tim. 1:11. And so is every faithful preacher. 2 Tim. 4:2.") According to Leviticus, Chapter 25, the doctrine and the Year of Jubilee ­ heralded by the "Trumpet of the Jubilee" ­ was a very big deal in the economy of God. Listen to the words: "And thou shalt number seven sabbaths of years unto thee, seven times seven years; and the space of the seven sabbaths of years shall be unto thee forty and nine years. Then shalt thou cause the TRUMPET OF THE JUBILE to sound on the tenth day of the seventh month, in the DAY OF ATONEMENT shall ye make the trumpet sound throughout all your land. And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty throughout all the land unto all the inhabitants thereof; it shall be a jubile unto you; and ye shall return every man unto his possession, and ye shall return every man unto his family. A jubile shall that fiftieth year be unto you; ye shall not sow, neither reap that which groweth of itself in it, nor gather the grapes in it of thy vine undressed. For it is the jubile; it shall be holy unto you; ye shall eat the increase thereof out of the field. In the year of this Jubile ye shall return every man unto his possession." (Lev. 25:8-13)  Thus we may freely render John's "crying in the wilderness" as John's lifting up his voice like a trumpet (Isa. 58:1), "loudly and lustily," "in the ears of a waste and wild people; ­ meaning the world, void of God's grace, barren in all virtue, having no pleasing abode, nor sure direction of any good way in it, being full of horror and accursed." 3 Trapp 378. "God hath not appointed US to wrath," saith the apostle to the suffering saints at Thessalonica, who had "turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God, and to wait for his Son from heaven." (1 Thes. 1:9) But all the rest of stinking mankind "ARE APPOINTED TO WRATH," saith John, implicitly, by his harsh, lusty, rhetorical question to the stinking, rotting gang of cut-throat, murderous Pharisees and Sadducees; to wit: "...Who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come?" Mat. 3:7b. Answer necessarily implicit in the rhetorical question: Nobody. Nobody has warned them to flee from the wrath to come. In fact, they ­ and all the nonElect ­ are deaf to such a warning ­ because God has stopped up their ears, blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, to such a warning. Because, in fact, God Himself hath APPOINTED them to wrath ­ APPOINTED them to Hell. 1 Pet. 2:8. "But when he (John) saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come to his baptism, he said unto them, O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come?" (Mat. 3:7)  Sunday, April 13, 2008 page 3  Sermon Outline  Beloved, you can bet that John the Baptist was speaking "loudly and lustily" when he put that  question to those filthy, vile and impenitent Pharisees and Sadducees. Picture the man John as the  Holy Spirit most accurately presents him; to wit: "And the same John had his raiment of camel's  hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins; and his meat (food) was locusts and wild honey."  Mat. 3:4. "For Herod himself had sent forth and laid hold upon John, and bound him in prison  for Herodias' sake, his brother Philip's wife; for he had married her. For John had said unto  Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother's wife. Therefore Herodias had a quarrel  against him, and would have killed him; but she could not. For Herod feared John, knowing  that he was a just man and holy, and observed him; and when he heard him, he did many  things, and heard him gladly." Mk. 6:17-20. Our Lord Jesus highly valued John and paid him  wonderful compliments; to wit:  "And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the multitudes concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness to see?...A prophet? yea, I say unto you, and more than a prophet...Verily I say unto you, Among them that are born of women there has not risen a greater than John the Baptist." (Mat. 11:7,9-11)  So, Beloved, when we are taught by such a man ­ speaking of eternal things, Heaven and Hell, with wonderful authority ­ we are, above all people on earth, greatly blessed. Where is the word "love" one time used in the recorded history of his life and ministry ­ as written and left for us by the Holy Spirit? John speaks of God's wrath, and eternal Hell, and the absolute necessity for true repentance and objective proof thereof, and the preeminence of Christ, and the urgency of the need for quick and decisive action if you would avoid "unquenchable fire." Of the preeminence of Christ, John said: "I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance; but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear; he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire." Mat. 3:11.  "He must increase, but I must decrease. He that cometh from above is above all; he that is of the earth is earthly, and speaketh of the earth; he that cometh from heaven is above all. And what he hath seen and heard, that he testifieth; and NO MAN RECEIVETH HIS TESTIMONY." (Note here, Beloved, that this Lord Jesus Christ whose coming was heralded by John the Baptist does not sound like the kissy pooh sissy Jesus universally touted by the preachers of today. John the Baptist said that virtually NOBODY would accept the Jesus described and identified by the Holy Spirit; to wit: "No man receiveth his testimony.") Jn. 3:30-32.  But read on. "He that hath received his testimony (none but God's Elect Remnant) hath set to his seal that God is true." (O my, how beautiful!) But read on. "For he whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God; for God giveth not the Spirit by measure unto him. The Father loveth the son, and hath given all things into his hand. He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him." Jn. 3:33-36.  Now, as to the urgency of the need for quick and decisive action if you would avoid "unquenchable fire," John the Baptist said: "Whose fan is in his hand, and he will throughly  Sunday, April 13, 2008 page 4  Sermon Outline  purge his floor, and gather HIS wheat (i.e., God's Elect Remnant) into the garner; but he will  burn up the chaff," (i.e., the non-Elect, cast inevitably into Hell) ­ I say, "burn up the chaff with  UNQUENCHABLE FIRE." Matthew 3:12 (Thereby blasting to smithereens all goofy doctrines  of the devil, like Purgatory and other such nonsense that gives the impenitent dead anything short  of eternal perdition in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone).  Arminian heretics ­ who fill the land ­ cannot stand the preaching of John the Baptist, although the Lord Jesus was very well pleased with John and predestinarian doctrines that exalt the sovereignty of God. The old preachers put it this way in their creeds and confessions of faith; to wit: "All things arise from and depend upon the divine APPOINTMENT." Put another way: "Whatsoever things happen in time, were decreed by God to happen in eternity past." In other words, at all times, think, GOD'S APPOINTMENTS.  Think: ABSOLUTE PREDESTINATION OF ALL THINGS. Now, see what peace and comfort is found in these words; to wit: "For God hath not appointed (i.e., predestinated) us to wrath (i.e., to go to Hell), but to obtain salvation (i.e., predestinated US to go to Heaven) by our Lord Jesus Christ." 1 Thes. 5:9. These poor Arminian fools ­ (that includes just about every preacher, priest and rabbi throughout the world) ­ I say, these poor Arminian fools, spend multiplied billions of dollars on splendid educational facilities to train young preachers, priests and rabbis ­ including religious libraries with millions of books ­ all in failed attempts to get a few key Bible passages not to mean something they plainly and clearly mean. E.g., Rom. 9:13 ­ "As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated."  "According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world...Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will...In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestinated according to the purpose of him who worketh all things after the counsel of his own will." (Eph. 1:4,5,11)  "And when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord; and as many as were ordained to eternal life believed." (Acts 13:48)  "And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing; and he doeth according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou?" (Dan. 4:35)  You had better admit it. Some people are absolutely predestinated to go to Heaven; and some are absolutely predestinated to go to Hell. And you can build all the religious libraries you want to, and train all the kissy-pooh preachers you want to; and you can spend all the billions and billions of dollars you can con some old rich woman about to die into giving you for more libraries ­ and it won't make a lickin' bit of difference.  Sunday, April 13, 2008 page 5  Sermon Outline  Some people are still predestinated to go to Heaven, and some people are predestinated to go to  Hell. If you find no comfort in the age-old doctrine of the Absolute Predestination of all things, it  is because you are lost and on your way to Hell. Read our text again:  "For God hath not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ." (1 Thes. 5:9)  You are kicking against the pricks. "I am Jesus whom thou persecutest; it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks." Acts. 9:5. You are stumbling at the word, being disobedient. Why? Because you were appointed (i.e., predestinated by God) to stumble at (i.e., rebel against) His word, being disobedient. Here is the exact language which the Holy Spirit has used in describing and identifying you Arminian scum; to wit:  "And a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, even to them which stumble at the word, being disobedient; whereunto they were APPOINTED." (1 Pet. 2:8)  Every individual of mankind will keep all God's APPOINTMENTS as to them. You are absolutely bound and controlled by PREDESTINATION ­ whether you believe in it or not. You cannot break those bands asunder, and God is laughing at you for trying. Psa. 2:4 ­ "He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh; the Lord shall have them in derision." God has an APPOINTMENT with every individual of mankind ­ except His Elect Remnant ­ for judgment, pursuant to Acts 17:31; to wit:  "Because he hath APPOINTED a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead." (Acts 17:31)  And, God has made an APPOINTMENT with every individual of mankind ­ except for those of His Elect Remnant who are alive and remain at the coming of the Lord, who will be raptured without tasting death (1 Cor. 15:6; 1 Thes. 4:15,17) ­ with every other individual of mankind God hath made an APPOINTMENT at death. To-wit:  "And as it is APPOINTED unto men once to die, but after this the judgment." (Heb. 9:27)  O yes, all those who do not make peace with God in this life ­ by kissing the Son (Psa. 2:12a ­ "Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little.") ­ I say, all such are destined to keep some fearsome APPOINTMENTS (i.e., exact times and places) with God at death and at the Great Judgment Day. Wherefore, Beloved, let us heed the solemn admonition from the dying Peter; to wit: "Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall. For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." 2 Pet. 1:10,11. Amen.  
