Sunday, May 3, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Now when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where was a synagogue of the Jews; and Paul, as his manner was, went in unto them, and three sabbath days reasoned with them out of the scriptures; Opening and alleging, that Christ must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead; and that this Jesus, whom I preach unto you, is Christ. And some of them believed, and consorted with Paul and Silas; and of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a few. But the Jews which believed not, moved with envy, took unto them certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the city on an uproar, and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them out to the people. And when they found them not, they drew Jason and certain brethren unto the rulers of the city, crying, These that have turned the world upside down are come hither also." Acts 17:1-6.  Thereupon Paul escaped the riot which was fomented by the Jews when they shamelessly hired ­ (no doubt, rich Jews think they can buy anything, and here the inference is clear) ­ "the Jews took unto  them certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the city (Thessalonica) on an uproar." Acts 17:5. The brethren led Paul away by night to Berea, "who coming thither went into the synagogue of the Jews." Acts 17:10. Now, Beloved, get this hateful act of the Jews, wherein they went out of their way to oppose and prohibit the preaching of Gospel truth by stirring up the rabble, no doubt by "certain lewd fellows of the baser sort;" to wit:  "But when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge that the word of God was preached of Paul at Berea, they came thither also, and stirred up the people." (Acts 17:13)  Again, the brethren were compelled to take Paul and flee by night all the way to Athens, to escape what  no doubt were demon-possessed Jews. Acts 17:15. These events in the life of the apostle Paul are typical, and reflect the truth of those words about the Jews from the "First Letter of Paul to the  Thessalonians;" to wit:  "For ye, brethren, became followers of the churches of God which in Judea are in Christ Jesus; for ye also have suffered like things of your own countrymen, even as they have of the Jews; Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own prophets, and have persecuted us; and they please not God, and are contrary to all men; Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their sins alway; for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost." (1 Thes. 2:14-16)  Yet, so far from these things embittering Paul against the Jews, in listing the objective evidences of his apostleship, Paul says, PROUDLY; to wit:  "Are they Hebrews? so am I. Are they Israelites? so am I. Are they the seed of Abraham? so am I. Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak as a fool) I am more; in labors more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths oft. Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, (etc., etc)." (2 Cor. 11:22-25)  Just as we are ordered by the dying Peter to give diligence to make our calling and election sure (2 Pet. 1:10), meaning that we are to strive mightily, ­ all day, every day, ­ to get a hold of some undoubted, objective, satisfying pieces of evidence that we are God's elect; e.g.: "Seeing ye have purified your  Sunday, May 3, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that ye love one  another with a pure heart fervently...But the end of all things is at hand; be ye therefore sober, and  watch unto prayer. And above all things have fervent charity among yourselves; for charity shall  cover the multitude of sins." 1 Pet. 1:22; 4:7,8.  "And ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake; but he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved." (Mk. 13:13)  "Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you." (Mat. 5:10-12)  Even so, we are ordered by the dying Paul to watch in all things, to endure afflictions, to do the work of an evangelist, and to make full proof of our ministry. 2 Tim. 4:5. "For so persecuted they the prophets which were before you" Mat. 5:12, is a measuring rod by which to measure holy things, like our calling and election (beside which nothing is more important); and, the persecuted apostle Paul's ministry itself is the measuring rod by which to gauge or measure "full proof of our ministry."  In other words, Beloved, compared to what the Holy Ghost has revealed to us in the Book of Acts and the Pauline Epistles, about the ministry of Paul, how do we measure up? I've given a lot of thought to this matter lately, and I think that we as a church ­ have a lot to be thankful for. How do we compare to the church of the Thessalonians in Paul's day? Did they suffer more persecution than we have? Remember, the measuring rod: "For so persecuted they the prophets which were before you." Mat. 5:12.  The Jew-sponsored Riot of Thessalonica of the year 53 A.D., as recorded in Acts 17:1-10, compares very closely to the Jew-sponsored Riot of the Topeka Vintage Fag Bar of the year 1993 A.D. Both events were faithfully recorded, such that we have all relevant facts timely and topically preserved for us ­ both contemporaneously to the event by a disinterested, eye witness scrivener (who signs himself The Reverend Father Walter W. Crum, pastor of the St. Augustine's Anglican Church of Topeka) March 30, 1993; and corroborated 12 years later (February 24, 2005) by a naive Capital-Journal news reporter and Margie, our loved one.  This latter incident came about when Time magazine wrote a story about us, WBC, and said something to the effect that Topeka is best known for our anti-homosexual stance. Well that Time magazine story set the Capital-Journal off on their tin ear and led them to tell another lie on us in another long list of lies masquerading as sanctified so-called "editorials." Well, Beloved, this time the Capital-Journal lie was a whopper ­ even for them.  For at least 18 years, we at Westboro Baptist Church have endured lies that seemed to be deliberately designed to rouse the rabble, and get us pipe-bombed, fire-bombed, and otherwise seriously vandalized and beat up ­ VERY MUCH like the apostle Paul was treated as recorded in the Book of Acts and in the Pauline Epistles, e.g., 2 Cor. 11:22-25. And, which causes us to be, ­ (in the words of the Lord Jesus) ­ "exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you." Mat, 5:10-12.  Make no mistake, Beloved; there has been, and is to this day, a direct correlation between the CapitalJournal's lies that stir up and rouse the rabble, and crimes of violence committed against our humble church and her loving people. At any rate, when the Time magazine said to the effect that Topeka is best known for our anti-homosexual ministry, the Capital-Journal cranked up their lie-machine, and said (in a strong editorial); to wit: "It's amazing that they (the Westboro Baptist Church members) haven't suffered violence for it." Say what? Here we have one of the primary causes of the rabble-rousing  Sunday, May 3, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  violence committed against us, all through the years, saying, not only that there has been no violence  committed against us all through the years, but that "It's AMAZING! that there has been NO!  VIOLENCE! committed against us."  Beloved, that is the very kind of stuff of which the worst kind of rabble-rousing violence is made. That kind of editorial fairly screams for the rabble to come; for two reasons; to wit: 1) These people have been getting by without any violence all these years, carrying those awful signs INVITING violence; and, 2) It's AMAZING that it should be so. They are due for some come-uppance, and nobody will ever be prosecuted for crimes committed against members of Westboro Baptist Church under these circumstances.  Well, Beloved, that was just one lie too many, ­ one lie more than our little Margie was willing to quietly accept, without at least trying to set the record straight. And in so doing, she not only had her letter printed as a valuable part of the daily C-J newspaper, seen by thousands of daily readers throughout the nation, ­ but also kept in the newspaper's archives as a permanent record to refute and condemn all future so-called "researchers," of a malignant frame of mind.  (Let me digress a little here, to encourage all those members of the church "that handle the pen of the writer," as did Zebulun in the Song of Deborah [Jgs. 5:14]; and to point out that Zebulun was also "a people that jeoparded their lives unto the death in the high places of the field." [Jgs. 5:18]. In the Wars of the Lord, Deborah is certainly suggesting ­ as they say ­ that, "They fought from heaven; the stars in their courses fought against Sisera." [Jgs. 5:20]. But, may they not also say, ­ in the Wars of the Lord ­ that "THE PEN IS MIGHTIER THAN THE SWORD?" [Jgs. 5:14,18]).  The opportunities to "handle the pen of the writer" abound for the members of the Westboro Baptist Church. The following letter is typical of thousands, and has been publishing the message of WBC since the Capital-Journal first printed it some four years ago; to wit: "Oh my goodness, you guys" ­ (i.e., The Topeka Capital-Journal Editorial Board) ­ "have plumbed lower depths of deceit and hypocrisy than I thought possible. First, you whine that Topeka is best known for our anti-homosexual stance. True, and you're welcome. What better reputation could a city have than having a rational and sensible phobia for a lifestyle as dangerous and destructive as homosexuality? I guarantee you that we are dancing in the streets over the fact that we made Time magazine, ­ which sends this message to an international audience. Second, you've got a lot of gall claiming this town has not answered us with violence. Is that some kind of a joke? Have I awakened this morning in a parallel universe? Not a month ago my son was struck in the face with a fist, while several other picketers were attacked. Where were you on March 26, 1993, when eight of us were put in the hospital? No violence! Are you kidding me? Only thousands of times have the people in this community responded with violence, you big, fat liars! With the so-called leaders of the town cheering them on! Don't misunderstand me; that fact changes exactly nothing. Like I told the City Council, we are going to stay on message. No matter how violent or deceitful you are. No matter the outcome of any petition, vote, ordinance or otherwise. We have stayed on message for 14 years, and will continue until Christ returns. Not to try and convince this stiff-necked generation; but to fulfill our duty to God and man to warn every person alive in our day to flee the wrath to come. Who among the citizens of Topeka over the age of two is going to stand in front of God and claim we didn't fulfill that duty to you? Margie Phelps. Topeka."  A short while after publication of her letter, the Capital-Journal printed a huge "CORRECTION," directly under the "EDITORIALS" page heading, dated Thursday, February 24, 2005; to wit: "The Topeka Capital-Journal, Editorial Advisory Board, Editorials, Westboro Baptist Church, CORRECTION, Margie Phelps, daughter of the Rev. Fred W. Phelps Sr. and a member of Westboro Baptist Church, says The Topeka Capital-Journal made an erroneous statement in an editorial on Wednesday. SHE'S RIGHT. (!) In the editorial commenting on a Time magazine article on the  Sunday, May 3, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  homosexual issue in Topeka, the statement was made that, `It's amazing that they (Westboro Baptist  Church members) haven't suffered violence for it.' OF COURSE, THAT'S ERRONEOUS. (!) THERE  HAVE BEEN NUMEROUS ACTS OF VIOLENCE DIRECTED AT THE PHELPS FAMILY OVER  THE YEARS. (!) THIS NEWSPAPER HAS NEVER CONDONED SUCH ACTS, (!) NOR DOES IT  TODAY. WE REGRET THE ERROR." (!)  Beloved, Baby Gabe's parents' house was pipe-bombed in the wee hours, doing damage to their vehicle and their house, ­ because the criminals thought it was my house, with murderous shrapnel ripping through walls near where four-day-old Baby Gabe lay sleeping. We caught the criminals with the offer of a reward; ­ (no thanks to officialdom) ­ and, local and federal authorities deliberately saw to it that only the ringleader ­ (it was a Washburn University student conspiracy) ­ I say, only the ringleader was actually charged, only in state court, and only 16 days in jail was the sentence. An official and a judicial outrage! ­ 15 to 20 years ­ minimum ­ anywhere else in the nation ­ anywhere else in the world. A bomb, at a church, where people were sleeping (!). An official and a judicial invitation for crimes galore against the church of the Lord Jesus Christ.  Beloved, these things mentioned today are typical of many thousands of gross miscarriages of justice ­ against WBC members ­ that we have documented; all of which gives us great rejoicing as being solid proof from our Father that our calling and election is sure (2 Pet. 1:10), and which constitutes proof of our ministry as being commissioned by God, as required by 2 Tim. 4:5; to wit: "Make full proof of thy ministry." Moreover we have been permitted to see amazing divine retaliations ­ which the old Puritans called "Earth Judgments" ­ upon some of those hooligan Jews, officials, judicial officers, etc.; to wit: "Some men's sins are open beforehand, going before to judgment; and some men they follow after." (1 Tim. 5:24)  For example, the Washburn University fags who nearly killed our Baby Gabe with an IED (Improvised Explosive Device), brought the 9/11 devastation upon this nation, which resulted in the imprudent invasion of Iraq, which in turn resulted in thousands of Iraqi homemade IEDs killing thousands of America's so-called brightest and best troops ­ torn to pieces by an angry God. Think of it, Beloved. Is it likely that a righteous and faithful God will long ignore the outrageous treatment of his humble servants engaged in nothing but the publication of His message?  Another example involves the Vintage Massacre, where a filthy Jew lawyer and judge pro tem (i.e. Jerry Berger) ­ hired "certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the city on an uproar, and assaulted" the helpless members of WBC on March 26, 1993. (See, and compare, Acts 17:5). God's Earth Judgments upon Harry (Butch) Felker, Mayor of Topeka and one of the primary official instigators, back-ground perpetrators, indispensable to the Vintage Massacre; ­ I say, his death ­ was a dreadful thing to behold. God killed Felker, though a relatively young man, and his death was exceedingly strange and painful, involving Herod's Disease of Worms; to wit:  "And immediately the angel of the Lord smote him...and he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost." (Acts 12:23)  Two high judges committed suicide. See also, Anglican minister Walter W. Crum's naive, 3/30/93, eyewitness contemporary account of the riot against WBC, in the form of a lengthy letter from Crum to The Honorable Harry Felker, Mayor of Topeka, dated March 30, 1993. Praise the Lord. "O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!" (Rom. 11:33)  I love you.  Amen.  
