Sunday, January 4, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan with all  power and signs and lying wonders, And with all deceivableness  of unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received  not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. And for this  cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should  believe a lie: That they all might be damned who believed not the  truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." 2 Thes. 2:9-12.  This passage of Scripture refers primarily to the final Antichrist Beast of Rev. 13 & 17, whom we have identified as Barack Obama, the President-elect of the United States of America, soon to be the most powerful man in the world, when he is sworn into office later this month. Think of it. This demon-possessed Beast will then be ­ MR. PRESIDENT ­ with all that such a thing portends. His Satanic finger will then be on the trigger of this nation's awesome nuclear stockpile and capability, as the Commander in Chief of the world's only super power; and as such, he will be the de facto ruler of the world. Throughout history, the coming of a supremely wicked character to rule the world briefly at the end of time, has been foretold. Such a man (the FINAL ANTICHRIST) is to be the repository of all the sins and evils of all SYMBOLIC Antichrists who have appeared now and then to curse mankind through the ages.  In other words, Antichrist Beast Obama will be possessed of the distilled wickedness of all the supremely evil men of history, such as Nimrod, Pharaoh, Antiochus Epiphanes, Caligula, Nero, Judas, the Popes, the whole hierarchy of Rome, Hitler, Stalin, etc. ­ each of whom may well be called "THE MAN OF SIN," and, "THAT WICKED ONE" ­ because notoriously sinful.  Gill: "Not only sinners, but sin itself, a sink of sin, monsters of iniquity, spiritual wickedness in high places; it is not easy to reckon up their impieties, their adulteries, incest, sodomy, rapine, murder, avarice, simony, perjury, lying, necromancy (i.e., communicating with the dead; Black magic), familiarity with the devil, idolatry, witchcraft, and what not? and not only have they been guilty of the most notorious evils themselves, but have been patrons and encouragers of others in sin; by dispensing with the laws of God and man; by making sins to be lawful; by licensing brothel-houses, and by countenancing all manner of wickedness; so that it is no wonder to hear of Antichrist also being called, `the son of perdition.'" 2 Thes. 2:3; Rev. 17:8,11. "Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God." (2 Thes. 2:4)  Gill: "`Who opposeth,' or, IS AN OPPOSER, an adversary of Christ; in other words, the ANTICHRIST, the one who specializes in opposing Christ" ­ (i.e., he is anti- against-Christ) ­ "in all His words and deeds; the very antithesis of Christ." 2 Thes. 2:3. Extremely cautionary words precede discussion of this matter; to wit: "Let no man deceive you by any means." 2 Thes. 2:3(a). (The clear implication being that extraordinarily powerful forces of deception will be at work at that time, calculated to deceive the very Elect of God, if possible; to wit: "For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders; insomuch that, IF IT WERE POSSIBLE, they shall deceive the very elect." Mat. 24:24.)  Sunday, January 4, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  The Final Antichrist matter is then immediately tied to the Second Coming of the Lord Jesus  Christ in power and glory ­ called, "the Day of Christ," "the Day of the Lord," "the Day of  Vengeance," "the Year (i.e., Day or Era or Season) of my Redeemed," etc., etc. ­ it is nothing  less than the End of the World, referring to the final and complete winding up of all the affairs of  this evil world, sine die. The apostle declares, that the Great Day CANNOT ­ "SHALL NOT" ­  "come, EXCEPT ... THAT MAN OF SIN BE REVEALED, THE SON OF PERDITION."  2 Thes. 2:3(b). And then, as if to emphasize the matter once more, ­ by placing his own integrity  on the line ­ the apostle says, "Remember ye not, that, when I was yet with you, I told you these  things?" 2 Thes. 2:5. What things? Why, the things contained about the coming of Christ, and  the coming of Antichrist just prior thereto; to include especially the things in our Scripture text;  to wit:  "Even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan." (2 Thes. 2:9[a])  Beloved, we know how Satan works. The Bible tells us how Satan works. He begins (in the beginning, i.e., in the Genesis of all things) ­ by corrupting and perverting the Word of God. See him as he slithers into the Garden of Eden, determined to destroy our first parents. Hear him as he begins to speak ­ the very first words out of his serpentine mouth; to wit: "YEA, HATH GOD SAID, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden: But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die. And the serpent said unto the woman, YE SHALL NOT SURELY DIE." (Gen. 3:1-4)  Beloved. Study that scenario carefully, because it is the original pattern of how Satan works; told by the Holy Ghost in the Book of Beginnings ­ Genesis; and when Antichrist comes, we are told in no uncertain terms, that his "coming is after the working of Satan;" i.e., by corrupting and perverting the plain Word of God. And so we find him misquoting and misapplying Scripture when tempting the Lord Jesus in the wilderness at the outset of His ministry on earth; to wit: "Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil." Mat. 4:1.  However, many have corrupted and perverted and misquoted and misapplied Scripture ­ without being the final Antichrist, WITHOUT HAVING SUFFICIENT POWER in their circumstances to do much more than talk. The final Antichrist, when he comes upon the scene, will have POWER sufficient to make his lying, perverting, corrupting of God's holy Scriptures ACCEPTED BY THE WHOLE WORLD ­ except for God's elect. Notice carefully the Words; to wit: "Even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan WITH ALL POWER and signs and lying wonders." (2 Thes. 2:9)  Words used heretofore only by and of the Lord Jesus; to wit: "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth." (Mat. 28:18)  See how this works in the case of Antichrist Obama. Obama says he will be a "fierce advocate" for so-called "gay rights" and "reproductive rights" ­ (i.e., unlimited and unrestricted abortions). God says, with great plainness of speech: "Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind; it is abomination." Lev. 18:22.  Sunday, January 4, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  Comes now Antichrist Obama and says, "Disregard Leviticus, because Leviticus also forbids the eating of shellfish;" a phony and a specious argument ­ but NOW BACKED WITH POWER (i.e., power to change the zeitgeist, the spirit of the times, what everybody believes is normal, power to make it believed by the whole world) ­ except those whose names are written in the Lamb's Book of Life from the foundation of the world. Antichrist Obama says he will be a "fierce advocate" for gay rights and reproductive rights. He says he will use the Bully Pulpit of the White House and the full weight of the Presidency to promote gay rights and unrestricted reproductive rights. The Bully Pulpit of the White House, plus the full weight of the United States Presidency, is a description of power in the year 2009 that is as close to "all power" in a human being (even in Antichrist Obama) AS IT GETS!  Now let us examine how Obama's arguments stand up when challenged by the servant of the Lord who is holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to confute (i.e., refute decisively) the gainsayers (i.e., like Obama). Titus 1:9.  Example #1: Obama says, in effect, that we must disregard Roman 1:18-32, because that passage is OBSCURE. Obscure means vague, ambiguous, unclear, murky, subject to more than one interpretation, hazy, indiscernible, hard to make out. The apostle Peter admits that some things are "hard to be understood," but adds that only the ignorant and the spiritually "unstable wrest (i.e., twist), as they do also the other scriptures, unto their own destruction." 2 Pet. 3:16. Only reprobates and heretics use such difficult passages to justify their own sinful conduct, and to "turn the grace of our God into lasciviousness." Jude 4. And, the Lord has graciously provided for all such instances of honest inability to fully understand this or that passage of Scripture; and He has assured us and all mankind that ENOUGH has been plainly revealed so that we and our children may fully obey that which WE DO UNDERSTAND; to wit: "The secret things belong unto the Lord our God: but those things which ARE revealed belong unto us and to our children for ever, THAT WE MAY DO ALL THE WORDS OF THIS LAW." (Deut. 29:29)  Furthermore, it is a Satanic LIE to say that Rom. 1:18-32 is obscure. That passage is crystal clear, easy to make out, and subject to only one interpretation; to wit: "When they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful; ... Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies (fags) between themselves (who else but fags?): ... For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections: for even their women did change the natural use into that which is against nature (who else but dykes?): And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust one toward another; men with men working that which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves that recompence of their error which was meet." Rom. 1:21-27.  Who else but fags, pray tell, could it possibly be? What part of that, Obama, don't you understand? OBSCURE? You wish! In your dreams, Antichrist Obama! Or were you counting on the probability that all others are as ignorant of the Bible as you are?  Sunday, January 4, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  Example #2: Obama says ­ with more particularity ­ that we must disregard Leviticus 18:22,23 ­ "Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is abomination. Neither shalt thou lie with any beast to defile thyself therewith.") ­ because Leviticus 11:7&12 forbids the eating of ham (swine) and oysters (whatsoever hath no fins nor scales in the waters) as an abomination. This is a false and a nonsensical argument, like the one about shellfish, ­ unworthy of an answer. The silly argument states: Since God will not allow me to eat ham and oysters, then I will freely practice sodomy and bestiality! To merely state the proposition is to dispose of it.  However, though false and nonsensical, I will answer it further; to wit: The whole word of God consisted of the moral law and the ceremonial law. Lev. 11 contains the dietary law of Moses for the Theocracy of the Nation of Israel ­ which is entirely ceremonial, and which was expressly abolished as being superseded by the Gospel dispensation; to wit: the Apostle Peter was in a trance at noon on a flat housetop in Joppa when a "great sheet" was lowered to him from heaven whereon were many unclean creatures, and a voice said, "Arise, Peter; slay and eat." But Peter said, "Not so, Lord: for nothing common or unclean hath at any time entered into my mouth. But the voice answered me again from heaven, "WHAT GOD HATH CLEANSED, THAT CALL NOT THOU COMMON." Acts 10:15; 11:4-9. Gill ­ like all expositors whatsoever ­ is short, pithy and conclusive on this point; to wit: "This denotes that the distinction of food under the ceremonial law was now ceased." But the beautiful doctrine contained symbolically in the ceremonial law is just as eternally binding today as the moral law that forbids sodomy and bestiality; to wit: "I am the Lord ... your God: ye shall therefore be holy, for I am holy...TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE between the unclean and the clean." (Lev. 11:45-47)  The New Testament doctrine which the Old Testament ceremonial law symbolizes is stated as follows: "But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should show forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvelous light." (1 Pet. 2:9)  Filthy fags fleeing from Lev. 18 to Lev. 11, is, "As if a man did flee from a lion, and a bear met him; or went into the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit him." Amos 5:19. The last thing in the world these freely fornicating faggots want is to be holy; but that is the crystal clear message of Lev. 11, as well as the balance of Scripture; to wit: "But as he which hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation; Because it is written, Be ye holy; for I am holy." (1 Pet. 1:15,16)  "And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation. These are the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel." (Ex. 19:6)  As for all Antichrist Obama sycophants, God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie; that they all might be damned who believed not the truth about Final Antichrist Obama. 2 Thes. 2:11,12.  Amen.  
