Sunday, July 6, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 1  "In meekness instructing those that oppose  themselves; if God PERADVENTURE will give  them REPENTANCE to the acknowledging of  the truth." 2 Tim. 2:25.  This verse, together with its context, makes a beautiful bouquet of what we may call Gospel flowers. First, take the word "meekness." When you hear the word "MEEK," you ought immediately to think of "God's Elect," for only the MEEK will He guide in judgment; and only the MEEK will He teach His way; and it is only to the MEEK that all the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth; and it is only the MEEK that keep His covenant and His testimonies. Psa. 25:9,10. It is only the MEEK that savingly HEAR the Gospel, because it is only to the MEEK that the Lord Jesus Christ deigns to savingly preach the Gospel; to wit:  "The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings (the Gospel) unto the MEEK." (Isa. 61:1[a])  And it is only the MEEK ­ and none but the MEEK ­ who will survive the Judgment Day and be saved; to wit:  "Thou, even thou, art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry? Thou didst cause judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth feared, and was still, When God arose to judgment, to SAVE ALL THE MEEK of the earth. Selah." (Psa. 76:7-9)  Now, Beloved. Please do not let some kissypooh, sissified, faggy-assed preacher define for you what "meekness" means. It is a Bible word, and the Bible defines itself. I repeat, When you hear the word "MEEK," immediately think "MOSES." MOSES is the grand Bible example of MEEKNESS; to wit: "And Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses ­ (that is to say, the blood-brother and blood-sister, conspired together to gossip and bad-mouth Moses) ­ i.e., they:  "Spake against Moses because of the Ethiopian woman whom he had married; for he had married an Ethiopian woman. And they said, Hath the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses? hath he not spoken also by us? And the Lord heard it. (Now the man Moses was very MEEK, above all the men which were upon the face of the earth.) And the Lord spake SUDDENLY unto Moses, and unto Aaron, and unto Miriam, Come out ye three unto the tabernacle of the congregation. And they three came out. And the Lord came down in the pillar of the cloud, and stood in the door of the tabernacle, and called Aaron and Miriam: and they both came forth. And he said, Hear now my words: If there be a prophet among you, I the Lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a  Sunday, July 6, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 2  dream. My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine house. With  him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark  speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold: wherefore then  were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses? And the anger of  the Lord was kindled against them; And the cloud departed from off the  tabernacle; and, behold, Miriam became leprous, white as snow: and  Aaron looked upon Miriam, and behold, she was leprous...And Moses cried  unto the Lord, saying, Heal her now, O God, I beseech thee."  (Num. 12:1-10,13)  Thus you have the text and the context wherein it was grandly announced ­ and clearly and forever established ­ that the man Moses was very MEEK, above all the men which were upon the face of the earth. Remember, moreover, that this Moses was the man who dealt forcefully and manfully with the world's greatest tyrant Pharaoh, led all the mighty armies of Egypt into watery graves in the Red sea, dashed the tablets into little pieces when he caught the people in wild sex orgies, presided over the deaths and public consignments into Hell of hundreds of thousands of his people whose carcasses fell over a period of 40 years in the wilderness, etc., etc. True Bible MEEKNESS has to do with the fear of Him who is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell, and with humbling oneself under the mighty Hand of God that in due season He may exalt you; i.e., MEEK before God. 1 Pet. 5:6; to wit:  "Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time." (1 Pet. 5:6)  None but the MEEK shall inherit the earth, AND the Kingdom of God, showing that none but God's Elect are the MEEK. Mat. 5:5. Recently, at a press interview, this issue was reached, circuitously, due to a series of stupid, clumsy, foolish and unlearned questions that I had put up with way too long. Finally, I quoted this text, beginning with the first verse in the oracle, as my justifiable, Bible reason for refusing to answer further questions unless the dialogue was elevated; to wit:  "But foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do gender strifes. And the servant of the Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient, in MEEKNESS instructing those that oppose themselves; if God PERADVENTURE will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth; And that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his will (or, to do his will)." (2 Tim. 2:23-26)  Well my dear ­ when that TV reporter heard the words that I must be GENTLE unto all men, and, In MEEKNESS instructing those that oppose themselves ­ that reporter practically POUNCED into action. You see, Beloved, all those turkeys equate Bible gentleness and  Sunday, July 6, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 3  Bible meekness with kissypooh, sissified, faggy-assed preachers. And all of them have  sloppy-agape, sissified notions of Jesus, too. All of them! You take, for example, one of the  news releases we published last week; to wit:  "God Hates the U.S. Military, Thank God for 87 more soldiers killed in June. Yes. We at WBC know these American troops well. Many are fags and dykes. Many are what the Bible calls Chaff-People, meaning they are absolutely worthless (otherwise called Belials) ­ fit only to be killed in battle or via suicide, or some other cheap and easy way ­ and then be cast into Hell, there to be tormented for ever by Him who is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell. Mat. 10:28. AMERICA is DOOMED. We pray earnestly every day for the speedy destruction of this evil nation that has persecuted WBC just for preaching the Gospel; to wit: `And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him? I tell you, saith Christ, that he will avenge them speedily.' Lk. 18:7,8. Pray for Many More Dead and Mutilated Soldiers."  Now, THAT is a fair sampling of the kind of Gospel preaching that pours out of WBC day after day, all across the country, all around the world ­ timely and topical ­ laying the ax to the root of the trees ­ John the Baptist style (i.e., who hath warned you vipers and hypocrites to flee from the wrath to come? There cometh one after me, whose shoes I am unworthy to untie, and He will baptize you with the Holy Ghost and fire, and He will burn up the chaff (Chaff-People) with fire unquenchable ­ like a voice crying in the wilderness ­ instant, in season, out of season ­ reproofs, rebukes, exhortations ­ with all longsuffering and godliness ­ and bathed in prayer, with all kinds of prayers and supplications unto Him, Who hath poured out upon us at WBC a spirit of grace and supplications. Zech. 12:10.  A simple, honest, straight-forward comparison of our preaching with that of the prophets and the apostles and other writings generally as recorded in the Bible, will convince any fairminded and half-way intelligent person ­ not only that our preaching is Bible preaching, but that it is topical, that is, it addresses the signs of the times; it is God's Word applied to the providential situations as they arise day by day, on the ground, in country, as they say. Those who say they believe what we say is Truth, but they don't like the way we say it ­ or rather, the spirit in which we preach it; I say, those who say that, declare that they do not know God, and they reflect ONLY the spirit of error; and they are lost souls on their way irreversibly and inescapably to Hell; to wit: "We are of God: he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us. Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error." (1 Jn. 4:6) Beloved. When these Earth-Dwelling Chaff-People CAVIL at our preaching ­ (CAVIL: a false or frivolous objection, to quibble, to jeer or mock, to raise captious objection, to find fault without good reason, to carp) ­ I say, when they CAVIL at our preaching ­ i.e., when they refuse to "hear us" ­ i.e., when they refuse to embrace our preaching warmly and join us heartily in our humble efforts to serve the Lord ­ they thereby manifest the "spirit of error" ­ and we thereby discern the "spirit of error." The spirit of error is none other than  Sunday, July 6, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 4  demon-possession; i.e., "the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience." Eph.  2:2. So, when some interviewer from some hot-shot TV network or radio talk show raises  the objection that we are not "gentle" enough, or "meek" enough; Beloved! That's the Devil  talking!  "Let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience." (Eph. 5:6)  Some silly, self-confessed dyke whore wrote an editorial in Houston critical of the way we served God in publishing our sermon about the 91-year-old fag, Kermit Love, dying and going to Hell; wherein we warned all living fags as follows: "I have no hesitancy in declaring that all you living fags, who live in fag sins, and die in fag sins ­ will ultimately and inevitably join Kermit Love in Hell ­ there to be tormented by the Lord Jesus Christ and his holy angels and people, personally, for ever and ever." Rev. 14:10. Mind you. This was a self-confessed dyke whore ­ and a self-confessed WITCH to boot.  She denigrates any Bible study at all, and to her, all Bible preaching is at best an utter waste of time, and, at worst, is a positive harm to society, and ought to be outlawed and criminalized. And, Beloved, the vast, overwhelming majority of mankind today agrees with her! We are indeed in the last days of the last days. These are the days wherein God long ago foretold that He would send a worldwide famine of Gospel preaching; to wit:  "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord: And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it." (Amos 8:11,12)  Gill says in expounding this passage:  "But something worse (than slow starvation and dying of thirst) is here threatened; but of hearing the words of the Lord; the word of prophecy, and the preaching of the word, or explaining the Scriptures. The words of the Lord are the Scriptures, which come from him, and are concerning him; the doctrines of grace contained in them, the wholesome words of Christ; hearing them signifies the preaching of them, Isa. 53:1; Gal. 3:2, by which hearing comes, and is a great blessing, and should be attended to, as being the means of conversion, regeneration, the knowledge of Christ, faith in him, and the joy of it. Now, to be deprived of hearing the Gospel is a spiritual famine, for that is food, bread, meat, milk, honey, yea, a feast; it is food that is savory, wholesome, nourishing, satisfying, strengthening, and comforting; and when this is taken away a famine ensues, as when a church-state is dissolved, ministers are ordered to preach no more in such a place, or are scattered by persecution, or removed by death, and none raised up in their stead; or when error prevails, to the suppressing of truth; all which is done, or suffered to be done, for indifference to the word of  Sunday, July 6, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 5  God, unfruitfulness under it, and contempt of it, and opposition to it; which is a  dreadful case, when such a famine is; for the glory, riches, and light of a nation,  are gone; bread for their souls is no more; and the means of conversion,  knowledge, comfort, etc., cease; and people in course must die, for lack of these  things; see Isa. 3:1; Hos. 4:6."  Beloved, what God Himself declares to be the most important thing in the world, blasphemous mankind today totally DENIGRATES ­ (yes, today, TOTALLY DENIGRATES; which means, to deny the validity or importance of; to belittle; to calumniate the character or reputation; to blacken; to defame). Listen to the benighted wisdom of the self-confessed dyke-whore-witch from Houston ­ wherein she pretty well speaks for the masses of mankind today; to wit: "Go work in a soup kitchen! People don't eat in this country, and you're worrying about some guy having fag sex (up the rump) with another guy? Or a lady enjoying the sensual pleasures of another lady? Honestly." Here is the translation: "Quit preaching the Gospel. Preaching is a worthless waste of time ­ pure garbage. Feed the poor in a soup kitchen. That has some societal value." She is demonpossessed, and her father the Devil is speaking through her, even the Satanic spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience. Eph. 2:2. And these demonic spirits indwell and energize all of mankind in these last of the last days; which explains why there is no true Gospel preaching in the world today; to wit:  "For the PREACHING of the cross is to them that perish foolishness; but unto us which are saved it is the POWER of God. For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of this world? hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? For after that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the FOOLISHNESS of PREACHING to save them that believe." (1 Cor. 1:18-21)  Last Sunday after church I gave the visiting French film crew an exclusive interview ­ which they apparently thought was hot stuff, since Shirl said the international media community knows that I refused to give the BBC an interview because I didn't like the star of the show ­ big mouth Louis Theroux. Anyway, Jill the translator for the interviewer asked me what will happen to the church when I die. To which I answered that I expected the Lord to come before I die, but if not, the church of the Lord Jesus Christ is composed of living stones, who will reach a unanimous conclusion as to the pastor, each member esteeming others better than themselves, as see Phil. 2:3; to wit: "Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory; but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than themselves." And, I proceeded to quote a kindred passage from Eph. 4:32; to wit: "And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, FORGIVING one another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you."  Sunday, July 6, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 6  Well, my dear. As soon as I hit that word FORGIVING, that girl came alive. She bounded  like a cat upon it ­ like she had been anxiously looking all her life for to catch me using that  word, FORGIVE. Well, she said, can't you just forgive the gay community? I said, I'm  laboring under a severe handicap ­ you are so deep down Bible dumb, it's hard to handle  such a goofy question. I said there is no forgiveness without repentance. We face such  foolish and unlearned questions every day. That passage and those words describe the nature  of the relationship that exists between members of a true New Testament church, a genuine  golden candlestick community of believers functioning with Christ as the head and the Holy  Spirit as the indwelling Comforter. Those verses don't work for impenitent, anal-copulating  fags!! There is no forgiveness without repentance. And the last thing in the world fags want  to do is repent. Never! They live to fornicate and to practice all manner of filthy sex acts on  each other ­ day and night ­ 24/7! And, they are PROUD of their godless lives of impenitent  rebellion against God.  We just passed through the month of June ­ now called Gay-Pride Month. Filled with filthy Gay-Pride festivities ­ the World over! Filled with Gay-Pride parades, with naked fags and dykes strutting down the main streets of cities all over the world from New Dehli, India, to Rome, Paris, New York, Mexico City, Miami, San Francisco ­ and hundreds if not thousands more. Flaunting their filth and degradation, total depravity, and degeneracy. I say, Flaunting, Touting and Bragging about their sins ­ not the least bit interested in repenting ­ which carries with it the duty to thoroughly abandon and forsake all known sin ­ including, especially all fag sins of the flesh. Furthermore, Fags CANNOT REPENT, because Fags are PROUD of their sins, and the filthier and more abominable their sins are, the better Fags like them. So, French visitors with your lights and cameras, forget about either God or us forgiving Fags. These animals want to be forgiven willy nilly ­ without repenting. It won't happen. Forget about it. Every last one of you fags and fag-enablers are going to Hell. Be smart. Take some wisdom home to France with you.  FIRST: It is an axiomatic matter of fact ­ that the whole world knows is bedrock truth; to wit: Nobody is going to Heaven when they die except those who have sincerely repented of and forsaken their abominable sins; and, SECOND: It is an axiomatic matter of fact, that nobody is going to repent of and abandon their abominable sins who are at the same time PROUD of their abominable sins; to wit:  "Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore they shall fall among them that fall: at the time that I visit them they shall be cast down, saith the Lord." (Jer. 6:15)  Meaning, cast down to Hell. Every last one of these filthy, impenitent fags and fag-enablers are going to Hell ­ which includes all mankind ­ except for a "VERY SMALL REMNANT." Isa. 1:9. Deal with it, you perverts. Anathema Maranatha. 1 Cor. 16:22. That is, Come quickly, Lord Jesus and send the damned to Hell. Amen.  
