Sunday, January 27, 2008 page 1  Sermon Outline  "My word hath no place in you...ye cannot hear my word."  John chapter 8 contains some golden nuggets of truth, straight from the lips of our Lord Jesus Christ. First, He spent the night in prayer on the Mount of Olives. Then verse 2 says: "And early in the morning he came again into the temple, and all the people came unto him; and he sat down, and taught them." (Jn. 8:2) And then, 59 verses later ­ after a lengthy discourse containing some of the most glorious teaching ever heard on this sick earth ­ those miserable Jews took up stones to kill Him. The discourse ended like this: ­ (see if I have misrepresented this event) ­ to wit:  "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day; and he saw it, and was glad. THEN SAID THE JEWS unto him, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham? Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am. THEN TOOK THEY UP STONES TO CAST AT HIM: but Jesus hid himself, and went out of the temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by." (Jn. 8:56-59) These murderous Jews were heavy on the mind of Jesus, as he preached. Many Jews repented, and believed on the Lord Jesus Christ. The others wanted to kill Jesus on the spot. Some Jew named Ruthie called in to a radio program I was on last Thursday and said that I hated Jews and that I therefore was anti-Semitic. I do not hate Jews ­ but I say that Jews must come to Jesus Christ for salvation on the same terms and conditions as anybody else. You won't get a free pass because you are a Jew. And you won't intimidate me by calling me names ­ anti-Semitic or anything else. Listen to these words from John 8:30-32 to wit: "As he spake these words, MANY believed on him. Then said Jesus TO THOSE JEWS which believed on him, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." (Jn. 8:30-32)  A golden nugget of truth from the lips of our Savior. But a Jew like Ruthie, who called in to talk to me on the radio program, is ­ spiritually ­ as blind as a bat, and she needs to be preached to, held over the flames of Hell, preached to hard, ­ or there is no hope at all that Ruthie the Jew can go to Heaven when she dies. She wanted to read to me from Gen. 1:27; and when she had done so, she made the argument that it was proof from the Bible that sodomy was OK, that it's OK to be gay. Beloved, this may be the silliest bit of Bible exegesis ­ or Bible commentary ­ ever given. Here is Gen. 1:27, that Ruthie the Jew read on the radio; to wit: "So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them." Ruthie the Jew said that that verse proves it's OK to be gay, ­ in full demonstration of the fact that God Almighty has stricken the Christ- rejecting Jews with His judicial blindness, as it is written in Romans 11: 7-10; to wit:  Sunday, January 27, 2008 page 2  Sermon Outline  "What then? Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for; but  THE ELECTION hath obtained it, and THE REST WERE BLINDED  (According as it is written, God hath given them the spirit of slumber,  eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear;)  unto this day. And David saith, ­ (in fervent prayer to God) ­ Let their  table be made a snare, and a trap, and a stumblingblock, and a  recompence unto them: Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not  see, and bow down their back alway." (Rom. 11:7-10)  These are strong, so-called imprecatory prayers ­ ("imprecatory" means to pray for God to bring evil things upon a person; a curse) ­ these verses in Romans are prayers of David ­ imprecatory prayers ­ but very acceptable to God, ­ (who answered those prayers by striking unbelieving Jews with judicial blindness to this day) ­ and that kind of praying was also acceptable to Paul the Jew, who chooses to quote from ­ (and adopt as his own) ­ David's imprecatory prayers. I say, my conversation with Ruthie the Jew, perfectly illustrates this passage of Scripture. And I, as a minister of Christ, refuse to walk gingerly around Jews like walking on egg shells, lest somebody would yell, ANTI-SEMITE!  Speaking directly to the Jews of His day, our Lord Jesus Christ was very uncompromising ­ (Jesus was a straight, plain, hard, no-nonsense preacher ­ not a kissy-pooh preacher); and very straight-forward; to wit: "Then said Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and shall die in your sins: whither I go, ye cannot come." Jn. 8:21 Then said THE JEWS, Will he kill himself? ­ (this is a typical, frivolous, blinded Jew response) ­ because he saith, Whither I go, ye cannot come. (Listen up, you blind Jew bastards who will not receive the chastening of the Lord, and who therefore are bastards, not sons. That's what God called you, and put it in the Bible for me to preach to you. Heb. 12:8).  "But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons." (Heb. 12:8)  Listen up, you blind Jew dummies, "Whither I go ye cannot come", means I am going to Heaven, and you cannot go to Heaven. You are going to Hell. Deal with it.  "And he said unto them, Ye are from beneath (doomed earthdwellers); I am from above: ye are of this world (this doomed, soon-to- be-destroyed-with-fire world, ­ make no mistake); I am not of this world. I said therefore unto you, that ye shall die in your sins: for if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins."  And so, following the example of my Savior, Captain, and Divine Pattern, I say unto Ruthie the Jew, that if you believe not that Jesus is the Christ, the Messiah, the Son of the Living God ­ you will die in your sins; and you will thereupon join Heath Ledger in Hell, where, throughout eternity, you two can swap fairy tales like saying that Gen. 1:27 proves it's OK to be gay, and like making the movie "Brokeback Mountain" was just fine with God.  Sunday, January 27, 2008 page 3  Sermon Outline  Moreover, we learn from the words of Christ Himself that the experience WBC is having with exposing the evils of the movie "Brokeback Mountain", as well as exposing the eternal destiny of Heath Ledger as being torment in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, the fires of Hell ­ excites murderous rage throughout the world. Since we announced that we would picket the funeral of Heath Ledger, we have been inundated by literally thousands of murderous phone calls and email ­ from around the world ­ literally ­ from around the world. Hear again the words of Christ:  "If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham. But now ye seek to KILL ME, a man that hath told you the truth, which I have heard of God: this did not Abraham. Ye do the deeds of your father." (Jn. 8:39-41)  These fags disagree with WBC (and with the Bible); but nothing will satisfy them short of murder, if that's what it takes to silence the publication of Gospel truth. This fact is repeatedly stated by the Lord Jesus; to wit: "I know that ye are Abraham's seed, but ye seek to kill me, because my word hath no place in you." Jn. 8:37. This doctrine is just SO precious. The doctrine infuriates the non-Elect to the point of murdering the Elect. The doctrine appears to be that God has planted His word in the heart of each of His Elect; but not in the hearts of the nonElect. And so it is, that when the Elect hear the Word of God preached, a responsive chord is struck, such that the heart of the sheep resonates with that of the Shepherd. Thus the Elect have no inclination to kick against the pricks; but to the contrary; his heart sings with the throb of 1,000 "Amens."  With the non-elect, the exact opposite occurs. Super-active hate and vicious, murderous enmity arise at the preaching of the Gospel; to wit: "And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed." Gen. 3:15. There it is. And we require no further evidence as to the cause of all this bloody, murderous hatred that we must face and deal with every day. In the infinite wisdom of God it is so, and we would have it no other way. Plain and simple is His word to us: "Even so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight." Lk. 10:21. Beloved, we are dealing every day with people who are Bible dumb, dumb, dumb. Including these clowns calling themselves "reverend," "doctor of divinity," and "rabbi." Bible dumb, dumb, dumb. Why? Well, the Lord Jesus answered that question, following a rhetorical question of His own; to wit: "Why do ye not understand my speech? EVEN BECAUSE YE CANNOT HEAR MY WORD." What little bit of Gospel you pick up by accident, Satan ­ who is your father ­ immediately snatches away; to wit:  "And these are they by the way side, where the word is sown; but when they have heard, Satan cometh IMMEDIATELY, and taketh away the word that was sown in their hearts." Mk. 4:15.  Our duty is to preach the Gospel to every son and daughter of Adam. Mk. 16:15. And a part of that Gospel is to tell them that most of them are deaf, dumb, and blind, and otherwise are too hard-hearted to accept our message; and that what little of Gospel preaching (seed) might  Sunday, January 27, 2008 page 4  Sermon Outline  otherwise take hold and grow within them, is IMMEDIATELY snatched away by Satan, their  father. And so, their situation is hopeless.  And to make matters infinitely worse for them, we must also preach to them, that the Devil, ­ who is always close by them to IMMEDIATELY snatch God's word from their heart ­ THAT DEVIL IS THEIR FATHER! Deal with that solemn fact. God is not your father, you ignorant wretch! The Devil is your father, and God has told you so in words so plain that a wayfaring man, though he were a fool, shall not err therein. Isa. 35:8. To wit: "Why do ye not understand my speech? even because YE CANNOT HEAR MY WORD." Jn. 8:43. We preach it, crystal clear ­ but they don't have the hearing-ear equipment to hear His word. It's like a dog whistle. The dog can hear it ­ but humans cannot. Wrong frequency. The sheep (God's Elect) can hear God's word ­ (e.g., "God Hates Fags! & Fag-Enablers!" and "God Hates America") ­ But the goats (the non-Elect), cannot hear a thing from God. For the non-Elect, Jesus had the following plain, clear words; to wit:  "Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it." (John 8:44)  Note: That there are two lusts ascribed to Satan, which his children are said to predominantly and consistently "do." Indeed, they so regularly and famously "do" these two things, that they are identified by them as Satan's children. Like father; like son, so to speak. Those two things are murder and lying. Jn. 8:44. "Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father YE WILL DO." Jn. 8:44.  Some goofy editor favored us with another editorial this week ­ as did a multitude of such editors. This has been a busy week. In seeking to correct our message from God ­ whom she admitted she knew very little about ­ she said, "It's like my father always used to tell me when I would do something wrong ­ he didn't hate me, he hated what I had done wrong. It is my belief that God is similar to my parents ­ while he may see the sin itself as an abomination, HOW COULD HE HATE ANYONE HE HAS CALLED HIS CHILD...who are we to put the word `hate' in God's mouth?"  This is typical of the many thousands of such editorials that we get. Every pinhead editor suddenly becomes a great theologian when it comes to writing about us. And such a writing will be Exhibit "A" in the case against you before the Great White Throne when the books are opened. We are warning all of you bloggers and editorial writers and clever, smart-mouth columnists who take up your lying, murderous pens and write scandalous, profane, and Satanic garbage about WBC. It was an especially evil day in the saga of your miserable, self-absorbed life, when it entered your wicked heart to malign Westboro Baptist Church with your silly editorial:  Sunday, January 27, 2008 page 5  Sermon Outline  "But I say unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment. For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned." (Mat. 12:36,37)  We are solemnly warning all you smart-mouth pundits who sit around idling away the time, and suddenly, moved and energized by your father the Devil, you decide to jump on WBC with your poison pen. You will pay dearly when the Lord God comes to your pitiful case in the Courts of Heaven. To the editor referred to above; Listen up, smart-mouth: God is not your father; and you are not His child. You are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father you will do. Your editorial maligning WBC is sufficient evidence ­ in and of itself ­ to prove that God is not your father; and you are not His child. Satan is your father, and he is leading you to Hell. Continuing the same theme, the Lord Jesus said to his disputants immediately after telling them that Satan ­ not God ­ was their father, and calling them liars and murderers ­ I say, immediately thereafter, Jesus says to them as follows; to wit:  "And because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not...He that is of God (God's Elect) heareth God's words ­ (i.e., heareth His words warmly, believes them completely, accepts them as being from God, and makes them a part of his life); ­ ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God." (Jn. 8:45,47)  The response of the Jews upon hearing such devastating pronouncements of their lost condition, was to attack Jesus with baseless, slanderous and irrelevant, ad hominem lies ­ (like they do us today) ­ to wit:  "Then answered the Jews, and said unto him, Say we not well that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil? Now we know that thou hast a devil. Art thou greater than our father Abraham, which is dead? and the prophets are dead: whom maketh thou thyself? Jesus answered, your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day; and he saw it, and was glad. Then said the Jews unto him, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham? Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am. Then took they up stones to cast at him: but Jesus hid himself, and went out of the temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by." (Jn. 8:48,52,53,56-59)  Amen.  
