Sunday, March 9, 2008 page 1  Sermon Outline  "Beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea." Hos. 1:2.  Hosea 1:2 is a remarkable verse of Scripture. It consists of two sentences ­ a short one, followed by a long one; to wit: "The beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea (short sentence). And the Lord said to Hosea, Go, take unto thee a wife of whoredoms and children of whoredoms: for the land hath committed great whoredom, departing from the Lord (long sentence)." Hos. 1:2. The short sentence announces a wonderful change in the dispensation of God's dealings with the sons of men, in making His Word to be preserved by His prophets ­ in writing ­ for all future generations. In his great work, "The History of Redemption" ­ (which was put together and published some 15 years after his death by his son, Jonathan Edwards Jr.) ­ Jonathan Edwards commented on this unusual change of dispensations in God's providential dealings with mankind; to wit: "Thus the prophets, even from Samuel's time ­ (indeed, I say, `God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began.' Acts 3:21) ­ but, even from Samuel's time, the prophets had been adding to the canon of scripture by their HISTORICAL writings. But now, in the days of Uzziah (792-740 B.C.), did God FIRST RAISE UP A SET OF GREAT PROPHETS, not only to write HISTORIES, but to write books of their PROPHECIES. The first of these is thought to be Hosea the son of Beeri, and therefore his prophesy, or the word of the Lord by him, is called the beginning of the word of the Lord; as Hos. 1:2. `The beginning of the word of the Lord by, (or, "in"), Hosea;' that is, the beginning, or the first part, of the written word of that kind, viz., that which is written in books of prophesy. There were many other witnesses for God raised up about the same time, to commit their prophesies to writing, Isaiah, and Amos, and Jonah, and Micah, and Nahum, and probably some others; and so from that time forward God seemed to continue a succession of what we may call, "WRITING PROPHETS."  What a wonderful expression: The Writing Prophets. Not only the "Preaching Prophets" ­ which is a glorious name ­ but, now, the "Writing Prophets." Edwards says, "This was a great dispensation ­ (i.e., a dispensation is the manner in which God deals with mankind during a certain period of time) ­ "This was a great dispensation of Providence, and a great advance made in the affair of redemption. The main business of these Writing Prophets was to foreshow Christ and his redemption. They were all forerunners of the Great Prophet. The main end why the spirit of prophecy was given them was, that they might give testimony to Jesus Christ, the great Redeemer, that was to come; and therefore the testimony of Jesus, and the spirit of prophecy, are spoken of as the same thing; to wit: Rev. 19:10. ­ `And I fell at his feet to worship him: and he said unto me, See thou do it not: I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus: worship God: for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.'" Rev. 19:10. Now, Beloved, having summarily announced to the world, for all mankind and for all time and eternal ages to come, that God was herewith and henceforth altering His dispensations by raising up a set of great men to be known as the WRITING PROPHETS, to herald the coming of the Great Redeemer ­ I say, having made such a spectacular announcement, the first words out of the prophet Hosea's mouth were these; to wit:  Sunday, March 9, 2008 page 2  Sermon Outline  "And the Lord said to Hosea, Go, take unto thee a wife of whoredoms and  children of whoredoms: for the land hath committed great whoredom,  departing from the Lord." Hos. 1:2(b).  And, what's more amazing, and instructive, for our learning ­ the two announcements are in the same verse: ­ Hos. 1:2. Now, I know that the King James translators are the men who arranged the verses. But ­ Beloved ­ there is usually some legitimate, vital reason for what the King James translators did. They were brilliant and dedicated men, in the first place; and, the overruling Hand of the faithful and all-wise God was in control, thereby to keep his Word pure for His people ­ in the second place. Nothing in the Bible is more clearly said than this; to wit:  "The words of the Lord are pure words: as silver tried in a furnace of earth, purified seven times. Thou shalt keep them, O Lord, thou shalt preserve them from this generation for ever ­ (i.e., God will keep His word from being corrupted by this, and all other generations, as smartass generations arise and pass on; pass on to eternal damnation, still cursing His word that condemns them)." (Psa. 12:6,7)  "My zeal ­ (i.e., zeal for thy word) ­ hath consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy words. Thy word is very pure: therefore thy servant loveth it. I am small and despised: yet do not I forget thy precepts." (Psa. 119:139-141)  "Every word of God is pure: he is a shield unto them that put their trust in him." (Prov. 30:5)  "Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the ONLY WISE GOD, be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen." (1 Tim. 1:17)  So, here is a situation, where the only wise God ­ the all-powerful God ­ has committed Himself to do one thing; to wit: To keep His Word pure throughout the whole human experience. Beloved. It is highly probable that the second, the long, sentence of Hos. 1: verse 2, is just exactly where it ought to be; to wit: right next to and right behind the first, the short, sentence of Hos. 1: verse 2. See how it goes again: "The beginning of the word of the Lord by (or, `in') Hosea (first, or short, sentence). And the Lord said to Hosea, Go, take unto thee a wife of whoredoms and children of whoredoms: for the land hath committed great whoredom, departing from the Lord (second, or long, sentence)." Hos. 1:2. The two sentences have been put in the same verse, deliberately, by the Holy Spirit, for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of THIS scripture might have hope. Rom. 15:4. The first sentence announces the inauguration of a glorious new dispensation, to be known as the era of the WRITING PROPHETS. The immediately- following sentence, placed jam up against the first, gives the central theme of just what it is that the Writing Prophets will be writing ­  Sunday, March 9, 2008 page 3  Sermon Outline  from Isaiah 1:1 to Malachi 4:6 ­ generally ­ a huge section of the Bible; to wit: "For the land  hath committed great whoredom, departing from the Lord. Hos. 1:2(b).  It is generally conceded that the prophets all pointed to the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. Yet the THEME is "WHOREDOMS," and, as John Trapp puts it, "Most frequently and most filthily. Aholah (that is, Israel) played the harlot when she was mine, so that she might say, with that impudent strumpet Quartilla, that she could never remember herself a virgin; yea she grew old in her adulteries, opening her feet to every passenger, and multiplying her whoredoms." Ezek. 16:25.  Note, Beloved, The Writing Prophets did thus and thereby preach up the Lord Jesus Christ. Those who did not decry the soul-damning whoredoms in the land did NOT preach Jesus Christ, but rather some sissified idol, because idolatry is always accompanied by adultery. Even so today, those who do not expose and identify sodomy and all uncleanness in this our sin-soaked culture, do not preach the Lord Jesus Christ of the Bible, ­ however many times they mouth His Name and sing the sissified praises of their substitute girly-man christ. John Trapp, who is usually the soul of brevity and pithy comment in his 5-volume exposition of the whole Bible ­ I say, that same John Trapp fairly explodes with colorful words ­ pages of them ­ when he comes to expound Hos. 1:2(b) ­ "Go, take unto thee a wife of whoredoms and children of whoredoms: for the land hath committed great whoredom, departing from the Lord." Hos. 1:2(b).  Trapp calls this, "An uncouth precept, and a rough beginning for a young preacher, whose youth might be despised, and whose sharpness might be disgusted. But truth must be spoken, however it be taken; and a preacher should take the same liberty to cry down sin, that men take to commit sin." And then Trapp uses the same verse to support his argument that we often use to support the ministry of Westboro Baptist; to wit: Isa. 58:1  "Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins." (Isa. 58:1)  Jerome of Prague (1375-1416) was called "The Church Thunderbolt;" whose bold and uncompromising preaching led to his martyrdom by fire and his ashes thrown into the Rhine River. The great 16th Century Calvinist, William Perkins (1558-1602), was said to have "applied the word so closely to the consciences of his hearers, that he was able to make their hearts fall down and their hairs to stand on end."  In calling and ordaining His twelve apostles, it is written that, "And he ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach." Mk. 3:14. In doing so, He nicknamed or surnamed some of them. "And James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James; and he surnamed them Boanerges, which is, The sons of thunder." Mk. 3:17. Gill says that Christ so surnamed them Boanerges (Sons of Thunder), "either because of their loud and sonorous voice; or their warm zeal for Christ, and fervency in their ministry; or for their courage in opposing the enemies of Christ, and the power that went along with their words; which either put to confusion and silence, or issued in conviction and conversion."  Sunday, March 9, 2008 page 4  Sermon Outline  Beloved. Let each of us aspire to such a name. And that our Lord Jesus Christ should regard us  in such a way as to be worthy of such a name. Westboro Baptist Church, ­ whose members are  ­ each one of them ­ Tachmonites and Sons of Thunder.  As was our first great Writing Prophet, Hosea, ­ as evidenced by his book of powerful words. E.g., "Go, take unto thee a wife of whoredoms." Hos. 1:2(b). To which, Trapp says, "An arrant whore, a stinking strumpet from the stews (brothels), a known and trite harlot, such as were Thais, Lais, Phryne, etc. ­ (here the actual names of famous whores in John Trapp's day were identified ­ pursuant to the Bible injunction, `Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear.' 1 Tim. 5:20.) ­ and such a one as, after marriage with a former husband at least, went astray after other sweethearts; for so the application of the figure to the subject, Hosea, chap. 2, requireth it to be understood. Whereby it appears (says Diodati) that all this was done in a vision. Others infer as much from the phrase in this verse, `The beginning of the word of the Lord in Hosea,' that is (says Polanus), appearing and speaking to him by an inward vision, as it were by an ecstasy. Besides, in the third chapter and three first verses, the young prophet is told to marry another harlot, to buy her for his own use, and to keep her at his house for a time. Now, says Calvin, we know that this was never really done. It follows therefore that this figure was only proposed to the people, that they might perceive, in the looking glass of this allegory, first, their duty towards God second, their disloyalty; thirdly, their penalty for the same. It is not an historical narration, but a prophetical vision."  And, next, "Go, take unto thee... children of whoredom." Hos. 1:2(b). Children of fornication. A bastardly brood such as this "adulterous and sinful generation" (Mk. 8:38) which we now find ourselves to be living in. Sons of the rebellious and whorish woman, children of Satan (Jn. 8:44), children of transgression, and, "a seed of falsehood." Isa. 57:4.  "But draw near hither, ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of the adulterer and the whore. Against whom do ye sport yourselves? against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? are ye not children of transgression, a seed of falsehood?" (Isa. 57:3,4)  The Hebrews call such children brambles, such as Abimelech was, who grew in a hedgerow of a harlot; they call them also Mamzer, as ye would say, a strange blot; and Shatuki, or silent, because when others are praising their parents, such must hold their peace, and hold down their heads with shame.  Gill says, "It seems best to understand the whole as a parable, and that the prophet, in a parabolical way, is bid to represent the treachery, unfaithfulness, and spiritual adultery of the people of Israel, under the feigned name of an unchaste woman, and of children begotten in fornication; and to show unto them that their case was as if he had taken a woman out of the stews," ­ (note that old Anglo-Saxon word, "stews", which means common brothels or cheaprate whorehouses), ­ as though Hosea had said in his preaching, `you folks have treated God as badly as if I had taken me a woman out of some cheap whorehouse, with her bastard kids, to become my wife and family; or, as if a wife married by him had defiled his bed, and brought  Sunday, March 9, 2008 page 5  Sermon Outline  him a spurious brood of children that he thought were his, when in fact they were not his, nor  was she a faithful wife.  "That is," says Gill, "the inhabitants of the land of Israel ­ the 10 northern tribes ­ have committed idolatry, which is often in Scripture signified by adultery and whoredom; as an adulterous woman deals treacherously with her husband, so these people had dealt with God, who stood in such a relation to them; see, Jer. 3:1,6,9."  This interprets the parable (i.e., of Gomer and her children), and shows the reason for using these graphic symbols and emblems (i.e., of Gomer and her children); to wit: "They say, If a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become another man's, shall he return unto her again? shall not that land become greatly polluted? ­ (Beloved, America is now similarly "greatly polluted," by the same multiplicity of marital and sexual irregularities as Israel, Judah, and the antediluvian world as it was in the days of Noah.) ­ but thou hast played the harlot with many lovers; yet return again to me, saith the Lord." Jer. 3:1.  "The Lord said also unto me in the days of Josiah the king, Hast thou seen that which backsliding Israel hath done? she is gone up upon every high mountain and under every green tree, and there hath played the harlot...And it came to pass through the lightness of her whoredom, that she defiled the land, and committed adultery with stones and with stocks." (Jer. 3:6,9)  Trapp: "IDOLATRY IS SPIRITUAL WHOREDOM in many respects. It defiles the soul, God's bridal-bed. It breaks the marriage-knot, and discovenants. It enrageth God, who in this case will take no ransom. It subjecteth men to God's deepest displeasure; it besots them and unmans them. Lastly, IDOLATRY IS SELDOM WITHOUT ADULTERY, in a proper sense; as appears in the old heathens at their feasts of Priapus and Lupercalia. The Canaanites had filled the land from one end to another with their uncleanness." Ezra 9:11.  "Which thou hast commanded by thy servants the prophets, saying, The land, unto which ye go to possess it, is an unclean land with the filthiness of the people of the lands, with their abominations, which have filled it from one end to another with their uncleanness." Ezra 9:11.  Beloved, that uncleanness that forever doomed the Canaanites is plainly set forth in Lev. 18:1723; to wit: incest, adultery, sodomy, and bestiality. When one adds Jer. 3:1 marital irregularities (50+ percent divorce and remarriage), WBC is prepared to discern the signs of the times pursuant to Mat. 16:3; to wit: AMERICA IS DOOMED. Amen.  
