Sunday, November 23, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 1  "For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of  Gomorrah; their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters  are bitter; Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the  cruel venom of asps. Is not this laid up in store with me,  and sealed up among my treasures?" Deut. 32:32-34.  Here is an elegant, mystical metaphor that tells more about fags and fag-enablers (aka, Sodomites) than they wish to be told. About 20 years ago, in response to a so-called "Homosexual Manifesto," which was widely circulated and published in the Congressional Record ­ I say, in response to that scandalous faggot Manifesto, I wrote and published, what I titled, "A Compendium of Bible Truth About Fags." Therein, I referred to the passage in our text as follows; to wit: "Sodomites are wicked and sinners before the Lord exceedingly (Gen. 13:13)..., and they produce in society a kind of mass intoxication from their wine made from grapes of gall from the vine of Sodom and the fields of Gomorrah, poisoning society's mores with the poison of dragons and the cruel venom of asps (Deut. 32:32,33)."  I had occasion to read that filthy "Homosexual Manifesto," again recently, to see what progress the Sodomites have made in achieving their Satanic agenda in the last 20 years; and I tell you, Beloved, it is amazing. It is nothing short of spectacular, the progress fags have made toward achieving their Satanic goals. It is simply impossible to explain ­ short of a supernatural Satanic miracle; to wit:  "And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death; and his deadly wound was healed; and all the world wondered after the beast. And they worshipped the dragon which gave power unto the beast; and they worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the beast?" (Rev. 13:3,4)  Supernatural Satanic miracles. Listen to the loud, bombastic prognostications of the Fag Manifesto; to wit: "We shall sodomize your sons, emblems of your feeble masculinity, of your shallow dreams and vulgar lies. We shall seduce them in your schools, in your dormitories, in your gymnasiums, in your locker rooms, in your sports arenas, in your seminaries, in your youth groups, in your movie theater bathrooms, in your army bunkhouses, in your truck stops, in your all male clubs, in your houses of Congress, wherever men are with men together. Your sons shall become our minions and do our bidding. They will be recast in our image. They will come to crave and adore us."  That, Beloved, is the opening paragraph of the Filthy Fag "Manifesto," as reprinted from The Congressional Record of the United States of America. Now, today, some 20 years after its vile publication ­ who can deny that those filthy fags' boasts and threats have been largely fulfilled? And who can deny that God Almighty, in His precious Word, has warned us that these dreadful days would come?  "As it was in the days of Lot..., so shall it be when the Son of man is revealed." (Lk. 17:28,30)  "But the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners before the Lord exceedingly." (Gen. 13:13)  Sunday, November 23, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 2  The expression "before the Lord," means they were arrogant, defiant, blasphemous, sacrilegious,  right in God's face, daring God to do anything about it, flipping God the bird, right in His Holy  Face, in the utmost extremity of impudence ­ in a word, "The men of Sodom were wicked and  sinners before the Lord EXCEEDINGLY" ­ i.e., TO THE MAX, just as they are today, as  reflected in the "Homosexual Manifesto," as recorded in The Congressional Record of the  United States of America ­ since Feb. 15, 1987 ­ more than 20 years ago.  Now hear these filthy fags condemn themselves at paragraph #2 of their bombastic Manifesto of Satanic Evil; to wit: Women, you cry for freedom. You say you are no longer satisfied with men; they make you unhappy. We, connoisseurs of the masculine face, the masculine physique, shall take your men from you then. We will amuse them; we will instruct them; we will embrace them when they weep. Women, you say you wish to live with each other instead of with men. Then go and be with each other. We shall give your men pleasures they have never known because we are foremost men too, and only one man knows how to truly please another man; only one man can understand the depth and feeling, the mind and body of another man."  I say, UGH. BARF. Shortly after we at Westboro Baptist Church took to the streets of America, in a great picketing crusade to warn this evil nation about the dangers of fags and dykes taking over the country, ­ and about 18 years ago ­ a group of older teenage boys from the First Southern Baptist Church accosted us at our picket at 15th and Gage Blvd. ­ their church being four blocks from where we were picketing. To my amazement ­ and to my education as an unhappy and most unpleasant learning experience, indeed ­ those Southern Baptist teenagers began making the same argument the second paragraph of the fag manifesto was making; to wit, that same-sex sex is more satisfying than heterosexual sex, because men know how to please other men better than women do.  Well, Beloved, I thought, "If the Southern Baptist teenagers have sunk to such depths of Satanic debauchery and decadence and degeneration and depravity ­ what, in Heaven's name, is going on amongst the others?" A reporter asked me the other day, ­ that, since I was so condemnatory of the sexual mores of American society today, ­ "what kind of sex-education did I have in the public schools of your day?" I said, "Let me tell you a story. When my grandfather Pat Johnston had been courting my grandmother Minnie Hawkins for a year or two in Alabama, he finally gave her a little peck on the cheek. She worried about that kiss for weeks, that she might have sinned, that she might be pregnant, that she might have disgraced the family, etc., etc. And THAT" ­ I told the reporter ­ "was all the sex education I had; and THAT was all the sex education I needed. Something deadly, something fatal, has taken over the mores of America, and the Zeitgeist (i.e., the spirit of the times) of the world.  One important point I failed to cover in my sermon last week, had to do with the Third of the Three Great Epics of the world; to wit, The turning of the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, and condemning them with a fiery overthrow, or holocaust. In many ways, the Third Epic was trivial, compared to the First Two Epics; to wit: Epic #1, And God spared not the Angels that sinned; and Epic #2, And God spared not the old world, i.e., the antediluvian (before the Flood of Noah) world. Both the Fall of Angels, and the drowning of the whole antediluvian world, involved the final doom of hundreds of millions ­ possibly even billions ­ of rational, intelligent creatures; and the casting of them into eternal Hell. Whereas, in the case of Sodom  Sunday, November 23, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 3  and the other three cities of the plain, ­ (the Third Epic event of the world) ­ no more than 16  million souls were reduced to ashes and cast into Hell in an instant.  The explanation seems to be the intensity of the filthiness, the unspeakable impudence of the creature toward the Creator, and the enormity of the sins of the Sodomites ­ all of which was most especially obnoxious and abominable in the Eyes of God. Just Lot was vexed with the filthy behavior of the entire population, and Just Lot's Righteous soul was vexed all day, every day, 24/7, with the UNLAWFUL DEEDS OF THE ENTIRE population, (see, "But before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of Sodom, compassed the house round, both old and young, ALL THE PEOPLE from every quarter," Gen. 19:4). Moreover, those vile beasts appear to have put their filthy abominations into law, making it a punishable offense to criticize or oppose them in any way (think, Canada, Sweden, the UK, etc., etc.); to wit: "This one fellow (Lot) came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge; now will we deal worse with thee than with them. And they pressed sore upon the man, even Lot, and came near to break the door." (Gen. 19:9)  The angels had to hands-on, physically save Lot, at the very last minute; and the Lord God delivered Lot finally and permanently from the rabble-rousing rioters of Sodom, by sending a fiery holocaust that turned all their bodies, instantly, into cinders, and cast their vile, filthy souls into eternal Hell. The Zeitgeist, the mores, and conditions generally that prevailed systemically throughout Sodom, are further described at Jude 7; to wit: "Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire." (Jude 7)  Gill says that the expression, "GOING AFTER STRANGE FLESH," means: "Not other women besides their own wives, but men; and designs that detestable and unnatural sin, which, from these people, is called sodomy to this day; and which is an exceeding great sin, contrary to the light of nature and the law of God, dishonorable to human nature, and scandalous to a nation and a people, and commonly prevails where idolatry and infidelity do, as among the Papists (i.e., Roman Catholics) and Mahometans (i.e., Muslims); and arose from idleness and fulness of bread in Sodom, Ezek. 16:49, and was committed in the sight of God (i.e., openly, arrogantly, impudently and blasphemously, right in His Face), with great impertenance, Gen. 13:13."  Beloved, does not all this sound ominously familiar? Are not conditions now ripe for the next and final Great Epic? To wit: the Second Coming of our dear Lord Jesus, in power and great glory. "For the coming of the Lord draweth nigh." Jas. 5:8.  And now hear the third blasphemous paragraph of the filthy Fag Manifesto; to wit: "All laws banning homosexual activity will be revoked. Instead, legislation shall be passed which engenders love between men."  Beloved. Think of the United States Supreme Court, a couple of years ago, dipping their metaphorical pens in Satan's slime and scratching out a Hellish ruling in Lawrence vs. Texas, holding not only that Texas nor any other state can outlaw sodomy; but that we all MUST RESPECT FILTHY SODOMITES.  Sunday, November 23, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 4  It is as though the judges have all read the filthy Fag Manifesto, and are determined to fulfill all  its Satanic and ungodly prognostications. And in case the court has not gone far enough or  quickly enough, comes now Antichrist Obama, breathing preliminary brimstone, and promising  to use the President's office and powers (including his Bully Pulpit) to enact the full panoply of  so-called "pro-gay" laws, ­ same-sex marriage and all ­ and promising to criminalize all Gospel  preaching on the subject, under the specious rubric of "hate speech" laws, ala Canada, Sweden,  etc. Incidentally, the female Member of Parliament (MP) who wrote us a threatening letter last  week about arresting us if we come to Canada ­ I say, that woman is a dyke. We now have her  picture.  "The show of (her) countenance doth witness against (her); (she) declares (her) sin as Sodom, (she) hides it not. Woe unto (her) soul ! for (she) has rewarded evil unto (herself)." (Isa. 3:9)  Fags and dykes absolutely control all aspects of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, just as they do every important decision-making and policy-making position in the governments of Canada, Sweden, the UK, America, etc., etc. All pursuant to the so-called 20-year-old "Goals of the Homosexual Movement," as promulgated in the "Homosexual Manifesto."  Listen to these further prognostications of militant fags; to wit: "All churches who condemn us will be closed. Our only gods are handsome young men. We adhere to a cult of beauty, moral and esthetic. The exquisite society to emerge will be governed by an elite comprised of gay poets. One of the major requirements for a position of power in the new society of homoeroticism will be indulgence in the Greek passion. Any man contaminated with heterosexual lust will be automatically barred from a position of influence. All males who insist on remaining stupidly heterosexual will be tried in homosexual courts of justice and will become invisible men."  Meanwhile, fags and fag-enablers are salivating at the prospects of achieving great things from president-elect Obama and his hordes of Sodomites, to whom Obama has promised the moon and all the stars in this galaxy, so to speak. Both houses of Congress also are filled to the brim with Sodomites. Never before in history has a great power been so thoroughly aligned to work the filthy will of demon-possessed fags and their sycophants. Not since the destruction of Sodom in 1898 B.C. ­ that's 4,000 years. Beloved, stupendous things are happening. "Is not the coming of the Lord drawing nigh?" Jas. 5:8. Every day brings fresh, new evidence that the end of the world is near.  "And he that hath this hope in him purifieth himself even as He is pure." (1 Jn. 3:3)  "And, behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me." (Rev. 22:12)  For example, CNN reported last week that Obama is plotting how best to lift the ban on fags and dykes serving openly in the U.S. military. Even now, our military is filled with fags and dykes. It is a badly kept secret that the rule and the law about no fags and dykes in the military is widely ignored and even flaunted. The CNN story says that: "Obama has pledged to lift the ban on gays serving openly in the U.S. military." "The lead sponsor of a bill to overturn the U.S. military's controversial Don't Ask ­ Don't Tell policy said the law could be overturned in the first year of President-elect Obama's term. Two months ago, Obama signaled he would move cautiously,  Sunday, November 23, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 5  telling the Philadelphia Gay News newspaper he would first get the military on board. Obama  said, `Although I have consistently said I would repeal Don't Ask ­ Don't Tell, I believe that the  way to do it is to make sure that we are working through processes, getting the Joint Chiefs of  Staff clear in terms of what our priorities are going to be,' he said. A bill to replace the law with  a policy that would allow gays to openly serve has 149 co-sponsors in the house, including  California's Ellen Tauscher, dem. She said with a new administration, the timing is right to try  to pass the bill."  Beloved. The armed forces and nuclear weaponry of the world's only remaining super power will soon be in the complete control of Sodomites. Just as the Fag Manifesto said, 20 years ago; to wit: "We will unmask the powerful homosexuals who masquerade as heterosexuals. You will be shocked and frightened when you find that your presidents and their sons, your industrialists, your senators, your mayors, your generals, your athletes, your film stars, your television personalities, your civic leaders, your priests are not the safe, familiar, bourgeois, heterosexual figures you assumed them to be. We are everywhere; we have infiltrated your ranks. Be careful when you speak of homosexuals because we are always among you; we may be sitting across the desk from you; we may be sleeping in the same bed with you."  Beloved, as leaven secretly, quietly, mysteriously, works its way throughout every particle of the bread dough, making it rise; we are told that the sinister forces of evil work, permeating society until the whole is fatally and irreversibly corrupt; to wit: "Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump?" 1 Cor. 5:6. America will soon be saturated ­ totally controlled by fags and dykes. Nuclear weapons and all. Fearful thought. See how the Fag Manifesto of 20 years ago predicts their ultimate victory; to wit:  "We shall be victorious because we are fueled with the ferocious bitterness of the oppressed who have been forced to play seemingly bit parts in your dumb, heterosexual shows throughout the ages. We too are capable of firing guns and manning the barricades of the ultimate revolution. Tremble, hetero swine, when we appear before you without our masks."  The picture the Manifesto paints of every Sodomite who ever lived, is the same picture the Bible paints. Beloved, it would be impossible to exaggerate the filthiness and the abominable nature of fags and dykes. If you are not powerfully, overwhelmingly, and daily VEXED by their filthiness, and VEXED by their lawlessness, then, God's word for it, you are not JUST, and you are not RIGHTEOUS, and you are on your way to Hell with your friends, the fags and the dykes. (2 Pet. 2:7.8).  Furthermore, you are DRUNK on the bitter wine made from the grapes of gall from the vine of Sodom which grows only on the fields of Gomorrah ­ all as more fully set out and described in our text for today; to wit: "For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah; their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter; Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps. Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures?" (Deut. 32:32-34)  Amen.  
