Sunday, March 8, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "These are the statutes and judgments, which ye shall observe to do  in the land, which the Lord God of thy fathers giveth thee to possess  it, all the days that ye live upon the earth. (FIRST, FOREMOST, SINE  QUA NON ­ WITHOUT WHICH NOTHING). YE SHALL UTTERLY  DESTROY ALL THE PLACES, wherein the nations which ye shall  possess served their gods, upon the high mountains, and upon the  hills, and under every green tree; And ye shall overthrow their altars,  and break their pillars, and burn their groves with fire; and ye shall  hew down the graven images of their gods, and destroy the names of  them out of that place. YE SHALL NOT DO SO UNTO THE LORD  YOUR GOD. (Forget about all these weirdo strange gods and their  gadgets when it comes to the one and only legitimate place and  manner for public worship of the only Lord God Almighty. Keep it  simple!). But unto THE PLACE WHICH THE LORD YOUR GOD SHALL  CHOOSE OUT OF ALL YOUR TRIBES TO PUT HIS NAME THERE,  EVEN UNTO HIS HABITATION SHALL YE SEEK, AND THITHER THOU  SHALT COME." Deut. 12:1-5.  Beloved. There is a great and mighty principle at work here, involving the legitimate public worship of God; and, for the days in which we find ourselves living, involving the dignity, authority, and exclusivity of the local church; to wit: "But if he (anyone) neglect to hear" ­ (i.e., simply neglect to submit himself to the final ecclesiastical and moral authority of the local church) ­ "the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican. Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven...For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them." Matt. 18:17-20. And, "Jesus saith unto her, Woman, believe me, the hour cometh, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father... But the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshipers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth; for the Father seeketh such to worship him." Jn. 4:21-23.  Right here is the simplest expression and definition of a New Testament church ­ and it is awesome to consider. The principle is further demonstrated in the holy ministry of 30-year-old ­ presently-then-imprisoned ­ John the Baptist; to wit: "For I say unto you, Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist; but he that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he. And all the people that heard him, and the publicans, justified God, BEING BAPTIZED WITH THE BAPTISM OF JOHN. But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, BEING NOT BAPTIZED OF HIM." (Lk. 7:28-30) Right here let me observe two things: 1) This great host ­ consisting of millions of lying religious organizations ­ from Pope Benedict the 16th's so-called churches on every corner, to Obama's WHOF-BNappy (HO-church, for short) tax-paid folly ­ I say, these great hosts of organizations are not legitimate places wherein public worship is acceptable to God; and, 2) It was when Obama usurped the office of National American Pope, and Senior Pastor of the National Prayer Breakfast with tax-paid offices in the White House ­ I say, when I saw these things coming to pass, I  Sunday, March 8, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  determined to preach upon the doctrine of the Local Church and its holy indicia or infallible  watermarks of identification; to wit: water baptism by immersion of penitent sinners only; Lord's  Supper of wine and unleavened bread for members walking orderly only, 5-point Calvinism  theology, church discipline practiced rigorously, local and visible called out assembly, democratic  form of church government, separate from all others. Beloved, God has established His Church,  identified it by certain evidences, and invested it with full power and plenipotentiary authority to  act and speak in His Name.  It is dangerous to usurp its holy prerogatives, as did king Uzziah of old, and as Obama is doing in a most brazen, grievous and arrogant fashion at present ­ in fact, WBC is herewith citing the experiences of king Uzziah as specific warning from God, lest Obama continue in his Hell-bound ways to the utter destruction of himself and his nation; Obama, and the citizens of the United States of America, may readily see that the case with king Uzziah was much better ­ (i.e., easier to defend) ­ than is the case with Obama; to wit:  "Then all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in the room of his father Amaziah... Sixteen years old was Uzziah when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty and two years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Jecoliah of Jerusalem." ­ (Here we should take note that ­ unlike Uzziah's good and respectable parents, Obama's mother was something of a white trash tramp, and his father was a black African dead-beat and fornicating dad who left him and his mother penniless when Obama was two years old, never to return.) ­ "And he (king Uzziah) did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his father Amaziah did." ­ (Here we should note, that it could not possibly be said that Obama EVER did that which was right in the sight of the Lord; for, Obama's hands drip with the blood of millions of innocent babies whom Obama assisted in aborting, including the blood of his own grandchild, in the event one of Obama's two daughters should "make a mistake, I don't want them punished with a baby.") ­ "And he (king Uzziah) sought God in the days of Zechariah, who had understanding in the visions of God; and as long as he sought the Lord, God made him to prosper. And he went forth and warred against the Philistines, and brake down the wall of Gath, and the wall of Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod, and built cities about Ashdod, and among the Philistines." ­ (Note: This shows king Uzziah's amazing military and nation-building prowess, unequaled in human history.) ­ "And God helped him against the Philistines, and against the Arabians that dwelt in Gurbaal, and the Mehunims." ­ (Such military prowess and nation-building success has yet to be demonstrated by Obama, although he talks a good fight; whereas good king Uzziah has a golden resume in the bank. But bitter days are coming ­ probably for Obama. Certainly for Uzziah.) ­ "And the Ammonites gave gifts to Uzziah; and his name spread abroad even to the entering in of Egypt; FOR HE DID STRENGTHEN HIMSELF EXCEEDINGLY. Moreover Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem at the corner gate, and at the valley gate, and at the turning of the wall, and fortified them. Also he built towers in the desert, and digged many wells; FOR HE HAD MUCH CATTLE, BOTH IN THE LOW COUNTRY, AND IN THE PLAINS; HUSBANDMEN ALSO, AND VINE DRESSERS IN THE MOUNTAINS, AND IN CARMEL; FOR HE LOVED HUSBANDRY." ­ (Note: this shows king Uzziah's amazing success in all other peaceful endeavors; to the immeasurable improvements in his country's agriculture, "green," commercial and environmental concerns ­ without which no nation can survive and prosper as an independent empire.)  Sunday, March 8, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  "Moreover Uzziah had an host of fighting men, that went out to war by bands, according to the  number of their account by the hand of Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the ruler, under the hand  of Hananiah, one of the king's captains. The whole number of the chief of the fathers of the  mighty men of valor were two thousand and six hundred. AND UNDER THEIR HAND WAS  AN ARMY, THREE HUNDRED THOUSAND AND SEVEN THOUSAND AND FIVE  HUNDRED, THAT MADE WAR WITH MIGHTY POWER, TO HELP THE KING AGAINST  THE ENEMY." ­ (Note: This describes a great military/industrial complex, second to none.  Obama ­ as president of the United States of America ­ looks like a Troop Leader of a Boy Scout  Patrol compared to Uzziah. Even as president of the world's only Superpower. But more is  coming, in demonstration of king Uzziah as far superior to Obama. State-of-the-art weaponry and  defensive fortifications also now demonstrate Uzziah's favor with God; to wit:) ­ "And Uzziah  prepared for them throughout all the host shields, and spears, and helmets, and  HABERGEONS, and bows, and slings to cast stones. And he made in Jerusalem engines,  invented by cunning men, to be on the towers and upon the bulwarks, to shoot arrows and great  stones withal. AND HIS NAME SPREAD FAR ABROAD; FOR HE WAS MARVELOUSLY  HELPED, TILL HE WAS STRONG." 2 Chron. 26:1-15.  And now, Beloved, the spectacular story of the life and times of king Uzziah, takes a sad turn for the worse, which may place it at the head of the list of sad stories ­ UNTIL OBAMA CAME ALONG, THAT IS. Let us finish the sick, sad tale of king Uzziah ­ for it is, indeed, finished. And, fortunately, we have an absolutely historically accurate account of Uzziah's life story ­ as related and preserved for us by the Holy Ghost. Obama's story is yet to be told to the finish. But, as we finish king Uzziah's tale, I ask that you compare it with what we know of Obama's ongoing and winding up tale. Bearing in mind as we go, that Obama has lifted up his hand against the Lord's church and people ­ as king Uzziah did, to his destruction. And, bearing in mind also that Obama has usurped the position as pastor of his own counterfeit church ­ holding himself out, blasphemously, as one of the Lord's holy stars which He holds in His right hand; to wit: "The mystery of the seven stars which thou sawest in my right hand, and the seven golden candlesticks. The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches; and the seven candlesticks which thou sawest are the seven churches." (Rev. 1:20) In brief, as an outline, I say, The Idiot Man Obama has held himself out as a counterfeit pastor of the counterfeit National Prayer Breakfast Church, and he holds himself out as Bishop of the WHOF-Bnappy (White House Office of Faith-Based Partnerships) (HO-church, for short) with her tax-paid headquarters in the White House.  Now let us parallel the historic fall of king Uzziah with the predictable or prophetic fall of Obama aka The Anti-christ; to wit: "But when he (king Uzziah) was strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction; FOR HE TRANSGRESSED AGAINST THE LORD HIS GOD," ­ (HOW? In what way did he transgress against the Lord his God? Did we not read of king Uzziah, `And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his father Amaziah did?' 2 Chron. 26:4. ­ What happened to good king Uzziah?) ­ "But when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction; (BANG ! ) FOR HE TRANSGRESSED AGAINST THE LORD HIS GOD, (BANG ! ), AND WENT INTO THE TEMPLE OF THE LORD TO BURN INCENSE UPON THE ALTAR OF INCENSE." 2 Chron. 26:16.  Sunday, March 8, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  Beloved. There you have it! The one thing that doomed king Uzziah was his profane usurpation ­  i.e., unholy desecration of the ONE, HOLY PLACE that God had chosen to put his name. And,  that is exactly the transgression of Obama. He thinks he's been elected POPE, and he doesn't  even recognize the temple of God known as Westboro Baptist Church ­ let alone the Pastor of  Westboro Baptist Church known as Fred Phelps ­ as anything other than a cartoon character to be  vilified and banned from all human society.  Let us follow the story line to the destruction of the mighty king Uzziah, once he had decided to desecrate that which God had selected from among men as holy; to wit: "And Azariah the priest went in after him, and with him fourscore priests of the Lord, that were valiant men; And they withstood Uzziah the king, and said unto him, It appertaineth not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense unto the Lord, but to the priests the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense; go out of the sanctuary; for thou hast trespassed; neither shall it be for thine honor from the Lord God." ­ (It showed great disrespect for the profound things of God in the PLACE God had chosen; a PLACE where every item, every act, every ceremony, every day ­ had a profound meaning. It was deadly serious business.) The altar of incense was about 40 inches high and 20 inches square, and overlaid thick with gold; ­ "and Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense every morning and every evening; and, Ye shall offer no strange incense thereon." Ex. 30:1-9. And so, you see, the priests were deadly serious, too, when they ordered the king out of the sanctuary, shouting the admonition, "It appertaineth not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense unto God." And, you see, too, why king Uzziah sealed his own doom when he flew into a murderous rage at the faithful priests who tried to stop his mad usurpation; to wit: "Then Uzziah was wroth, and had a censer in his hand to burn incense; and while he was wroth with the priests, the leprosy even rose up in his forehead before the priests in the house of the Lord, from beside the incense altar. And Azariah the chief priest, and all the priests, looked upon him, and, behold, he was leprous in his forehead, and they thrust him out from thence; yea, himself hasted also to go out, because the Lord had smitten him. And Uzziah the king was a leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a several house, being a leper; for he was cut off from the house of the Lord; and Jotham his son was over the king's house, judging the people of the land. Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, first and last, did Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, write. So Uzziah slept with his fathers, and they buried him with his fathers in the field of the burial which belonged to the kings; for they said, He is a leper; and Jotham his son reigned in his stead." (2 Chron. 26:19-23)  God Almighty has two commands for Obama, the failure to heed either one of which ­ let alone both ­ will be fatal; to wit: "Unto the PLACE which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your tribes to put his name, there, even unto his habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou shalt come." Dt. 12:1-5. "It appertaineth not unto thee, (Obama), to burn incense unto the Lord, but to the priests the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense." (2 Chron. 26:18) I love you.  Amen.  
