Sunday, October 26, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie: That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." 2nd Thes. 2:11,12.  This strongly-worded text is only a partial description of the true state of affairs upon the earth shortly before the Antichrist is revealed to the world. This is such an important matter, that we need "the eyes of our understanding to be (supernaturally) enlightened," (Eph. 1:18) in a special way, to help with our understanding of the timing of the coming of the Antichrist ­ also known as the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition, That Wicked One, The Beast From the Sea, and a number of other descriptive names and appellations.  Beloved, there is a Great Paradox here ­ a Mystery, called the Mystery of Iniquity, vs. 7; to wit: "For the mystery of iniquity doth already work." 2 Thes. 2:7. The people in the church at Thessalonica were confused. The Bible is full of paradoxes. (A paradox is a seemingly contradictory statement that may nonetheless be true; an assertion that is essentially selfcontradictory, although based on a valid deduction from acceptable premises.) I say, that the Bible is full of paradoxes ­ what we may call Holy Paradoxes ­ and I have called this one a Great Paradox, because it is a humdinger of a Paradox. In his Introduction to the Book of Second Thessalonians, Fausset says, feebly; to wit: "The apostle's description of Christ's SUDDEN Second Coming (1 Thes. 4:13, etc., and 5:2), and the POSSIBILITY of its being AT ANY TIME, led them to believe it was already, actually, at hand, i.e., already here." Now. Stop right there, Fausset.  Beloved. I don't see how in the world, anybody could be mistaken about whether the Second Coming of Jesus Christ in power and glory had taken place, or not; and especially, since their mistake is supposedly based on the language of Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy at 1 Thes. 4:13, et seq., and 5:2. Just look at that language; to wit:  "For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall be ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these words." (1 Thes. 4:15-18)  "For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night. For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape." (1 Thes. 5:2,3)  Sunday, October 26, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 2  Remember, Beloved, that the Book of the Revelation opens at verse 7 with this same doctrine; to wit: "Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him: and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. Even so, Amen." Rev. 1:7. Beloved, can there be any doubt that the Bible teaches the doctrine of the imminent return of Jesus Christ; i.e., that the Lord Jesus may return literally at any time ­ suddenly ­ as a thief in the night, without warning ­ with great power and glory, with myriads of His saints and angels, in the sight of all? Listen:  "For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be." (Matt. 24:27)  Beloved, have we not been taught as a part of accepted Bible eschatology (i.e., the doctrine of last things), that there remaineth nothing whatsoever to be said or done before the Lord Jesus may return ­ SUDDENLY ­ for His glorious Apocalypse (meaning, to take off the cover, disclose, reveal)? Then what in the world are we to make of 2nd Thes. 2:3, et seq.?; to wit:  "LET NO MAN DECEIVE YOU BY ANY MEANS: for that day SHALL NOT COME, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition." (2 Thes. 2:3)  Think, PARADOX, HOLY PARADOX, GREAT PARADOX ! Here it plainly says that there are two things that must come to pass BEFORE THAT DAY SHALL COME; to wit: 1) There must come a Great Worldwide Falling Away from The Truth by Virtually All Mankind; and, 2) That Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition (i.e., the Antichrist) MUST BE REVEALED (Note: the word "revealed" ­ is the APOCALYPSE, meaning to take off the cover, to disclose, to reveal) ­ and is the same word applied to the Revelation of Jesus Christ, and it means that the Antichrist himself is to have an Apocalypse ! Mind you, there is nothing to keep Antichrist from living and working among us ­ and being well-known to us ­ for several years before his grand apocalypse.  Indeed, as the Great Falling Away (Apostasy) begins to "snowball" in the rapidity of its growth until it covers the whole inhabited earth, so does the power and prestige of Antichrist grow until it bursts forth in his grand unveiling (i.e., his apocalypse). Beloved, we are to watch for such a thing ­ for such a development ­ and I suggest Obama is a prime object of suspicion as Antichrist (the Beast of Rev. 13, arising out of the sea of restless humanity). Look at the wild rush of mad humanity to defacto cast aside the Bible in a frenzied dash to absolute worldwide apostasy or falling away from God's Truth about fags, abortion, samesex marriage, etc.  Last Sunday, Obama told a crowd at Hocking College in Nelsonville, Ohio, that he believes the Sermon on the Mount justifies same-sex marriage ­ just don't call it marriage, call it SAME-SEX UNIONS ! He also told the crowd that his position allowing and even favoring abortion ­ (which is nothing less than cold-blooded, premeditated, felony murder) ­ does not make him any less a Christian, and that the Sermon on the Mount is Bible authority for his murderous position !  Sunday, October 26, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 3  Listen to his lying, mealy-mouthed explanation; to wit: "If people find that controversial, then I would just refer them to the Sermon on the Mount, which I THINK IS, IN MY MIND, FOR MY FAITH, MORE CENTRAL THAN AN OBSCURE PASSAGE IN ROMANS !!" That, Beloved, is the Devil quoting Scripture, with the hiss of the serpent, and the voice of Antichrist. Obama ­ by thus OBFUSCATING HOLY WRIT (obfuscate means to render obscure, to darken, to confuse) ­ I say, by thus using his worldwide "bully pulpit" to famously OBFUSCATE HOLY WRIT, in these last days of galloping apostasy, OBAMA HAS IDENTIFIED HIMSELF AS ANTICHRIST, and his apocalypse ­ rather than his swearing-in ceremony ­ may be near at hand. And his doom may follow soon thereafter, because the brightness of the coming of the Lord Jesus ­ otherwise known as "the Apocalypse of Jesus Christ which God gave unto him," Rev. 1:1 ­ I say, the destruction of Antichrist follows soon after the unveiling of Antichrist, at the Second Coming of Jesus Christ; to wit:  "And then shall that Wicked be revealed (unveiled, apocalypse), whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall DESTROY WITH THE BRIGHTNESS OF HIS COMING." (2 Thes. 2:8)  And thereupon, the Beast (Antichrist, Obama) will be "cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone." Rev. 19:20. Obama is headed for Everlasting Hell. Maybe he can impress those inmates. Meanwhile, and during the run-up to the apocalypse (the glorious unveiling) of the Beast, the worldwide condition of things that are then ­ (maybe NOW) ­ prevailing on the earth are set forth and described at 2nd Thes. 2:9-12; to wit:  "Even him (Antichrist, Obama), whose coming is after the working of Satan" ­ (i.e., deceitfully and craftily perverting, corrupting, wresting, twisting, all to obfuscate Scripture) ­ "with all power and signs and lying wonders, And with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; because THEY RECEIVED NOT THE LOVE OF THE TRUTH, THAT THEY MIGHT BE SAVED. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe THE LIE:" ­ (i.e., that it's OK to be gay, a big lie; that it's OK to murder infants, a big lie; that God loves everybody, a big lie; that man has a free will, a big lie) ­ "THAT THEY ALL MIGHT BE DAMNED WHO BELIEVED NOT THE TRUTH," ­ (i.e., that it's NOT OK to be gay, the truth; that it's NOT OK to murder infants, the truth; that God HATES fags and fag-enablers, the vast majority of all mankind, the truth; that man does not have a free will, but his will is in slavery to sin and Satan, the truth), ­ "but HAD PLEASURE IN UNRIGHTEOUSNESS." 2nd Thes. 2:9-12.  Obama is no ordinary pot-smoking, crack-headed fag or fag-enabler, muttering his ignorant blasphemies at the fag-bar on the corner. Obama is a Harvard lawyer, a political rock-star, mesmerizing thousands on the stump, with hundreds of millions of contributed dollars for TV ads and 30-minute TV segments to spread his vile, Satanic message world-wide, ­ and about to become President of the United States, ­ which will make him the leader of the so-called free world ! Beloved, that's the stuff Antichrist is made of ! Listen:  Sunday, October 26, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 4  "And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a Beast rise up out of the sea, ...And they worshipped the Beast, saying, Who is like unto the Beast? ...And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and BLASPHEMIES... And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name...and power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations. And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world." (Rev. 13:1,4-8)  Beloved, who of us has looked upon Obama's sea of humanity as they wave and clap and chant their leader's praise and adulation, all over the United States and Europe, Germany, France, and thence via TV to all the world ­ I say, who of us has looked upon this amazing, unprecedented activity, without thinking back to Rev. 13, and envisioning Obama as the Antichristic Beast arising out of the worldwide sea of idol- and Obama-worshipping humanity? Is it not the RUN-UP to the glorious apocalyptic unveiling, of Obama as the blaspheming Antichrist leading the world in rebellion against God, to be followed soon thereafter by the Second Coming Apocalypse of Jesus Christ, and the destruction of the Beast "with the brightness of His coming?" 2 Thes. 2:8.  Anyone who uses the power of communicating to the entire world to proclaim that the murder of millions of infants is justified in their slaughter by the Sermon on the Mount of our Lord Jesus Christ ­ IS BLASPHEMING GOD and is also, SIMULTANEOUSLY, COMMITTING the UNPARDONABLE SIN AGAINST THE HOLY GHOST, He who dictated the Sermon on the Mount, as well as Romans. Is that what you meant to say, Obama?, that the blessed Holy Spirit is authority for you to murder millions of infants? And, anyone who justifies the filthy, vile sins of the fags and the dykes by deceitfully touting the Sermon on the Mount and negating Romans, chapter one ­ is guilty of blasphemy and the unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost. Is that what you mean to say, Obama? that the Holy Ghost did not know what He was doing when He dictated the Book of Romans, the greatest theological treatise ever written? Is that what you meant to say, you idiot? And besides, the Sermon on the Mount doesn't help Obama. He is hoping and trusting that the entire population of the world is Bible-ignorant, and wouldn't know the Sermon on the Mount if it bit them. The Sermon on the Mount condemns Obama, up one side and down the other, as a heretic and a false prophet leading people to Hell; to wit:  "Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. WHOSOEVER THEREFORE SHALL BREAK ONE OF THESE LEAST COMMANDMENTS, AND SHALL TEACH MEN SO, he shall be called THE LEAST in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven." (Mat. 5:17-19)  Sunday, October 26, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 5  The commandments included strong prohibitions against murder and sodomy; to wit: "Thou shalt not kill." Ex. 20:13. "Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is abomination." Lev. 18:22. Obama is well-known by the inhabitants of Heaven, and to them Obama is the low-downdest human on Planet Earth!  "He shall be called THE LEAST in the kingdom of heaven." (Mat. 5:19)  Because, with a huge bully pulpit and global megaphone; with a worldwide audience, and with a controlling influence over multiplied millions of people ­ that sorry son of Belial, Barak Obama, repeatedly and flagrantly breaks the holy commandments ­ not just the least of them, but the greatest of them ­ and teaches others to break them.  Beloved, Obama the Beast is on a fast track to Hell ­ if you believe the very Sermon on the Mount that he ignorantly, & HYPOCRITICALLY, touts. So, galloping worldwide apostasy, or, a falling away from the faith once delivered to the saints (Jd. 3); and, rapid rise of Antichrist, hastening toward the great day (he thinks) of his apocalyptic unveiling (could it be his inauguration as president of the United States of America?). All the holy prophets from the foundation of the world have told of these things, and it is very exciting to see their fulfillment in our day. These last days of the last days are witnessing the RUN-UP to the unveiling of Antichrist Obama, which just shortly precedes the coming of the Lord; to wit:  "Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh." (Jas. 5:8)  Another thing which characterizes and identifies the RUN-UP DAYS of the last days ­ is the worldwide DWINDLING AWAY OF RIGHTEOUS PEOPLE. The prophets have warned us; to wit:  "Woe is me ! for I am as when they have gathered the summer fruits, as the grapegleanings of the vintage: THERE IS NO CLUSTER to eat: my soul desired the firstripe fruit." (Mic. 7:1)  (Here and there a single, scraggily grape hangs on a rickety stem; but NO CLUSTER. It is an elegant metaphor describing a situation existing just prior to the apocalypse (unveiling) of Antichrist Obama ­ as foreseen by the prophet centuries ago, and described in the next three verses in Micah chapter 7; to wit:)  "THE GOOD MAN IS PERISHED OUT OF THE EARTH: and there is none upright among men: they all lie in wait for blood; they hunt every man his brother with a net. That they may do evil with both hands earnestly, the prince asketh, and the judge asketh for a reward; and the great man, he uttereth his mischievous desire: so THEY WRAP IT UP. The best of them is as a brier: the most upright is sharper than a thorn hedge: the day of thy watchmen and thy visitation cometh; NOW SHALL BE THEIR PERPLEXITY." (Mic. 7:2-4)  Sunday, October 26, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 6  (Exposition. In the days of the RUN-UP, the Lord's faithful people still alive on earth will be so few as to be statistically irrelevant, minuscule. What few there are will be persecuted to death by every segment of the evil sodomical society then ruling the earth, led by Antichrist Obama, including judges, their final resort. The Lord Jesus Christ will then appear in wrath, power and glory, with His saints, to punish Antichrist Obama and his millions of sycophants, even Satan's servile, fawning toadies; all to their everlasting perplexity, in Hell, "cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone," Rev. 19:20.)  Beloved, there can be no doubt that we are a nation of fags and murderers. Judge Bork, in his book, Slouching Toward Gomorrah, argues that Toqueville predicted these days, when evil forces would make a majority vote in our American Democracy, and thereby change the Zeitgeist (spirit of the times), and thereby doom the nation. We have arrived at those days. Evil fags and baby-killers have the majority vote and have changed our Zeitgeist. We are no longer a good people. We are an evil people. We are a God-cursed people. We are a doomed people.  In 1972, Sen. Edmund Muskie, D-Maine, was a candidate for the Democratic nomination for president. A group of fags, calling themselves Gay Liberationists, picketed OUTSIDE one of his campaign meetings. Mind you, this was only 36 years ago, and Muskie was a leading Democratic politician on the national scene. He felt no pressure to knuckle under to those fags. Fags did not have enough political influence to blow out a match. Muskie exploded to his staff: "G..D... it, if I've got to be nice to a bunch of sodomites to be elected President, then f... it."  Today, fags are not OUTSIDE picketing; they are INSIDE, choosing the nominee by their majority vote, and controlling both houses of Congress, and the selection of judges, and the Supreme Court (See, Lawrence v. Texas.), and all 50 State governments at every level, and all local politicians and officials, and all segments and levels of society. And if I have left anybody out, it was inadvertent. Any politician who refuses to kiss fag behinds is soon to be a former politician. Now retired.  Truly, God has sent America "strong delusion (Greek: the efficacy of error), that they should believe THE LIE;" ­ (i.e., it's OK to be gay; it's OK to murder; God loves all; man has a free will), ­ "That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." 2nd Thes. 2:11,12.  "And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie: That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." (2 Thes. 2:11,12)  Amen.  
