Sunday, July 8, 2007 pg.1  Sermon Outline  America's Dumb, Greedy Dogs In the Last Days of All ­ the Last of the Last Days ­ one of the biggest and clearest Signs of those Times is declared in the Bible to be the great, and universal proliferation of false prophets. I'm talking Institutionalized Apostacy on a massive worldwide scale. And I'm talking Blasphemy ­ Institutionalized Blasphemy. "When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place, (whoso readeth, let him understand)." Mat. 24:15. This signals a complete takeover of all RELIGIONS by fags and fag-enablers. "And ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake; but he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved. (Bang!) But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not, (let him that readeth understand)." This signals a complete takeover of all GOVERNMENTS by fags and fag-enablers. Mk. 13:13-14. "And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, WHOSE NAMES ARE NOT WRITTEN IN THE BOOK OF LIFE OF THE LAMB slain from the foundation of the world." Rev. 13:8. Where does Daniel speak of this Institutionalized Worldwide Apostacy and Blasphemy? Dan. 11:31: "And arms (governmental power) shall stand on his part, and they shall pollute the sanctuary of strength (powerful organized religion worldwide), and they shall take away the daily sacrifice, and they shall place (in its stead) the abomination that maketh desolate (fags)." This signals the End of the World, as the context proves: Dan. 12:11-13: "But go thou thy way till the end be; for thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days." And where does it expressly refer to worldwide Institutionalized Blaspheny as more proof that we are in the Last Days of All? See, Rev. 13:4,5: "And there was given unto him ­ this Abomination that maketh Desolate standing in the holy place and standing where he ought not, `Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God' (2 Thes. 2:4,5) ­ I say, "there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies...And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven." Rev. 13:5,6. "And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies...And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven." Revelation 13:5,6  Sunday, July 8, 2007 pg.2  Sermon Outline  Institutionalized Worldwide Apostacy and Blasphemy This universal Institutionalized Apostacy and Blasphemy is the direct result of a judicial stroke from God Almighty. God has cursed filthy, abominable, disobedient mankind with a delusion ­ a strong delusion ­ that they should believe a lie, and be damned in Hell forever; to wit: "And with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received not the love of the truth ­ (the Truth WBC has preached to them on the mean streets of the nation and the world for 16+ years now) ­ I say, "they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie; That they all might be damned who believed not the truth (that WBC preached to them), but had pleasure in unrighteousness." 2 Thes. 2:10-12. AND, Isa. 66:3,4; to wit: "Yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their soul delighteth in their abominations; I ALSO WILL CHOOSE THEIR DELUSIONS, and will bring their fears (terrors) upon them; because when I called, none did answer; when I spake, they did not hear; but they did evil before mine eyes, and chose that in which I delighted not." AND, 2 Tim. 4:4; to wit: "And they shall turn away their ears from the Truth (that WBC preached to them for 16+ years daily on the mean streets of America and the world), and shall BE TURNED unto fables." 2 Tim. 4:4. And, in further proof that false prophets shall abound in the Last Days of All, are these solemn pronouncements from the virtual death bed of the Apostle Paul, and from his last words on earth, in 2nd Timothy; to wit: "This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come...For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they HEAP TO THEMSELVES TEACHERS, (i.e., literally, a proliferation of false prophets) ­ having itching ears." 2 Tim. 3:1 and 4:3. Gill: "Having itching ears, ­ always desirous of new things, as the Greeks of old; loving to have their ears scratched and tickled with smooth things; that are pleasing and agreeable to natural men, and carnal minds; as for example, 1) the purity of human nature, and that man is essentially good at heart­ not totally depraved at all; 2) the power of man's free will, that irresistible grace is a false doctrine, because it's all up to man's free will choices as to salvation and all other issues of life; 3) the excellency of man's own self-righteousness; and, 4) and the merit of man's works; and the like; see Isa. 30:8-11: `Now go, write it before them in a table, and note it in a book, that it may be for the time to come for ever and ever. That this is a rebellious people, lying children, children that will not hear the law of the Lord; Which say to the seers, See not; and to the prophets, Prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits. Get you out of the way, turn aside out of the path, cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us.'"  Sunday, July 8, 2007 pg.3  Sermon Outline  What we have here is Institutionalized false doctrines and Institutionalized blasphemy out of the mouths of filthy false prophets; and Institutionalized corrupting of the Word of God and Institutionalized morphing of the Truth of God into fables. All such Institutionalizing costs billions, worldwide ­ Big Business. Which brings us to Billy Graham and His Friends: An 800-page book with thousands of footnotes documenting every allegation of corruption by Billy Graham, et al. This nation has Institutionalized the corruption of the Bible. From the Fountainhead of Satan's lies to the swamps of sodomite slime: Even the multitudes of quite heavily-endowed, and opulently-funded theological seminaries, Bible schools, colleges and universities that grind out the armies of church pastors (America's Dumb, Greedy Dogs) who spoon feed Satan's swill to ­ and brainwash ­ 300 million zombies (the undead, Hell-bound citizens of "America, America, God Shed His Rage on Thee").  Here's an example of the garbage taught at the Fountainhead: They promote such bastardized versions of the Bible as the NIV (New International Version) and the TNIV (Today's New International Version); 41% of all Bibles sold; more than 170 million sold since introduction, 1978; removes all reference to sodomites, and calls itself "gender-sensitive" (no longer sons of God, now children of God); prepares for onset of feminizing God ala lesbian professor (Bob Jones grad), Dr. Virginia Mollenkott, calling Jesus Christ a woman at National Council of Churches conference; and who wrote in her book (The Biblical Imagery of God as Female) that she is "lifting up the biblical image of God as the One Mother of us all." And, take the Fountainhead's WCC (World Council of Churches) corrupt commentary on Mark 7:25-30, where a distraught Greek mother begged Jesus to cast a devil out of her daughter, and Jesus said, "Let the children first be filled; for it is not meet to take the children's bread, and to cast it unto the dogs. And she answered, Yes, Lord; yet the dogs under the table eat of the children's crumbs. And he said unto her, For this saying go thy way; the devil is gone out of thy daughter. And when she was come to her house, she found the devil gone out, and her daughter laid upon the bed." Mk. 7:25-30.  A beautiful story of our Savior's compassion and power to do according to His own will in the army of heaven and among the inhabitants of the earth. But hear how the idiot, Institutionalized corrupters of God's Word pervert that story: "The woman rebuked Jesus, `Why did you call me a dog?' Jesus responded, `I am sorry I said that. I was brought up in such a discriminatory society I used that kind of language without thinking. I am a man and because of my privilege I did not realize how insulting was my comment. But I was afraid. I had to be careful of the powerful religious leaders, the priests, the scribes and Pharisees who wanted to find fault and judge me. So I had to watch what I said.' Jesus then apologized for abusing this Syrophenician woman, saying, `I repent of my indifference, my weakness, my fear, my pride, my unkind behavior and my exclusive language in front of you. Thank you for teaching me.'" Thus, these false prophets corrupt the Scriptures; ­ which clearly distinguishes them dramatically and definitively from the true messengers of God in the earth.  Sunday, July 8, 2007 pg.4  Sermon Outline  "Who is sufficient for these things?" 2 Corinthians 2:16 Simply put: We are not of those who corrupt the Scriptures; hence we are bold in preaching and decisive in judgmental condemnation of all mankind, pursuant to a faithful reading of the signs of the times; to wit: "O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky; but can ye not discern the signs of the times?" Mat. 16:3. And hence we are a sweet savor unto God, and a savor of life unto life and death unto death of all mankind. See, 2 Cor. 2:14-17; to wit: "Now thanks be unto God, which always causeth us to triumph in Christ, and maketh manifest (plainly visible for all to see) the savor of his knowledge (the Truth of God ­ only we have it ­ and we give off fumes everywhere we go ­ a distinctive scent and flavor) by us in every place. (Savor--The taste and/or smell of something. To exhibit a specific quality or characteristic. To impart a specific flavor or scent.) For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish; To the one we are the savor of death unto death; and to the other the savor of life unto life. And WHO IS SUFFICIENT FOR THESE THINGS? (We are!) For we are not as many which corrupt (deal deceitfully with) the word of God; but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ." 2 Cor. 2:14-17.  Note this, Beloved. The Touchstone to it all lies right here. The church at Corinth had plenty wrong with it. They were tolerating gross sin within its membership and abusing the Lord's Supper; to wit: "It is reported commonly that there is fornication among you, and such fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles, that one should have his father's wife...Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened." 1 Cor. 5:1,5. And, church members at Corinth were actually suing each other in Pagan courts; to wit: "Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to law one with another. Why do ye not rather take wrong? why do ye not rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded? Nay, ye do wrong, and defraud, and that your brethren." 1 Cor. 6:7,8. How could Paul call such people, who were ­ of all people on earth ­ "a sweet savor of Christ unto God, in them that are saved, and in them that perish"? 2 Cor. 2:15.  Little wonder the Apostle could cry out in facial bewilderment, "AND WHO IS SUFFICIENT FOR THESE THINGS?" 2 Cor. 2:16. WHO, INDEED! "Foolish, weak, base, despised, nobodies." That's who. 1 Cor. 1:26-28. Beloved, WE! are sufficient! Because we are not as the insincere mass of mankind who "corrupt the Word of God." THAT is the Touchstone. This nation is headed for Hell because this nation has corrupted the Word of God. America has Institutionalized the wholesale Corruption and Perversion of the Bible. It is fatal to pervert the words of the living God; to wit: "For ye have perverted the words of the living God, of the Lord of hosts our God... Therefore, behold, I, even I, will utterly forget you, and will forsake you...and cast you out of my presence; And I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame, which shall not be forgotten." Jer. 23:36,39,40. Amen.  
