Sunday, February 22, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "A sound of battle is in the land, and of great destruction. How  is the hammer of the whole earth cut asunder and broken! how  is Babylon become a desolation among the nations! I have laid  a snare for thee, and thou art also taken, O Babylon, and thou  wast not aware; thou art found, and also caught, because thou  hast striven against the Lord. The Lord hath opened his  armory, and hath brought forth the weapons of his indignation;  for this is the work of the Lord God of hosts in the land of the  Chaldeans. Come against her from the utmost border, open her  storehouses; cast her up as heaps, and destroy her utterly; let  nothing of her be left. ... Woe unto them! for their day is come,  the time of their visitation. The voice of them that flee and  escape out of the land of Babylon, to declare in Zion the  vengeance of the Lord our God, THE VENGEANCE OF HIS  TEMPLE." Jer. 50:22-28.  And here is the place for us to remember these words, spoken to US by the Holy Ghost; to wit: "For YE" ­ (i.e., to US, collectively) ­ "For YE are the temple of the living God." 2 Cor. 6:16. Notice, that the apostle was addressing a small, local, visible, eklesia ­ a called out assembly ­ like Westboro Baptist Church ­ with all the indicia, watermarks, points of evidence that unmistakably identify an authentic, living, functioning body of the Lord Jesus Christ. But notice where it crops up; to wit: At the end of prophetic declarations relating to the final end and complete Fall of mighty Babylon ­ and assigned as the REASON for that world- shattering event; to wit: "Woe unto them! for their day is come, the time of their visitation. The voice of them that flee and escape out of the land of Babylon, to declare in Zion the vengeance of the Lord our God, (to wit) THE VENGEANCE OF HIS TEMPLE." (Jer. 50:28)  Beloved, please look at that verse, which is immediately following a 5-verse description of the utter fall of Babylon ("destroy her utterly; let nothing of her be left." verse 26.). A tiny remnant of God's people manage to escape the slaughter; it is "The voice of them that flee and escape out of the land of Babylon," and make their way back to Zion, and go to make up the church on earth, "to declare in Zion" a mighty thing by way of declaring to the whole world exactly what is going on, and why, regarding the Fall of Babylon; to wit: It is "the vengeance of the Lord our God," which is exactly the same as, "THE VENGEANCE OF HIS TEMPLE." Jer. 50:28.  What an amazing thing, which I have never seen explained satisfactorily by any of the wellknown Bible expositors; or, for that matter, I have never seen it ­ or heard it ­ explained satisfactorily, by anybody. God's mighty dealings with ancient Babylon are the most fearful and horrendous of all His dealings with the sons of sinful man.  Sunday, February 22, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  They occupy many pages of the Bible ­ from Genesis and the Tower of Babel, to Revelation, where three-plus chapters near the end of that Book of holy mystery and the Book of the final consummation of all things; I say that huge chunks of Scripture are given over to a declaration of ­ and a detailed description of ­ the Fall of Babylon! Truly amazing! And now, tucked away within the blessed folds of those precious pages ­ page after page, literally ­ about the Fall of Babylon, we have revealed unto us ­ and I dare to opine, it is ONLY unto us ­ the primary reason for that momentous and horrendous event. And it is, "THE VENGEANCE OF HIS TEMPLE," Jer. 50:28(b). To be sure, it is also, "THE VENGEANCE OF THE LORD OUR GOD," but notice verse 28(b) and the arrangement of the words; to wit: "TO DECLARE IN ZION" (ONLY IN THE CHURCH IS THIS DECLARATION MADE) "THE VENGEANCE OF THE LORD OUR GOD," (BANG, WHICH IS EXPRESSED IN NO OTHER WAY THAN THIS EQUIVALENT PHRASE, to wit:) "THE VENGEANCE OF HIS TEMPLE."  Put another way, it is that the Vengeance of God is not in the abstract, but is particularized. God did not pour out his Vengeance upon ancient Babylon for any reason other than for the way they treated His ancient people. Ergo, God will not pour out his Vengeance upon corrupt mankind at the end of the days, for any reason, other than FOR THE WAY DEPRAVED MANKIND OPPRESSED AND PERSECUTED HIS ELECT PEOPLE. The final doom of Babylon is told and described by the blessed Holy Ghost at ­ among many other places in Holy Writ ­ Isaiah, chapters 13, 14, and 47; Jeremiah, chapters 50 and 51, and Revelation, chapters 16, 17, 18, and 19, beginning at Jer. 50:1,2; and, Rev. 16:19; to wit:  "The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see...Howl ye, for the day of the Lord is at hand; it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty... Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate; and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it (Isa. 13:1,6,9)  "And it shall come to pass in the day that the Lord shall give thee rest from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage wherein thou wast made to serve, That thou shalt take up this proverb against the king of Babylon, and say, How hath the oppressor ceased! the golden city ceased! The Lord hath broken the staff of the wicked, and the septre of the rulers." (Isa. 14:3-5.)  "Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground; there is no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans; for thou shalt no longer be called tender and delicate... For thou hast trusted in thy wickedness; thou hast said, None seeth me. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath perverted thee; and thou hast said in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me. Therefore shall evil come upon thee; thou shalt not know from whence it riseth; and mischief shall fall upon thee; thou shalt not be able to put it off; and desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou shalt not know." (Isa. 47:1,10,11)  Sunday, February 22, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  "The word that the Lord spake against Babylon and against the land of the Chaldeans by Jeremiah the prophet. Declare ye among the nations, and publish, and set up a standard; publish, and conceal not; say, Babylon is taken, Bel is confounded, Merodach is broken in pieces; her idols are confounded, her images are broken in pieces...At the noise of the taking of Babylon the earth is moved, and the cry is heard among the nations." (Jer. 50:1,2,46)  "Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will raise up against Babylon, and against them that dwell in the midst of them that rise up against me, a destroying wind...For THIS IS THE TIME OF THE LORD'S VENGEANCE; he will render unto her a recompence... And thou shalt say, Thus shall Babylon sink, and shall not rise from the evil that I will bring upon her; and they shall be weary. Thus far are the words of Jeremiah." (Jer. 51:1,6,64)  "And great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath...And there came one of the seven angels which had the seven vials, and talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither; I will show unto thee the judgment of the great whore that sitteth upon many waters... And upon her forehead was a name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH... And after these things I saw another angel come down from heaven, having great power and the earth was lightened with his glory. And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird... Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be utterly burned with fire; for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her... And a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all... And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth... And after these things I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying, Alleluia, Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power, unto the Lord our God; For true and righteous are his judgments; for HE HATH JUDGED THE GREAT WHORE, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and HATH AVENGED THE BLOOD OF HIS SERVANTS AT HER HAND. And again they said, Alleluia. And her smoke rose up for ever and ever...And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia; for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth." (Rev. 16:19b; 17:1,5; 18:1,2,8,21,24; 19:1-3,6.)  These passages are but a small sampling of Scripture dealing with the Fall of Babylon ­ but enough to show the mighty impact which that event has upon all other end-time events.  Sunday, February 22, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  You may remember that not long after the beginning of the war on Iraq (ancient Babylon), I opined that America's huge involvement with that small state was making it look like America had become ­ or was fast becoming ­ indistinguishable from Iraq, i.e., Babylon. All that Scripture has to say about Babylon certainly sounds more like America is the Great Whore of Babylon: "And the woman which thou sawest IS THAT GREAT CITY (NATION, GOVERNING BODY), which reigneth over the kings of the earth (subsumes them all)." Rev. 17:18.  And now with the advent of Antichrist Obama, I am more persuaded that America fits the Bible pattern and description of Babylon. Moreover, since I made such a prophetic prediction and observation about 5 years ago, the United States has steadily invested more billions of dollars in Iraq.  Indeed, Joseph Stiglitz of the Harvard University's Kennedy School of Business has a new book out entitled The Three TRILLION Dollar War, the theme of which seems to be that despite what the politicians say about getting out of Iraq and bringing our troops home any time soon, ­ and into the indefinite future ­ it is certain that a bloodbath would ensue. Beloved, it looks like we are stuck in Iraq, and we are running Iraq; ergo, WE ARE BABYLON, FOR ALL PRACTICAL PURPOSES ­ LIKE IT OR NOT. And, we are getting in deeper all the time.  Remember the large chart I brought out years ago, depicting Iraq with five red stars showing where five U.S. military bases were located ­ as evidence that we were set for a long stint in Iraq; such that America is now Babylon of Bible prophecy. Well, Beloved. I was a piker. And we did not even have an American Embassy in Iraq at that time. It had been blown up and demolished.  Well, just the other day, the United States completed a brand new embassy in Iraq; and, the thing is SIX TIMES THE SIZE OF THE ENTIRE UNITED NATIONS COMPLEX in New York City. Despite the fact that Iraq is very, very small (25 million or so) compared to many other embassies in many other countries ­ despite that fact, the U.S. Embassy in Iraq is much larger than any other embassy in the world; and many thousands of U.S. government employees will be running the embassy, and will, de facto, be running Iraq. America IS Iraq.  Ergo, America is the Babylon of Bible prophecy. They showed pictures of our completed embassy on TV. And now we not only have HUNDREDS of so-called American military bases all over Iraq, but many of them are simply massive ­ according to Stiglitz in his book, The Three TRILLION Dollar War; to wit:  "The United States has established hundreds of military bases in Iraq since 2003. Several are massive compounds that appear to be designed for long-term U.S. occupation. The largest include Al-Asad, the main supply base for troops in Al Anbar Province, about 120 miles west of Baghdad (housing about 17,000 troops + the same number or more of supporting and civilian personnel and contractors); Al-Balad (also known as Camp Anaconda), which is the U.S. Military's main air transportation and  Sunday, February 22, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 5  supply hub (housing about 22,500 troops and several thousand contractors); Camp  Taji (which has the largest shopping center in Iraq); and Al-Talil, in the south, a key  stopping point for supply convoys from Kuwait. These key U.S. bases are vast. They  cover many square miles within secure perimeters. They are largely self-sufficient in  terms of utilities, including power, phone systems, heating/cooling, and hospital  facilities, protected by highly fortified perimeters. Iraq people for the most part suffer  for lack of clean water, electricity, or quality medical care ­ but the American bases  are islands of fully functioning amenities."  Despite talk of withdrawing American troops (incidentally, Obama and others have been strangely quiet on that matter lately), but to the extent some are thinking and hoping for our early withdrawal, a feature piece in the Washington Times this week ought to quiet even them; to wit:  "As President Obama weighs options for withdrawing U.S. troops from Iraq, the country's military is purchasing American helicopters, cargo planes and tanks ­ equipment that typically requires a prolonged U.S. presence for maintenance and training. These complex defense systems require sophisticated maintenance and training that would keep U.S. forces in the country LONG beyond the 2011 date now set."  The short of it is, Beloved, that the lengthy, prophetic description of the final Fall of Babylon, does not fit any nation on earth but the U.S. Not by a long shot. Only the U.S. is a so-called super-power; no other nation is even close. About 12 years ago I rode in a taxi with an Iraqi the 600-mile trip from Amman, Jordan, to Baghdad. Planes could not land in Baghdad; Clinton was beating the war drums; everyone expected war to break out any minute; no cars on the beautiful, 6-lane highway we were traveling.  It was dark and spooky, but I felt strangely at home, like I had been there before, and would be there again. The cloudless sky was heavy with stars, and the weather was wondrously fair. I thought as we rode, mile after mile: This was the route Nebuchadnezzar and his army took, traveling west to conquer Israel. It was also the route that Daniel, Ezekiel and others of the prophets took, traveling east into Babylonian captivity.  Beloved. Sometimes the reality of the world to come breaks in upon our thoughts, and reminds us to watch and work; to wit:  "Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame." (Rev. 16:15)  I love you.  Amen.  
