Sunday, November 2, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And He said unto them, These are the words which I  spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the Law  of Moses, and in the Prophets, ­ (i.e., The Prophecy of  Jeremiah) ­ and in the Psalms, ­ (i.e., the Hagiographa) ­ concerning Me. Then opened He their  understanding, that they might understand the  scriptures." Lk. 24:44,45.  (Parenthetical Note: Amazing, and in a way, Encouraging and Challenging. After serving the Lord Jesus Christ on a daily basis for some three and a half years, the Apostles themselves had no adequate and no spiritual and no proper understanding of the scriptures. What appears to be wanting is a HOLY, SUPERNATURAL UNDERSTANDING OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURES. Unless and until the Lord God puts forth His hand to OPEN THE UNDERSTANDING, the natural man can read the scriptures for ever, and never understand the great truths contained therein; e.g., the absolute sovereignty of God, election, reprobation ("Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated," Rom. 9:13); ergo, God does NOT love everybody, absolute predestination of all things, etc. Conversely, the very fact that we DO see and we DO understand these blessed things from the scriptures, is strong, positive evidence that our "calling and election is sure," 2 Pet. 1:10.)  The Jews, at the time of Christ on earth, had the same Old Testament as we have today, but they had it arranged differently; a fact which you must understand in order to grasp the true sense of our text to its fullest. The best way to an understanding of how the Jewish scriptures (i.e., the Old Testament) were arranged at the time of Christ, is to get a handle on the meaning of the large and tongue-twisting word, ­ "HAGIOGRAPHA." It is not an antiquated word, but is defined to in any modern dictionary as follows; to wit: "The third of the three ancient Jewish divisions of the Old Testament, containing those books not in the Law (Torah) or the Prophets, and comprising usually The Psalms, the Proverbs, Job, the Song of Solomon, Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, Esther, Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah, and Chronicles."  Rabbi Kimchi says that according to a tradition of the Jews, well-grounded in antiquity, the book of Jeremiah stands at the head of the second division of the Old Testament books, as being the highest regarded of the prophets, the order being as follows; to wit: "Jeremiah, Isaiah, Ezekiel, and the twelve." And Dr. Lightfoot from thence concludes, that this is the reason why a passage in Zechariah is cited under the name of Jeremy, at Mat. 27:9; to wit: "Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying, And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was valued, whom they of the children of Israel did value." Mat. 27:9, where the citation is to Zech. 11:12; to wit: "And I said unto them, If ye think good, give me my price; and if not, forbear. So they weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver." (Zech. 11:12)  Sunday, November 2, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 2  Thus, you see, that, although the citation was to Zechariah, Matthew says he is quoting from Jeremiah; because, Jeremiah, standing first in the volume of the Prophets, gave name to the whole. So firmly did Jeremiah hold first place among the prophets, he was often referred to ­ simply and deferentially ­ as, "THAT PROPHET," as when the prestigious delegation from the Sanhedrin came to John the Baptist to respectfully inquire as to John's authority, they asked John if he was Elijah, and he saith, I am not; they then asked about Jeremiah like this, "Art thou THAT PROPHET? And he answered, No." Jn. 1:19-21. And, similarly, Just as the book of Psalms dominates the division in which it appears ­ they are all called the Psalms from it, Lk. 24:44 (our text).  Hence, you see how the risen Savior encompasses all the written word of God ­ up until that time ­ with three little words, at Lk. 24:44; to wit: "And he said unto them, These are the words which I spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me." (Lk. 24:44) Three little words ­ encompassing our entire Old Testament, only arranged differently ­ and the three little words are, 1) the LAW, 2) the PROPHETS, and, 3) the PSALMS. In their amplified form, the three divisions of the Jewish scriptures, at the time of Christ on earth, were, 1) the law of Moses, or the Torah; 2) the prophets, or Jeremiah; and, 3) the psalms, or the Hagiographa. These, then, were the Holy Scriptures at the time of Christ on earth ­ and they constituted the exact wording of our Old Testament. So that, whenever the term "scriptures" was used in those days, these three little words were implicated; e.g.: "Jesus answered and said unto them, Ye do err, not knowing the SCRIPTURES, nor the power of God." (Mat. 22:29) And Mark, recording the same incident, added these words to describe those who are deliberately ignorant of the holy scriptures; to wit: "Do ye not therefore err, because ye know not the scriptures?... YE THEREFORE DO GREATLY ERR." (Mk. 12:24,27) Moreover, Beloved, those same Old Testament SCRIPTURES are precious indeed, and are able to make one wise unto salvation; to wit: "And that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee WISE UNTO SALVATION through faith which is in Christ Jesus." 2 Tim. 3:15. These same SCRIPTURES, though written many centuries ago, in a strange tongue, and by a naturally strange people to us Anglo Saxon European Gentile Savages ­ were, by the ultimate Author ­ (i.e., the Holy Ghost), ­ nevertheless, written, expressly, to and for us ­ at Westboro Baptist Church, for our learning, patience, comfort, and hope; to wit:  "For whatsoever things WERE WRITTEN aforetime were written for our LEARNING, that we through PATIENCE and COMFORT of the SCRIPTURES might have HOPE." (Rom. 15:4)  Sunday, November 2, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 3  Furthermore, we are assured of the PLENARY (i.e., complete in all aspects) ­ and the GOD-  BREATHED, ­ and the infallibly miraculous and THERAPEUTIC ­ (i.e., having infallible  healing or curative powers) ­ nature of the Holy Scriptures; to wit: "All SCRIPTURE is  given by inspiration of God," ­ (i.e., God-breathed; dictated completely, verbally, down to the  last jot and tittle, by God the Holy Ghost), ­ "and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for  correction, for instruction in righteousness:" ­ (four facets of a precious stone, all combining  to produce the diamond of perfection) ­ "That the man of God may be perfect, throughly  furnished" ­ (i.e., perfected) ­ "unto all good works." 2 Tim. 3:16,17.  When the scriptures are in full control of our faculties, as they should be by diligent, intelligent and daily study, the inevitable result will be "good works" ­ or, the "work of the Lord;" to wit: "Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the WORK OF THE LORD, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord." 1 Cor. 15:58. That is, "ye know it," from your study of God's Holy Scriptures! "And let us not be weary in well doing; for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not." (Gal. 6:9)  After the Lord Jesus had invited His disciples to inspect His precious wounds; to wit: "Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I Myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. And when he had thus spoken, he showed them his hands and his feet." Lk. 24:39,40. And then the Holy Ghost records an amazing bit of Holy History; to wit: "And WHILE THEY YET BELIEVED NOT FOR JOY, and wondered, he said unto them, Have ye here any meat? And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb. And he took it, and did eat before them." (Lk. 24:41-43)  (Digression: Here we have the Lord Jesus in His resurrection body ­ EATING FISH AND HONEY ­ presumably to refute the disciples' fear that He was only "spirit" and not a physical body: "a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have," Lk. 24:39. Maybe also to teach us a bit more about our new bodies in Heaven; to wit: Will we eat when we get our new bodies? On another occasion, in His resurrection body, Jesus made a big deal about feeding everybody, having cooked bread and fish for them, on an open fire by the seashore; to wit: "Jesus then cometh, and taketh bread, and giveth them, and fish likewise. This is now the third time that Jesus showed himself to his disciples, after that he was risen from the dead." (Jn. 21:13-14)  On several occasions He suddenly materialized from nowhere, once through walls of a tightly closed room, "when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you." Jn. 20:19. Also, on several occasions, He rose through the air, from a standing position on earth, to be received by the clouds, into Heaven. All of which revealed qualities, characteristics and attributes of our new bodies, for it is written that our new bodies will be made like unto His glorious body; to wit:  Sunday, November 2, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 4  "For our citizenship is in heaven; from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself." (Phil. 3:20,21)  "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, WE SHALL BE LIKE HIM." 1 Jn. 3:2. End of Digression.)  The context of our text, consisting of things and people and words spoken ­ and the thoughts of many hearts ­ bristles with excitement, and fear, and wonder, and paralyzing unbelief. Jesus Christ had just now risen from the dead ­ and ALMOST NOBODY BELIEVED IT ! Peter, for example, was running around like a chicken with its head cut off; to wit: "It was Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James, and other women that were with them, which told these things unto the apostles." (I.e., "the women told them these things about the empty tomb, and the two men in shining garments, who told them, He is not here, but is risen, as He told you. And the women returned from the sepulchre, and told all these things unto the eleven, and to all the rest... Whereupon, the eleven holy apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ DISBELIEVED THE REPORT OF THE WOMEN." (Lk.24:4-9)) "And their words seemed to them as idle tales, AND THEY BELIEVED THEM NOT." Lk. 24:10-11.  In additional context of our text, and soon after His resurrection, the Lord Jesus suddenly and supernaturally appeared unto two disciples as they walked along the 6-mile trek from Jerusalem to their home in Emmaus. "But their eyes were holden that they should not know him." (Lk. 24:15-16). The Arabic version renders it, "now he had veiled their eyes," ascribing it to Christ. Gill says, regarding their inability to see Him for who He was, that, "there might have been a peculiar influence of divine power and providence, so disposing them that they did not look up to Christ their new fellow-traveller, who walked on with them."  One thing is certain, Beloved: If the Lord our God does not want us to recognize Him in this or that situation, pursuant to this or that of His blessed and glorious purposes; He certainly has a multitude of ways to keep us from seeing Him or recognizing Him in it, until the right time comes. We read: "And he said unto them, What manner of communications are these that ye have one to another, as ye walk, and are sad?" (Lk. 24:17)  When it became clear that these two disciples on the road to Emmaus were grappling with the concepts of unbelief and the violent death and reported resurrection of Jesus Christ, that then the Lord brought them up short; to wit: "Then he said unto them, O FOOLS, and SLOW OF HEART TO BELIEVE all that the prophets have spoken." (Lk. 24:25)  Sunday, November 2, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 5  (An elliptical figure of speech, meaning the Old Testament then, and both the Old and New  Testaments now.) ­ Beloved, every individual of mankind has a solemn, non-delegable duty  to know and believe and obey all that the prophets have spoken.  "Because, that which may be known of God is manifest in them; FOR GOD HATH SHOWED IT UNTO THEM. For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse." (Rom. 1:19,20)  Yes, Beloved, I believe that, in a very real sense, God is thundering in the ears of the inner man of every individual of mankind, these fateful words; to wit: "O FOOLS, AND SLOW OF HEART TO BELIEVE ALL THAT THE PROPHETS HAVE SPOKEN." Lk. 24:25. What follows next on the road to Emmaus powerfully illustrates the absolute sovereignty of God in the Great Paradox; i.e., although all mankind has the duty to hear and obey, without divine intervention he has no power to hear and obey; to wit:  "And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he EXPOUNDED UNTO THEM IN ALL THE SCRIPTURES the things concerning himself... And they said one to another, Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and WHILE HE OPENED TO US THE SCRIPTURES?" (Lk. 24:27,32)  Beloved, here is one of those glorious doctrines which the scriptures are profitable to give us (2 Tim. 3:16); to wit: Without the divine, supernatural intervention of Almighty God in "EXPOUNDING" to us the Holy Scriptures, and "OPENING" to us the Holy Scriptures after He has expounded them, ­ the Holy Scriptures would remain in midnight darkness to us, so far as our understanding the truth of them is concerned, and locked up tighter than Fort Knox, so far as our access to their soul-saving benefits is concerned. And then ­ as if to emphasize this Doctrine as the antidote of choice for curing gloom, discouragement, grief and sorrow, to His "terrified and affrighted" disciples (Lk. 24:37) ­ following His violent death and resurrection ­ I say, to cure all their fears, Jesus plucks forth this Doctrine; to wit:  "Then opened he their understanding, that they might UNDERSTAND THE SCRIPTURES, And said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day: And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. And ye are witnesses of these things. . . . And he led them out as far as to Bethany, and he lifted up his hands, and blessed them. And it came to pass, while he blessed them, he was parted from them, and was carried up into heaven. And they worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy." (Lk. 24:45-52)  "Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, To the only  Sunday, November 2, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 6  wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both  now and ever. Amen." (Jude 24-25)  Amen.  
