Sunday, December 14, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of  man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh  (i.e., a word) against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be  forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world  to come... For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and  by thy words thou shalt be condemned." Mat. 12:32,37.  These facts on the ground, that triggered the language of our text, are these:  "Then was brought unto him one possessed with a devil, blind, and dumb: and he healed him, insomuch that the blind and dumb both spake and saw. And all the people were amazed, and said, Is not this the son of David? But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, This fellow doth not cast out devils, but by Beelzebub the prince of the devils." (Mat. 12:22-24)  Some say that this Beelzebub ­ here translated as the prince of devils ­ was none other than Satan, the king of all demons. It doesn't matter. The Savior suggests that he himself had cast out the devil, by the Holy Ghost, and that such an amazing occurrence signaled that the kingdom of God was come down upon the scene; to wit:  "But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God is come unto you." (Mat. 12:28)  Then the Savior adds, "He that is not with me" ­ (i.e., in this pending matter, and generally) ­ "is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad." Mat. 12:30. Beloved, this pronouncement is an unfailing principle and guiding policy for all mankind ­ from Adam to now, and to the end of time. In this conflict of the ages, told by prophets and by sages ­ NOBODY IS NEUTRAL ! We are engaged in what the Bible variously calls "the wars of the Lord," (Num. 21:14), and, "the wars of Canaan," (Judg. 3:1), and, "the quarrel of My covenant," (Lev. 26:25), etc. Standing alone ­ without any reference to the context ­ this HOLY PRONOUNCEMENT is an unfailing principle and guiding policy, for all mankind, from Adam to now, and to the end of time. And here again ­ from the lips of the Lord Jesus Christ ­ is that HOLY PRONOUNCEMENT; to wit:  "He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad." (Mat. 12:30)  At a minimum, without any reference to the context, this HOLY PRONOUNCEMENT stands for the proposition that in this all-of-life-absorbing conflict in which we are engaged­ NOBODY IS NEUTRAL. We say to one and all; to wit:  "For the grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men, Teaching us that, denying (resisting) ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world; Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ; Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke WITH ALL AUTHORITY. LET NO MAN DESPISE THEE." (Titus 2:11-15)  Sunday, December 14, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 2  Beloved, we have authority from God Almighty to preach and to make full proof of our ministry (2 Tim. 4:1-5); and those who are not actively, and affirmatively, and loyally engaged with us, are against us; and those who are not thus faithfully and happily assisting us in the publishing activities of this message which God has given us, are workers of iniquity who are diligently working with both hands fervently to suppress and silence this holy message which God has given us ­ AND THEY ARE HEADED FOR HELL ! NOBODY IS NEUTRAL ! in this holy war. Mat. 12:30.  There was an occasion when the Lord Jesus appointed another seventy disciples to go forth two by two on a special preaching mission, and fortified their spirits by assuring them that He was with them, and that they were speaking in His Name and with His authority ­ upon pain of eternal damnation ala Sodom and Gomorrah for those who did not receive them and their message warmly and generously and with that unconditional respect that a Word from their Creator deserved; to wit: "And say unto them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your ways out into the streets of the same, and say, Even the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against you: notwithstanding be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in that day" ­ (i.e., the Great Judgment Day, and often some intervening so-called Earth-Judgment Days; e.g., the many eruptions of Mt. Vesuvius, as in 79 AD and 1631 AD, etc.) ­ I say, "it shall be more tolerable in that day FOR SODOM THAN FOR THAT CITY !" Lk. 10:9-12.  Upon a little reflection, Beloved, this was certainly an amazing word from our dear Lord Jesus, as to just how far He intends to go, in "backing up" His faithful preachers when they are mistreated, even if the shabby mistreatment is only by neglecting to hear them and respectfully receive their message. More tolerable for Sodom ?! ­ When it is recalled that Sodom is the standing symbol of the most horrific punishment from God, ­ in many places throughout Scripture. Just how far will the dear Lord Jesus go, in "backing up" His faithful preachers? Listen to these further words of blessed encouragement; to wit: "He that heareth you heareth me; and he that despiseth you despiseth me; and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me." (Lk. 10:16)  God's servants are to maintain a humble, yet robust, confidence, at all times, that their Great Commander-in-Chief will back them up to the hilt, in the midst of the battle. "LET NO MAN DESPISE THEE." Titus 2:15. And now, let us consider our heavenly pronouncement in light of its immediate Scripture-context, and in light of current events on the ground (as they say), or, in other words, in light of the signs of the times; to wit: "He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad." (Mat. 12:30)  We have contended that President-elect Barack Obama is none other than the final Antichrist, or the Beast arising out of the sea (the worldwide, abominable, unclean, filthy, sodomite cesspool) of restless humanity. Rev. 13:1.  Sunday, December 14, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 3  "But the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked." (Isa. 57:20,21)  Obama has captured the universal and favorable attention ­ (bordering on idolatrous adoration and sacrilegious worship) ­ of the whole world; and current events seem to enhance his Satanic halo of supernatural invincibility. These events are certainly remarkable; and they are unprecedented; and they are entirely consistent with those happenings and attributes prognosticated of the Antichristic Beast of Rev. 13; and they are proliferating, ­ astonishingly, ­ on a daily basis. Check these out:  1.) "And the dragon (Satan, Rev. 12:9) gave him his power, and his seat (throne), and great authority" ­ President-elect of the United States of America, and defacto King of the World, or, Prime Minister of the Universe, or, etc., the exact title is not important. Rev. 13:2.  2.) "All the world wondered (adored, idolized, did obeisance to, worshipped) after the beast." Rev. 13:3.  3.) "And they worshipped the dragon (Satan) which gave power unto the beast: and they worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the beast? who is able to make war with him?" Rev. 13:4.  4.) "And there was given unto him a mouth" ­ (Obama is a splendid orator, drawing vast multitudes in America and abroad, and making plans for more multi-million dollar speaking trips abroad, this time with an entourage of thousands, in Air Force One, and planes for the press, etc., etc., all as President of the United States, and hence at taxpayers' expense. Obama will thus use the American Bully Pulpit for purely Satanic purposes, to a staggering extent, entirely unprecedented, and never visualized in the history of the nation.) ­ I say, "AND THERE WAS GIVEN UNTO HIM A MOUTH" ­ (yes indeed!) ­ "speaking great things and blasphemies... And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle (church), and them that dwell in heaven" ­ ("For our citizenship is in heaven; from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ." Phil. 3:20."). Rev. 13:5,6.  5.) "And it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them." Rev. 13:7a. His victories over us, such as they are, we know to be only small ones, and short-lived; and we know them to be working for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; to wit: "For which cause we faint not; but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day. For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal." (2 Cor. 4:16-18)  Furthermore, Beloved, we are up for this war in every way. We know how to use these weapons, which are mighty through God to the pulling down of strongholds. 2 Cor. 10:4. And we have jeoparded our lives, many a time, in the high places of the field. Judg. 5:18.  Sunday, December 14, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 4  Think of it. Without these Satanically-inspired assaults, we would be denied these golden opportunities to lay up treasures in heaven, and to make to ourselves friends, who will one day soon receive us into everlasting habitations. Lk. 16:9. Our Captain has taught us how to fight and wage this spiritual war. The Antichrist Beast Obama doesn't have much of a chance against us. We are like David's mighty men who could sling stones with deadly accuracy with either hand. 1 Chron. 12:2. And, we are like David himself, who sang a song in his declining years; saying; "He teacheth my hands to war; so that a bow of steel is broken by mine arms." 2 Sam. 22:35. "For by thee I have run through a troop; and by my God have I leaped over a wall." Psa. 18:29. And so, although it was given unto the Beast to make war with the saints, and to overcome them occasionally, in minor skirmishes, and for a short time; in the end it is given to the saints to crush Satan's head; to wit: "And the God of peace shall bruise (crush) Satan under your feet shortly." Rom. 16:20. "And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet... These both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone." Rev. 19:20.)  6.) "And power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations. And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world." Rev. 13:7(b),8. The signs of the times, or, current events on the ground, tell the discerning saints on earth that big-mouth, blaspheming Obama, with his unprecedented worldwide influence and control as President of the world's only military and otherwise super-power, is probably the final Antichrist aka the Beast of Rev. 13. Every day brings fresh, new evidence of Obama's Antichristic heresy and blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. For the past 20 years, Obama has been a regular, activist member of the Sodomitical United Church of Christ (UCC). Although Obama has sought to minimize and play down his support for and participation in the militant stance of the UCC, in promoting the wholesale murder of aborted babies, and the filthy, abominable, so-called "gay rights" aka same-sex marriage.  Make no mistake, Beloved. The UCC so-called church, is nothing but a 1.4 million demonpossessed member, sodomite whorehouse, masquerading as a church. As President-elect Obama is busily engaged, night and day, at putting together his cabinet, as well as appointing many hundreds ­ maybe thousands ­ of high-ranking management officials for his new government ­ most Americans will not notice (or care!) that this filthy Antichrist Beast Obama is quietly, secretly, literally PACKING the government of the United States of America with militant fags, dykes, and fag/dyke enablers!  The latest, according to the HRC ­ (the so-called Human Rights Commission, which is the largest, and richest, and most influential, out-of-the-closet, fag and dyke propaganda mill in the world, with headquarters in downtown Washington, D.C., where all the nation's heavy action is centered) ­ I say, the latest admitted faggots headed for cabinet seats are John Berry, Secretary of the Interior, (faggot Berry was formerly Executive Director of the National Fish & Wildlife Foundation, under fag-enabler Bill Clinton); and, Mary Beth Maxwell, a militant dyke, as Secretary of Labor; and, admitted faggot Fred Hochberg, for Administrator of the Small Business Administration, a huge federal agency with power to apportion out billions of dollars for fags and dykes to hopefully start up and run thousands of so-called small businesses all across America ­ at the taxpayers' risk and expense.  Sunday, December 14, 2008  Sermon Outline...page 5  Fag-enabler Bill Clinton saturated the 2.5 million member federal bureaucracy with fags and dykes; Fag-enabler George Bush followed the Clinton lead; and now, the Antichrist Beast Obama is literally PACKING the government of the United States of America with militant fags, dykes, and fag/dyke enablers.  Beloved. Do not be surprised. Antichrist Beast Obama promised the fags that he would use the Bully Pulpit of the White House, and the full weight of the Federal Government, to promote the Satanic fag agenda ­ even to the point of promising to remove the "STIGMA... that continues to surround HIV/AIDS." (Obama's "Statement to the Gay Community," Feb. 28, 2008).  A "STIGMA" is a mark or token of infamy, disgrace, reproach or shame. God put an everlasting, indelible, irradicable mark of shame and disgrace upon fags, ­ and only the Antichrist Beast Obama would ever imagine he could remove it! This is further evidence that Obama is the final Antichrist. In reality, fags, AIDS carriers, should be required to cry out the warning "UNCLEAN" when they are approaching others ­ just as the ancient lepers; to wit: "And the leper in whom the plague is, his clothes shall be rent, and his head bare, and he shall put a covering upon his upper lip, and shall cry, Unclean, unclean ...he shall be defiled; he is unclean: he shall dwell alone; without the camp shall his habitation be." (Lev. 13:45,46)  Obama and all his UCC friends should be required to cry UNCLEAN, because of the filthy and blasphemous book they published in their so-called UCC church, entitled, "The Man Jesus Loved: Homoerotic Narratives From the New Testament." A UCC spokesman says that this blasphemous book fits the UCC church's policy of "extravagant welcome" toward gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender (GLBT) people.  The UCC book says that John, at the Last Supper, "was lying in (on) Jesus' lap ­ that is, snuggled up to Jesus. Jesus loved all his colleagues, but THIS ONE FRIENDSHIP WAS EXPRESSED BY PHYSICAL AND PERSONAL INTIMACY ­ what we might today suppose to be A HOMOEROTIC OR A `GAY' RELATIONSHIP SEXUAL IN CHARACTER." Beloved, was ever a passage of Scripture more perverted, corrupted, handled deceitfully, or wrested (twisted) than these? Hear how the Holy Ghost dictated each word: "Now there was leaning on Jesus' bosom one of his disciples, whom Jesus loved... He then lying on Jesus' breast saith unto him, Lord, who is it? ...Then Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following; WHICH ALSO LEANED ON HIS BREAST AT SUPPER." (Jn. 13:23,25; 21:20)  Not only is this Hellish UCC book further evidence that Obama is the final Antichrist Beast; it is, standing alone, proof positive. By blasphemously characterizing the "words" of the Holy Ghost so as to make the Lord Jesus Christ a filthy, practicing, hypocritical faggot, Obama spoke words against the Holy Ghost that shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come...and by those words, Obama shall be condemned. Mat. 12:32,37.  Amen.  
