Sunday, February 8, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout,  with the voice of the archangel, and with the TRUMP OF GOD:  and the dead in Christ shall rise first: Then we which are alive  and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds,  to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the  Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these words." 1  Thes. 4:16-18. "Behold, I show you a mystery; We shall not all  sleep, but we shall all be changed, In a moment, in the twinkling  of an eye, at the LAST TRUMP: for the TRUMPET SHALL SOUND,  and the dead shall be raised incorruptible (i.e., perfect and  eternally new bodies), and we shall be changed."  1 Cor. 15:51,52.  When I was in high school they bought me a trumpet, and I played it, and the school-owned big  base horn, in the school band for some three years or so. Mostly at football games. And there  were more trumpets than just mine in that band ­ maybe 10 or 15. And there are multiplied  thousands of middle schools, and high schools, and colleges, and universities, and municipal  orchestras, and military marching bands; and each year a fresh crop of youngsters eagerly takes  up the trumpet in the band of Meredith Wilson's "The Music Man, 76 Trombones"-type groups  ­ all adding up to ­ probably ­ over the years ­ millions of trumpets.  The trumpet has a distinctive, startling, thrilling, and unmistakable sound. This is so, as taken in its natural sense. And how much more, as taken in its spiritual sense; that is, God mystically calls and leads His people safely and joyfully through this life ­ all the way to Heaven ­ by the sounding of His mysterious and unique trumpet calls. In addition, every single trumpet on earth ­ whether in the hands of middle-school children or professional musicians ­ from the beginning of the world to "The Last Trump;" ­ I say, every time a trumpet is seen, or its alarming and piercing voice is heard, on earth, all mankind is again put on startling and eternal notice that the Great Judgment Day is coming.  Furthermore, every human trumpet is a type of "The Last Trump," intermediately, and as itself pointing to The Last Trump as distinguished from every other trump. And, mystically, nothing gives more comfort to the Elect than sanctified meditation upon the role of the trumpet in the Elect's passage from this world to the next ­ from the first call to salvation to the last call to Heaven.  Seiss says: "Trumpets are expressive instruments. The voice of the trumpet is the most significant voice known to the Holy Scriptures. God Himself gave to His ancient people very special directions with regard to the use of the trumpet. It is itself described as a cry ­ a loud and mighty cry ­ which related only to important occasions. The time for the blowing of trumpets was always a time of moment (i.e., very great importance) ­ a time of solemnity ­ a time for men to bestir themselves greatly in one way or another." Consider the case of the little one, as an example, of God's Elect ­ the helpless little lamb of the Shepherd's fold; to wit: "Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves." (Matt. 10:16) "I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine." (Jn. 10:14)  Sunday, February 8, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  "MY SHEEP HEAR MY VOICE, and I know them, and they follow me." (Jn. 10:27)  "My sheep hear my voice," is a mystical HEARING, and the "VOICE" is a mystical voice, and includes the voice or cry of the TRUMPET, the Silver Trumpet, which the little sheep hears at first in the call of God to salvation ­ the impulse upon the heart within; ­ and continues upon all life's important occasions ­ and persists throughout life until the Good Shepherd finally and gently calls the little lamb to Himself in Heaven at the sounding of the LAST TRUMP.  Nothing is more comforting than the Bible doctrine of the Silver Trumpets, implicit in this verse of "How Firm a Foundation, Ye Saints of the Lord;" to wit:  "E'en down to old age, all my people shall prove, My sovereign, eternal, unchangeable love. And when hoary hair shall their temples adorn, Like lambs they shall still in my bosom be borne." Can you not metaphorically hear the Silver Trumpet's urgent cry at appropriate places in the following passage of Scripture? To wit: "And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of strangers." (Jn. 10:4,5)  Beloved, the everlasting safety ­ i.e., the ETERNAL SECURITY ­ of all God's Elect lies right here; to wit: "And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of strangers." Jn. 10:5. Some stranger, ­ some bombastic blasphemer, ­ some spiritual bastard case from the mixt multitude comes along; ­ some smooth-talking son of Belial like the bait-and-switch artist Barack Obama; ­ some gainsaying heretic ­ and God's precious little Lambs CAN'T EVEN HEAR HIM !!! It's like the old Deputy Barney Fife dog whistle on the old Andy Griffith TV re-runs ­ which only the dogs could hear. The pitch was too high for humans to hear. Blow it all day, and nobody can hear it. But every dog in town would come, and raise cain. In somewhat like manner is the Savior's Voice and the Silver Trumpets to God's Elect Sheep. And what a wonderful ­ and what a comforting ­ thing it is.  Beloved, we cannot finally go astray. We cannot long be deceived by the likes of Barack Obama or any other gainsayer. Titus 1:9-11. We do not need the exhaustive labors of Alexander LaBrecque, who wrote a wonderful, thoroughly-researched, three-part article, entitled, "Obama's Religious Ruse: `I've Always Been a Christian;' (Part 1 of 3); Obama's Religious Ruse: His `Conversion;' (Part 2 of 3); Obama's Religious Ruse: The Cult of the Marxist Messiah. (Part 3 of 3)."  There are many footnotes in LaBrecque's piece, and he has done a wonderful service to all mankind, and speaks with authority when he makes such powerful announcements as these; to wit: "`The Audacity of Hope?' Obama has the audacity to claim he has always been a Christian while disbelieving the Christian hope and its foundation, the reality of Jesus' resurrection, whereby Jesus is Lord of all. His definition of `Christian' includes being an agnostic and a skeptic (what about being a murderer and sodomite promoter?). Not only is he a  Sunday, February 8, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  pseudo-Christian, he's A `MESSIANIC POSER.'"(That is, this blasphemer poses as Messiah; to  wit: Obama will be our Savior!)  Again, LaBrecque on Obama; to wit: "The preliminary title of a Chicago Tribune reporter's book on Obama was, `The Savior.' That author says `Throughout his life, Obama has been able to make people of wildly divergent vantage points see in him exactly what they want to see.' With HIS HEART'S ADULATION another journalist COMPARES THE EFFICACY OF OBAMA TO CHRIST !!!"  A filthy, fornicating jackass, who brags about how many females he has (quote) "had" (black and white females; in America and Europe and Africa) ­ I say this braying jackass dares to compare himself with our Lord Jesus Christ. Beloved, would anybody but Antichrist do such a thing ?; and, more importantly, make such a vile thing "stick ???" Again I say, we are very thankful to LaBrecque for his most excellent investigative journalism, exposing more devastating and very damaging facts on Obama, bringing them to the sanitizing light of day. But, God's Elect Sheep don't need his help. We have the Shepherd's Voice and we have the Silver Trumpets, both of which follow us, lovingly and powerfully, all our lives long ­ from birth to THE LAST TRUMP; to wit: "And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Make thee two trumpets of silver; of a whole piece shalt thou make them: that thou mayest use them for the CALLING OF THE ASSEMBLY, and for the JOURNEYING OF THE CAMPS." (Num. 10:1,2) Many years ago, in this place, this passage of Scripture, and this message conveyed to my heart from it ­ became very precious to me. The simple little Greek word ­ "ecclesia" ­ means, "a called out assembly;" and it is nearly always translated "church," in the New Testament, and refers to the local, authentic, visible "house of God" and "church of the living God" on the earth;" to wit: e.g.: "But if I tarry long, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the HOUSE OF GOD, which is the CHURCH OF THE LIVING GOD, the pillar and ground of the truth." (1 Tim. 3:15)  Water baptism by immersion of the penitent, wine and unleavened bread at the Lord's supper with none but church members, who are walking orderly, permitted to sit and eat and drink at the table, church discipline rigorously enforced, and no doctrine except strict Calvinism (TULIP Baptists) preached from the pulpit.  These watermarks, or Gospel indicia, identified those who knew how they ought to behave themselves in the house of God which is the ecclesia (i.e., Church) of God, the pillar and ground of the truth. And it became as clear as crystal to me, that notwithstanding the size of the congregation at Westboro Baptist Church, God's Elect Sheep (for this fold !!!) would eventually hear the Shepherd's voice, and would hear the Silver Trumpets "for the calling of the assembly." Num. 10:2. And those dear ones will thereupon set about spending their lives giving diligence to make their CALLING and ELECTION sure. 2 Pet. 1:10.  Sunday, February 8, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  I tell you, Beloved, that from those days so many years ago, to these days, I often think in my mind's eye of the individual members of this little church, within the framework of those two metaphors or prophetic similitudes ­ ("I have also spoken by the prophets, and I have multiplied visions, and used SIMILITUDES, by the ministry of the prophets." Hos. 12:10). Each Sunday witnesses the enactments of numerous miracles in this place. If one should ask, What brought you here to this humble place today? The answer would be, The Silver Trumpets. The Good Shepherd's voice. Nothing less miraculous than these divinely ordained voices, somehow manipulating innumerable acts of providence, to bring about the blessed result; the result, I say, that will make you constitutionally equipped and conditioned to joyfully hear and respond when the Last Trump sounds.  It will be no new, startling, or shocking experience for you when the Lord Himself descends from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the "TRUMP OF GOD" (1 Thes. 4:16); or, when you are changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the LAST TRUMP; for, make no mistake, Beloved, the LAST TRUMP shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. You will recognize the blessed Voice of the Last Trump; for you have become very familiar with it for many years and through many glorious adventures in which that Trump was involved. The entire experience of the Last Trump will be altogether pleasant and comfortable for us.  In addition to "the calling of the assembly," those blessed trumpets are "for the journeying of the camps." Num. 10:2. Is there any doubt what that means, in the last days of all, in the context of the picketing ministry of the Westboro Baptist Church? ­ which amazing ministry God has given us, by many infallible proofs; to wit: "Make thee two trumpets of silver...for the calling of the assembly (church), AND FOR THE JOURNEYING OF THE CAMPS." Num. 10:2. "Make full proof of thy ministry," commanded the dying apostle to young Timothy. 2 Tim. 4:5.  In the last 18 years, we have criss-crossed this nation (evangelizing all 50 states), Canada, and Iraq, faithfully publishing this crystal-clear message of God's inevitable wrath and doom shortly to be poured out upon a guilty nation and world ­ a message which God has given us ­ and we went forth taking nothing of the Gentiles (3 Jn. 7). We have carefully journalized, videographed and computerized this "journeying of the camps," (aka, this exciting adventure); and, as of last Thursday, February 5, 2009, this little church has conducted 39,794 open-air Gospel picketing services in 649 cities in all 50 states ­ and counting.  We are therefore extremely competent witnesses, based on vast first-hand experience, generated by the Silver Trumpets leading us into the thick of the forensic battle between good and evil on the eve of the consummation of all things, to give valuable testimony before the Throne of God. We are uniquely positioned ­ both geographically and theologically ­ temperamentally and experimentally ­ to engage in this conflict of the ages told by prophets and by sages, otherwise called the Wars of the Lord.  Sunday, February 8, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 5  Beloved, I am talking about the final end of all things whatsoever ­ the grand catastrophe of the world's history, now actually about to occur. The final and unprecedented event is to be marked by a series of deadly, overwhelming calamities ­ ALL ANNOUNCED BY OUR FRIENDS THE SILVER TRUMPETS !!! And all of these trumpets are held and blown by the seven presence-angels ­ the greatest and most powerful of all created beings ­ thus identifying this as the greatest and most damning of the divine curses and plagues upon all mankind. Beloved, one runs out of superlatives in Heaven's and Earth's Vocabularies !!!  Seiss says: "And here John beholds those angels ­ the glorious septemvirate of celestial archregents ­ the mightiest and the highest creatures in the universe ­ presenting themselves for the momentous work." "And I saw the seven angels which stood before God; and unto them were given SEVEN TRUMPETS." (Rev. 8:2)  Think of it, Beloved; the same Silver Trumpets that called you to salvation, and that called you to assemble with the church in this humble place, and that called you to the mean streets of journeying to receive the reproaches of this evil nation ­ now call upon you to have vital participatory honors in the final winding up of the affairs of this vile and corrupt world. "Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world?" (1 Cor. 6:2)  Think it not strange, Beloved; all the prophets told about it; e.g.: "Blow ye the trumpet in Zion (the church), and sound an alarm in my holy mountain (the church): let all the inhabitants of the land tremble: FOR THE DAY OF THE LORD COMETH, FOR IT IS NIGH AT HAND... And the Lord shall utter his voice before his army: for his camp is very great (his saints and angels): for he is strong that executeth his word: for THE DAY OF THE LORD IS GREAT AND VERY TERRIBLE; AND WHO CAN ABIDE IT?" (Joel 2:1,11)  From these and many, many other passages of Scripture, it most certainly appears that we will have a substantial part in the final outpouring of God's wrath upon the doomed world ­ CALLED TO THE HAPPY TASK, BY OUR OLD AND VERY FAMILIAR FRIEND, THE SILVER TRUMPET, SOUNDING FOR THE LAST TIME, AND HENCE CALLED "THE LAST TRUMP." 1 Cor. 15:52. It is the final consummation of the greatest mystery of God; to wit: "The great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hasteth greatly, even the VOICE OF THE DAY OF THE LORD: the mighty man shall cry there bitterly. THAT DAY IS A DAY OF WRATH, a day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness. (Yes! And,) A DAY OF THE TRUMPET." (Zeph. 1:14-16)  Beloved, sounds a lot like the hatred of God for all mankind ­ except for "a very small remnant" (Isa. 1:9). President Idiot, speaking at an idolatrous prayer breakfast in Washington yesterday, (Feb. 5), said no legitimate religion has the hatred of God as one of its basic tenets ­ or some such. Too bad President Stupid is so Bible-dumb.  I love you.  Amen.  
