Sunday, July 22, 2007 pg.1  Sermon Outline  David's Mighty Men, types of God's Elect in WBC  David's Mighty Men who came to David in the wilderness where he was hated and hounded by King Saul ­ "to make David king over all Israel" 1 Chron. 12:38 ­ I say, David's Mighty Men were types of New Testament saints in New Testament churches, who have forsaken all to follow and serve King Jesus, saying: "Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach. For here have we no continuing city, but we seek one to come." Heb. 13:13,14. David's Mighty Men left all the comforts of home to live in a hostile wilderness with David, as King Saul ­ in a jealous rage ­ had his whole army diligently seeking David's life. These Mighty Men went to join David in the wilderness because they were in deep, ruinous debt, they were distressed (in anguish under Saul's oppression), and they were discontented (bitter of soul). Their lives were unhappy and miserable under King Saul's administration. The story is told in 1 Sam. 22:1,2; to wit: "David therefore departed thence, and escaped to the cave Adullam...And every one that was in distress (i.e., in anguish due to oppression; see, S#4689 + S#6693), and every one that was in debt (i.e. having been deceived into borrowing money at usurious rates of interest, and being dunned by bill collectors; see, S#5378 + S#5377), and every one that was discontented (i.e., bitter of soul), gathered themselves unto him (David); and he became a captain over them; and there were with him about four hundred men." 1 Sam. 22:1,2. This is an elegant metaphor of the Elect of God, who confess that they are strangers and pilgrims on the earth, that they are miserable living in the City of Destruction and fearing the wrath of God to come, and that they therefore declare plainly that they seek a country, better than this, that is, an heavenly country; "wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God: for he hath prepared for them a city;" (Heb. 11:13-16) "For here have we no continuing city, but we seek one to come, whose builder and maker is God." Heb. 13:14. Our Great David calls us to suffer with him ­ as it were ­ "without the camp," i.e., to be ostracized and hated by all of society. As it is written: "Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people (God's Elect) with his own blood, suffered without the gate. Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach." Heb. 13:12,13. Again, as it is written: "If we suffer, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he also will deny us." 2 Tim. 2:12.  "David therefore departed thence, and escaped to the cave Adullam: and when his brethren and all his father's house heard it, they went down thither to him. And every one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto him; and he became a captain over them: and there were with him about four hundred men." (1 Samuel 22:1-2)  Sunday, July 22, 2007 pg.2  Sermon Outline  David's Mighty Men: TACHMONITES  As with David's Mighty Men leaving all to follow David into a danger-fraught wilderness knowing exactly what they were doing and what they were getting into, and yet rejoiced for the opportunity to suffer with David for a short while, and then to rule and reign with him, SO DO WE! "For there was joy in Israel!" (1 Chron. 12:40); to wit: "All these men of war, that could keep rank, came with a perfect heart to Hebron, to make David king over all Israel; and all the rest also of Israel were of one heart to make David king. And there they were with David three days, eating and drinking; for their brethren had prepared for them. Moreover they that were nigh them, even unto Issachar and Zebulun and Naphtali, brought bread on asses, and on camels, and on mules, and on oxen, and meat, meal, cakes of figs, and bunches of raisins, and wine, and oil, and oxen, and sheep abundantly; for there was joy in Israel." 1 Chron. 12:38-40. Now hear this companion verse: "If we suffer, we shall also reign with him!" And that blessed verse leads us through a dangerous wilderness, and refreshes us all along the journey, as a pillar of cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night. And that verse is supplemented by multitudes of "exceeding great and precious promises" (2 Pet. 1:4) ­ All to the effect that our afflictions are submicroscopic and infinitesimal (so tiny in quantity and volume as to be incapable of measurement) in size, and diminutive in duration, compared to the certainty of our glorious rewards, ­ all of which are infinite in size and duration; to wit, e.g.: "For our light (tiny) affliction, which is but for a (tiny) moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal." 2 Cor. 4:17,18. Indeed, our Lord Jesus Christ is our precise ­ and precisely-worded ­ pattern in and for this doctrine, urging us on to infinite reward and infinite glory; to wit: "Let us run with patience the race that is set before us, Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith; who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God." Heb. 12:1,2. And from that glorious throne on high, our Captain is beckoning us to join Him, with these happy words; to wit: "To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches." Rev. 3:21,22.  Sunday, July 22, 2007 pg.3  Sermon Outline  8 Characteristics of David's Mighty Men  Now let us examine the attributes and descriptive characteristics of David's Mighty Men ­ which are the same attributes and characteristics, in principle, as those possessed by God's Elect in New Testament Churches. In each case, they are supernatural gifts from God; "For at that time day by day there came to David to help him, until it was a great host, like the host of God." 1 Chron. 12:22. To wit:  1) "And they helped David against the band of the rovers; FOR THEY WERE ALL MIGHTY MEN OF VALOR." 1 Chron. 12:21. (Valor. Courage and Boldness in battle; Bravery under fire. "Who through faith...waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens." Heb. 12:34.)  2) "And THESE...WERE READY ARMED TO THE WAR." 1 Chron. 12:23. ("And be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you with meekness and fear." 1 Pet. 3:15. "Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier." 2 Tim. 2:3,4. "Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil." Eph. 6:11. "For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh; ­ [but we ARE engaged in a war!] ­ For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds." 2 Cor. 10:3,4.)  3) "THESE CAME TO DAVID TO HEBRON, TO TURN THE KINGDOM OF SAUL TO HIM, ACCORDING TO THE WORD OF GOD." 1 Chron. 12:23. (They had a thorough knowledge of the Word of God, and exactly how it should be applied to the providential situation of things on the ground, at that precise time and place of history; i.e., it was time for David to replace Saul as King of Israel!) 4) "WHICH WERE MEN THAT HAD UNDERSTANDING OF THE TIMES, TO KNOW WHAT ISRAEL OUGHT TO DO." 1 Chron. 12:32. (This attribute ­ an understanding of the times, which is substantially the same as the signs of the times of Matthew 16:3 ­ when connected to their thorough knowledge of the Word of the Lord of 1 Chronicles 12:23 ­ is solid evidence that David's Mighty Men were likely to have been God's Elect, making them mighty in spirit ­ even the Holy Spirit ­ as well as in body.) 5) They were battle-hardened, "SUCH AS WENT FORTH TO BATTLE, EXPERT IN WAR...WITH ALL MANNER OF INSTRUMENTS OF WAR FOR THE BATTLE." 1 Chron. 12:36,37.  Sunday, July 22, 2007 pg.4  Sermon Outline  6) "ALL THESE MEN OF WAR, THAT COULD KEEP RANK, (1  Chronicles 12:38)  7) "CAME WITH A PERFECT HEART TO MAKE DAVID KING OVER ISRAEL ...AND WERE OF ONE HEART TO MAKE DAVID KING." 1 Chron. 12:38. Words could not be plainer ­ and need not be added to ­ in identifying and describing God's Elect in the New Testament Church ­ even all the members of Westboro Baptist Church. "Ye also, as lively or living stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ." 1 Pet. 2:5.  "But now hath God set the members every one of them in the body, as it hath pleased him...But now are they many members, yet but one body... That there should be no schism in the body; but that the members should have the same care one for another." 1 Cor. 12:18,20,25.  "For ye are the temple of the living God; as God hath said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people." 2 Cor. 6:16. The church members [David's Mighty Men], keep rank, with true hearts that beat with singlehearted fidelity to Christ their Head. 8) King Saul's brethren of Benjamin, now forsaking him and turning to David, may provide the best description of all of David's Mighty Men; to wit:  "THEY WERE ARMED WITH BOWS, AND COULD USE BOTH THE RIGHT HAND AND THE LEFT IN HURLING STONES AND SHOOTING ARROWS OUT OF A BOW...MEN OF WAR FIT FOR THE BATTLE, THAT COULD HANDLE SHIELD AND BUCKLER, WHOSE FACES WERE LIKE THE FACES OF LIONS, AND WERE AS SWIFT AS THE ROES UPON THE MOUNTAINS." 1 Chron. 12:2,8.  
