Sunday, December 27, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  e "Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Also, thou son of man, thus  saith the Lord God unto the land of Israel; An end, THE END is come upon the four  corners of the land" ­ (i.e., the entirety of the land; Trapp: "They had defiled the land  from corner to corner" [as Ezra 9:10,11; to wit: `And now, O our God, what shall we  say after this? for we have forsaken thy commandments; Which thou hast  commanded by thy servants the prophets, saying, The land, unto which ye go to  possess it, is an unclean land with the filthiness of the peoples of the lands, with  their abominations, which have filled it from one end to another with their  uncleanness.'], which pretty well describes the United States of America today,  December, 2009; `it is an unclean land with the filthiness of the peoples of the  lands, with their abominations, which have filled it from one end to another with  their uncleanness.') ­ "Now is THE END come upon thee, and I will send mine  anger upon thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways, and will recompense  upon thee all thine abominations. And mine eye shall not spare thee, neither will I  have pity; but I will recompense thy ways upon thee, and thine abominations shall  be in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I am the Lord. Thus saith the Lord  God; An evil, an ONLY EVIL (i.e., NOTHING BUT EVIL, 100% EVIL), behold, is come.  AN EVIL is come, THE END is come; IT WATCHETH for thee; behold, IT IS COME.  Ezek. 7:1-6.  Beloved, here is an amazing, holy anthropomorphism ­ (ANTHROPOMORPHISM. Remember,  this is a figure of speech often used in the Bible; it is the attribution of human motivation,  characteristics, or behavior to inanimate objects, animals, or natural phenomena;) ­ here, an EVIL  END, AN IT ­ (an inanimate concept) is said to be performing a human function, to wit: "IT  WATCHETH for thee" to die and enter Hell (!) This shows the great value the Holy Ghost places  on figures of speech in conveying truth to the sanctified minds of God's elect. "Blessed are your  eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear," said our dear Lord Jesus in explaining why He  used parables in preaching to all men indiscriminately, but only to His own sheep  DISCRIMINATELY, i.e., particularly ­ (God is the Great DISCRIMINATOR [!]) ­ with saving  effect. Mat. 13:16. The same holy truth is conveyed in the following words by Hosea; to wit: "I  have also spoken by the prophets, and I have multiplied visions, and USED SIMILITUDES  (e.g., PARABLES, METAPHORS, TYPES, SIMILES, AND MANY OTHER FIGURES OF  SPEECH) by the ministry of the prophets." Hos. 12:10. Beloved, just think how many times and  different ways the Lord has striven to awaken sinners to the unmitigated terrors of the great and  dreadful Judgment Day ­ which is coming on inevitably, apace, and which certainly lies just ahead  for each of us children of Adam; to wit:  "And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment; So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many; and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation." (Heb. 9:27,28)  And I think it is primarily to the holy plethora (i.e., superabundance) of WARNINGS to sinners to flee from the wrath to come that the Holy Ghost has reference when He opens the book of Hebrews as follows; to wit: "God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake (warned) in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, Hath in these last days spoken unto us (warned us) by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds...Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard (warnings), lest at any time we should let them slip. For if the word spoken (warnings) by angels was stedfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward  Sunday, December 27, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  (warning); How shall we escape (i.e., escape the fires of everlasting Hell and damnation, what  else?), if we neglect so great salvation; which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord  (warnings), and was confirmed unto us (warnings) by them that heard him (heard His warnings);  God also bearing them witness (bearing them witness to their warnings, binding all those who  heard them), both with signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost,  according to his own will?" Heb. 1:1,2; 2:1-4.  The apostle Paul described his own ministry at Ephesus, which is typical of all true Christian ministries then and now; to wit: "Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of three years I ceased not to WARN every one night and day with tears." Acts 20:31. "Whom we preach, WARNING every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom; that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Whereunto I also labor, striving according to his working, which worketh in me mightily." Col. 1:28,29. It is Christ in you the hope of glory. "For it is God which worketh in you, both to will and to do of his good pleasure." Phil. 2:13. And again, "Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, Make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen." Heb. 13:20,21.  Nearing the end of his earthly ministry, and soon to be bound with Roman chains for the rest of his natural life, the apostle Paul issues a solemn appeal to the elders of the church at Ephesus, predicated upon two passages in Ezekiel; to wit: "And now, behold, I know that ye all, among whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of God, shall see my face no more. Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I AM PURE FROM THE BLOOD OF ALL MEN. FOR I HAVE NOT SHUNNED TO DECLARE UNTO YOU ALL THE COUNSEL OF GOD." (Acts 20:25-27)  It is at once obvious that Paul here implicates two passages in Ezekiel; to wit: "Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore hear the word at my mouth, and GIVE THEM WARNING FROM ME. When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but HIS BLOOD WILL I REQUIRE AT THINE HAND. Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity; but THOU HAST DELIVERED THY SOUL." Ezek. 3:17-19. What does the Lord mean when He says, "HIS BLOOD WILL I REQUIRE AT THINE HAND?" Again, "But if the watchman see the sword come, and blow not the trumpet, and the people be not warned; if the sword come, and take any person from among them, he is taken away in his iniquity; BUT HIS BLOOD WILL I REQUIRE AT THE WATCHMAN'S HAND." Ezek. 33:6. The same question arises. The words are very potent. What does the Lord mean, exactly? "His blood will I require at the watchman's hand," sounds very much like the Old Testament passage or passages the apostle referred to when he said to the Ephesian elders at Acts 20:26,27, "Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men (i.e., all God's Elect; the word "men" is not in the text, but was supplied by the King James translators, and is hence in italics in most all Bibles). For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God." Acts 20:26,27.  Sunday, December 27, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  Further light is thrown upon the Lord's meaning by consulting the immediate context; to wit:  "And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the elders of the church. And when they  were come to him, he said unto them, Ye know, from the first day that I came into Asia, after  what manner I have been with you at all seasons, Serving the Lord with all humility of mind,  and with many tears, and temptations, which befell me by the lying in wait of the Jews; And  how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have showed you, and have taught  you publickly, and from house to house, Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks,  repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ." Acts 20:17-21. And, again:  "So thou, O son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, and WARN them from me. When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shalt surely die; if thou dost not speak to WARN the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity; BUT HIS BLOOD WILL I REQUIRE AT THINE HAND." (Ezek. 33:7,8)  The grand old prophet Ezekiel is so insistent upon this subject ­ and so redundant; and the apostle Paul pays such deference to Ezekiel, and with such a fine point as they say; that I am convinced we are dealing with an extraordinarily important matter. Here at Ezekiel 33:8, the question arises again, What does it mean, "HIS BLOOD WILL I REQUIRE AT THINE HAND?" It means that the un-warned sinner will die in his sins and go straight to Hell; and the dumb-dog, greedy-dog, sleepy-dog, selfish-dog, gluttonous-dog, ignorant-dog, drunk-dog, so-called watchman who FAILED, NEGLECTED, AND REFUSED TO WARN, will also go to Hell right along with the un-warned sinner. That's what I think it means. I reason that there are only two places for a soul to go when he dies: Heaven or Hell. No surprises. No compromises. No in-between nonsense like purgatory. And, once he dies, his destiny is fixed; to wit: joy unspeakable and full of glory and eternal bliss; or, eternal torment and pain in Hell fire and brimstone. The un-warned sinner, and the lazy, ignorant, non-warning dumb-dog of a preacher ­ both alike bound for Hell ­ no ifs, ands or buts; to wit:  "His watchmen are blind; they are all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber. Yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot understand; they all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from his quarter. Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; and tomorrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant." (Isa. 56:9-12)  On the other hand, what evidence did Paul confidently say that he had that would prove beyond all doubt that he was pure from the blood of all men, or, put another way, that God Almighty would never require the doom of any others to be charged to Paul's account (i.e., "his blood will I require at thine hand")? What evidence? Here it is, and it is powerful, and it is objective to the maximum degree and transparently so, for all the world to see and read about through eternal ages to come; to wit: "And now, behold, I know that YE ALL, AMONG WHOM I HAVE GONE PREACHING THE KINGDOM OF GOD, shall see my face no more. WHEREFORE I take you to record this day" ­ (i.e., I call you Ephesian elders as my witnesses) ­ "that I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God." ­ (i.e., I have faithfully preached the whole Bible to you, laboring in the word and doctrine; predestination, election, reprobation, Calvinism, etc.) Acts 20:25-27.  Sunday, December 27, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  We may safely conclude from these passages describing the conduct and preaching of Paul as  being proof that he was "pure from the blood of all men;" simultaneously proves that all  preachers NOT WARNING sinners to flee the wrath to come, and NOT declaring "all the counsel  of God," including the Five Points of Calvinism, etc., are guilty of hastening the doom of millions,  and thereby invoking the furious wrath and vengeance of God upon themselves. "Because thou  hast not remembered the days of thy youth, but hast FRETTED (i.e., enraged and infuriated) me  in all these things; behold, therefore I also will recompense thy way upon thine head, saith the  Lord God, and thou shalt not commit this lewdness above all thine abominations." Ezek. 16:43.  The opening text of this sermon has the Lord solemnly announcing that THE END, OF THE END, of all things is at hand; to wit: "Now is the end come upon thee, and I will send mine anger upon thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways, and will recompense upon thee all thine abominations. And mine eye shall not spare thee, neither will I have pity; but I will recompense thy ways upon thee, and thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I am the Lord. Thus saith the Lord God; An evil, an only evil, behold, is come. AN end is come, THE end is come; it watcheth for thee; behold it is come. The morning is come unto thee, O thou that dwellest in the land; the time is come, the day of trouble is near, and not the sounding again of the mountains (i.e., not just more echoes from the hills). Now will I shortly pour out my fury upon thee, and accomplish mine anger upon thee; and I will judge thee according to thy ways, and will recompense thee for all thine abominations. And mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity; I will recompense thee according to thy ways and thine abominations that are in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I am the Lord that smiteth." Ezek. 7:3-9.  We recently heard from the other side of the world (Clifton, Australia, to be exact); by virtue of a man named Ken Hood writing a letter to the editor of the Topeka Capital-Journal. It was a short letter, and something about it immediately resonated with me ­ a rare experience to be sure. It just might be the bleating of God's little sheep. Gospel light could be shining. Here it is; to wit: "The Westboro Baptists may be on the right track after all, although gay marriage, not just homosexuality, could be the catalyst for the consummation (i.e., the proliferation of worldwide fag marriages may be the thing that triggers the Second Coming of our dear Lord Jesus in power and glory, the consummation of all things [Dan. 9:27]). With several states ratifying gay marriage and movements afoot to extend it elsewhere, it could become general. The Babylonian Talmud reveals that until now only one society in all of history practiced it, the Antediluvian. The Babylonian Talmud also says the practice was the reason for Noah's flood. The risk of retribution is real. Interestingly, Jesus said the time of his coming would resemble those far off days. He even mentioned `marriage' and `giving in marriage.' We in Australia have just had our first such wedding. It's a worry. Ken Hood. Clifton, Australia."  The Talmud expounds the Torah (i.e., the Pentateuch), like an official Gill or Trapp. I was working on this sermon, near the end, when the message from Down Under came; and I tell you, Beloved, it was like a huge exclamation mark to the nearly-completed sermon (!). There is a palpable Satanic Zeitgeist throughout the world ­ a feverish push on every legal and propaganda front ­ demanding that fags have the absolute right to marry one another. I have long believed that filthy sodomitical practices and conditions ruled the world in Noah's day, which only a worldwide flood could wash away. "As it was in the days of Lot, so shall it be when the Son of man is revealed." Lk. 17:28-30. "As the days of Noah were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be." Mat. 24:37. I love you. Amen.  
