Sunday, October 11, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and  glory for ever and ever. Amen." 1 Tim. 1:17. "And when those beasts give glory  and honor and thanks to him that sat on the throne, who liveth for ever and ever,  The four and twenty elders fall down before him that sat on the throne, and worship  him that liveth for ever and ever, and cast their crowns before the throne, saying,  Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honor and power; for thou hast  created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created." Rev. 4:9-11.  "After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all  nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before  the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands; And cried with a loud  voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the  Lamb. And all the angels stood round about the throne, and about the elders and the four beasts, and fell before the throne on their faces, and worshipped God, Saying, Amen; Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen." Rev. 7:9-12.  Beloved. We serve a Great God, and our THOUGHTS must be much upon that Greatness ­ as are the THOUGHTS of that blessed innumerable company of holy angels, and the THOUGHTS of that blessed "so great a cloud of witnesses" gone on before us. Heb. 12:1,22. We come now to consider some little portion of the ever-blessed THOUGHTS of God to us-ward, ­ but only so far as our Heavenly Father has revealed them to us, with such inferences as may reasonably be taken there from. E.g., "Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works which thou hast done, and thy THOUGHTS which are to us-ward; they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee; if I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can be numbered." Psa. 40:5. Great and invaluable and indispensable "heart work" ­ so-called by the old preachers ­ I say, "heart work" is accomplished, at the THOUGHTS level ­ to the everlasting comfort and delight of God's Elect; to-wit: "In the multitude of my THOUGHTS within me thy comforts delight my soul." (Psa. 94:19)  And there follows immediately a sample of just the kind of activity intended ­ a "bringing into captivity every THOUGHT to the obedience of Christ" (2 Cor. 10:5); i.e., "heart work" (!) A brief description of the victorious spiritual warfare of the saints with the devil and his "throne of iniquity" follows the simple claim of the efficacy of the THOUGHT weaponry of the warriors of Christ; to wit: "In the multitude of my THOUGHTS within me thy comforts delight my soul," ­ (BANG !) ­ "Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which frameth mischief by a law? They gather themselves together against the soul of the righteous, and condemn the innocent blood. But the Lord is my defence; and my God is the rock of my refuge. And he shall bring upon them their own iniquity, and shall cut them off in their own wickedness; yea, the Lord our God shall cut them off." Psa. 94:19-23.  Thus you see how it is that "we wrestle not against flesh and blood," ­ (i.e., flesh and blood only, or even decisively), ­ "but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places." Eph. 6:12. And thus you see how it is that we become "strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might," and how it is that we "put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil...(and) take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand." Eph. 6:10,11,13.  The filthy Obama regime ­ with an administration typified by the militant fag Kevin Jennings wielding the absolute power of the federal government, with a sinister title of "Safe Schools Czar," is a real life case study of Satanic human government at its worse.  Sunday, October 11, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  Make no mistake. We at Westboro Baptist Church are waging deadly spiritual warfare against the United States of America, whose government is now in the hands of militant sodomites and abortionists like President Barack Obama and Kevin Jennings. When he was running for president, Obama pledged, if elected, that he would use the Bully Pulpit of the White House and the full resources of the presidency of the United States to advance the twin Satanic causes of sodomy and abortion. His words were that he would be a "fierce advocate" for those two causes that come straight from the bowels of Hell.  Candidate Obama reduced his Satanic pledges to writing in a long statement entitled, "Open Letter from Barack Obama to the LGBT (fag/dyke) Community;" and that document was circulated widely throughout the sodomite media, and also throughout the nation's mass media generally, starting in early March, 2008, before the primary election, which Obama won over Hillary Clinton ­ thanks to massive support of every kind from fags and their huge disposable incomes with no (or relatively few) children to feed and care for. And, Obama went on to win the general election ­ with unprecedentedly-massive help from fags ­ openly and notoriously provided. Thus, you see, Beloved, that this evil sodomite nation had full advance notice and warning, that Obama was sworn to "fiercely" advance the sinful sodomite and abortion causes, using the White House as a Bully Pulpit and the full powers and resources of the Presidency for the Hellish purpose.  Last night, in Washington DC, the largest and richest fag organization in the world held a gigantic banquet, to rival the blasphemous banquet of Babylonian King Belshazzar, as recounted in the 5th chapter of the book of Daniel. Big bucks were raised. The affair was star-studded. Demagogic politicians groveled for the fag vote and the fag buck. The event was held in the cavernous Washington Convention Center. And, Beloved, guess who delivered the Keynote Address. You got it. Barack Hussein Obama, President of the United States of America. The homo-fascist tyrant lent his enormous prestige and ex officio power to the fags and baby-killers of the world. And we, humble servants of the Most High God, picketed the filthy thing (!) Yes (!) In religious protest and warning: "Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities." (Rev. 18:4,5)  Certainly, that idolatrous and sodomitical banquet epitomized doomed Babylon as well as doomed Sodom, especially where it is said, "For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her." Rev. 18:3. And certainly, that vile scene last night in the capital of this doomed nation is well-described where it is said, "And after these things I saw another angel come down from heaven, having great power, and the earth was lightened with his glory. And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird." Rev. 18:1,2.  Indeed, "and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird." Rev. 18:2 Beloved. We are dealing with devils and their habitation (i.e., where they live); and we are dealing with EVERY foul spirit. And what do you think of this cage or coop or some kind of swinging place of caged confinement? For restraining EVERY unclean and hateful bird? Remember, Beloved, we are engaged at wrestling against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. Obama and his sick sycophants like Kevin Jennings certainly qualify as rulers of the darkness of this world, and they are certainly practitioners of spiritual wickedness in high places.  Sunday, October 11, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  Those two reprobates (i.e., Obama and Jennings, the non-Elect), are, indeed, demon-possessed, and, from time to time Satan no doubt enters them as he did Judas Iscariot and others in Scripture for the purpose of working his Satanic mischief. We preach to them discriminatorily, and we pray with regard to them, that God will deliver us from their Satanic wiles and devices; and in these and other ways ­ (e.g., imprecatory prayers, or praying for God to curse the tyrants) ­ we wrestle not ONLY against flesh and blood. Eph. 6:10-18. "For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh" ­ (but we DO WAGE SPIRITUAL WAR; often grim and deadly; always against a skillful and determined enemy). ­ "(For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty" [we should reflect often on the genuine MIGHTINESS of our weapons, beginning with the sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God, wielded skillfully - Eph. 6:17] ­ I say, "mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds;) Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ." 2 Cor. 10:3-5.  Barack Hussein Obama, president of the United States of America, is an abominable murderer, from the standpoint and the viewpoint of the Bible and the God of the Bible ­ and, perforce, from the viewpoint of all who love and believe the Bible and who love and trust the God of the Bible. Period. No ifs, ands or buts. "Thou shalt not lie with mankind as with womankind; it is abomination." Lev. 18:22. Obama has revealed in at least one of his books that he is a cheap, fornicating womanizer on four continents. Obama has revealed also that in most of his formative years he was fathered and mentored by a black man named Frank Marshall Davis, who was a perverted, bisexual dope-head. Davis, who became a father to young Obama, once wrote a book about his own dark sexual exploits. He bragged of "spanking" sex-craved white women, and of having swinger parties with depraved white women. His unusual ties as mentor and teacher of Barack Obama are available on video from Texe Marrs, 1708 Patterson Road, Austin, Texas.  Obama's most intimate Chicago associates were, and are today, perverts. Virtually all are Jews, and most are gay. Indeed, Barack Obama's whole life has been a sordid cesspool and saga of intensely perverted homosexual buggery, and a `Hate Whitey' form of black racism. What we have here is a President who is alien to the Bible. As to his willingness to commit murder if he deems it expedient, Obama bragged publicly as follows: "We've got two daughters, nine years old and six years old. I'm going to teach them first of all about values and morals, but if they make a mistake, I don't want them punished with a baby." There you have it, out of his own filthy mouth. The pervert occupying the White House as President of the United States of America, is an admitted abominable murderer.  An altogether fitting speaker for the Keynote Address for the largest organization of fags and dykes in the world, gathered in Washington, DC, world capital of militant sodomites. Satan's most recent entry into the willing body of Obama, for a bit of Satanic mischief, appears to have been for the purpose of appointing demon-possessed Kevin Jennings as America's so-called "Safe Schools Czar." Jennings ­ whose father was a Baptist minister (!) ­ admitted in his Memoir, published in 2006, that because God did not make him happy and lovingly accepted in society as a homosexual, that he told God, "Screw you, buddy, I don't need you around anymore." Obama had full knowledge of Jennings and his homosexuality and his blasphemy and his sacrilege ­ when Obama placed Jennings in charge of pushing homosexuality down the throat of every public school child in America (!) Obama thereby became as guilty, as blasphemous, and as sacrilegious as Jennings. Obama has filled his administration and the federal work force with the vile likes of Kevin Jennings. I use him here as typifying the Hellish Obama administration.  Sunday, October 11, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  Therefore, let us examine Jennings more closely: Jennings was founder and executive director of GLSEN (Gay, Lesbian, and Straight Education Network), developing and advocating classroom curricula for public schools that would re-educate school-children to embrace filthy homosexuality. As a key part of their strategy GLSEN leaders say they specifically target children as young as kindergarten to begin a "saturation process, that forms the child's imagination with positive impressions of the homosexual lifestyle, and so pre-cognitively influences the way a child perceives the world and makes judgments on right and wrong." That, Beloved, is what I call Satanese for: Teach the child as follows: "Don't believe the Bible. God is a liar. Ye shall not surely die if you flatly disobey the plain commandments of God." Gen. 3:1-6.  Jennings has a history of bashing Christians, which appears deeply rooted in his decision at 17 years-old that he was a homosexual and God was to blame for his feelings of guilt and shame. He says in his book called "Mama's Boy, Preacher's Son: A Memoir," as follows: "Before, I was the one who was failing God; now I decided He was the one who had failed me," wrote Jennings. "I decided I had done nothing wrong: He had, by promising to `set you free' and never delivering on His promise. What had He done for me, other than make me feel shame and guilt? Squat. Screw you, buddy - I don't need you around anymore, I decided." Jennings still retains contempt for those on what he calls the religious right. At a recent conference Jennings told a gathering that conservative-minded Christians were "hard core bigots" who should "drop dead;" but he had the group laughing by telling them he really wanted to just say to them: "f...you!" It was bad enough when cheap, filthy-talking blasphemers like Obama and Jennings did their potty-mouth routine in back alleys where they belong today.  Now, with the exact same mentality and morals as then, Obama is the most powerful man in the world, and Jennings is in a position ­ using our tax money by the $billions ­ to push the filthiest conduct known to man or beast down the throat of every public school child in America. And so, the world is set ­ de facto ­ to control the THOUGHTS of all mankind ­ as it was in the days before the Great Flood ­ (called, "the waters of Noah," ­ Isa. 54:9 - "For this is as the waters of Noah unto me."). It was the THOUGHT-LIFE of the antediluvian sinners that triggered the wrath of God, and sealed the doom of millions at once; to wit: "And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the THOUGHTS of his heart was only evil continually." (Gen. 6:5) "And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth." (Gen. 6:12) Beloved, with men like Obama and Jennings absolutely in the driver's seat, and absolutely running the world, can the end be far away? "But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burned up. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness. Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat?...Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also, being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him be glory both now and for ever. Amen." (2 Pet. 3:10-12,17,18)  I love you. Amen.  
