Sunday, December 5, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Go through, go through the gates; prepare ye the way of the people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a standard for the people. Behold, the Lord hath proclaimed unto the end of the world, say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation cometh; behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him. And they shall call them, The holy people, The redeemed of the Lord; and thou shalt be called, Sought out, A city not forsaken. Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? this that is glorious in his apparel, travelling in the greatness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save. Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the winefat? I have trodden the winepress alone; and of the people there was none with me; for I will tread them in mine anger. and trample them in my fury; and their blood will be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment. For the DAY OF VENGEANCE is in mine heart, and the YEAR OF MY REDEEMED IS COME. And I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that there was none to uphold; therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me; and my fury, it upheld me. And I will tread down the people in mine anger, and make them drunk in my fury, and I will bring down their strength to the earth." Isa. 62:10-12; 63:1-6.  Here is a picture of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Mighty God of Vengeance, as He shall appear at the end of the world, coming in power and great glory to punish the wicked, the non-Elect, in eternal retaliation and recompence for the way they persecuted and mistreated His Elect for some 6,000 years upon earth. The righteous shall then rejoice when he sees the vengeance, for which he has cried to God day and night, and concerning which the Lord Jesus said, "And shall not God avenge His own Elect who cry unto God day and night, though he bear long with them? I tell you, He will speedily avenge them." Luke 18:7-8. Moreover, the blood of thousands, if not millions, cries unto God from under the altar in Heaven, saying, with a loud voice, "How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and AVENGE OUR BLOOD on them that dwell on the earth?" Rev. 6:10. And so you see now, Beloved, exactly where the great volumes of holy blood come from, that soak the garments of the Mighty Traveler coming up out of Bozrah, red in his apparel; to wit:  "Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the winefat? (Isa. 63:2)  Beloved, is not this doctrine more than theory with us at Westboro Baptist Church? Let us look again and at length at this glorious Son of God as He appears fresh from His slaughter of all the persecutors of His people ­ including all the persecutors of the humble servants of God at Westboro Baptist Church. See, Isa. 63:1-6.  This is a most remarkable passage of Scripture. God's persecuted ones ­ His Elect ­ are herein asking two questions; to wit: 1) "Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah?" (I.e., Edom is the land of Esau the reprobate, and Bozrah is a principal city of Edom. Thus, the Lord Jesus is here represented as returning from the slaughter of all persecutors of His people). And, 2) "Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the winefat?" (I.e., On six separate occasions the Lord Jesus answered the Elect's inquiry ­ as to why His garments were blood-red ­ by explaining that it was the blood of the Elect's persecutors which He, the Lord Jesus had personally shed. It was the end of the world. It was the day of God's vengeance, foretold by the Savior Himself in Luke, chapter 18;) to wit:  "And he spake a parable unto them to this end, that men ought always to pray, and not to faint; saying, There was in a city a judge, which feared not God, neither regarded man; And there was a widow in that city; and she came unto him, saying, Avenge me of mine adversary. And he would not for a while; but afterward he said within himself, Though I fear not God, nor regard man; Yet because this widow troubleth me, I will avenge her; lest by her continual coming she weary me. And the  Sunday, December 5, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  Lord said, Hear what the unjust judge saith. AND SHALL NOT GOD AVENGE HIS OWN  ELECT, WHICH CRY DAY AND NIGHT UNTO HIM, though he bear long with them? I  tell you that HE WILL AVENGE THEM speedily." (Lk. 18:1-8)  Yes, yes, yes! This promise by the Lord Jesus was made to all God's Elect about 2,000 years ago. It is VERY important to all God's suffering saints alive on the Earth, at any given time, enduring persecutions and afflictions and fiery reproaches at the hands of Satan's children; (Jn. 8:44), and  who find heavenly comfort in such promises and assurances; to wit:  "Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you; but rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that, when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you." (1 Pet. 4:12-14)  What would be better calculated to comfort the suffering saints under fiery trials than a full and blessed view of their mighty Savior with garments soaked in the fresh-spilled blood of their cruel persecutors? And even as that beautiful sight draws nigh, we hear the Savior announce:  "I have trodden the winepress alone; and of the people there was none with me; for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment. For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come." (Isa. 63:3,4)  Thereupon the dear Savior reveals in a most blessed outpouring of great and precious words, just how deeply He loves His Elect, and hence with what passion he wades into the vile persecutors of His loved ones, cutting and slashing, sprinkling and soaking His beautiful garments. The Song of Solomon is filled with passages of tender love that the Savior has for his people; but I think that none exceeds that of the mighty Savior coming from Edom with bloody garments, and explaining to His Beloved Little Ones exactly why He slaughtered billions in vengeance and retaliation and recompense ­ all because they persecuted His Elect; to wit:  "And I will tread down the people in mine anger, and make them drunk in my fury, and I will bring down their strength to the earth. I will mention the lovingkindnesses of the Lord, and the praises of the Lord, according to all that the Lord hath bestowed on us, and the great goodness toward the house of Israel, which he hath bestowed on them according to his mercies, and according to the multitude of his lovingkindnesses. For he said, Surely they are my people, children that will not lie; so he was their Savior. In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence saved them; in his love and in his pity he redeemed them; and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old." (Isa. 63:6-9)  The juxtaposition of these words by the Holy Ghost, to the Person and mission of God the Son with His garments soaked with fresh-killed human slaughter ­ should leave no doubt that the scene is that of Divine retribution upon mankind because of their cruel mistreatment of God's Elect while they live on Earth. This is a subject scarcely ­ IF EVER ­ sermonized upon by the 600,000 preachers, priests and rabbis in the United States. Like the surrender of planet Earth to the filthy sodomite agenda. And yet, the Bible is full of both subjects ­ from Genesis to The Revelation of St. John the Revelator. Take, for example, the dramatic passage of Scripture depicting an angel standing in the sun ­ evidently at the end of the world ­ calling for every fowl alive to come to a grisly feast of all reprobate cadavers (i.e., human corpses) ­ flesh only ­ (no blood?) ­ in the Valley of Megiddo (or, Armageddon); to wit:  "And I saw an angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a loud voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, Come and gather yourselves together unto  Sunday, December 5, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  the supper of the great God. That ye may eat the FLESH of kings, and the FLESH of  captains, the FLESH of mighty men, and the FLESH of horses, and of them that sit on  them, AND THE FLESH OF ALL MEN, both free and bond, both small and great...And the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat upon the horse, which sword  proceeded out of his mouth; and all the fowls were filled with their FLESH."  (Rev. 19:17-18,21)  Now take a closer look at "him that sat upon the horse," and see if you do not agree with the  likelihood that He is one and the same with the avenging Son of God whose garments were soaked with the blood of the Satanic persecutors of God's Elect, as identified in Isa., chap. 63. Notice the points of similarity; to wit: "And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse; and he that sat  upon him was called Faithful and True, and in righteousness he doth judge and make war. His  eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns; and he had a name written, that  no man knew, but he himself. AND HE WAS CLOTHED WITH A VESTURE DIPPED IN BLOOD;" ­ (Bingo!!! Almost dispositive, standing alone, wouldn't you say?!) ­ "and his name is  called The Word of God. And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses,  clothed in fine linen, white and clean. And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he  should smite the nations; and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; and HE TREADETH THE WINEPRESS OF THE FIERCENESS AND WRATH OF ALMIGHTY GOD" ­ Again,  BINGO!!! Rev. 19:11-15. And see how the two passages do warmly and closely complement each  other. Our dear Lord Jesus does wonderfully love His Church, His Bride, His body, insomuch that  we are told that He gave Himself FOR IT. Not for every individual of mankind, but only for His  church.  "Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself FOR IT." (Eph. 5:25)  "And walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us, and hath given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweetsmelling savor." (Eph. 5:2)  "But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, Even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ, (by grace ye are saved;) And hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus; That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus." (Eph. 2:4-7) Beloved, we are the apple of God's eye. "He has reproved kings for our sakes, saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm." Psa. 105:14-15. Now, what do you suppose God will do to those who have maliciously persecuted, robbed, mocked, defamed, slandered, sued, arrested, jailed, beaten, bombed, vandalized, torched, slashed tires, etc.?  "BUT THE LORD IS WITH ME AS A MIGHTY TERRIBLE ONE; THEREFORE my persecutors shall stumble, and they shall not prevail; they shall be greatly ashamed; for they shall not prosper; their everlasting confusion shall never be forgotten. But, O Lord of hosts, that triest the righteous, and seest the reins and the heart, LET ME SEE THY VENGEANCE ON THEM; for unto thee have I opened my cause." (Jer. 20:11,12)  The mass annihilating vengeance wreaked upon those who have persecuted the righteous for doing nothing but preaching God's Word to the rebels ­ Is the cause for great and eternal rejoicing. It is the answer to the imprecatory prayers of all the saints of all ages, the bottom line of which is, "LET ME SEE THY VENGEANCE ON THEM." Jer. 20:12.  "REJOICE OVER HER, THOU HEAVEN, AND YE HOLY APOSTLES AND PROPHETS; FOR GOD HATH AVENGED YOU ON HER." (Rev. 18:20)  Sunday, December 5, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  "The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance; he shall wash his feet in  the blood of the wicked." (Psa. 58:10)  When the righteous see the massive carnage done by our dear blood-spattered Savior to the evil persecutors, they will recognize the answer to their heart-felt prayers ­ indeed, their IMPRECATORY PRAYERS ­ indeed, their cries to God DAY AND NIGHT ­ in the final and definitive words of our dear Lord Jesus; to wit: "And shall not God avenge His own elect, which cry day and night unto Him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that He WILL AVENGE THEM SPEEDILY. Nevertheless, when the Son of man cometh, shall He find faith on the earth?" Lk. 18:7,8. Beloved, is not this the iron-clad promise of the Son of God to avenge us? ­ (i.e., "I TELL YOU THAT HE WILL AVENGE THEM SPEEDILY." Lk. 18:8.) And, is not the wholesale slaughter of the wicked by the Mighty Traveller coming up from Edom with dyed garments from Bozrah (Isa. 63:1-6) the absolute answer to those prayers of the Elect FOR VENGEANCE through the ages?  Furthermore, when our Savior sits astride His white horse and rides forth conquering and to conquer, we read that He is called Faithful and True, and that "in righteousness he doth judge and make war." Rev. 19:11. Interpret it this way: He is called Faithful and True, because He now rides forth to keep His promises to avenge His Elect by destroying their persecutors by making war against them. Hence we are told, "AND HE WAS CLOTHED WITH A VESTURE DIPPED IN BLOOD." Rev. 19:13. Yes, even the blood of those who persecuted His Elect on Earth ­ as is the case with Him; as the Mighty blood-soaked Savior was so pictured in Isa. 63:1-6. Furthermore, His divine "RIGHTEOUSNESS" is implicated ­ BY HIM ­ here; to wit: "and in RIGHTEOUSNESS he doth judge and make war." Rev. 19:11. The message is clear. Slaughtering billions of the cruel persecutors of God's people is the only RIGHTEOUS thing to do; to wit: "Seeing it is a RIGHTEOUS thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; And to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, In flaming fire TAKING VENGEANCE on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power; when he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe." (2 Thes. 1:6-10)  The church of the Thessalonians was famous for the persecutions that they endured; according to Paul in his letter to them; to wit: "So that we ourselves glory in you in the churches of God for your patience and faith IN ALL YOUR PERSECUTIONS AND TRIBULATIONS THAT YE ENDURE." 2 Thes. 1:4. They were advised to meditate on the sure and certain Day of Vengeance wherein they would be satisfying eye-witnesses to the bloody destruction of their Persecutors. Likewise, the eternal principle lies within this short passage; to wit: "Dearly beloved, AVENGE NOT YOURSELVES, but rather give place unto wrath; for it is written, VENGEANCE IS MINE; I WILL REPAY, SAITH THE LORD." (Rom. 12:19)  Bloody vengeance is on the way. Isa. 63 & Rev. 19. Rejoice! Be thankful! Psalm 105, and an identical passage in 1st Chron. 16:21, articulate the comforting principle about as well as it has ever been spoken; to wit: "When they went from one nation to another, from one kingdom to another people; He suffered no man to do them wrong; yea, he reproved kings for their sakes; Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm." (Psa. 105:13-15) "FOR HE THAT TOUCHETH YOU TOUCHETH THE APPLE OF HIS EYE." (Zech. 2:8) I love you. Amen.  
