Sunday, November 8, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Thou shalt also make a laver of  brass," ­ (i.e., laver, a large basin or pan, a large basin used in ancient times  by the priest for ablutions, [i.e., sacrifices], which is for ritual purification, the washing is before making a sacrificial offering), ­ "and his foot (base) also of  brass, to wash withal; and thou shalt put it between the tabernacle of the  congregation and the altar, and thou shalt put water therein. For Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet thereat; When they go into the  tabernacle of the congregation, they shall wash with water, THAT THEY DIE  NOT; or when they come near to the altar to minister, to burn offering made by fire unto the Lord; So they shall wash their hands and their feet, THAT  THEY DIE NOT; and it shall be a statute for ever to them, even to him and to  his seed throughout their generations." Ex. 30:17-21.  The death penalty which was attached to all violations of this body-washing requirement certainly reflects how important the measure was in the eyes of God. Beloved, it was a BIG DEAL; ­ and the matter was not open for discussion. You fail to wash up. YOU DIE. Just as all other items and practices pertaining to the tabernacle and its trappings had symbolic references in some important way to the Lord Jesus Christ, His holy nature, and His glorious attributes, ­ even so, this holy washing by God's anointed priests was vital and indispensable to a well-rounded understanding of our salvation.  Everything about Israel's tabernacle in the wilderness, ­ (superceded and subsumed by the Temple on Mt. Zion) ­ stood for something important, right down to the requirement that there had to be a unique and divinely concocted PERFUME, dictating the way things SMELLED around the place, as one drew near to the badger-skin outer covering of that amazing structure. Yes. If it didn't smell right ­ then it wasn't right. Think of it. One whiff told the story. And nowhere else in the world could anybody else in the world use the lovely and precious perfume that told the whole world and everybody in it that THIS is the ONLY dwelling place on earth among men, of the Great Jehovah God.  Here is the application of the Great Holy Perfume Doctrine; to wit: Don't you try to tell me that you could not discern which church on earth was right in its doctrines and practices, and so you either didn't affiliate with any, or you picked one on the basis of its ostentatious display of ceremony and ritual. You have checked your brains at the door. God has so arranged it, that His dwelling place on this earth looks right, sounds right, feels right, tastes right, and even SMELLS RIGHT (!) You have to be deaf, dumb, blind, too old to smell, and dead, to mistake it with any of these whoremongering, lying, Devil-worshiping, idolatrous, ­ and STINKING ­ witches' covens, on every hill, mountain, high place or grove.  Check it out: "And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, This shall be an holy anointing oil unto me throughout your generations. Upon man's flesh shall it not be poured, neither shall ye make any other like it, after the composition of it; it is holy, and it shall be holy unto you. Whosoever compoundeth any like it, or whosoever putteth any of it upon a stranger, shall even be cut off from his people" ­ (i.e., cut off from Israel, Israel here standing for God's elect; and, not to be one of God's elect is to end up in Hell; a heavy penalty indeed for usurping, or counterfeiting, or infringing upon Heaven's patent rights to the Lord's exclusive, identifying Holy Perfume). ­ "And the Lord said unto Moses, Take unto thee sweet spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; these sweet spices with pure frankincense; of each shall there be a like weight; And thou shalt make it a perfume, a confection after the art of the apothecary, tempered together, pure and holy; And thou shalt beat some of it very small, and put of it before the testimony in the tabernacle of the congregation, where I will meet with thee; it shall be unto you most holy. And for the perfume  Sunday, November 8, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  which thou shalt make, ye shall not make to yourselves according to the composition thereof; it shall  be unto thee holy for the Lord. Whosoever shall make like unto that, to smell thereto, shall even be  cut off from his people (i.e., he shall go to Hell)." Ex. 30:34-38.  Here again, for what appears at first blush to be a relatively minor transgression ­ the ultimate penalty, the death penalty, was prescribed by the Lord. But, with the eyes of the spiritual understanding being enlightened, ­ (to wit: "That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him; The EYES OF YOUR UNDERSTANDING BEING ENLIGHTENED; that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints." Eph. 1:17,18.) ­ I say, when the eyes of our understanding are enlightened, an altogether different picture emerges. We are, ­ when considered aright, ­ talking about life and death, Heaven and Hell ­ nothing less. Tampering with the Holy Perfume meant obfuscating or misidentifying or confusing the dwelling place of God upon the earth in this the days of the church militant. We are, according to David, in Psalm 27, talking about the most important thing in the world; to wit: "One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his temple." (Psa. 27:4)  A Psalm of David. The question that presents itself to every thoughtful person ought to be, and is, except for Devil-Worshiping fools ­ (And we know that only stripes are for the back of fools; to wit: "Judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the back of fools." Prov. 19:29.) ­ The question, I repeat, is this, Where does God meet with his people on earth, as the only place for legitimate public worship? This, of course, requires accurately identifying the house of God; to wit: "But if I tarry long, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God, which is the church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth." (1 Tim. 3:15)  Back to the prophet David ­ (i.e., "Men and brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried, and his sepulchre is with us unto this day. THEREFORE BEING A PROPHET, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne." Acts 2:29,30.) I say, Back to David, and Psalm 27, and the doctrine of the Holy Perfume, and the mandatory, ritualistic washings of the hands and feet by the Lord's Aaronic priests. "One thing" was so important to David that all other things in his life faded into nothingness by comparison. "ONE THING," said David, "have I desired of the Lord, THAT will I seek after." Psa. 27:4. Even if David is using a little hyperbole here, still, it bespeaks a powerful, Gospel truth.  What is it ­ what is that ONE THING ­ that David has desired of the Lord, and is prepared to spend his life seeking after if necessary? Implicit in his passionate desire is David's straight-forward recognition that he can get his desire only from the Lord; to wit: "One thing have I DESIRED OF THE LORD." Psa. 27:4(a). Since his desired boon is to "dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life," it is axiomatic that David must have an authoritative identification of "the house of the Lord." And THAT, Beloved, is where such items as the Holy Perfume and the Foot-Washing at the Laver ­ and a whole multitude of other sounds, and sights, and feels, and SMELLS, ­ come in. And they all point, unerringly, to our dear Lord Jesus and His precious blood of the everlasting covenant; to wit:  Sunday, November 8, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  "Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the BLOOD OF THE EVERLASTING COVENANT, Make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen." (Heb. 13:20,21)  The laver of brass for the washing of the priests was ordered to be placed ­ ordered by a sovereign God in eternal ages past ­ ordered to be placed first in the tabernacle between the tabernacle of the congregation and the altar; to wit: "And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Thou shalt also make a laver of brass, and his foot also of brass, to wash withal; and thou shalt PUT IT BETWEEN THE TABERNACLE OF THE CONGREGATION AND THE ALTAR, and thou shalt put water therein. For Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet thereat; When they go into the tabernacle of the congregation, they shall wash with water, that they die not; or when they come near to the altar to minister, to burn offering made by fire unto the Lord; So they shall wash their hands and their feet, THAT THEY DIE NOT; and it shall be a statute for ever to them, even to him (Aaron) and to his seed (the Aaronic priesthood) throughout their generations." Ex. 30:18-21.  Now see how the doctrine of the Brass Laver speaks to the believer (Jew AND Gentile) in the wilderness, about salvation through Messiah, the Lord Jesus Christ. Purification of the polluted sinner in the eyes of a thrice holy God is the issue (!) Every son and daughter of Adam knows he is polluted, and must be made pure to enter Heaven. After the Aaronic priest and the orthodox Rabbi have insulted God with their last beheaded chicken in Toledo as a sick substitute for the requirements of the Tabernacle in the Wilderness, they are still polluted and headed for Hell ­ AND THEY KNOW IT (!) And, what is worse, today, they have no Tabernacle in the Wilderness, and they have no Temple of God on Mt. Zion.  All that was said of and by ­ (yes, "BY" ­ for the furniture of the Tabernacle has a voice in each piece, for those with an ear to hear; as our Lord Jesus often said, "He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear." Rev. 2:7.) ­ the Brass Laver, for example, was typical of the blood of Christ, which is "a fountain opened to the house of David, and inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and uncleanness;" to wit: "In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness." (Zech. 13:1)  The actuality of that blessing, they obtained through faith in the blood of the Lamb. That blood was shed by covenant for the remission of the sins of many ­ it is blood of infinite value, for it is the "precious blood of Christ," God's own son, a person of infinite dignity and worth; and guilty rebels obtain an interest in it, in no other way than by crediting the divine report concerning it. Believing in it, as the ransom of elect man's redemption, or that whereby the church was purchased, they are justified from all things from which they could not be justified by the law of Moses, or any obedience of their own ­ and hence the apostle says to the Corinthians, who had received the Gospel ­ "but ye are washed," ­ (that is, from your sins in the blood of Christ) ­ "but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God," 1 Cor. 6:11. Hence the song of the redeemed: "And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the first begotten of the dead, and the prince of the kings of the earth. Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and hath made us kings and priests unto God and his Father; to him be glory and dominion, for ever and ever. Amen." (Rev. 1:5,6)  Sunday, November 8, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  "Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation (i.e., manner of life) received by tradition from your fathers; But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot; Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you." (1 Pet. 1:18-20)  You can be sure, Beloved, that every believing Jew who lived during the days of the actively-  functioning Tabernacle in the Wilderness, had his mind and heart saturated with holy and true and  innumerable doctrines and teachings about the Lord Jesus every time he visited the Tabernacle. And,  you can be sure that his heart was filled with delight as he drew nearer and nearer the Tabernacle, and  began to smell the strong but altogether fragrant and lovely odor that could be smelled nowhere else in  the world. Beloved, that odor was the distinctive Perfume that typified the Lord Jesus Christ, and  identified Him as the Lily of the Valley and the Rose of Sharon and every other pleasant and holy thing  known to man; to wit:  "I am the rose of Sharon, and the lily of the valleys. As the lily among thorns, so is my love among the daughters...I will get me to the mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense...I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse; I have gathered my myrrh with my spice." (Song of Solomon 2:1,2; 4;6; 5:1)  What accurate and pleasant notions about our dear Lord Jesus, would visitors to the Tabernacle have, who believed in Christ as Messiah. And then, as the believer delivered his animal sacrifice to the priest for slaying and burning upon the altar of burnt offering, he would place his hands upon the head of the animal, thereby symbolically transferring his sins to the innocent beast. What believing Jew or Gentile could fail to see our innocent Lord Jesus dying for the sins of the guilty elect; to wit: "Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness; by whose stripes ye are healed. For ye were as sheep going astray; but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls." (1 Pet. 2:24,25)  Next comes the Brass Laver, standing to the penitent believer for the purification of his garments from filth and pollution to bright, shining linen fit for the marriage supper of the Lamb; to wit: "And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia; for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him; for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself ready. And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in FINE LINEN, CLEAN AND WHITE (OR, BRIGHT); for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints. And he saith unto me, Write, Blessed are they which are called unto the marriage supper of the Lamb. And he saith unto me, These are the true sayings of God." (Rev. 19:6-9)  And so on, to every item of furniture in the Tabernacle. It was a veritable preaching machine there in the wilderness. So much so, that when king Jeroboam ­ for crass political expediency, (fearful that he would lose his 10-northern-tribes kingdom) ­ cut off his peoples' access to the Temple (Tabernacle subsumed) of God on Mt. Zion ­ substituting two golden calves for it ­ the nation quickly degenerated to complete apostasy and destruction at the hands of the Assyrians; to wit: "So was Israel carried away out of their own land to Assyria unto this day." 2 Kgs. 17:23.  I love you. Amen.  
