Sunday, August 9, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "For this cause ought the woman to have power ­ (i.e., uncut hair  as a sign or symbol of her husband's authority) ­ on her head  BECAUSE OF THE ANGELS...But if any man seem to be  contentious (about this matter), we have no such custom (other  than this one), neither the churches of God." 1 Cor. 11:10,16.  "Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and  to bring thee into the place which I have prepared. Beware of him,  and obey his voice, provoke him not; for he will not pardon your  transgressions; for my name is in him. But if thou shalt indeed  obey his voice, and do all that I speak; then I will be an enemy  unto thine enemies, and an adversary unto thine adversaries. For  mine Angel shall go before thee, and bring thee in unto the  Amorites, and the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Canaanites,  and Hivites, and Jebusites; and I will cut them off." Ex. 23:20-23.  "And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field, keeping watch over their flock by night. And, lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them; and they were sore afraid. And the angel said unto them, Fear not; for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all peoples. For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. And this shall be a sign unto you, Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger. And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men." ­ (i.e., God's good will toward God's Elect on earth). Luke 2:8-14. Now let us digress to consider this "multitude of the heavenly host." Gill: "That brought the tidings of Christ's birth to the shepherds; a multitude of the heavenly host; who being caused to fly swiftly, were at once with him, by his side, and about him; and which was a further confirmation of the truth of his message to them; these were angels who were called an host, or army, the militia of heaven, the ministers of God, that wait upon him, and do his pleasure; and are sent forth to minister to his people, and encamp about them, preserve, and defend them; see Gen. 32:1,2; to wit: `And Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him. And when Jacob saw them, he said, This is God's host; and he called the name of that place Mahanaim.' These are styled an heavenly host, because they dwell in heaven; and to distinguish them from hosts and armies on earth; and said to be a multitude, for the angels are innumerable; there are thousands, ten thousands, and ten thousand times ten thousand of them; it may be rendered the multitude, and may intend the whole company of angels, who were all of them together to sing the praises of God, and glorify him at the birth of the incarnate Savior, as well as to adore him; since it is said, `when he bringeth in the first begotten into the world, he saith, and let all the angels of God worship him,' Heb. 1:6. And these were praising God, on account of the birth of Christ, and the redemption that was to be obtained by him, for elect men; which shows their friendly disposition, and how much they rejoice at their spiritual and eternal welfare; see Lk. 15:10; to wit: `Likewise, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence  Sunday, August 9, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth.' And thus, as at the laying of the  foundation of the earth, these `morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God  shouted for joy,' Job 38:7. They did the same when the foundation of man's salvation  was laid in the incarnation of the son of God."  "And it came to pass, that the beggar (Lazarus) died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom; the rich man (Dives) also died, and was buried. And in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom." (Lk. 16:22)  Thus, when we connect up these verses in Luke 16, with Mat. 18:10, it is reasonable to conclude that each of God's Elect persons is assigned a detail of elect angels at birth, and these glorious and powerful and wonderful creatures do lovingly and effectively care for their charge throughout life, and then assemble about the death bed in the dying hour to majestically waft (i.e., to cause to go gently and smoothly through the air) each of God's humble beggars (each Lazarus) to his heavenly home; to wit: "And it came to pass that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom." Lk. 16:22. Connected to Mat. 18:20; to wit:  "Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones (i.e., these little sheep, God's Elect persons); for I say unto you, That in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven." (Mat. 18:10)  That is, these angels live in the immediate presence of God, have immediate access to God Himself, who know exactly, everything, at all times, about their heavenly charges; and are prepared, at any hour of the day or night, to spring into action on their behalf, cloaked with God's supreme authority. The Elect angels also assist in the administration of the eternal punishment of the damned. Rev. 14:9-11; to wit:  "And the third angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, If any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation; and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb. And the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever; and they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his image, and whosoever receiveth the mark of his name." (Rev. 14:9-11)  The Elect Angels know all about authority ­ and rebellion against God's authority ­ having witnessed those of their fellow "angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation (their own lot in life, on account of which the Lord) hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day." Jude 6. "For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment." 2 Pet. 2:4. And, parenthetically, since we are to take part in that adjudication of those fallen angels, we should strive to learn from the Elect angels all about lawful authority and its counterpart ­ rebellion; to wit: "Know ye not that we shall judge angels? how much more things that pertain to this life?" 1 Cor. 6:3. Our Lord Jesus was present and saw Satan and his angels fall from heaven to earth through their rebellion against God's righteous authority; to wit: "And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightening fall from heaven." Lk. 10:18.  Sunday, August 9, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  Gill: "Meaning, that this was no news to him, nor any surprising event, that devils should be cast out of men, and be in a state of subjection; for as he existed as the eternal son of God before his incarnation, he was present, and saw Satan and his angels fall from heaven, from their first estate, their habitation of bliss and glory, down to hell, upon their sin and rebellion, as violently, swiftly, and suddenly, as the lightning falls from heaven to earth."  And, some say that one-third of the multi-billion-member heavenly host at that time fell, along with Satan as their leader, and that the great red dragon of Rev. 12 is an allusion to that fact; to wit: "And there appeared another wonder in heaven; and behold a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads. And his tail drew the THIRD PART OF THE STARS of heaven, and did cast them to the earth." (Rev. 12:3,4)  And, certain it is that angels are often called stars in Scripture, and especially before there were any other creatures in God's vast universe; and even then, angels were also called the sons of God; and even then they were great and harmonious singers and joyful amplifiers of beautiful musical punctuation; to wit: "Gird up now thy loins like a man (i.e., man-up); for I will demand of thee, and answer thou me. Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare if thou hast understanding. Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or who hath stretched the line upon it? Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the corner stone thereof; WHEN THE MORNING STARS SANG TOGETHER, AND ALL THE SONS OF GOD SHOUTED FOR JOY?" (Job 38:3-7)  As I say, the Elect angels know an awful lot about LAWFUL AUTHORITY ­ and its counterpart, REBELLION AGAINST AUTHORITY ­ and that angelic authority stretches back into the dim and distant eternal ages, long before the creation of the earth, and the relatively short history of rebellious man upon the earth. So, these blessed angels recognize soul-damning, life-destroying, Hell-bound DEFIANCE of AUTHORITY when they see it (!) All of which gives fresh, new, and more accurate meaning to the two verses at the head of our text; to wit: 1 Cor. 11:10, &, 1 Cor. 11:16.  No godly woman will cut her hair. When asked, Why? her answer is: "BECAUSE OF THE ANGELS (!)" 1 Cor. 11:10. When heretics seek to be contentious about this matter, and point to the absolute universality of bob-headed women, God's Elect answer with an irrefragable and 100% dispositive argument to all those who bow to Scripture as the final rule for faith and practice; to wit: ALL THE CHURCHES OF GOD, WITHOUT EXCEPTION, FORBID WOMEN TO CUT THEIR HAIR. In these words: "But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the churches of God." 1 Cor. 11:16.  A few years ago when we were picketing the Topeka Performing Arts Centre (TPAC), a youngish, dressed up, painted up woman accosted me demanding to know what she had done that made her deserve to be picketed ­ (like she was the only one in that crowd that we were picketing, since we are equal opportunity picketers and do not discriminate against appropriate picketees).  Sunday, August 9, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  I told her that I would talk to her, and answer all her questions, if she would guarantee not to get mad at my answers, and that she wouldn't be filing some kind of complaint over my answers. She said she would never think of such a thing, as she was a good Christian and a good Catholic and belonged to such and such local church. Well, we got along alright for a couple of seconds ­ until we came to the obvious, visible-for-all-the-world-to-see matter of her short, cropped-off head of hair. Whereupon she looked absolutely stunned, ­ incredulous, really ­ as though she could not believe that I was serious. And when I let her know that I was as serious as a heart attack, she got down right mad, and pitched a little fit right there before God and everybody ­ and forgot all about her promise to me that she would not get mad at my answers. That is a very typical reaction.  Some years ago, when Shirley was little, she told me of an encounter she had with a young woman in a beauty college who commented on Shirley's long hair. The woman was expostulating on all she could do with Shirley's long hair by first cutting it. Expostulate means to reason earnestly with someone in an effort to dissuade or correct that person. I tell you, the woman was expostulating with Shirley, even after Shirley told her she could not cut her hair. Repeatedly told her, that she could not cut her hair. Finally, the pushy woman demanded to know WHY she could not cut her hair. To which little Shirley told the woman that she could not tell her WHY, lest she get mad. Back and forth they went, with the woman assuring Shirley that she would NOT get mad if Shirley told her WHY she could not cut her hair. So, at last, Shirley relented, and told the woman that she could not cut her hair because the Bible forbad women from cutting their hair. Whereupon, the woman threw a fit of rage at Shirley, in spite of her repeated promises that she would NOT get mad. Shirley said, "I told you you'd get mad."  Beloved, the ultimate answer is, "BECAUSE OF THE ANGELS (!)" 1 Cor. 11:10. There is something about that highly visible and bold audacity against the sovereignty of God that strikes a nerve with the Elect angels on duty at that time and place. The Elect angels beheld first hand the precipitous fall and doom of the reprobate angels. Hence they are very sensitive to signs of rebellion against the authority of God. It is as though when the Elect angels see a church full of crop-headed women, (or even one crop-headed female member of that church), the angels flee in disgust, and abandon that church, sine die.  In my now-famous four-night debate with the Campbellites, in the church at Huntoon & College in Topeka, ­ 51 years ago ­ this sensitive subject came up, as it inevitably does in all serious discussions of religion. One of the propositions for debate was, The soul that has been saved by faith in the shed blood of Christ can thereafter so sin as to be finally lost. Campbellite Pastor Doyle Cannon affirmed; I denied. At some point in the arguments, I said, if the saved soul can so sin as to be finally lost, what sin or combination of sins, will accomplish that feat, will perform that little trick? I said, in this congregation of Campbellites, I see many of your women, including the pastor's wife, with bobbed hair.  Now, to me, that is a very great sin of rebellion against the absolute authority of God, which was the sin that damned a whole race of reprobate angels to everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day, and thence to Hell fire and brimstone. It is no small or insignificant sin we are talking about here. 2 Pet. 2:4, and Jude 6. So, ­ said I to Pastor Cannon, ­ it would appear to me that you are facing a powerful conundrum ­ (i.e., a difficult and complicated problem.)  Sunday, August 9, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 5  After thrashing about for a while, Cannon lamely came up with a typical Campbellite debating  trick; to wit: misapplying a passage, in a daring attempt to make a Scripture verse say the opposite  to what it, in fact, does say. They have had college courses teaching such trickery. As, e.g., in the  past at least, Texas Christian University. In this case, Pastor Cannon clung to 1 Cor. 11:16, as a  drowning man clings to a floating device with a hole in it. Cannon said, "See, Paul says if any  man wants to argue about it, just forget the whole thing."1 Cor. 11:16. He argued that such a  cavalier attitude by Paul proved that the apostle did not regard the bobbed-hair matter as a thing of  much importance. Read the verse; to wit:  "But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the churches of God." (1 Cor. 11:16)  This Arminian heretic would argue that the great apostle would spend half a chapter developing a doctrine of Scripture touching upon the gravity of rebellion against the authority of God that doomed one-third of the heavenly host, such that the angels are riled; and then, if somebody wants to argue about it, just forget it. Well, THAT does not sound like Paul, the lion of God. The sense of what Paul is saying is, ­ This matter is not open for argument or further discussion with some jackass just wanting to be the contentious center of attention talking about female hair.  The matter is settled. Women church members may not cut their hair. The churches of God are all in 100% agreement on this matter. We want the holy angels ­ the innumerable company of angels ­ present and joyously so ­ when we assemble to present ourselves before the Lord. Because of the angels, is rationale enough for us. If an angel spots a crop-headed female church member, ­ this passage seems to indicate, ­ all of the angels are out of there. It is somewhat analogous to removing the candlestick. When the innumerable company of angels packs up and leaves (the holy encampment being gone ­ Psa. 34:7), there is no longer a New Testament church in that place. Heb. 12:32. Not only does the Angel of the Lord inexorably lead each step of our way to glory (Ex. 23:20), but he also has our back, as they say; to wit: "And the angel of God which went before the camp of Israel, removed and went BEHIND THEM; and the pillar of the cloud went from before their face, and stood BEHIND THEM." (Ex. 14:19) And, finally Beloved, the angels are represented as having a grand and major part in winding up the affairs of a ruined creation, especially in seeing to it that comfort and kindnesses are extended to all God's Elect, while all about them is chaos, pain, tribulation and the outpoured wrath of an outraged God. Just look, Beloved, at what the Lord our God puts the angels in total charge of; to wit: "And then shall they see the Son of man coming in the clouds with great power and glory. And then shall he send his angels, and shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from the uttermost part of the earth, to the uttermost part of heaven." (Mk. 13:26,27) Ensconcing us comfortably, blissfully, and gloriously in our celestial inheritance, with love, kindness, and honor in their every angelic move. And, to the sound of trumpets, all throughout the heavenly realm, the angels shall proclaim with regard to each of God's wonderful, faithful Elect, "Thus shall it be done to the man whom the great King delighteth to honor." Esther 6:9.  I expect to see you, the members on earth of the despised Westboro Baptist Church, in Heaven.  I love you. Amen.  
