Sunday, November 21, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Moreover thou shalt not lie carnally with thy neighbor's wife, to defile thyself with her. And thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through the fire to Molech (i.e., abortion, or any kind of infanticide), neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God; I am the Lord. Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind; it is  abomination. Neither shalt thou lie with any beast to defile thyself  therewith; neither shall any woman stand before a beast to lie  down thereto; it is CONFUSION." Leviticus 18:20-23.  Note: the word, "CONFUSION," here, means "Audacious Depravity;" and it does not require that  all five of the listed sins be committed to make out the crime of AUDACIOUS DEPRAVITY. One  is enough, following the rule of divine law spelled out at Jas. 2:10; to wit:  "For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. For he that said, Do not commit adultery, said also, Do not kill. Now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a transgressor of the law." (Jas. 2:10-11)  Even so, nowadays, the crimes/sins of adultery, fornication, and abortion are accounted as mighty little or nothing at all in the concepts and opinions of mankind. There may be a few of mankind who balk at bestiality and mildly flinch at the idea of human beings having sex with animals ­ especially women having sex with big dogs and pygmy horses ­ as they are said to do for entertainment purposes in Mexican border towns such as Tijuana, Mexico. But, listen to me, Mr. Big Business Man with a sterling reputation as a church-going family man who keeps a mistress on the side ­ with your wife's permission. I tell you, God has given you His opinion of you on all such matters. God has rendered His judgment on you, and finds you as AUDACIOUSLY DEPRAVED as the filthiest, trashiest American who wanders across the Mexican border every night to feed his boundless and unfathomable lusts.  Beloved, we are dealing here with the doctrine of Total Depravity. Andrew Bonar (1810-1892); to wit: "And such is the human heart that all these forms of depravity were not too bad to be anticipated by the Lord, who knew the heart. He knows the virulence of the poisoned spring. ... Some might be led to the grossest and most shocking lust ­ man with man, and man or woman with beasts. How awful is the Lord's judgment of the human heart! The Lord believes that an Israelite, though surrounded, as an Israelite, of course was, with everything that could fence in his morality, might nevertheless have a heart so foul as to burst all bounds, and transgress all limits, and overthrow all banks. ,,The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked; who can know it? I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to give to every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings.' Jer. 17:9,10." Andrew Bonar: "Surely, in an unrenewed soul, there is a secret connection with Hell and the devil; even as in a regenerate soul, there is a secret connection with Heaven and with God."  "Defile not ye yourselves IN ANY OF THESE THINGS;" ­ (i.e., adultery, abortion and/or infanticide, sodomy, bestiality, female lying down to beast aka bestiality #2, audacious depravity) ­ "FOR IN ALL THESE THE NATIONS ARE DEFILED WHICH I CAST OUT BEFORE YOU." Lev. 18:24. Beloved, we are preaching to the nations. Notice that it was not necessary that every single citizen of the nation be guilty of all five or six of the enumerated sins to bring down the wrath of God in final judgment upon the subject nation. Moreover, it was not necessary that only the very most audaciously depraved of the five or six enumerated sins be involved. Study those sins. They seem to grow in intensity of evil and filth from first to last.  Sunday, November 21, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  Could anything be more audaciously depraved than for a woman to initiate sex with a big dog or pygmy horse? ­ all as described by the last of the enumerated sins at Lev. 18:23(b); to wit: "Neither shall any woman stand before a beast, to lie down thereto; it is confusion." Lev. 18:23(b). Various of the sins, all escalating in seriousness and relative degrees of intensity ­ all forming a toxic mix that finally causes both the Lord of the Land, and the Land itself, to vomit, or, metaphorically speaking, to spue that nation of depraved people, the inhabitants of the land, out. God knows and keeps His own timetable for such a remarkable incident to take place. But the time came to pass for first the Canaanites, and then the Jews, to be vomited out of God's mouth.  Absolutely remarkable. All matters of Historical Fact. And, Beloved, is not our discerning of the signs of the times enough to convince any reasonable servant of the Lord in these last of the last days, that our own nation, America; is just about due for a gigantic purging? And is it not our duty to warn them? The Secretary of Defense just announced that the Don't ask Don't tell, policy that presently, in theory at least, keeps fags and dykes out of our military is likely to be repealed before the end of this year. Same-sex marriage will soon be the law of the land. In short, does not the agenda of militant fags now prevail throughout the U.S.A., at every level of society?  Now, in this light, let us look again at the five or six enumerated sins, the dominance of which signals the doom of guilty nations. At least three of them deal with sodomy and bestiality; mainly, Lev. 18:22; to wit: "Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind; it is abomination." Sodomy. This is the only one of the enumerated sins that refuses to acknowledge it is a sin; and, in fact, brags about their filthy lifestyle, and insist that all mankind respect and honor their abominable practices. "Therefore I am full of the fury of the Lord; I am weary with holding in; I will pour it out upon the children abroad, and upon the assembly of young men together; for even the husband with the wife shall be taken, the aged with him that is full of days. And their houses shall be turned unto others, with their fields and wives together; for I will stretch out my hand upon the inhabitants of the land, saith the Lord. For from the least of them even unto the greatest of them every one is given to covetousness; and from the prophet even unto the priest every one dealeth falsely. They have healed also the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when there is no peace. Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination (i.e., SODOMY)? NAY, THEY WERE NOT AT ALL ASHAMED, NEITHER COULD THEY BLUSH. Therefore they shall fall among them that fall; at the time that I visit them they shall be cast down, saith the Lord." (Jer. 6:11-15) It is enormously significant that SODOMY leads the Filth Parade, not only on the American Stage, but also on the World Stage. BESTIALITY is a close second; with uniquely FEMALE BESTIALITY a shockingly disgusting third. Adultery and Abortion abound, but occur so universally ­ and are so nationally, and internationally, approved throughout every level of society, as to make irrelevant every effort to count and assign places in the categories of each of the filthy sins enumerated at Lev. 18:20-23. Also, the arrangement of words and phrases in verses 24 and 25, et. seq., seems to make all those filthy sins of the flesh Satanically FUNGIBLE ­ (i.e., FUNGIBLE, means that one thing is capable of being used in place of another for all purposes. Here, there is an enumeration of five or six Satanically-filthy sins of the flesh: Adultery, Abortion, Sodomy, Bestiality #1, and Bestiality #2. Each may be substituted for any one of the other, for purposes of measuring the degree of the wrath of God, for meting out the kind and amount of God's eternal punishment, etc. In other words, in God's economy of things, they're interchangeable.).  In the fullness of time, a deep sleep fell upon Abraham, the friend of God, during which the Lord told him of these things; to wit:  Sunday, November 21, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  "And when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and, lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him. And he said unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land (i.e., Egypt) that is not theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years; And also that nation whom they shall serve, will I judge; and afterward shall they come out with great substance. And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried in a good old age. BUT IN THE FOURTH GENERATION they shall come hither again; FOR THE INIQUITY OF THE AMORITES (OR, CANAANITES) IS NOT YET FULL. And it came to pass, that, when the sun went down, and it was dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp that passed between those pieces. In the same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates; The Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and the Kadmonites, and the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Rephaims, And the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites." (Gen. 15:12-21)  And so you see, Beloved, that the time prognosticated unto Abram and his seed, for the iniquity of the Amorites to be full, and for the conquest of Canaan by the Jews to begin ­ has arrived. A description of the awful condition of affairs at the time the iniquity of the Amorites had gotten full ­ as well as a renewed warning to Israel that a like fate would befall them ­ is given at Lev. 18:24-30, and it is truly fearsome. Are we in this land approaching a similar historical episode? It seems to me of late to be hauntingly familiar. Have the times of the Gentiles begun to come in?  Consider this brief historical outline; to wit: At the time the white Europeans began systematically to slaughter the American Indians, (say, the 15th century), there were several (some say many) millions of Indians, and Indians had occupied this land as their own for thousands of years. But they had grown filthy and depraved ­ much as had the Canaanites ­ and in much the same way as set forth in such phrases as the land vomiting out the inhabitants and spuing out the land which is defiled by abominations, etc. The Jews slaughtered the Canaanites in much the same way as the white Europeans slaughtered the Indians. And, disregarding the warnings that if they followed the ways of the idolatrous and filthy Canaanites, God would not hesitate to destroy the Jewish nation likewise. They did; and God did. The last act of this little historical drama is the destruction of the United States.  The warning from God to this evil, sodomitical nation is crystal clear in Lev. 18:24-30. Moses is not here to issue the warning in person to the United States of America, and, to the world, as he did to the stubborn Jewish nation some 3,500 years ago. But the Westboro Baptist Church is here; and we have heard the voice of the Lord, saying, "Moses my servant is dead; now therefore arise, go over this Jordan, thou, and all this people, unto the land which I do give to them, even to the children of Israel. Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have I given unto you, as I said unto Moses ...There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life; as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee; I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee...Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe to do according to all the law, which Moses my servant commanded thee; turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest prosper withersoever thou goest. This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do according to all that is written therein; for then thou shalt make thy way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success. Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed; for the Lord thy God is with thee withersoever thou goest." (Josh. 1:2-9)  Sunday, November 21, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  The short of it is, that God has plainly declared that He is never without a true and faithful witness alive on this earth; since the world began; and even down to the present time. A fortiori, He has them in the last of the last days, as the universe witnesses exciting events constituting runners-up to the Second Coming of Christ and the End of the world.  We search the Scriptures daily and pray to rightly divide the Word of truth; and strive daily to accurately discern the Signs of the Times ­ the two modes utilized by the Lord whereby He regularly communicates with His children on earth. For many years we have watched continuously, seeking some such witnesses for the cause of God and truth ­ all to no avail; to wit:  "The good man is perished out of the earth; and there is none upright among men...The best of them is as a brier; the most upright is sharper than a thorn hedge; the day of thy watchmen and thy visitation cometh; now shall be their perplexity." (Micah 7:2,4)  "Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that executeth judgment, that seeketh the truth; and I will pardon it. And though they say, The Lord liveth; surely they swear falsely." (Jer. 5:1,2)  We have heard the voice of the Lord speaking through the ancient prophet Isaiah, saying "Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? (apparently the Trinity explains the "us"). Then said I, here am I, send me." Isa. 6:8.  Thus, with abundance of internal and external evidences; with objective as well as subjective proof; and with impulses upon the hearts of the members; we conclude and believe that the Lord our God has called us at Westboro Baptist Church to boldly warn this nation, and the world, that your sins are taking you to Hell, led by the militant sodomitical hosts who now dominate the politics and the governments of the whole world. The warnings include the ancient words of Moses the prophet and lawgiver, at Lev. 18:24-30; to wit: (First comes the listing by category of the Five Deadly Sins of the Sodomites; to wit: Adultery, Abortion, Sodomy, Bestiality #1, and Bestiality #2).  "Defile not ye yourselves in any of these things; for in all these the nations are defiled which I cast out before you; And the land is defiled; therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and the land itself VOMITETH OUT HER INHABITANTS." (Lev. 18:24,25)  (Similarly, one may say, that this land vomited out the American Indians, because of their grossly filthy sodomitical sins of the flesh and of the spirit; and gave it to its present inhabitants of mostly white Europeans. And, just as the Jews ­ despite warnings from God ­ defiled themselves by wallowing in the Five Deadly Sins of the Canaanites; even so have the white Europeans defiled themselves. God Almighty destroyed the nation of the ancient Jews, using the instrument of Titus the Great, in 70 A.D. All of which adumbrated the destruction of America, and the World, at the End of the World ­ also for wallowing in the Five Deadly Sins of the Jews and the Canaanites.)  WBC is at this time warning the inhabitants of America, that they are in danger of destruction: You have defiled the land with filthy sodomites ­ border to border; coast to coast. "For all these abominations have the men of the land done, which were before you, and the land is defiled." (Lev. 18:27)  I love you.  Amen.  
