Sunday, March 7, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince which standeth for the children of thy people; and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation even to that same time; and at that time thy people shall be delivered, EVERY ONE THAT SHALL BE FOUND WRITTEN IN THE BOOK. And many of them" ­ (i.e., the multitudes) ­ "that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever. But thou, O Daniel, SHUT UP THE WORDS, AND SEAL THE BOOK, EVEN TO THE TIME OF THE END; many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased." Dan. 12:1-4. (Some 600 years later, after Daniel did "shut up the words, and did seal the book," the following took place on Patmos Isle; to wit:). "And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a BOOK WRITTEN WITHIN AND ON THE BACKSIDE, sealed with seven seals. And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof? And no man in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the earth, was able to open the book, neither to look thereon." Rev. 5:1-3.  Now the question is, Beloved: Was the sealed book of Daniel the same book as the sealed book in the right hand of Him that sat upon the throne? Many good men say that it was. Certainly, the close attention given the mysterious nature of the matter suggests that the two sealed books are one and the same; to wit: "And I heard, but I understood not; then said I, O my Lord, what shall be the end of these things? And he said, Go thy way, Daniel; for the words are closed up and sealed TILL THE TIME OF THE END. Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly; and none of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand...But go thou thy way till the end be; for thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days." Dan. 12:8-13. Further, when nobody was found worthy to open the book and look on and read the contents of the book in the right hand of Him that sat upon the throne, John the beloved apostle broke down and wept copiously; to wit:  "And I wept much, because no man was found worthy to open and to read the book, neither to look thereon." (Rev. 5:4)  I submit to you, Beloved, that John, standing here for all God's Elect, was not reduced to weeping "MUCH" because of mild curiosity in a matter of slight importance. No sir (!)(!)(!). Total Vindication of the righteous of all the ages, AND, total compensatory punishment of all the wicked of all the ages, MAY NEVER TAKE PLACE unless this sealed book is finally open, read, and implemented. The prophesies of the book of Daniel must all be totally and literally fulfilled if the times of restitution of all things, and times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord, may come to pass as prognosticated by all the holy prophets since the world began; e.g., (Daniel's declaration to the great king Nebuchadnezzar standing for all human government from the creation to the end of all things).  "Thou, O king, sawest and behold a great image. This great image, whose brightness was excellent, stood before thee; and the form thereof was terrible. This image's head was of fine gold, his breast and his arms of silver, his belly and his thighs of brass, His legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part of clay. Thou sawest till that A STONE WAS CUT OUT WITHOUT HANDS, which smote the image upon his feet that were of iron and clay, and brake them to pieces. Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold broken to pieces  Sunday, March 7, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  together, and became like the chaff of the summer threshingfloors; and the wind  carried them away, that no place was found for them; and the stone that smote  the image BECAME A GREAT MOUNTAIN, AND FILLED THE WHOLE EARTH... And  in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven SET UP A KINGDOM, which  shall never be destroyed; and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it  shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.  Forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone was cut out of the mountain without  hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the  gold; the great God hath made known to the king what shall come to pass  hereafter; and the dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure."  (Dan. 2:31-35,44,45)  Beloved. I have directed attention at some length to the book of Daniel, because, if we are correct in believing that Daniel's prophesies are the "sealed book" now opened to John, then we have come upon the KEY unlocking many mysteries in the book of the Revelation from chapter six to the end, (or, chapter twenty-two). Right out of the starting gate, as they say, we find our Lord Jesus Christ in His holy triumphant warrior's robe, "conquering and to conquer;" to wit: "And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals," ­ (John's weeping episode had been arrested when "one of the elders saith unto me, Weep not; behold, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, hath prevailed to open the book, and to loose the seven seals thereof," Rev. 5:5) ­ "and I heard, as it were the noise of thunder (symbolic language for the voice of the Lord) one of the four beasts saying, Come and see. And I saw, and behold a white horse; and he that sat on him had a bow; and a crown was given unto him; and he went forth CONQUERING AND TO CONQUER." Rev. 6:1,2.  Simply put, the prophesies of Daniel which were ordered to be sealed up until the days of John, are now being revealed as our Lord Jesus Christ rips off the seven seals one by one in the book of the Revelation. E.g., Daniel's prophesy said that "in the days of these kings (i.e., the Roman Empire)" the God of heaven would "SET UP A KINGDOM WHICH SHALL NEVER BE DESTROYED," and would ultimately destroy all other world empires (i.e., the Lamb would go forth "conquering, and to conquer," grinding them all to fine chaff which the wind drives away. Woodhouse, page 132; to wit: "The "going forth" of this Christian armament, seems to be represented by the white horse in this first seal." Jones, page 155; to wit: "Here, then, we have, in the prophesies of Daniel, that which constitutes the contents of the first seal, which John saw opened by the Lion of the tribe of Judah; namely, THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN (!)(!)."  This is a subject of deep interest to us all; and I humbly conceive, that our time cannot be more usefully employed during the remainder of the present exercise, than by taking a review of what the Scriptures say concerning it, keeping our eye more particularly fixed on Daniel's account of it. This prophecy was to commence its origin during the existence of the Roman Empire, the last of the four great monarchies that were to succeed each other. Dan. 2:44.  This Kingdom of Christ; aka Kingdom of God; aka Kingdom of Heaven, in its infantine state, was to resemble a stone cut out of a mountain "without hands," thereby indicating that it should be destitute of all worldly glory, power, and pomp, not the result of human agency or policy ­ nevertheless, it was to undergo a wonderful change; for, in process of time it should itself become a great mountain and fill the whole earth. Dan. 2:35. Such is Daniel's description and prophecy concerning it; now let us direct attention to the New Testament and see what further account is given to us concerning it by the evangelists and apostles. When John the Baptist commenced his public ministry, he called the attention of his countrymen to this important subject: "Repent," said he, "for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." Mat. 3:2.  Sunday, March 7, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  "In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judea, and  saying, Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." (Mat. 3:1,2)  Our Lord and His apostles took up the same theme ­ ("From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." Mat. 4:17.) ­ and much of the ministry of Jesus was occupied in illustrating by parable its nature, immunities and blessings. This drew upon Him the rage and malice of the unbelieving Jews, who understood Him to claim to be the true Messiah, and they therefore brought an accusation against Him to the Roman governor of making Himself a king, and consequently interfering with the claims of Caesar.  He was apprehended on a charge of high treason, or blasphemy, and brought before Pontius Pilate, who interrogated Him closely: "Art thou, then, a king?" HE ACKNOWLEDGED THAT HE WAS A KING ­ but added, "My kingdom is not of this world; if my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but now is my kingdom not from hence... to this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth ­ every one that is of the truth, heareth my voice," Jn. 18:36,37.  Thus our dear Lord Jesus did confess Himself to be a King, even at the moment when He stood as a CULPRIT before Pilate's bar; and the account He gives of His kingdom is in perfect harmony with the prophesy of Daniel concerning it; viz., that it should be SET UP BY THE GOD OF HEAVEN ­ that it should never be destroyed ­ nor should it be left to other people, but should break in pieces all the kingdoms of the earth, and stand for ever. Thus our dear Lord Jesus, by His good confession, shows Pilate that, such was the nature of His kingdom; it could in no wise interfere with Caesar's. But recall that a short time earlier, when the mob came to Gethsemane to arrest the Savior, and Peter drew HIS SWORD and cut off the ear of the servant of the high priest. "Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into his place; for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword. THINKEST THOU THAT I CANNOT NOW PRAY TO MY FATHER, AND HE SHALL PRESENTLY GIVE ME MORE THAN TWELVE LEGIONS OF ANGELS? But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?" (Mat. 26:52-54)  In furtherance of the advancement of the Kingdom of God, Dr. Luke wrote a letter ­ (i.e., the Book of Acts, to be specific) ­ to an inferior Roman official, after the resurrection of Christ; to wit: "The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do and teach, Until the day in which he was taken up, after that he through the Holy Ghost had given commandments unto the apostles whom he had chosen; to whom also he showed himself alive after his passion BY MANY INFALLIBLE PROOFS, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of THE THINGS PERTAINING TO THE KINGDOM OF GOD (!)(!). And, being assembled together with them, commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which, saith he, ye have heard of me." (Acts 1:1-4)  After about fifty days, about an hundred and twenty disciples were waiting together when the following supernatural event took place; to wit: "And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the spirit gave them utterance. And there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, OUT OF EVERY NATION UNDER HEAVEN." Acts 2:1-5.  Sunday, March 7, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  Peter preached to the ready-made crowd each man of which heard Peter, supernaturally, in his own tongue; and we are told that so mightily did the Holy Ghost work on the hearts of those thousands gathered to celebrate Pentecost, that, "Then they that gladly received his word were baptized; and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls." Acts 2:41.  The next day, "about five thousand" believed (Acts 4:4), under the preaching of Peter; and it is reasonable to assume that many more thousands were saved under the preaching of the other eleven apostles and the 108 others of the Lord's 120 servants who were all baptized with fire and who were all similarly gifted to speak to each of the Jewish pilgrims in Jerusalem at the Pentecostal holidays. And, Beloved, just think of the many thousands of Jews returning home all over the world, testifying to the hundreds of thousands or millions of the friends and relatives back home! "And with great power gave the apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus; and great grace was upon them all." (Acts 4:33) The old preachers use to love to say that this book entitled, "The Acts Of The Apostles," ought to be called, "The Acts Of The Holy Ghost (!)(!)." Those were certainly glorious days, filled with the holy advancement of the Kingdom of God. The last two years of the life of the apostle Paul symbolizes the whole; to wit: "And when they had appointed him a day, there came many to him into his lodging; to whom HE EXPOUNDED AND TESTIFIED THE KINGDOM OF GOD, persuading them concerning Jesus, both out of the law of Moses, and out of the prophets, from morning till evening...And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and received all that came in unto him, PREACHING THE KINGDOM OF GOD, and teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence, no man forbidding him." (Acts 28:23,30,31) Beloved, we are already in the Kingdom of God; and, shortly now, all things will be manifest. Put another way, the little stone cut out without hands is rolling down the mountain, gathering steam as it rolls, shortly now to smash to smithereens the colossal monster called Antichrist. The Kingdom of God moves silently but effectively, led by the Captain of our salvation.  Rollin's Ancient History, conclusion: "God, from His throne on high, overthrows all their projects, and makes even their ambition the means of executing His purposes, in a manner infinitely superior to our understandings. He alone knows His operations and designs. All ages are present to Him. `He seeth from everlasting to everlasting.' He has assigned to all empires their fate and duration." The mystery of the ages lies in a manger: "But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting." (Mic. 5:2)  Notwithstanding that APPARENT weakness, and even meanness, the Lord Jesus Christ will certainly conquer the whole universe. His work and mission were to set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed. The power granted to the Lord Jesus Christ, the Founder of this Empire, ­ even the Kingdom of God ­ I say, the power granted to Jesus Christ, to set up this Kingdom and maintain it gloriously throughout eternity, is without bounds, measure, or end.  Whilst all human affairs are in a state of perpetual flux, there passes, silently, and secretly, the Kingdom of God ­ with only one observable goal: gathering the Elect, to God's glory.  I love you. Amen.  
