Sunday, March 27, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "These be the names of the mighty men whom David had; The Tachmonite that sat in the seat, chief among the captains" ­ (who had the name Tachmonite meaning one noted for his great wisdom) ­ "the same was Adino the Eznite; he lift up his spear against eight hundred, whom he slew at one time" which was truly an amazing feat requiring supernatural strength and courage, as with Samson slaying one thousand Philistines with the jawbone of an ass; to wit: "And when he (Samson) came unto Lehi, the Philistines shouted against him; And the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon him, and the cords that were upon his arms became as flax that was burnt with fire,  and his bands loosed from off his hands. And he found a new JAWBONE OF  AN ASS, and put forth his hand, and took it, and slew a thousand men  therewith. And Samson said, With the jawbone of an ass, heaps upon heaps,  with the jaw of an ass have I slain a thousand men. And it came to pass,  when he had made an end of speaking, that he cast away the jawbone out of  his hand, and called that place Ramoth-lehi. And he was sore athirst (dehydrated), and called on the Lord, and said, Thou hast given this great deliverance into the hand of thy servant; and now shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised? But God clave an hollow place that was in the jaw, and there came water thereout; and when he had drunk, his spirit came again, and he revived; wherefore he called the name thereof Enhakkore, which is in Lehi unto this day. And he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty years. Judges 15:14-20.  (Let me interject here, Beloved, that such an expenditure of heat and body fluid in killing 1,000 men would likely cause severe dehydration to Samson or anybody else.) And then there is Shamgar, in the Song of Deborah; to wit: "So Moab was subdued that day under the hand of Israel. And the land had rest fourscore years! And after him was Shamgar the son of Anath, which slew of the Philistines SIX HUNDRED MEN WITH AN OX GOAD; and he also delivered Israel." (Judges 3:30,31) We are searching out the qualities and character traits of Davids mighty men. The first was Adino whose demonstrated wisdom earned for him the coveted title and chair of the Tachmonite; and his physical prowess and supernatural strength enabled him to lift up his spear against eight hundred of King Davids enemies and slay them all at one time. David herein is a type of the Lord Jesus Christ, and may we aspire to be worthy types of Davids mighty men. Let us study them often and carefully. What made them so valuable to David in His exploits? After Adino the Tachmonite was "Eleazar the son of Dodo the Ahohite, one of the three mighty men with David, when they defied the Philistines that were there gathered together to battle, AND THE MEN OF ISRAEL WERE GONE AWAY. 2 Sam. 23:9.  This was a shameful incident in the national life of the Jews, which was saved by the bravery of Eleazar. It took place at the battle of Pasdammim, as recorded in the book of Chronicles; to wit: "He (Eleazar) was with David at Pasdammim, and there the Philistines were gathered together to battle, where was a parcel of ground full of barley; and the people (Jews) fled from before the Philistines." ­ (i.e., they fled in cowardly fashion, went AWOL as traitors abandoning posts of duty in time of war) ­ "And they set themselves ­ (i.e., David and Eleazar and what few Jews were left on duty, if any) ­ And they set themselves in the midst of that parcel, and delivered it, and slew the Philistines; and the Lord saved them by a great deliverance." 1 Chron. 11:12-14. 2 Samuel 23 has it; to wit:  Sunday, March 27, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  "And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo, the Ahohite, one of the three mighty men  with David, when they defied the Philistines that were there gathered together to  battle, AND THE MEN OF ISRAEL WERE GONE AWAY (AWOL COWARDS). He  (Eleazar) arose, and smote the Philistines until his hand was weary, AND HIS HAND  CLAVE UNTO THE SWORD; and the Lord wrought a great victory that day; and the  people returned after him only to spoil." (2 Sam. 23:9,10)  Beloved, the sense is that though extremely weary, and abandoned by the masses, ELEAZAR DID NOT DROP HIS SWORD, but held it fast until he had destroyed the enemy. Pauls advice to young Timothy is in full accord; to wit: "Thou therefore endure hardness (i.e., hardships, afflictions), as a good soldier of Jesus Christ (i.e., Jesus Christ, Davids prototype and greater Son). No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier... Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead according to my gospel; Wherein I suffer trouble, as an evil doer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound. Therefore I endure all things for the elect's sake, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory. It is a faithful saying; For if we suffer, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he also will deny us." 2 Tim. 2:3-12. We should aspire to emulate Davids mighty men and their wonderful revealed attributes; and follow the advice and wisdom of the apostles of the Lamb; to wit: "Consider what I say; and the Lord will give thee understanding in all things." (2 Tim. 2:7) "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him." (Jas. 1:5)  A few days ago we were visited by a 6-man TV crew from Spain, (4 males, 2 females), working on a documentary about our church, to be aired in Spain and Europe generally. They were interviewing me, when all of a sudden the head honcho pulled out a copy of my sermon outline for Sunday, Feb. 27, and ­ with his best Spanish gotcha! flourish since his Roman Catholic ancestors perfected the art of torture techniques in the days of the Spanish Inquisition (c. 1233) ­ I say the boy found at the end of my sermon outline where I always say, "I love you. Amen." And he pounced upon it, fairly shouting in triumph as he pointed, with words substantially as follows; to wit: "Weve been here two days filming everybodys words and activities, and this is the first time Ive even heard the word ,,love mentioned." With those few words we had enough ammunition to again sink the Spanish Armada, so to speak, as in 1588.  I mean, Mr. Juan Cortez, gave away the farm AND the store. Now we knew what the theme and the thesis of his TV Documentary on Westboro Baptist Church would be. This thing is BBCs Louis Theroux #2. I thought, "Im sitting across the desk from ole screwy-Louis Demon-possessed, Satan incarnate, Louis re-incarnated Theroux." Because WBC believes what the Bible says on all matters of faith and practice ­ especially we believe and preach what the Bible says about the majestic doctrine of Eternal Retribution with all its derivative doctrines, including the wrath of God, the justice of God, the hatred of God ("Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated" Rom. 9:13, and which every mainline church for 2,000 years has believed and taught and codified in their creeds and confessions of faith) ­ Theroux has made a lot of money falsely branding WBC as a hate church, and her church members as the most hated family in America.  Comes now Juan Cortez and seizes the moment making Louis Theroux sounds with covetous overtones to the effect that having spent two days with WBC, the only time he heard the word love was my concluding words following my sermon of Feb. 27; to wit:"I love you. Amen" Whereupon, I asked The Spaniard if he knew Louis Theroux, and following a lengthy series of questions by WBC members established to our satisfaction that the Spanish delegation were not acting in good  Sunday, March 27, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  faith. Whereupon, I opined that The Spaniard was a demon-possessed son of Belial whose father  was the Devil; to wit:  "Why do ye not understand my speech? even because ye cannot hear my word. YE ARE OF YOUR FATHER THE DEVIL, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own; for he is a liar, and the father of it. And because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not...and if I say the truth, why do ye not believe me? He that is of God heareth God's words; Ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God." (Jn. 8:43-47)  History has a way of stamping indelible marks ­ for good or ill ­ upon nations and peoples.  Characteristics of momentous events. I have alluded to two such events in the national life of  Spain, which have stamped Spain with shame and ignominy for time and eternity; to wit: The  Iniquitous Spanish Inquisition and The Glorious and Humiliating Defeat of the Proud Spanish  Armada. These two events highlighted the long-running spiritual debate between what are called and known as the Roman Catholic Free-Willers of Spain and the Absolute Predestinarians of Puritan England.  THE SPANISH INQUISITION: In 1481 The Inquisition started in Spain, targeting Secret Jews and New Christians (non-Catholics). Fear of Jewish influence led Queen Isabella and King Ferdinand (known as the Catholic Kings) to write a petition to the Pope asking permission to start an Inquisition in Spain. Thomas de Torquemada became the Inquisitor-General for most of Spain, and he set Tribunals in many cities. Also heading the Inquisition in Spain were two Dominican monks, Miguel de Morillo and Juan de San Martin. The sinister procedure of these diabolical men looked like this; to wit: First, the Secret Jews and New Christians were invited to come into what may be called a house of horrors and voluntarily confess their "heresies" to a group of Roman Catholic priests. Then these same Catholic clergymen would sit at the proceedings and would deliver the vicious punishments, which included confinement to dungeons, physical abuse, and torture. Those who ,,reconciled with the Roman Catholic Church were still punished, and many had their property confiscated, as well as being banished from public life. Those who never confessed were BURNED AT THE STAKE ­ WITHOUT STRANGULATION. Those who did confess were BURNED AT THE STAKE ­ WITH STRANGULATION FIRST. These unfortunate victims of Roman Catholicism were tortured and strangled and burned at the stake by the tens of thousands ­ IN PUBLIC ­ BEFORE WILD CHEERING CROWDS more numerous than those in attendance at Spanish bullfights!  Thus you see, Beloved, the fruit of Roman Catholic Free-Willism. When they attain political and governmental power, they will kill you if you do not believe that God loves everybody and its OK to be gay and its OK for priests to rape boys. In Seville more than 700 were burned at the stake, and 5,000 "repented" and joined "Mother church." Inquisition Tribunals were also opened in Aragon, Catalonia, and Valencia, where more than 13,000 non-Catholics were put on trial, tortured, and burned at the stake. Many Jews and non-Catholic Christians fled to the New World. The Spanish Inquisition continued to the 19th Century, leaving a bloody Arminian record of 31,912 "heretics" burned at the stake, 17,659 burned in effigy, and 291,450 so-called reconciliations (i.e., people tortured into submission to the Pope). In Portugal about 40,000 cases were tried, although only 1,800 were burned at the stake, and the rest "did penance."  Now let us consider THE SPANISH ARMADA DEFEATED; aka, THE INVINCIBLE ARMADA. Meanwhile, seething with righteous indignation because of the Spanish Inquisition, Puritan England prayed mightily that God would destroy that infamous institution of Arminian evil. In the late 1580s, English raids against Spanish commerce, and Queen Elizabeth 1's support of the Dutch  Sunday, March 27, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  rebels in the Spanish Netherlands, led King Philip II of Spain to plan the conquest of England!  Beloved, here we have two then-powerful kings (Elizabeth I of England, and Philip II of Spain)  plotting and scheming the destruction of each the other. Or, more accurately, here we have God  Almighty planning the end of the bloody, Satanic, Spanish Inquisition; to wit:  "The king's heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water; he turneth it withersoever he will." (Prov. 21:1)  Naturally, Pope Sixtus V rushed in to give his blessing to the undertaking of King Philip II to conquer England; hoping that a victory and conquest of England would bring Protestant England back into the Roman Catholic fold. Remember that England was once a Roman Catholic country, until King Henry VIII of England wanted to divorce his wife and marry another, but the Pope would not let him. Whereupon, the lecherous old King Henry ran all the Roman Catholic bishops, cardinals, and the Pope out of England, and organized his own church, with himself the head of the new church. And that, Beloved is how we got the Episcopalian Church. How nice.  The Baptist church was founded by Jesus Christ on the banks of the Jordan River. The Methodist Church was founded by John Wesley. But the Episcopal Church was founded by Henry VIII, for the sole purpose of allowing him to live in adultery with the blessing of some religious group. Now let us address Grace Cathedral and St. David Episcopal Churches in Topeka; to wit: Arent you proud of yourselves and your church affiliations? Founded by a fat and fornicating pervert! Or is it that you dont care because you yourself are divorced and remarried? The story of Henry VIII and the Defeat of the Spanish Armada ­ with all of its ramifications ­ is truly amazing. The short of it is, Beloved, that if the vastly inferior English sea force had lost to the invincible Spanish Armada ­ WE WOULD ALL BE SPEAKING SPANISH AND KISSING THE POPES RING; and, if Henry had not thrown the Catholics out of England and formed his own church ­ DITTO. In 1588, off the coast of France, Spains so-called "Invincible Armada" is defeated by an inferior English naval force under Sir Francis Drake. After eight hours of furious fighting, the Lord sent a dramatic change in wind direction which prompted the jittery Spanish ­ inexplicably ­ to break off from the battle and retreat toward the North Sea. Its hopes of invasion crushed, the remnants of the Armada began a long and difficult journey back to Spain. A few days earlier, on May 19, 1588, the Invincible Armada set sail from Lisbon on a mission to 1) secure control of the English Channel; and, 2) transport a Spanish army to the British Isles to conquer England. The fleet was under the command of the Duke of Medina-Sidonia, and consisted of 130 ships carrying 2,500 guns, 8,000 seamen, and 20,000 soldiers.  Historians agree that if the 20,000-man Spanish army had been put ashore anywhere in England, they would "undoubtedly have prevailed." But without control of the English Channel their passage to England would be impossible. And a series of well-placed storms from the Hand of God kept back the Army of Spain from landing. Amazing! The panicked Spanish ships were forced to cut their anchors and sail out to sea. The disorganized fleet, completely out of formation, was attacked by the English and forced to retreat. Battered by storms, some of the ships foundered in the sea, while others were driven onto the rocky coasts of Ireland and Scotland and wrecked. By the time the last of the surviving fleet reached Spain, half of the Armada was lost, and 15,000 men had perished. Praise the Lord. The Lords almighty Hand, said those ships would never land; it was sad when those great ships went down.  Beloved, beyond any doubt, the Lord our God regularly gives us similar deliverances from our own Spanish Inquisitions and Spanish Armadas. Otherwise, we would be as stinky and smarmy as Spaniards of today.  I love you. Amen.  
