Sunday, May 1, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And as it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be also in the days of  the Son of man. They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they  were given in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark,  and the flood came, and destroyed them all." (Note: It is said of  Cain ­ the first man ever born of woman, who slew his brother Abel  ­ who is supposed by the Jews to have lived till the Flood; saying,  the Flood came, and washed him away.) Lk. 17:26,27.  Gill would be a fair example of the expositors who have commented upon the moral and spiritual lives of the Antediluvian World (those who lived before the Flood); to wit: "The inhabitants of the old world ate and drank, not merely in a common way, with moderation, and for the support and comfort of life, which is not blameworthy, nor inconsistent with religious exercises; but they lived in an extravagant and luxurious manner; they indulged their sensual appetites, and put away the evil day far from them, that Noah told them of; they married wives, they were given in marriage; not as should have been done by professors of religion among themselves; but the sons of God, or professors of the true religion, the posterity of Seth took them wives of the daughters of men, of the wicked, of the seed of Cain; and very likely gave their daughters in marriage to the sons of men; see Gen. 6:2,4;" to wit:  "And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were born unto them, That the sons of God saw the daughters men that they were fair; that they took them wives of all that they chose. And the Lord said, my spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh; yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years. There were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare children to them. The same became mighty men which were of old, men of renown. And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. And it repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart." (Gen. 6:1-6) "And so they (the Antediluvians) went on in a secure manner, notwithstanding all the remonstrances, and warnings, and threatenings of God, by his servant (Noah); until the day that Noe entered into the ark; which he had built by divine direction, for the saving of himself and family, and the creatures that were with him, from the waters of the flood; and this was in the six hundredth year of his life, and the flood came and destroyed them all; all the inhabitants of the earth, every living substance, men, cattle, creeping things, and fowls of the heaven; all but Noah, and his wife, and his three sons, and their wives, and the creatures that were with him in the ark. The Flood came not of itself, or by chance, or through the influence, or by the concurrence of second causes merely; though these were used, ordered, and directed by the First Cause of all things; but it came by the power of God, according to his will; He brought it on the world of the ungodly;" see, 2 Pet. 2:5;  "And spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly." (2 Peter 2:5)  "For it is better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for well doing, than for evil doing. For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit; By which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison (through Noah); Which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water." (1 Pet. 3:17-20)  Sunday, May 1, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  Beloved, have I missed something? Or has Brother John Gill missed something? In expounding  Luke 17:27 in his Exposition, Bro. Gill failed to take adequate account of what I affectionately  refer to as The Fag Factor at work in totally annihilating the entire civilization and the entire world  population of the Antediluvian people. What in the world had those people done that was so extraordinarily bad as to call down the wrath of God in such measure? Here's what the verse says they did; to wit:  "They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in marriage, unto the day that Noe entered into the ark, and the flood came, and destroyed them all." (Lk. 17:27)  In commenting on the evils of the Antediluvian World, Gill said they lived an extravagant and luxurious life-style, indulging their sensual appetites; with the righteous children of Seth intermarrying with the wicked seed of Cain ­ but with no mention of the proliferation of homosexuality, and more specifically of same-sex marriage ­ being the precipitating cause of the Flood. Yet, Gill was probably aware of the Fag Factor, which I have chosen to identify this fatal phenomenon as. I say this because of the way Gill accurately interpreted Genesis 9:22; to wit: "And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father (Noah). Which, had it been through surprise, and at unawares, would not have been thought criminal; but he went into his fathers tent, where he ought not to have entered; he looked with pleasure and delight on his fathers nakedness. HAM IS REPRESENTED BY MANY WRITERS AS A VERY WICKED, IMMODEST, AND PROFLIGATE CREATURE. Berosus makes him a magician, and to be the same with Zoroast or Zoroastres, and speaks of him as the public corrupter of mankind; and says THAT HE TAUGHT MEN TO LIVE AS BEFORE THE FLOOD, TO LIE WITH MOTHERS, SISTERS, DAUGHTERS, MALES AND BRUTES, AND CREATURES OF ALL SORTS; AND HE ACTUALLY DID SO HIMSELF, AND THEREFORE WAS CAST OUT BY HIS FATHER NOAH." Gen. 9:23.  Now, Beloved. This, and much more, did Gill have knowledge of about the universal moral and spiritual condition of things JUST BEFORE THE FLOOD. Certainly sodomy in all its most aggravated forms ­ including sex with males, sex with animals, sex with brutes, and sex with creatures of all sorts. Moreover, Gill knew of the wide-spread practice of bestiality and incest among the Antediluvians just before the Flood. I say that Gill must have known of these filthy sins of what would later be called sodomites ­ because Gill wrote of these things when he expounded Gen. 9:22, quoted above, and other passages of Scripture. Nevertheless, in my humble opinion, Bro. Gill did not assign the galloping proliferation of homosexuality ­ especially as it manifested itself in same-sex marriage ­ as the main catalyst for the Flood. In other words, fags brought on the Flood, just as they will bring on the final destruction of the world in a fiery conflagration; to wit: "And as it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man. They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and the flood came, and destroyed them all. Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; but the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. EVEN THUS SHALL IT BE IN THE DAY WHEN THE SON OF MAN IS REVEALED." (Lk. 17:26-30)  Remember my proposition to you. In other words, I say, fags brought on the flood, just as fags will bring on the final destruction of the world by fire, as adumbrated by the fiery destruction of Sodom, just now recounted. The same day Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. This adumbrated the event prophesying the end of the world by Peter; to wit:  Sunday, May 1, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  "Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their  own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell  asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation. For this  they willingly are ignorant of, that by the word of God the heavens were of old, and the  earth standing out of the water and in the water; Whereby the world that then was,  being overflowed with water, perished. But the heavens and the earth, which are  now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of  judgment and perdition of ungodly men...But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in  the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the  elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein  shall be burned up." (2 Pet. 3:3-10)  There it is, Beloved: When Noah entered into the ark, the Flood came, and destroyed them all. When Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from Heaven, and destroyed them all. All history; and all heavily adumbrating the fiery conflagration (a genuine Holocaust) marking the end of the world; this time TRIGGERED BY WORLD-WIDE ACCEPTANCE (EVEN PROMOTION) OF SAME ­ SEX MARRIAGE ­ as it was in the days of Noah! and, as it was in the days of Lot! Yes, Beloved, evidence exists aplenty that sodomites dominated society, to the point that society heartily accepted, and approved of same-sex marriage in those far-off days of the past. From Australia, the Land Down Under, some beams of Gospel light were posted in the Topeka Capital Journal, Dec. 15, 2009, in the form of a letter from Ken Hood, of Clifton, Australia; to wit:  "The Westboro Baptists may be on the right track after all, although gay marriage, not just homosexuality, could be the catalyst for the consummation. With several states ratifying gay marriage and movements afoot to extend it elsewhere, it could become general. The Babylonian Talmud reveals that until now only one society in all of history practiced it, the Antediluvian. The Babylonian Talmud also says the practice was the reason for Noahs flood. The risk of retribution is real. Interestingly, Jesus said the time of his coming would resemble those far off days. He even mentioned ,,marriage and giving in marriage. We in Australia have just had our first such wedding. Its a worry. Ken Hood, Clifton, Australia."  This reference to the Talmud is binding for faith and life on all orthodox Jews, and even liberal Jews give the Talmud great deference, respect, and persuasive authority. The Talmud is the central document of Hebrew literature, and authority of Jewish law, SECOND TO THE BIBLE. It is important for our knowledge of how the Jews interpreted the Old Testament. It also throws light on portions of the New Testament.  The Babylonian Talmud is that version of the Talmud that was reduced to writing by famous pious Jewish scholars in the sixth century, deriving from similar arrangements in the second century. Thus, you see, Beloved, that the reference by Ken Hood to the history of the Antediluvian world at the time of its destruction by the Flood of Noah ­ (who was 600 years old at the time, and could therefore give personal corroboration to the Talmud account) ­ I say, gives the Talmudic testimony very high credibility. And, the Encyclopedia Britannica says, "The Talmud is a kind of Encyclopaedia in its scope, a storehouse representing the knowledge and the thought, the religious and literary creativity of postBiblical Israel in Palestine and Babylon, in so far as it has been preserved, of probably more than eight centuries." Thus, there is a high probability that what the Babylonian Talmud says about wide-spread same-sex marriage having been the catalyst (or, trigger) for Noah's Flood ­ IS TRUE (!) And, that what the Babylonian Talmud says about the wide-spread practice of same-sex marriage among the Antediluvians having been the reason for Noah's Flood ­ IS TRUE (!)  Sunday, May 1, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  Especially since the testimony of the Babylonian Talmud is in perfect harmony with other historical evidence AND WITH THE HOLY BIBLE; to wit: "And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were born unto them, That the sons of God saw the daughters of men, that they were fair; and they took them wives of all which they chose. (NOTE: It is evident that something very wrong took place here, when it is said that the sons of God ,,took them wives of all which they chose.')" Genesis 6:1-2. The Lord issued something of an ultimatum; to wit: "And the Lord said, My spirit shall not always strive (litigate) with man;" i.e., set up a throne in man's conscience and try each case to judgment and sentence each culprit to eternal Hell. What's wrong with taking wives of all which they chose? Has the evil of divorce and remarriage already, by then, have tainted and damned the human race? What about polygamy, ala the Mormons, and Solomon? WHAT ABOUT SODOMY? MALE ON MALE; FEMALE ON FEMALE? AND, ALAS, HOW DO YOU SPELL "WIDE-SPREAD SAME-SEX MARRIAGE?" "And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. And it repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart. And the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I created from the face of the earth; both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that I have made them." (Genesis 6:5-7) These passages from God's Holy Word have the advantage of being rock-solid Truth, giving great weight and credibility to the Babylonian Talmud revelation that until now only one society in all of history practiced wide-spread same-sex marriage (the Antediluvian), and that THAT PRACTICE WAS THE REASON FOR AND THE TRIGGER FOR NOAH'S FLOOD. "The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence. And God looked upon the earth, and behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth. And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence through them; and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth." (Gen. 6:11-13) The short of it is, that when same-sex marriage is universally accepted as the law of the land ­ in total derogation of the ancient law of marriage (one man, one woman, one lifetime) ­ the end of the world in total, fiery destruction will have arrived. The reason appears to be, that same-sex marriage strikes a fatal blow to the doctrine behind the beautiful metaphor of Christ and His Bride, the Church. This was well explained by the Savior in Matthew, chapter 19; to wit: "And he answered and said unto them, Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female, And said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife; and THEY TWAIN (AND NO OTHER TWAIN) SHALL BE ONE FLESH." (Matthew 19:4-6) (Note: All other flesh is "STRANGE FLESH" according to Jude 7, and suffers the "vengeance of eternal fire." Mat. 19:4,5.) Wherefore, at the end of the world, the jealous, avenging Bride-groom, pronouncing sentence, will again roar the ancient, irrevocable law of Zion: "Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder." (Mat. 19:6)  I love you.  Amen.  
