Sunday, November 15, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  Total Depravity, from which we get the "T" in the TULIP acronym for the five points of  Calvinism (i.e., the doctrines of grace, otherwise known as the Gospel). The name of the doctrine  is, Total Depravity. A failure to get this doctrine right is certain to get the other four doctrines of  Calvinism (the Gospel) wrong.  "Lo, this only have I found, that God made man (originally) upright; but they have sought out many inventions." (Eccl. 7:29)  That is, in the beginning, God made the human creature Adam pure, and holy, and perfectly so. The man Adam had a perfection of knowledge, a holy disposition of mind, and perfect purity in his affections. No ignorance attended him in his primitive state. We shall later see how ignorance and darkness overspread his mind upon the entrance of sin; but in the beginning it was not so.  Brine ­ (John Brine was born in England in 1703 [the same birthday as Jonathan Edwards]; and was converted in the Baptist church where John Gill was preaching; and, after preaching more than 35 years, his funeral service, and that of his wife, were both preached by Dr. Gill; famous John Ryland ranked him among the seven greatest of the Puritan preachers, and, when speaking of Bunhill-fields burial ground, Ryland used to say, "There lie the ashes of the three great Johns: ­ John Bunyan, John Gill, and John Brine.")  Brine: "Some have thought, that he (Adam) had a knowledge of the Trinity, and it is not improbable. For, though, that is not attainable by reasoning on the operations of God's hand, we may fairly suppose that man received by immediate and supernatural revelation, the knowledge of some truths, and why may we not conclude, that, the knowledge of this mystery was conveyed to him in that way? To the end he might, in his acts of devotion, pay those honors to the Divine Three, which are the due of each." (To digress briefly, Both Isaac Newton and Isaac Watts struggled to understand the Trinity ­ and neither of those brilliant minds was able, in the end, to do so.)  The tenacity with which depraved mankind insist upon the lie that man is now made in the image of God, standing alone, is dispositive proof of man's total depravity. Only Adam was made or created in the image of God. Since the Fall, all mankind are made in the image of Totally Depraved Adam; to wit: "So God created man IN HIS OWN IMAGE, IN THE IMAGE OF GOD CREATED HE HIM; MALE AND FEMALE CREATED HE THEM." (Gen. 1:27) "This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him; Male and female created he them; and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created. And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a son IN HIS OWN LIKENESS, AFTER HIS IMAGE; and called his name Seth; And the days of Adam after he had begotten Seth were eight hundred years; and he begat sons and daughters; And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years; and he died." (Gen. 5:1-5)  Now I say, it is crystal clear that every son and daughter of Adam was born in Adam's Totally Depraved image ­ NOT IN GOD'S IMAGE. What a world of false, Satanic, demon-inspired, Arminian doctrine is smashed to smithereens when a tiny little bit of Bible light is shined on the subject. "And this is the condemnation (i.e., damnation to Hell), that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. For every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But he that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought" ­  Sunday, November 15, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  (wrought means to make a thing delicately or elaborately, as by hammering with tools to shape metal,  usually as working with metals), ­ I say, "he that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may  be made manifest, that they are WROUGHT" ­ HAMMERED OUT AND SHAPED ­ "IN GOD."  Jn. 3:19-21.  Beloved, how many times have you been confronted with the totally meritless argument, that since sodomites are made in the image of God along with all mankind, they must be acceptable to God just like they are ­ anal copulating, fisting, scat, golden showers, and sui generis (sui generis means "of its own kind;" here it means there are many, many more such filthy sexual practices which fags and dykes fill their lives with, which are all of the same general kind; and there is no need to itemize them here, as a concession to our absolute limit, or ability, to tolerate disgusting fag filth). The meritless fag/dyke argument goes on, usually buttressed by the trite Arminian aphorism ­ (an aphorism is a brief, tersely- or pithily-phrased statement of a pretended truth or opinion): "God don't make no junk." Ergo: God made me a flaming, lusting, sodomite sex fiend; since God don't make no junk, He loves me as His child and accepts me just as I am; God loves me and all other persons unconditionally.  Having rejected the doctrine of Total Depravity, the theological Arminians have zero moral and spiritual authority to deal with the homosexual threat, and this nation and this world are helpless slaves to His Majesty, the Devil, who indwells all fags and fag-enablers and dykes ­ DevilWorshippers, all (!) Total spiritual ignorance and thick, gross darkness have overspread the American nation, and the world. It is a far more serious and terminal disease than mankind knows. As with the antediluvian world shortly before Noah's Flood came and swept them all away to Hell directly ­ even so at this hour doom for the earth's inhabitants lies just ahead. Without hope and without God, and nobody knows or cares. This is the natural result of Total Depravity.  As a blind person is incapable of being impressed by the strongest rays of light, so men, naturally, by reason of the blindness of their minds (Total Depravity) cannot discern the nature of heavenly things. Hence the notions which they form about them are totally contrary to their nature, and they think them to be the very reverse of what in fact they are. The highest wisdom, they account folly; and objects the most glorious and attractive, when viewed as they are in themselves, they despise and reject, as having in their account nothing that is amiable and charming to them. The Lily of the Valley and the Rose of Sharon are, to them, poisonous and stinking weeds; to wit: "The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned." (1 Cor. 2:14)  Moreover, it is the primary (and fatal) characteristic of mankind's Total Depravity, that mankind is universally OBSTINATE ­ viciously and murderously obstinate ­ whenever and wherever the doctrine of Total Depravity comes up. Recall the martyrdom of the gentle Stephen, full of faith and of the Holy Ghost, preaching to the self-righteous, Christ-rejecting Jewish thugs; to wit: "And Stephen, full of faith and power, did great wonders and miracles among the people. Then there arose certain of the synagogue, which is called the synagogue of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of them of Cilicia and of Asia, disputing with Stephen. And they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spake...And all that sat in the council, looking stedfastly on him, saw his face as it had been the face of an angel." (Acts 6:8-10,15)  Sunday, November 15, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  After a lengthy sermon that dealt with the Total Depravity reflected in Stephen's brilliant rendition of the history of the Jewish people, Stephen concluded by chastising the Jews for their wicked recalcitrance and vicious, murderous, stubborn OBSTINACY. Their stubborn heads were solid rocks and their stiff necks were sinews of iron and steel; to wit:  "Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost; as your fathers did, so do ye. Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and they have slain them which showed before of the coming of the Just One; of whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers." (Acts 7:51,52)  Brine: "The unyielding disposition of the human mind to heavenly things, is beyond expression. On this account the heart is compared to a stone, and the neck to an iron sinew. We not only lack ability to perform what is good; but a will and inclination to it also. The most pathetic entreaties and moving expostulations, cannot entice the mind to close with what is absolutely necessary to its solid peace and final happiness; nor the most awakening threats and thundering menaces, force the will to retract the evil choice it has once made." (That, Beloved, is the poison root of Total Depravity [!] ­ wicked OBSTINACY [!] ) "An unsanctified mind will for ever risk the loss of the chiefest good, and suffer the greatest misery, to gratify its sinful desires." Brine's statement that the unregenerate human heart is likened unto a stone, and the neck to an iron sinew, is found in such verses as Isaiah 48:4; to wit:  "Because I knew that thou art OBSTINATE, and thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass." (Isaiah 48:4)  Further Holy Scripture proof supporting the plain doctrine of Total Depravity is found in such passages as Jeremiah 13:21-23; to wit: "What wilt thou say when he shall punish thee?" (NOTE: Answer, Absolutely nothing! It's a rhetorical question, bearing its obvious answer in its teeth as it comes. What wilt thou say when God Almighty throws your sorry hide into the raging fires of Hell for all eternity, having called your case up for plenary hearing before the Great White Throne and having presented overwhelming evidence of your Total Depravity before the assembled universe of intelligent witnesses?; to wit: "And Jesus answered and spake unto them again by parables, and said, The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which made a marriage for his son, And sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding; AND THEY WOULD NOT COME. [Total Depravity]. Again, he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my dinner; my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready; come unto the marriage. But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise; And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, AND SLEW THEM. [Total Depravity]. But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth; and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city. Then saith he to his servants, The wedding is ready, but they which were bidden were not worthy. Go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid to the marriage. So those servants went out into the highways, and gathered together all as many as they found, both bad and good; and the wedding was furnished with guests. And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man which had not on a wedding garment; And he saith unto him, Friend, how camest thou in hither not having a wedding garment? [Total Depravity]. AND HE WAS SPEECHLESS. Then said the king to his servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. For many are called, BUT FEW ARE CHOSEN." [Total Depravity]. Mat. 22:1-14).  Sunday, November 15, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  "What wilt thou say when he shall punish thee?" ­ (Answer: Nothing. Absolutely nothing. "And he was speechless." He was Totally Depraved ­ and he jolly well knew it.) ­ "for thou hast taught them to be captains, and as chief over thee; shall not sorrows take thee, as a woman in travail? And if thou say in thine heart, Wherefore come these things upon me? For the greatness of thine iniquity" ­ [i.e., Total Depravity] ­ "are thy skirts discovered, and thy heels made bare. CAN THE ETHIOPIAN CHANGE HIS SKIN, OR THE LEOPARD HIS SPOTS? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil. [Total Depravity] ... This is thy lot, the portion of thy measures from me, saith the Lord; because thou hast forgotten me, and trusted in falsehood. Therefore will I discover thy skirts upon thy face, that thy shame may appear. [Total Depravity]. I have seen thine adulteries, and thy neighings," ­ ("They were as fed horses in the morning; every one neighed after his neighbor's wife" - Jer. 5:8), ­ "the lewdness of thy whoredom, and thine abominations on the hills in the fields. Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem! wilt thou not be made clean? when shall it once be?" [Total Depravity]. Jer. 13:21-23,25-27.  The essence of Total Depravity is the Original Sin of our Father Adam, whose tainted blood literally flows in all our veins, typifying the total moral corruption that indelibly stamps all our characters and predisposes all of us to sin. "The natural man" ­ (i.e., the impenitent, unregenerate man) ­ "receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned." 1 Cor. 2:14. The "things of the Spirit of God," referred to in the verse, are the doctrines of Grace, sometimes called the Five Points of Calvinism, which are, collectively, the Gospel, plain and simple. And those doctrines ­ to the impenitent, unregenerate person ­ "are foolishness."  Immediately, instantly, when the genuine Gospel, i.e., the Five Points, I say, when the genuine Gospel is preached in a robust and authoritative way, mankind rejects it, despises it, and openly rebels against it. Why? Total Depravity. That's why. Those Five Points declare plainly from the clear and unvarnished Word of the Living God, that God does not love everybody ­ only His Elect ­ and that He does, in fact, hate all mankind except His Elect. These Five Points proclaim proudly and without any timidity or hint of apology, that the Lord Jesus did NOT die on the cross for everybody ­ but only for His Elect; and that, in fact, all the billions of mankind from Adam to the end of the world ­ except for a relatively small remnant ­ are certain to spend eternity in Hell.  Last Sun., Nov. 8, 2009, St. David's Episcopal Dog Kennel dedicated its new $3 million DOG HOUSE "church" to the Devil. The goofy female rabbi from Satan's Temple Beth Sodom, together with many other ecumenical heretics in and around Topeka and Kansas, including the crop-headed presiding female bishop of the Episcopal diocese of Kansas, were there; as were many Hell-bound religious types, all Totally Depraved, and all identified at Rev. 18:1-3; to wit: "And after these things I saw another angel come down from heaven, having great power; and the earth was lightened with his glory. And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies." (Rev. 18:1-3)  Temple Beth Sodom and St. David's Sodomite Whorehouse are near WBC on Gage in Topeka, so that we get a big whiff of their brimstone each Sunday. I love you. Amen.  
