Sunday, September 6, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Then Job answered and said, I have heard many such things;  miserable comforters are ye all. Shall vain words have an end? I also  could speak as ye do; if your soul were in my soul's stead, I could  heap up words against you, and shake my head against you... How  long will ye vex my soul, and break me in pieces with words? These  ten times have ye reproached me. ...Why do ye persecute me as God,  and are not satisfied with my flesh?" Job 16:1,2,4; 19:2,3,22.  Some passages of Scripture are short, profound confessions of faith ­ standing alone. We do well to take heed to all such passages. Such as Job's passionate defense against the frontal assault upon his soul by his three so-called "friends," who were then and there raising sharp, and tormenting questions about Job's salvation, in light of the fact, said they, that the sore and grievous calamities lately befalling Job were proof positive of God's disfavor. It is obvious, from Job's contemporaneous words and statements, that he had had just about enough of those three eggheads; to wit: "Then Job answered and said, I have heard many such things; miserable comforters are ye all. Shall vain words have an end? I also could speak as ye do; if your soul were in my soul's stead, I could heap up words against you, and shake my head against you... How long will ye vex my soul, and break me in pieces with words? These ten times have ye reproached me. ...Why do ye persecute me as God, and are not satisfied with my flesh?" Job 16:1,2,4; 19:2,3,22.  As much as if Job had said, I am about as low as a man can get. My ten children have recently died violent deaths; all of my earthly possessions are clean gone; my body is racked with unbearable pain; my wife insolently charged me, ­ in the heat of passionate rage against God, ­ to curse God and die; all of my relatives and friends have abandoned me as though I had contracted leprosy; except now you three; and you three have come, not to cheer me and comfort me, but to charge me ­ with many eloquent and forceful theological arguments, ­ with being a vile, lost, Hell-bound hypocrite, whom God has at last caught up with, and is punishing, in due proportion to the multiplicity of his sins and crimes. Bang (!) But I now have something to tell YOU three fine "friends." LISTEN UP; and listen up good. "Though He slay me, yet will I trust in Him;" ­ (i.e., I will trust Him to save me and take me to Heaven when I die); ­ "but I will maintain mine own ways before Him. He also shall be my salvation; for an hypocrite shall not come before him. Hear diligently my speech, and my declaration with your ears. Behold now, I have ordered my cause; I know that I shall be justified. Who is he that will plead with me? for now, if I hold my tongue, I shall give up the ghost." Job 13:15-19.  As if Job had said, After all the nasty and ungodly things you guys have said about me ­ especially since you cowards are kicking me mercilessly while I am down. ­ I say, now, if I tried to keep quiet and not answer your hateful, vile, and blasphemous slanders upon me ­ I would just die of acute indignation and righteous explosive rage. Didn't Job say that when he said that he knew when he stood before God he would be declared justified, ­ (i.e., justified in the righteousness of his mighty Goel, his Kinsman-Redeemer [Job 19:25]) ­ in Whom he trusts? And that for now, "If I hold my tongue, I shall GIVE UP THE GHOST?" Job 13:18.  Further, as if Job had said, I am so certain that I am right with God, and that you are three Arminian heretics, that I wish there were some way my words could be written (!) and printed in a book; (!) no, change that; I wish my words in this historic debate we're having could be graven with an iron pen (!) and lead (!) in the rock (!) FOR EVER (!) THAT'S HOW CERTAIN I AM THAT I AM RIGHT AND THAT YOU GUYS ARE WRONG (!). Listen up (!); and listen up good (!)  Sunday, September 6, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  Here is my Confession of Faith, for time and eternity, which I will live by, and die by, and go to  Heaven by; to wit: "For I know that my redeemer" (i.e., my Goel, my mighty Kinsman-  Redeemer-Avenger) "liveth," ­ (i.e., eternally lives, cannot die, the great I AM - "Before  Abraham was, I AM," Jn. 8:58.), ­ "and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth;" ­  (i.e., saith Job, My Redeemer is, and shall forever be, gloriously triumphant over all other  principalities and powers whatsoever, declaring, simply, "All power is given unto me in heaven  and in earth;" Mat. 28:18, which guarantees me, saith Job, the fulfillment of all His exceeding  great and precious promises, to me, including, especially, those promises respecting an inheritance  that is incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away, complete with a new and glorified body  that is powerful, agile, beautiful, spiritual (and hence eternally indestructible), and impassible (i.e.,  totally impervious to pain and sorrow of whatsoever kind or nature) ­ all such as described by our  dear Lord Jesus; to wit: "Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and  night in his temple; and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them. They shall  hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. For  the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living  fountains of waters; and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes." Rev. 7:15-17.) ­ "And  though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God;" Job 19:25-26.  Beloved, our glorified and glorious, brand, spanking new bodies are on the way. God's Word for it. They will look like these earthly bodies, except they will be glorious above our poor power to describe ­ and it matters not one whit that worms have completely destroyed these sick, dying and dead bodies. Listen. "The first man (Adam) is of the earth, earthy; the second man is the Lord from heaven. As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly." 1 Cor. 15:47-49.  God has predestinated that it shall be so, that we shall bear the image of Jesus Christ in our new bodies; to wit: "For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the IMAGE of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren (i.e., many of God's Elect, maybe millions, all bearing the image of Jesus Christ)." Rom. 8:29. "For God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face" ­ (i.e., face, countenance, visage, look, see, show thyself) ­ "in the face of Jesus Christ." 2 Cor. 4:6. Beloved, in our new bodies we shall see Him as He is, and we shall be like him; to wit: "Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God; therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not. Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure." 1 Jn. 3:1-3.  (As an aside, let us take note that these fornicating fags, these fag-enabling, Chapaquitic Baymurdering Teddy Kennedy types, these crop-headed females, these grand-baby-killing Barack Hussein Obama murderers, and this flood of ungodly Arminian heretics ­ whose deadly, satanic preaching is largely to blame for the nation and the world surrendering to the fags ­ since they have not purified themselves, "even as he is pure," (1 Jn. 3:3) ­ they have no hope of salvation and the resurrection of their vile bodies unto glorious new bodies, at the coming of Christ.)  Now back to Job's wondrous Confession of Faith, where Job said, triumphantly, and speaking through acute pain and distress: "And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God." Job 19:26. It does not matter one whit if cannibals have cooked you and eaten you and every mouthful of your body has passed through some persons' or some animals'  Sunday, September 6, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  digestive system. God's power is able to raise you from the dead, and is pledged to do so. And  you may multiply similar scenarios, all to illustrate that the doctrine of the resurrection of the  human body from the dead is fraught with mysteries, conundrums, and mighty difficulties. Are  they not all anticipated by the language of the verse? After all, what animal digestive system is  smaller than that of worms?! It matters not to the trusting soul. The trusting soul says, God's  power is pledged to raise me from the dead, and sooner or later it shall be done. Are there  mysteries? Are there difficulties? Paul and faithful preachers refer them all to the power of God  for a full and ample solution.  The inspiration for the preaching of old Dr. Bob Jones ­ founder of Bob Jones University ­ was William Elbert Munsey (1833-1877). It is said that Dr. Munsey, a Methodist preacher, built himself such a reputation as the greatest pulpiteer of his day, that he killed himself ­ (he was only 44 years old when he died) ­ living up to that reputation. He preached all over the South, mostly in such large cities as Nashville, Memphis, and New Orleans, drawing huge crowds everywhere he spoke, due to his eloquence. Often, upon concluding one of his fiery sermons, the entire congregation would be standing ­ and nobody knew when he stood up. I have a book containing some 38 of his sermons and lectures. (I used to have 3 of his books of sermons.) One of his sermons was upon the resurrection of the human body from the dead.  In it, Munsey wrote: to wit:"For man, who is himself a microcosm of wonders, standing amid a world of wonders, profound and confounding, to present the difficulties involved in the resurrection of the body as an insuperable obstacle to its accomplishment, is at once preposterous. Though your bones may lie bleaching in the bottom of the sea, or fossilized be deeply imbedded in rock; though your dust may be scattered over continents, transmuted into animals or plants, diffused in the air, diffused in the water, or mingled with clay, ­ GOD'S POWER IS ABLE TO RAISE YOU FROM THE DEAD, AND IS PLEDGED TO DO IT. That Power sooner or later will be exercised. The last day will come. The sun, unwheeled, will drag along the jaring heavens and refuse to shine. The stars will hide their faces, and the moon will roll up in the heavens red as blood, and hang her crimson livery upon the wing of the night. Earth will tremble upon her axis, and huge mountains of woe will drift and lodge upon her heart. (Rev. 6:12-16; Isa. 34:3,4.) A Mighty Angel with a face like the sun, clothed with clouds, and crowned with a rainbow, and shod with wings of fire, will cleave the heavens in his lightning track, and descending with his right foot upon the troubled sea, and his left foot upon the quaking earth, lift his hand to heaven, and swear by the judge of the quick and the dead that time shall be no longer.(Rev. 10:1-6.) Old Time, the father of centuries and the tomb-builder of generation after generation, will drop his broken scythe and break his hour-glass, careen and fall, a giant in ruins. The trump of God will then sound. (1 Cor. 15:52; 1 Thes. 4:16.) Its resonant thunders will roll through all the lengths and breadths of Death's vast empire, and its old walls and arches crammed with buried millions of human bodies will fall in crashing ruins. The dingy king Death will drop his sceptre ringing in fragments upon the damp pavements of the grave, and fly howling from his tottering throne down, down to the nethermost Hell (`O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin; the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord; 1 Cor. 15:55-58, [i.e., not in vain because of the sure and certain hope of the resurrection of our human bodies, to a glorious inheritance in Heaven, including impassible (impervious to pain) and glorified bodies, radiant and bejeweled crowns, thrones, and an everlasting kingdom, as co-regents with Christ.])."  Sunday, September 6, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  We have sought to expound Job 19:26, which is the central verse of the marvelous, ancient, 3-  verse Confession of Faith, that Job called "the root of the matter is found in me." Job 19:28(b).  Look at that central verse again; to wit: "And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet  in my flesh shall I see God." Job 19:26. There are two passages of God's Holy Word that  expound Job 19:26 far better than my poor powers of exposition, and I recommend them to your  regular, daily Bible-reading activity; to wit: 1 Cor. 15:51-54; and, 1 Thes. 4:13-18. "Behold, I  show you a mystery; We shall not all sleep [i.e., die], but we shall all be changed," ­ [Job says,  "If a man die, shall he live again? all the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change  come," (Job 14:14) ], ­ "In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump; for the  trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed (i.e.,  put in everlasting possession of our new bodies). For this corruptible must put on incorruption,  and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is  written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy  victory?" 1 Cor. 15:51-55.  "But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the arch- angel, and with the trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first; Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these words." 1 Thes. 4:13-18. Beloved, more beautiful and comforting words were never spoken or written. They fill the room of the death-bed of the righteous with the dazzling bright light of God's supernatural hope; and they hang the rainbow of God's immortal and eternal promise over the grave of God's Elect.  "For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us." ­ (i.e., when we are put into possession of our new bodies). "For the earnest expectation of the whole creation waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God." ­ (i.e., only God's Elect get new bodies, and then will be made known to the whole creation just exactly who God's Elect are, and exactly who the damned are). ­ "For the whole creation itself was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of Him who hath subjected the same in HOPE, Because the whole creation itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God." ­ (i.e., simultaneously with God's Elect receiving their new bodies, the whole creation is restored to its pristine condition of things in the Garden of Eden before Adam's transgression and Fall.) ­ "For we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now." ­ (i.e., it is irrefutable and incontestable fact ["For we know"] that all of nature is under some kind of dreadful curse from God that dooms and damns all the animal, vegetable, and mineral world to inevitable death and/or fiery destruction and death.) ­ "And not only they, but ourselves also, which have the first-fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, WAITING FOR THE ADOPTION, to wit, THE REDEMPTION OF OUR BODY. For we are saved by HOPE; but HOPE that is seen is not HOPE; for what a man seeth, why doth he YET HOPE FOR? But if we HOPE FOR THAT WE SEE NOT, then do WE WITH PATIENCE WAIT FOR IT." Rom. 8:18-25. No other religion in the history of the world even comes close to Job's Confession of Faith; to wit: "For I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth; And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God; Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another (i.e., no stranger), though my reins be consumed within me." I love you. Amen.  
