Friday, October 1, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And now, because ye have done all these (many wonderful works - Mat.  7:22) works, saith the Lord, and I spake unto you, rising up early and  speaking, but ye heard not; and I called you, but ye answered not;  Therefore will I do unto this house, which is called by my name, wherein  ye trust, and unto the place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I  have done to Shiloh" ­ (the biggest city in the biggest tribe, Ephraim, of  the ten northern tribes, i.e., which was destroyed by Assyria c. 721 BC). ­  "And I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out all of your brethren,  even the whole seed of Ephraim. Therefore PRAY NOT THOU FOR THIS  PEOPLE, neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession  to me; FOR I WILL NOT HEAR THEE. Seest thou not what they do in the  cities of Judah (America) and in the streets of Jerusalem (New York)?"  Jer. 7:13-17.  Beloved, the Lord our God has given this little church a divine calling to be as a watchtower of the nations, to see how they do, and render a report to Him ­ much in the fashion of Jeremiah's calling and subsequent reports unto Him that sent him; to wit: "Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ORDAINED THEE A PROPHET UNTO THE NATIONS." (Jer. 1:4,5)  It took Jeremiah a while to adjust his thinking to such a remarkable turn of events, and he began immediately to interpose objections; to wit: "Then said I, Ah, Lord God! behold, I cannot speak; FOR I AM A CHILD." Jer. 1:6. The word Ah, or Ahah, is used in distress, and grief; and is expressive of mourning and complaint, which shows that the prophet was troubled and uneasy at his call to be God's representative to the sons of men on earth, and would have gladly been excused on the grounds of his youth and inexperience in his speaking abilities, eloquence, knowledge, and understanding generally. Rabbi Abarbinel supposes that Jeremiah was twelve or fifteen years old, while Gill thinks he was twenty years old at the time, "since he seems to have prophesied to the men of Anathoth (Jeremiah's home town) before he was sent to Jerusalem."  (NOTE HERE, that the evil little town of Anathoth was later destroyed by the Almighty for conspiring stealthily to kill Jeremiah; to wit: "And the Lord hath given me knowledge of it, and I know it; then thou showest me their doings. But I was like a lamb or an ox that is brought to the slaughter; and I knew not that they had devised devices against me, saying, Let us destroy the tree with the fruit thereof, and let us cut him off from the land of the living, that his name may be no more remembered. But, O lord of hosts, that judgest righteously, that triest the reins and the heart, LET ME SEE THY VENGEANCE ON THEM; for unto thee have I revealed my cause. Therefore thus saith the Lord of the men of Anathoth, that seek thy life, saying, Prophesy not in the name of the Lord, that thou die not by our hand; Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, Behold, I will punish them; the young men shall die by the sword; their sons and their daughters shall die by famine; And there shall be no remnant of them; for I will bring evil upon the men of Anathoth, even the year of their visitation." Jer. 11:18-23. I put it to you now, Beloved. If it is an identifying mark upon the prophets of God that the friends and kinfolks of their own home town threaten to kill them and plot secretly to kill them FOR THE SOLE AND STATED REASON THAT THEY ARE PREACHING GOD'S WORD TO THE MEN OF ANATHOTH, do not the gentle souls of Westboro Baptist Church qualify? How many death threats have we received? And, do not exploding bombs and raging fires constitute attempts on our lives?)  Friday, October 1, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  Here Jeremiah struggles with the age-old prosperity of the wicked ­ in the context of the murderous men of Anathoth plotting to kill Jeremiah, and the Lord not executing judgment on them soon enough to suit him; to wit: "Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee; yet  let me talk with thee of thy judgments; Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper?  wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously? Thou hast planted them, yea, they have taken root; they grow, yea, they bring forth fruit; thou art near in their mouth, and far from their reins. But thou, O Lord, knowest me; thou hast seen me, and tried mine heart toward thee; PULL THEM OUT LIKE SHEEP for the slaughter" ­ (among first of many of Jeremiah's imprecatory prayers, calling down God's curses on someone or something) ­ "and prepare them  for the day of slaughter. How long shall the land mourn, and the herbs of every field wither, for  the wickedness of them that dwell therein? the beasts are consumed, and the birds; because they said, He shall not see our last end." Jer. 12:1-4.  Beloved, the matter of imprecatory prayers is vital for us to seek the Lord for an understanding, especially as we draw ever nearer the time of the restitution of all things. The book of Psalms and the writings of Jeremiah are loaded with imprecatory prayers and strong supplications. The explanation usually given by those who oppose the doctrine and practice of such prayers, is, that we must not think of such praying as retaliatory personal satisfaction; but only as vindicating the justice and satisfying the pure righteousness of God Who ­ after all ­ promised unto His people such satisfaction and such vindication. Jonathan Edwards was a well-known advocate for such holier-than-thou ­ if well-meaning ­ tom-foolery.  Let us examine an incident from Jer. 18:18-23; to wit: "Then said they, Come, and let us devise devices against Jeremiah; for the law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet. Come, and let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words. Give heed to me, O Lord, and hearken to the voice of them that contend with me. Shall evil be recompensed for good? For they have digged a pit for my soul. Remember that I stood before thee to speak good for them, and to turn away thy wrath from them." ­ (Comes now what James calls the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man ­ Jas. 5:16 ­ the context of which reveals that James had reference to one of Elijah's imprecatory prayers Jas. 5:17.) ­ "THEREFORE DELIVER UP THEIR CHILDREN TO THE FAMINE, AND POUR OUT THEIR BLOOD BY THE FORCE OF THE SWORD; AND LET THEIR WIVES BE BEREAVED OF THEIR CHILDREN, AND BE WIDOWS; AND LET THEIR MEN BE PUT TO DEATH; LET THEIR YOUNG MEN BE SLAIN BY THE SWORD IN BATTLE" ­ (Shades of America's thousands of recent war dead in Iraq and Afghanistan, all of which WBC has regularly prayed for, following Jeremiah's example.) ­ "LET A CRY BE HEARD FROM THEIR HOUSES, WHEN THOU SHALT BRING A TROOP SUDDENLY UPON THEM" ­ (Shades of cries and wails heard from thousands of American houses upon receiving word that God Almighty had killed more thousands of godless American brats by means of IEDs, i.e., Improvised Explosive Devices: cheap, deadly homemade bombs responsible for more bloody deaths and injuries than any other sophisticated weaponry costing our enemies like Iran, Syria, Russia, etc., billions. America has departed from God to worship idols and persecute Westboro Baptist Church. God has now departed from America and is sending her hellish male and female troops home in body bags. WBC is praying fervently every day that God will punish doomed America, even as Jeremiah prayed for doomed Israel.) ­ "FOR THEY HAVE DIGGED A PIT TO TAKE ME, (JEREMIAH CONTINUES), AND HID SNARES FOR MY FEET. YET, LORD, THOU KNOWEST ALL THEIR COUNSEL AGAINST ME TO SLAY ME:" ­ (Shades of numerous death threats, bombing, assaults, arson, false arrests and imprisonments, vandalisms, destruction of property, thefts, etc.) ­ "FORGIVE NOT THEIR INIQUITY (JEREMIAH  Friday, October 1, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  CONTINUES), NEITHER BLOT OUT THEIR SIN FROM THY SIGHT" ­ (Note, here, that  Jeremiah, so far from praying for their salvation, he is actually praying for them to be sent to Hell  upon their death. It is beyond cavil that only God can forgive iniquity and blot out sin; and that if Jeremiah's enemies die in an impenitent state, they will go straight to Hell. Beloved. Here is where the rubber meets the road, as they say. Whether you choose to call Jeremiah's prayer an  imprecatory prayer or not is really quite irrelevant to the point. If God does not forgive the iniquity of Jeremiah's enemies, those perverts are going to Hell when they die. I like the old saying, that if that old codger dies in his sins he'll split Hell wide open. Beloved, if the dear Lord Jesus answers  the effectual, fervent prayer of his much-abused servant Jeremiah, then He will neither forgive their iniquity nor blot out their sin.) ­ "BUT LET THEM BE OVERTHROWN BEFORE THEE  (JEREMIAH CONCLUDES); DEAL THUS WITH THEM IN THE TIME OF THINE ANGER." Jer. 18:18-23.  The run-up to Jeremiah's powerful, heavy imprecatory prayers against the land of Judah and the city of Jerusalem, and for their total destruction, began at least by the seventh chapter, where Jeremiah was first ordered to discontinue praying for them; to wit: "THEREFORE PRAY NOT THOU FOR THIS PEOPLE, NEITHER LIFT UP CRY NOR PRAYER FOR THEM, NEITHER MAKE INTERCESSION TO ME; FOR I WILL NOT HEAR THEE." (Jer. 7:16)  What a drastic remedy at the hands of a loving God who at every turn of the road encouraged His people to pray; e.g., to wit: "And he (the dear Lord Jesus) spake a parable unto them to this end, that men ought always to pray, and not to faint." Lk. 18:1. "I exhort therefore, that, first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men; For kings, and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. ...I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting." (1 Tim. 2:1-3,8)  And, lest there be any claim of de minimus or mistake, the stunning order from an outraged God to an obedient prophet is repeated in chapter eleven; to wit: "THEREFORE PRAY NOT THOU FOR THIS PEOPLE, NEITHER LIFT UP A CRY OR PRAYER FOR THEM; FOR I WILL NOT HEAR THEM IN THE TIME THAT THEY CRY UNTO ME FOR THEIR TROUBLE." Jer. 11:14. And, lest there be any who continue to attempt to quibble and cavil at the order, pretending that it can be read to proscribe only imprecatory prayers, and that prayers for the good of the people are still permitted; I say, any such pretended sophistry or difficulty is removed by a shortened version of the order, as repeated in chapter 14; to wit:  "THEN SAID THE LORD UNTO ME, PRAY NOT FOR THIS PEOPLE FOR THEIR GOOD!" (Jer.14:11)  Thereupon, the order is enlarged, and something of the conditions that occasioned the order in the first place are added; to wit:  "When they fast, I will not hear their cry; and when they offer burnt offering and an oblation, I will not accept them; but I will consume them by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence." (Jer. 14:12)  In other words, false religion and idolatry has proliferated throughout the land; and the condition is systemic; and it is irreversible; such that the wrath of God fueling total destruction is imminent; to wit: "I will consume them by the sword, famine, and pestilence." America ­ and indeed the world ­ is saturated with false religion and idolatry.  Friday, October 1, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  Ought we not expect destruction to be imminent? "Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will bring evil upon them, which they shall not be able to escape; and though they shall cry unto me,  I will not hearken unto them. Then shall the cities of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem go,  and cry unto the gods unto whom they offer incense; but they shall not save them at all in the  time of their trouble. For according to the number of thy cities were thy gods, O Judah; and according to the number of streets in Jerusalem have ye set up altars to THAT SHAMEFUL THING (Priapus?), even altars to burn incense unto Baal (i.e., generic idol-worship, to  accommodate local filth preferences: Baal, Priapus, Tammuz, Molech, Baalzebub the god of Ekron, the Fishgods and Flygods of the pagan Philistines, etc.; that later merged into the whole systems of the famous pornographic false gods of the Greeks and Romans, called the Greek Pantheon, and the Roman Pantheon)." Jer. 11:11-13.  The multiplicity of false gods, and the multiplicity of false religious systems, and multiplicity of false houses of worship, thereby to have a society constantly reminded, openly and notoriously, that idolatry is the prevailing religion in time and in eternity ­ and that such is a healthy and wholesome family affair that may be safely trusted and worshipped. Any such idolatrous society is beyond hope, and no amount of praying will help; for all such people are comfortable in their selfrighteousness ­ a dangerous condition, beyond the pale of prayer; to wit: "Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me; for I will not hear thee. SEEST THOU NOT WHAT THEY DO IN THE CITIES OF JUDAH AND IN THE STREETS OF JERUSALEM?" (Jer. 7:16,17)  They have reached the level of degeneracy and decadence wherein idolatry is considered a healthy, wholesome family affair ­ just as America today. On every street corner of every city is a well-attended, well-funded so-called church, synagogue, mosque, witch's coven or other Hell-hole of iniquity lifting the middle finger to God daily. "SEEST THOU NOT WHAT THEY DO?" Family Affair; to wit: "The children gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead their dough, to make cakes to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto other gods, that they may provoke me to anger." (Jer. 7:17,18) Such a happy little family, singing Jesus Loves Me. Whoever could dream of God hating ­ and about to pour out His eternal wrath upon, sending every last one of them to Hell ! To-wit: "DO THEY PROVOKE ME TO ANGER? saith the Lord; DO THEY NOT PROVOKE THEMSELVES TO THE CONFUSION OF THEIR OWN FACES? Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Behold, mine anger and my fury shall be poured out upon this place, upon man, and upon beast, and upon the trees of the field, and upon the fruit of the ground; and it shall burn, and shall not be quenched." (Jer. 7:19,20)  Beloved, do you see those happy children gathering sticks for their religious father to kindle a fire so that their church-going mother could bake cakes for the fund-raising party for some "worthy project" (?) sponsored by the Young Adults Sunday School classes. Beloved, we know those Kind Hearts and Gentle People That Live In Our Hometown, (as the song puts it). We've preached to them on their mean streets for 20 years We told them they were idolaters headed straight for Hell. Their true nature came out. From their smallest children to their great, great grand-parents, they have cursed us bitterly and persecuted us in every possible way. "But, O Lord of hosts, ...let me see thy vengeance on them; for unto thee have I revealed my cause." (Jer. 11:20) I love you. Amen.  
