Sunday, August 16, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And Asa did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, (in his  41-year reign in Jerusalem), as did David his father. AND HE  TOOK AWAY THE SODOMITES OUT OF THE LAND, and removed  all the idols that his fathers (i.e., Solomon, Rehoboam, and Abijam)  had made. And also Maachah his mother, even her he removed  from being queen, because she had made an idol in a grove;" ­  (i.e., the dunghill god of Sodom, even Priapus, whose stunningly  impure, filthy, obscene image and statue of a naked Pan was  worshipped in grossly obscene rites which this outrageously  wicked woman, this Queen Maachah, presided over); ­ "and Asa  destroyed her idol, and burnt it by the brook Kidron."  1 Kgs. 15:11-13.  Notice here the inseparable connection between idolatry and sodomy. Good king Asa took away the sodomites out of the land (v. 12), and (necessarily and naturally), he removed all the idols that his fathers had made, and especially did he deal decisively and drastically in removing the Queen Mother and her vile fag idol Priapus (v. 13). Gill: "He removed her from the kingdom, as per the Targum; from having any share in the government. According to some Jewish writers the idol she made in a grove was a Priapus, of an obscene figure; and she presided over the obscene rites of this impure deity, the same as a Baal-peor."  Moreover, idolatry is held forth everywhere in Scripture as being the precipitating cause of sodomy. Where idolatry abounds ("and covetousness, which is idolatry," Col. 3:5), sodomy also abounds. "Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness" (Ezek. 16:49) ­ all of which is included under the heading of "covetousness" ­ which is "idolatry," ­ which leads inevitably to "sodomy," ­ which is the namesake sin of the "sodomites," ­ who are the inhabitants of "Sodom." Ergo, idolatry is the precipitating cause of sodomy. Mankind, standing alone, without God, "Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, and changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things." (And, THAT, Beloved, is gross, pagan idolatry ­ Rom. 1:22,23. ­ Followed immediately by the next verse, ­ 24, ­ which describes the rock solid fact); to wit: "Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between (or betwixt) themselves.") And THAT is God's explanation of exactly how fags got that way ­ "dishonoring their own bodies;" to wit: God, in direct punishment for their idolatry, "gave them up to uncleanness." And if God says plainly that He has given them up to their filthy lifestyle, where is there any power on earth or in heaven or in Hell that can cure fags from being fags?!  A headline in the paper last week announced, "Psychologists Repudiate Gay-To-Straight Therapy." Forty or so years ago the APA (American Psychological Association) listed homosexuality as a mental disease. To pressure the APA into dropping them from their list, militant sodomites began showing up at APA annual meetings, disrupting sessions, pacing up and down in the aisles, and just generally raising such cain, that the APA caved in. Also, so many fags began graduating as practicing psychologists and becoming voting members of the APA, that by and by they had the votes to pass resolutions that forbad any psychologist from even trying to treat homosexuality as a disease or mental disorder of any kind. Even if the goofy psychologist says he has a good-faith professional belief that he can "cure" the fag, so he won't be a fag any more. They call it "reparative therapy." Well, last Wednesday, the APA (this is a quote) "declared that mental health professionals should not tell gay clients they can become straight through therapy  Sunday, August 16, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  or other treatments. In a resolution adopted by the APA's governing council, the association  issued its most comprehensive repudiation of `reparative therapy' ­ a concept espoused by a small  but persistent group of therapists, often allied with religious conservatives, who maintain gays can  change. No solid evidence exists that such change is likely, says the resolution, adopted by a 105-4  vote. The APA said some research suggests efforts to produce change could be harmful, inducing  depression and suicidal tendencies."  Jerry Falwell, Pat Robertson, James Dobson ­ that bunch of heretics ­ say that fags who get born again can pray and try really, really hard, and with God's help fags can get cured from being fags ­ all predicated on the lying proposition and false doctrine that God loves every individual of mankind, and God wants everybody to be saved, and God wants every fag to be cured from being a fag. Beloved, this conundrum (i.e., a hard ­ really impossible ­ problem for these Arminian heretics to solve) points up the truth of what we preach, and the lies of what they preach, as well or better than any other alignment of circumstances I can think of.  First ­ put it down, Beloved ­ repentance is a gift from God, and He gives it arbitrarily only to whom He chooses, viz., to His Elect; to wit: "And the servant of the Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto all, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves; if God PERADVENTURE WILL GIVE THEM REPENTANCE to the acknowledging of the truth; and that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his will." (2 Tim. 2:24-26)  All mankind except the Elect of God are slaves to Satan and none can escape except those to whom God grants repentance.  Second ­ put it down, Beloved, three times within five verses (Rom. 1:24-28) God says that He has given sodomites up to lives of unspeakable filth, sin, degradation, and inescapable darkness of mind and soul; to wit: 1) "Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, and changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things. (Bang!) Wherefore GOD ALSO GAVE THEM UP to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves." Rom. 1:22-24.  2) "Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen. (Bang!) For this cause GOD GAVE THEM UP unto vile affections; for even their women did change the natural use into that which is against nature." Rom. 1:25,26.  3) "And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust one toward another; men with men working that which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves that recompence of their error which was meet. (Bang!) And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, GOD GAVE THEM OVER to a reprobate mind," ­ (i.e., such that they can't think straight about anything), ­ "to do those things which are not convenient (i.e., not becoming, appropriate, or fit to be done)." Rom. 1:27,28.  Third ­ put it down, Beloved, ­ God has stamped their miserable condition indelibly upon their faces, for all the world to see; to wit: "The show of their countenance doth witness against them; and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their soul (!) for they have rewarded evil unto themselves." (Isa. 3:9)  Sunday, August 16, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  Thus, a merciful God has ordained an outward, prominent warning ­ impossible for the sodomites  to physically hide or explain away. In the Law of the Leper, the Lord God required the Leper to  cry Unclean (!) when he went abroad among others; to wit: "And the leper in whom the plague is,  his clothes shall be rent, and his head bare, and he shall put a covering upon his upper lip, and  shall cry, Unclean, unclean." Lev. 13:45. Since the arrogant sodomite will not even admit that  his vile lifestyle is sinful and abominable ­ even with AIDS and multiple other enteric diseases ­  (i.e., diseases of the lower bowels) ­ STD diseases, etc., zapping his vitals, the Lord God has  mercifully provided this indelible warning on the show of the sodomite's countenance. Isa. 3:9.  Fourth ­ put it down, Beloved ­ Another sinful condition attends the sodomite by nature, that further militates against any possibility of his repentance and forgiveness and salvation; to wit: the sodomite is proud of his sin, and flaunts his sin, and pushes his sin in the faces of all mankind. He cannot blush for his filthy and abhorrent and disgusting sins of the flesh ­ however repugnant to nature ­ speaking of them as a matter of pride (think, gay pride week, gay pride month, coming out day, gay pride parade, gay pride this, gay pride that, and gay pride everything, however loathsome and abominable it is). And, it is axiomatic that one cannot possibly repent of a thing if one is constitutionally, warp-and-woof proud of that thing; to wit: "Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush; therefore shall they fall among them that fall; in the time of their visitation they shall be cast down, saith the Lord." (Jer. 8:12)  Link this passage to Lev. 18:22 ("Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind; it is abomination."), and the sense is that these abominable creatures are doomed ­ by a constitutional inability to repent of their sins, ­ to go to Hell; which said eternal sentence will inevitably be carried out at a time certain when God shall visit each of them at death.  Gill: "`And there were also Sodomites in the land.' 1 Kgs. 14:24. Such as were addicted to unnatural lusts between men and men, which the men of Sodom were guilty of, from whence they had their name; Jarchi interprets the word adultery, and some versions render it whoremongers; and filthy actions of this nature, both by men and women, usually attended idolatrous practices among the Heathens; in their temples and groves such wickednesses were privately perpetrated; and `they did according to all the abominations of the nations which the Lord cast out before the children of Israel;' the Canaanites, of whose uncleannesses, incests, and bestialities, see Lev. 18. `And he (i.e., good king Asa) took away the Sodomites out of the land,' which were in the times of Rehoboam; (ch. 14:24); those he took away, either by driving them out of the land, or by putting them to death according to the law of God; the criminal code under a Jewish theocratic form of civil government; to wit: `If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination; they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.' Lev. 20:13. Asa dealt thus with as many of these beasts as he had knowledge of, for some remained; to wit: `And the remnant of the sodomites which remained in the days of his father Asa, he (i.e., good king Jehoshaphat) took out of the land.' 1 Kgs. 22:46." And, please note: concomitantly ­ for the two ­ sodomy and idolatry, remember ­ are more inseparable than Siamese twins; ergo, "(And king Asa) removed all the idols that his fathers had made, or allowed to be made, as Solomon, Rehoboam, and Abijam." 1 Kgs. 15:12.  Fifth ­ Put it down, Beloved ­ Sodomites cannot go to Heaven. In fact, they are the first group or category listed, on the infamous list of six reprobate groups that cannot enter heaven. Rev. 22:15. (In fact, sodomites are more or less implicated in the other five groups, also.) It is a fearful thing to contemplate, but I do believe that it is the solemn teaching of God's Holy Word, that there are  Sunday, August 16, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  certain categories of people, who, while they live and walk on earth, are as sure for Hell as if they  were already there. That when any of those people walk by, you can smell the brimstone and feel  the heat ­ metaphorically speaking. It is a savor of death unto death. 2 Cor. 2:16. And I believe  that such is the true meaning of the verse just above the verse listing the categories of the damned  at Rev. 22:15; to wit:  "He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still; and he that is holy, let him be holy still." (Rev. 22:11)  All destinies are forever fixed. At verse 22:14 the holy inhabitants of Heaven, with their entitlement papers ­ their eternal passports, as it were, establishing their unquestioned right of access thereunto; to wit: "Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city." Rev. 22:14. And then, Bang (!) there follows immediately, a listing of the categories of mankind who are for time and for eternity excluded from the Holy City with all its attendant joys and bliss ­ forever "WITHOUT (!);" without the Holy City; without Heaven; (banished forever to the torments of Hell); to wit:  "For without are DOGS" ­ (i.e., fags, sodomites, called dogs because of their filthiness, impudence, and libidinous conduct, i.e., their non-stop sexual perversions) ­ "dogs, and SORCERERS" ­ (i.e., drug addicts, addicted to mind-altering drugs and doctrines of the occult, demon-possession, and worship of the dead, séances and voices from the beyond giving advice to the living as to the future); ­ "and, WHOREMONGERS" ­ (i.e., practitioners of all kinds of sexual perversion, incest, rape, child molestation, bestiality, pedophilia, necromancy, etc. per Lev. 18); ­ "and MURDERERS" ­ (war mongerers and practitioners, with particular attention to murderers of the helpless and the innocent, i.e., abortionists, and, the most vile, heinous and reprehensible of all murderers, i.e., the persecutors of God's Elect); ­ "and IDOLATERS" ­ (i.e., the alter ego of sodomites, due to the interchangeable nature of the two, whereby the one leads inevitably to the other; whereon see Rom. 1:22-28.) ­ "and WHOSOEVER LOVETH AND MAKETH A LIE" ­ (i.e., Arminians, and their twin lies that God loves everybody and Christ died for everybody; and, It's OK to be gay, ­ with all that such a bald-faced lie imports in these last of the last days, ­ chiefest of which is that God is a Liar).  Think of it. Audacious, lying worldwide fag propaganda ­ during the last 40 or so years ­ has persuaded all of mankind that, It's OK to be gay. They were able to accomplish that feat because mankind does not fear God or believe the Bible. Period. God said, "Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with woman-kind; it is abomination." Lev. 18:22. Only twelve plain little words. But they draw into question every single word in the Bible. Like Toqueville's worm in the American apple. If fags can multiply and pressure the majority of mankind into loving and making a lie; to wit: that it's OK to be gay, that God is a liar, where is there in the universe a more damnable sin? And, besides, sodomy itself is so grave a sin against God and His Word, that the death penalty was affixed thereto. Lev. 20:13. Added thereto in further universal support of the BIG LIE ­ (i.e., It's OK to be gay), ­ is the knockout blow to all mankind; to wit: "Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things (fags) are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them (fag-enablers)." (Rom. 1:32)  It is crystal clear, that neither sodomites NOR their supporters, sympathizers, and/or enablers ­ (i.e., virtually all of mankind) ­ can enter Heaven, ­ but must go to Hell. THAT is the message of Rev. 22:15. THAT is the final Word of God on the subject. I love you. Amen.  
