Sunday, January 10, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands; Neither is worshipped with men's hands," ­ (i.e., Arminian good works, salvation in whole or in part by human  effort, self-righteousness) ­ "as though he needed any thing, seeing he giveth to all  life, and breath, and all things; And hath made of one blood all nations of men for to  dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed,  and the bounds of their habitation." Acts 17:24-26.  Beloved, many signs point to the imminent return of our Lord Jesus in power and glory, to gather us to help Him judge the wicked; and it is very good and comforting for us to step back from time to time and take the long view of things as we attempt daily to discern the signs of the times (Mat. 16:3), and to study to show ourselves approved unto God, workmen that need not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth (2 Tim. 2:15). Indeed, the apostle did this very thing in his famous sermon on Mar's Hill, beginning with the passage quoted above, and ending with the Second Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in power and glory, to judge the world, at the Time of the Restitution of All Things; to wit:  "Because he hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead." (Acts 17:31)  You see how the Apostle began his discourse with the creation of the first man Adam, and Adam's blood that flows in every person's veins; and brought his message down the long corridors of time to the last person who shall be born into this present evil world, and whose case shall be finally adjudicated by the last Adam ­ even "that man [i.e. the God-Man, Christ Jesus] whom he [God] hath ordained)." Acts 17:31. Whom the heavens must RECEIVE until the times of refreshing shall come, even the longed-for Times of the Restitution of All Things; to wit: "Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you; Whom the heavens must RECEIVE" ­ (i.e., entertain, joyously and royally, as King Ahasuerus treated Mordecai ­ times infinity; [!] To wit: "Thus shall it be done to the man whom the king delighteth to honor," [Esther 6:9] ­ provide glorious hospitality unto). Acts 3:19-21.  Heaven is alive with super-abundant delight and joy ­ even joy unspeakable and full of glory ­ now that the Lord Jesus has triumphed over all the powers of darkness and has been exalted by God the Father and has been given a Name that is above every name, "That at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth" ­ (i.e., in Hell; the inmates of Hell must bow a reluctant knee `at the Name of Jesus.'); ­ "And that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father." Phil. 2:10, 11. Think of it, Beloved. Largely due to the triumphant return of our dear Lord Jesus to Heaven, all the joy bells of Heaven are ringing today, and all the voices of an innumerable company of angels and the spirits of just men made perfect, join in praising the Lamb that was slain for sinners; to wit: "And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels round about the throne and the beasts and the elders; and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands; Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing. And every creature which is in Heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever." (Rev. 5:11-13)  Sunday, January 10, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  It is further written, that our blessed Savior has wrought mightily in suffering and thereby procuring our salvation, "And having spoiled principalities and powers," ­ (i.e., demon spirits and fallen angels), ­ "he made a show of them openly, TRIUMPHING OVER THEM IN IT [!] (i.e., HIS CROSS)." Col. 2:14, 15. Beloved, these things were shown by many infallible proofs, and were all foretold and "spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." Acts 3:21. And John the Revelator opined that in addition to the voices of the prophets speaking in time past at sundry times and divers manners; and the voices of nature clearly manifesting that which may be known of God "so that they (mankind) are without excuse" (Rom. 1:19, 20); and in addition to the residual light of creation ("The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament showeth his handiwork." Psa. 19:1); and through the sometimes-reliable word-ofmouth traditions of the fathers; and in addition to Holy Scriptures themselves; I say in addition to these and other sources of light from God to the sons of men, God has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son (Heb. 1:1-3); including, remarkably, the holy, informed, valuable supposition of John the Revelator with which he closed his blessed, competent "Gospel of John" Testimony; to wit: "This is the disciple which testifieth of these things; and we know that his testimony is true. And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written." (Jn. 21:24, 25) Now, Beloved, is this supposition to be taken literally? Or is John speaking hyperbolically? It is, of course, alright if John is using hyperbole, as when the posterity of Abraham are said to be as numerous as the grains of sand by the sea; to wit: "Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead...as the sand which is by the sea shore innumerable." Heb. 11:12. And, "Yet the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered." Hos. 1:10. Where it is obviously intended to say that while Abraham's seed, the Jews, will constitute a very great number ­ maybe in the millions ­ it was not intended to suggest that the number would be infinite. Whereas, in the case of the goings forth of the eternal God from everlasting to everlasting, it would be impossible to exaggerate. One verse settles the matter for me. It has been a favorite of mine for some 60+ years. For some reason it was easy for me to memorize, when I was a student attending an Arminian Bible school in Canada. I recommend that verse. I vouch for it. It is Micah 5:2; to wit: "But thou, Bethlehem, Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting ­ (i.e., `the days of eternity,' in the margin)." Mic. 5:2.  There sits little Bethlehem, the tiniest, poorest, lowliest village among the thousands of such poverty-ridden villages in Judah. TV said the other day that Afghanistan is known as the land of 30,000 villages, where more than 70% of the people exist in such tiny villages, dirt-poor, in rocky mountain terrain, trying to scratch a hardscrabble diet for large families out of unproductive little farms. When I heard that TV story on a news channel, I immediately thought of Bethlehem in the days when our blessed Savior, as a newborn baby, lay, in the poorest of accommodations, in the poorest village, in an occupied over-taxed Roman territory, ­ driven there by the decree of a greedy, foreign tyrant; to wit:  "And it came to pass in those days, that there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the world should be taxed... And all went to be taxed, every one into his own city. And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judea, unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem; (because he was of the house and lineage of David;) To be taxed with Mary his espoused wife, being great with child. And so it was, that, while they were there, the days were accomplished that she should be delivered. And she brought forth her  Sunday, January 10, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger;  because there was no room for them in the inn." (Lk. 2:1-7)  Take a look, Beloved. There lies the One Whose "goings forth," including all His mighty works, have filled eternity; to wit: "For thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth ETERNITY, whose name is Holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones." Isa. 57:15. To inhabit eternity means to be the self-existing One ­ the Great I AM ­ living and doing mighty works from eternity past to eternity future ­ and including the 6,000-years or so of the Human-Beings-On-Earth trial period; to wit: "Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I AM." Jn. 8:58. Indeed, this declaration as to His "goings forth from of old," activity-filled infinitude, was the thing that so enraged the hypocritical Jews that they sought immediately ­ without another word, ­ to kill Him; to wit: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I AM." (Bang!) "Then took they up stones to cast at him; but Jesus hid himself, and went out of the temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by." Jn. 8:58.  (As an aside, Beloved; can you just picture the dear Lord Jesus scurrying about from pillar to post, nook and cranny, hiding from those murderous Jews; and finally apparently resorting to His divine, miracle-working power to slip through the midst of them without being seen, as He did at His hometown of Nazareth; to wit: "And all they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled with wrath, And rose up, and thrust him out of the city, and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they might cast him down headlong. But he passing through the midst of them went his way." Lk. 4:28-30.)  Now, Beloved, if you will consider again my favorite Bible verse, at Micah 5:2, I think you will have no trouble at all in accepting the last verse of the Gospel of John, MOST LITERALLY, as to the prodigious, and prolific, nature of the work-product of the eternal Son of God; to wit: "And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written. Amen." Jn. 21:25. Look again at the baby Jesus the night of His birth, and consider as you behold Him that an eternity of years have already ­ BEFORE HIS BIRTH ­ recorded His activity, encompassed in the words, "whose goings forth have been FROM OF OLD, FROM EVERLASTING." Mic. 5:2. For starters, take John 1:1-3; to wit: "In the beginning was the Word," ­ (`And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood; and his name is called The Word of God,' Rev. 19:13) ­ "and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. ALL THINGS WERE MADE BY HIM; AND WITHOUT HIM WAS NOT ANY THING MADE THAT WAS MADE." Bang (!)  An eternity of years to make things and do things; all by Him Whose one word can call a universe into being ­ let alone a world full of books (!). And to Whom, and FOR Whom, the word, "hyperbole" does not exist. Nor the word, "exaggeration." And we have not even begun to talk of the eternity of years STRETCHING OUT IN THE FUTURE before the sweet baby of Bethlehem's manger, during which His "goings forth" may ­ and doubtless will ­ ensue. We know that He keeps books and bottles of good things for His people ("Thou tellest [recordest] my wanderings; put thou my tears into thy bottle; are they not in thy book?" Psa. 56:8.) And He keeps great tomes of criminal records for evidence supporting the due punishment of all those vile animalistic creatures who have persecuted His people; to wit: "And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened; and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works." (Rev. 20:12)  Sunday, January 10, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  This adjudicatory work will require much time for the future "goings forth," of our Lord Jesus  Christ and His people; especially since these impenitent fools in Hell continue to sin, and gnaw  their tongues for pain, and blaspheme God, requiring a virtual army of adjudicators for the Son of  God to lead, manage, and administer; forever, to wit: "And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam,  prophesied of these," ­ (i.e., these sodomites, and their enablers) ­ "saying, Behold, the Lord  cometh with ten thousands of his saints, To execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that  are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of  all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him." Jude 1:14, 15. The  total human population of the earth for some 6,000+ years ­ from Adam to the last human born of  woman ­ probably numbering in the trillions of people ­ must be accounted for. The "ungodly  deeds" and "hard speeches" of them all, ­ probably numbering in the trillions of trillions (!), ­  (and to each of which must be added an infinite number of ramifications, unraveling and stretching  out to all eternity to come); ­ and each such episode constituting an addition to the "goings forth"  of our Mighty Savior "from everlasting" to "the days of eternity (margin)." Mic. 5:2.  It seems that there was a time in the long ago eternity past when only the triune God existed, and then the angels were created and were called the sons of God and the morning stars. Then when man was created along with the heaven and the earth, that innumerable company of God's holy angels sang and shouted for joy; to wit: "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth." Gen. 1:1. "When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" Job 38:7. The inference in the book of Job is that none but the truly brave and heroic, the truly wise and understanding, among mankind can handle this subject, involving as it does the preincarnate Christ and His "goings forth from old, from everlasting;" to wit: "Gird up now thy loins like a man; for I will demand of thee, and answer thou me. Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare, if thou hast understanding." Job 38:3, 4.  Our Lord Jesus is the eternal Wisdom of God, and as that holy and true Wisdom personified He educates His Elect, line upon line, and precept upon precept, until He has formed them in His own image; to wit: "But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption; That, according as it is written, He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord." (1 Cor. 1:30, 31)  "I Wisdom dwell with prudence, and find out knowledge... The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, BEFORE HIS WORKS OF OLD. I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was. When there were no depths, I was brought forth; when there were no fountains abounding with water. Before the mountains were settled, before the hills was I brought forth. While as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor the highest part of the dust of the world. When he prepared the heavens, I was there; when he set a compass upon the face of the depth; When he established the clouds above; when he strengthened the fountains of the deep; when he gave to the sea his decree, that the waters should not pass his commandment; when he appointed the foundations of the earth; Then I was by him, as one brought up with him; and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him; Rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth; and MY DELIGHTS WERE WITH THE SONS OF MEN." ­ (i.e., MY DELIGHTS WERE WITH GOD'S ELECT.) Prov. 8:12,22-31. "O My soul, thy counsel taking; what more blest than this could be; That thy God, all else forsaking, finds his highest joy in thee." "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him." (Jas. 1:5)  I love you. Amen.  
