Sunday, November 28, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "But the heavens and the earth, which are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the DAY OF JUDGMENT and perdition of ungodly men. But, beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count slackness; but is longsuffering to us-ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. But the DAY OF THE LORD will come as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burned up. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness, Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the DAY OF GOD, wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat? Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness. Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless. And account that the longsuffering of our Lord is salvation; even as our beloved brother Paul also according to the wisdom given unto him hath written unto you. As also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these things; in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest (twist) to their own destruction." 2 Pet. 3:7-16.  This Day of the Lord ­ which I am preaching about today ­ is called by Peter at the closing period of his life on earth, "The Day of the Lord," because for that Great Day, all other days exist;  because from that Great Day, all other days borrow their value; and, into that Great Day, the  interests of all other days will be crowded, from the first day that dawned and splashed its splendors upon man's Eden home, till the last day shall fade away. It will be emphatically, THE DAY OF  THE LORD, because, then, He will so publicly demonstrate His justice and integrity in saving the  righteous and destroying the wicked, as to call forth the voluntary and spontaneous sanction of the  entire Universe. The principles of His law, the righteousness of its claims, the justness of its  penalties, the moral agency and conduct of His subjects, the principles upon which determination is  made upon which some are saved and others lost, the whole administration and system of His  government, will be so perfectly exhibited and endorsed, that Heaven, Earth, and Hell will say, "Amen." Then, for the first time since man was created, our God will receive Universal glory.  Then shall be brought to pass that which was long ago written; to wit:  "Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name; That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Earth; And that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father." (Phil. 2:9-11)  The glory, honor, and praise heaped by the ancient Queen of Sheba upon King Solomon when she beheld the luster of his kingdom ­ must be multiplied to infinity in order to get a slight understanding of the glories above: "And she (i.e., the Queen of Sheba) said to the king (i.e., King Solomon), It was a true report that I heard in mine own land of thy acts and of thy wisdom. Howbeit I believed not the words, until I came, and mine eyes had seen it; and, behold, the half was not told me; thy wisdom and prosperity exceedeth the fame which I heard. Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants, which stand continuously before thee, and that hear thy wisdom. Blessed be the Lord thy God, which delighted in thee, to set thee on the throne of Israel." 1 Kgs. 10:6-9. The DAY OF THE LORD is also called, The GREAT DAY OF JUDGMENT; to wit:  Sunday, November 28, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  "And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the JUDGMENT OF THE GREAT DAY. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire." (Jude 6-7)  Notice that the sins that appear to have brought doom and eternal damnation to the mighty, superpowerful creatures known to us as "angels," were the sins of covetousness and rebellion against the absolute sovereignty of God. They were not content with how God had made them, where God had placed them, and the totality of the conditions and circumstances under which God assigned them to function and live. These things were called by the Holy Ghost "their (i.e., the angels') first estate," and, "their (i.e., the angels') own habitation." To wit: "And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation;" their greed, ambition, covetousness, rebellion, and murmuring knew no bounds. Two additional passages ­ although somewhat recondite ­ provide us with additional information on this somber subject; to wit: "How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God; I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north; I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I WILL BE LIKE THE MOST HIGH (!)(!) Yet thou shalt be brought down to Hell, to the sides of the pit." (Isa. 14:12-15) And, "Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, take up a lamentation upon the king of Tyrus (i.e., Satan, who possessed the evil king and wrought in and through him), and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord God; Thou sealest up the sum, full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty. Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God; every precious stone was thy covering, the sardius, topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald, and the carbuncle and gold; the workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was prepared in thee in the day that thou wast created. Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth; and I have set thee so; thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire. Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee. By the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned; therefore I will cast thee as profane out of the mountain of God; and I will destroy thee, O covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire. Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness; I will cast thee to the ground, I will lay thee before kings, that they may behold thee. Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude of thine iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traffick; therefore will I bring forth a fire from the midst of thee, it shall devour thee, and I will bring thee to ashes upon the earth in the sight of all them that behold thee. All they that know thee among the people shall be astonished at thee; thou shalt be a terror, and NEVER SHALT THOU BE ANY MORE." Ezek. 28:11-19. I have given you the essence of two wonderful passages of Scripture ­ (Isa., chap. 14, and Ezek., chap. 28) ­ which some theologians contend deal with Satan before his devastating rebellion against God, and refer to the time of which our Savior spoke in Luke, chap. 10; to wit: "And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through thy name. And he said unto them, I BEHELD SATAN AS LIGHTNING FALL FROM HEAVEN." (Lk. 10:17,18)  Sunday, November 28, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  Indeed, in the estimation of the Lord Jesus, Tyre at that time was more evil than Sodom, and the  vile city twosome, Tyre and Zidon, more damnable and morally filthy than Sodom and Gomorrah;  to wit:  "Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not: Woe unto thee, Chorazin! Woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the mighty works, which were done in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the DAY OF JUDGMENT, than for you. And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell; for if the mighty works, which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day. But I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the DAY OF JUDGMENT, than for thee." (Mat. 11:20-24)  All of which is more absolutely remarkable when the "DAY OF JUDGMENT" assumes another of its names; to wit: "THE DAY OF WRATH," as in Rom., chap. 2.  "Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance? But after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the DAY OF WRATH and revelation of the righteous judgment of God; Who will render to every man according to his deeds." (Rom. 2:4-6)  Beloved. Is it not a fearful prospect that the Holy Ghost holds to our view when He speaks of the impenitent sinner, day by day, "treasuring up unto himself WRATH AGAINST THE DAY OF WRATH AND REVELATION OF THE RIGHTEOUSNESS JUDGMENT OF GOD." Just think of the doomed sinner, going about all the days of his miserable life on earth, expending energy, laboring for treasure he cannot take with him into eternity. But that which he CAN ­ NAY, MUST ­ take with him is his vast store-house of the wrath of God, just waiting to shower down upon him the split second the DAY OF WRATH arrives, and to continue unabated ­ indeed, increasing in intensity ­ as the years of eternity roll. Two more Scriptures throw light upon this somber subject; to wit: "For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah; their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter; Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps. Is not this LAID UP IN STORE WITH ME, AND SEALED UP AMONG MY TREASURES?" (Dt. 32:32-34)  Soul-blessing and heart-admiring thought! The sodomite-promoting and other rebellious activities that have filled the barns and other store-housing facilities of the wicked with the simmering WRATH OF GOD, also add to the TREASURES of God. They provide the Almighty with infinite fuel for His wrath to burn and His holy jealousy to avenge. If you have trouble grasping this concept; consider these words in the Deuteronomy 32 passage; to wit: Having elaborated the colorful grapes of gall, poison of dragons, and cruel venom of asps metaphor, the Lord says, "Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures?" Dt. 32:34. What is "in store with me?" What is "sealed up among my treasures?" The very next verse may provide the answers in part; to wit: "To me belongeth vengeance, and recompence; their foot shall slide in due time; for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things, that shall come upon them make haste." (Dt. 32:35)  Sunday, November 28, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  Hence you see that not only is the DAY OF THE LORD also called THE DAY OF GOD'S  VENGEANCE, but is also in verse 32:35 called, THE DAY OF THE CALAMITY OF THE  WICKED. Oh! Now, Beloved; when will it dawn upon the dangerous, idolatrous Arminian heretics, all about us, in this sodomite-controlled nation and world ­ that the Lord God does NOT love everybody; and, in fact, He hates the great, overwhelming majority of Adam's depraved, and decadent, and debauched and degenerate progeny. And that God's hatred of the Adamic reprobates  is active in the extreme; and will endure throughout eternity, manifesting itself in a multitude of  ways; including tormenting them with fire and brimstone, and taking holy pleasure the while. It is  likely, therefore, that God is pleased that the wicked are storing up wrath, in order that He might  have vast quantities of combustible material, to stoke the fires that can never be quenched and with  which to torment the wicked. Much fuel is required; to wit:  "Through the wrath of the Lord of hosts is the land darkened, and the people shall be AS THE FUEL OF THE FIRE; no man shall spare his brother." (Isa. 9:19)  "And I will pour out mine indignation upon thee, I will blow against thee in the fire of my wrath, and deliver thee into the hand of brutish men, and skillful to destroy. THOU SHALT BE FOR FUEL TO THE FIRE; thy blood shall be in the midst of the land; thou shalt be no more remembered; for I the Lord have spoken it." (Ezek. 21:31,32)  "And the Lord shall cause his glorious voice to be heard, and shall show the lighting down of his arm, with the indignation of his anger, and with THE FLAME OF A DEVOURING FIRE, with scattering, and tempest, and hailstones...For Tophet" ­ (i.e., Hell; and notice how close the word Tophet is to Topeka) ­ "For Tophet is ordained of old; yea, for the king it is prepared; he hath made it deep and large; the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle it." (Isa. 30:30-33)  Furthermore, the deeds of the wicked by which he treasures up wrath against the DAY OF WRATH and revelation of the righteous judgment of God (Rom. 2:5,6) ­ constitute the pitiful life's work of the wicked ­ and are of a very low quality, fit really for nothing but burning ­ as the dried and worthless vine is to the finest of oak wood, cedar wood, etc.; to wit: "And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, What is the vine tree more than any tree, or than a branch which is among the trees of the forest? Shall wood be taken thereof to do any work? or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel thereon? BEHOLD, IT IS CAST INTO THE FIRE FOR FUEL; the fire devoureth both the ends of it, and the midst of it is burned. Is it meet for any work? Behold, when it was whole, it was meet for no work; how much less shall it be meet yet for any work, when the fire hath devoured it, and it is burned? Therefore thus saith the Lord God; As the vine tree among the trees of the forest, which I have given to the fire for fuel, so will I give the inhabitants of Jerusalem (i.e., The USA). And I will set my face against them; and they shall go out from one fire, and another fire shall devour them; and ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I set my face against them. And I will make the land desolate, because they have committed a trespass, saith the Lord." Ez. 15:1-8. Beloved. "To you who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honor and immortality, ETERNAL LIFE; But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every soul that doeth evil; but GLORY, HONOR, AND PEACE to every man that worketh good." (Rom. 2:7-10)  I love you. Amen.  
