Sunday, January 9, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and, lo, there was a great earthquake; and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon became as blood; And the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind. And the heaven departed as a scroll when it is rolled together; and every mountain and island were moved out of their places. And the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every free man, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains; And said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; For the great day of his wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand?" Rev. 6:12-17.  "And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low; and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. And the idols he shall utterly abolish. And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to SHAKE TERRIBLY THE EARTH. In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats. To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to SHAKE TERRIBLY THE EARTH. Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils; for wherein is he to be accounted of?" (Isa. 2:17-22)  "And they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them. Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud; and their enemies beheld them. And the same hour was there a GREAT EARTHQUAKE, and the tenth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand; and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven." (Rev. 11:12,13)  "And the seventh angel poured out his vial into the air; and there came a great voice out of the temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, It is done. And there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings; and there was a GREAT EARTHQUAKE, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so GREAT. And the great city was divided into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell; and great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath. And every island fled away, and the mountains were not found. And there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone about the weight of a talent (c. 10#); and men blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail; for the plague thereof was exceeding great." (Rev. 16:17-21)  The forces of nature are often used by God to glorify his Name, teach His people, terrify and punish the wicked, etc. They are called "wonders in heaven above, and signs in the earth beneath," as, e.g. in Peter's Holy Ghost oration on Pentecost; to wit: "But Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice, and said unto them, Ye men of Judea, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and hearken to my words; For these are not drunken, as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the day. But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel; And it shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams; and on my servants and on my handmaidens I will pour out in those days of my Spirit; and they shall prophesy; AND I WILL SHOW WONDERS IN HEAVEN ABOVE, AND SIGNS IN THE EARTH BENEATH; BLOOD, AND FIRE AND VAPOUR OF SMOKE;  Sunday, January 9, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  THE SUN SHALL BE TURNED INTO DARKNESS, AND THE MOON INTO BLOOD;  BEFORE THAT GREAT AND NOTABLE DAY OF THE LORD COME. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved." Acts 2:14-21.  Peter was, of course, referring to the beautiful passage of Scripture in Joel, the 2nd chap.; to wit: "And ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the name of the Lord your God, that hath dealt wondrously with you; and my people shall never be ashamed" ­ (Beloved. How glorious. This is the kind of short language which the Holy Ghost uses sprinkled like diamonds throughout Holy Writ, and which we should use in framing up prayers and thanksgivings to our Father.) ­ "And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the Lord your God, and none else; AND MY PEOPLE SHALL NEVER BE ASHAMED (Note, this language two times in two verses - beautiful). And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy; your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions; And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit. And I will show wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, BEFORE THE GREAT AND THE TERRIBLE DAY OF THE LORD COME. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered; for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord hath said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call." Joel 2:26-32. Note that Peter's language in Acts 2 is almost verbatim to Joel's language in Joel 2, and both describe a time near the end of the world when the Lord God Almighty will shake horribly the whole Earth; to wit: "Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision; for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision. The sun and the moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall withdraw their shining. The Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem; and the heavens and the earth shall shake; but the Lord will be the hope of his people, and the strength of the children of Israel. So shall ye know that I am the Lord your God dwelling in Zion, my holy mountain; then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no strangers pass through her any more." Joel 3:14-17. "For thus saith the Lord of hosts, Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land. And I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come; and I will fill this house with glory, saith the Lord of hosts... And again, the word of the Lord came unto Haggai in the four and twentieth day of the month, saying, Speak to Zerubbabel, governor of Judah, saying, I will shake the heavens and the earth; And I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms, and I will destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the heathen." (Hag. 2:6,7,20-22)  All of these holy shakings (primarily EARTHQUAKES) signify the end of the world in some aspects of it; and all mankind seems to sense it, from the original light of Creation since the days of Adam and Eve. For example, in a recent paper by The Associated Press, entitled "World Gone Wild: Quakes, Floods, Blizzards," a mask-wearing Moscovite clinician, Vera Savinova, said, "I think it is the end of the world. Our planet warns us against what would happen if we dont care about nature." Certainly no student of the Bible, nevertheless this Russian professional woman on the other side of the world recognizes total disaster when she sees it. And so it is, all around the globe. Julie Reed Bell and Seth Borenstein, of The Associated Press, have gathered the evidence, and they present it as "Essential News from The Associated Press: This was the year the Earth struck back. EARTHQUAKES, heat waves, floods, volcanoes, super typhoons, blizzards, landslides and droughts killed at least a quarter million people in 2010 ­ the deadliest year in more than a generation. More people were killed worldwide by natural disasters this year than have been killed in terrorism attacks in the past 40 years combined."  Sunday, January 9, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  Craig Fugate, head of the U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency, said: "It just seemed like it was back-to-back and it came in waves. The term ,,100-year event really lost its meaning this year." Having just described the definitive nature and function of the New Testament church ­ ("But ye are come unto mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem,  and to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better things than that of Abel." Heb. 12:22-24) ­ I say, having just described and identified the God-blessed New Testament church; the apostle issues a chilling warning to those who will not rightly divide the word of God's truth, and who will not accurately discern the signs of  the times; to wit:  "See that ye refuse not him that speaketh. For if they escaped not who refused him that spake on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that speaketh from heaven; Whose voice then SHOOK THE EARTH; but now he hath promised, saying, Yet once more I SHAKE NOT THE EARTH ONLY (BUT I WILL SHAKE THE EARTH), BUT ALSO HEAVEN. And this word, Yet once more, signifieth the removing of those things that are SHAKEN, as of things that are made, that THOSE THINGS WHICH CANNOT BE SHAKEN may remain. Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved (i.e., SHAKEN), let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear. For our God is a consuming fire." (Heb. 12:25-29)  Beloved. Here it is expressly declared, proclaimed, and promised that while all around us is being shaken and forever destroyed at the end of the world by a Sovereign, Almighty God, we and our inheritance "CANNOT BE SHAKEN." Heb. 12:27,28. Moreover, every disaster that strikes the Earth ­ however gigantic and deadly the toll in human life ­ is but a relatively tiny preview (or, adumbration) of the massive, catastrophic calamity lying just ahead at the end of the world. Therefore when we read that The Associated Press reports that the year just passed, 2010, is the year that the world went wild with earthquakes, floods, blizzards, super typhoons, volcanoes, landslides and droughts; killing at least a quarter million people; the deadliest year in more than a generation ­ I say, when we read such authentic reports, our hearts leap for joy. Because we look upon such news reports as love notes from our Father, that the end of the world draws nigh, and, rightly dividing the word of God's truth, and accurately discerning these horrendous signs of the times, we have a powerful message that our dear Lord Jesus is headed for this Earth on a welldocumented mission known for centuries as The Second Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ in Power and Glory; and with Him will be our glorious rewards, called our inheritances that are incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in Heaven for us who are kept by the power of God, through faith, ready to be revealed in the last days ­ (a most valuable part of those inheritances will include our new bodies which shall be beautiful, powerful, agile, spiritual, and impassible [i.e., insusceptible to pain or discomfort]).  Hence you see why prayed-up and ready-to-go Christians receive news of EARTHQUAKES and other catastrophes with such joy. They signal the Second Coming; to wit: "But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burned up. (Shades of The Associated Press story, "2010's World gone wild; Quakes, floods, blizzards.") Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness." 2 Pet. 3:10,11. And, "Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame. And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon.  Sunday, January 9, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  And the seventh angel poured out his vial into the air; and there came a great voice out of the  temple of Heaven, from the throne, saying, IT IS DONE. And there were voices, and thunders,  and lightnings; AND THERE WAS A GREAT EARTHQUAKE, SUCH AS WAS NOT SINCE MEN WERE UPON THE EARTH, SO MIGHTY AN EARTHQUAKE, AND SO GREAT." Rev. 16:15-18. (Think, The Associated Press: "This was the year the Earth struck back.  EARTHQUAKES, heat waves, floods volcanoes, super typhoons, blizzards, landslides, and droughts killed at least a quarter million people in 2010.")  Beloved, another "GREAT EARTHQUAKE" smote the Earth and received the prophetic attention of Amos and Zechariah ­ and also adumbrated the earthquake of Rev. 16:18, which was so mighty an earthquake "as was not since men were upon the earth," and which attended the Second Coming of Christ in Power and Glory at the end of the World. This somewhat mysterious and mighty earthquake deserves attention as throwing light upon these last of the last days; to wit: "The words of Amos, who was among the herdmen of Tekoa, which he saw concerning Israel in the days of Uzziah king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel, TWO YEARS BEFORE THE EARTHQUAKE." (Amos 1:1)  The prophets began preaching about this super-earthquake (80+) that killed many some years before the event. Trapp: "That notable earthquake, famous and fresh in most mens memories. Whether it fell out just then, when Uzziah attempted to offer incense, and was therefore smitten with leprosy, (2 Kgs. 15:5), as some ancients affirm; or whether at that instant when Isaiah in a vision saw the Lord in His glory, and the posts of the door moved, (Isa. 6:4), as some Rabbins tell us, I have not to say. It seems to be foretold" ­ ("Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but He revealeth His secret unto His servants the prophets" Amos 3:7.) ­ "and so terrible it was that people fled from it (Zec. 14:5). Josephus mentions it, and telleth us that half a great hill was removed by it out of its place, and carried four furlongs another way; so that the highway was obstructed, and the kings gardens utterly marred. God, by such extraordinary works of His, showeth His justice and displeasure against sin." God mightily blessed king Uzziah from the time he became king at 16 years old. "But when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction; for he transgressed against the Lord his God, and went into the temple of the Lord to burn incense upon the altar of incense. And Azariah the priest went in after him, and with him fourscore priests of the Lord, that were valiant men; And they withstood Uzziah the king, and said unto him, It appertaineth not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense unto the Lord, but to the priests the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense; go out of the sanctuary; for thou hast trespassed; neither shall it be for thine honor from the Lord God. Then Uzziah was wroth, and had a censer in his hand to burn incense; and WHILE HE WAS WROTH WITH THE PRIESTS, THE LEPROSY EVEN ROSE UP IN HIS FOREHEAD." (2 Chr. 26:16-20) And, BANG! The instant his kingly rage against God's priests reached its zenith ­ simultaneously with Isaiah beholding it in a vision just as the posts of the door moved in the temple wherein Isaiah worshipped (Isa. 6). "And Azariah the chief priest, and all the priests, looked upon him, and, behold, he was leprous in his forehead, and they thrust him out from thence; yea, himself hasted also to go out; because the Lord had smitten him." (2 Chr. 26:20)  The fate of all rebels.  I love you.  Amen.  
