Sunday, May 15, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  On October 22, 2005, we published what we called, "A Compendium of Bible Truth About Sodomites, A Work In Progress." Now, at this hour, after six years, that little treatise is more needed than ever ­ for all the sons of men ­ nationally and internationally. Led by the unthankful and unholy United States of America, the whole world is as Bible-ignorant as Balaam's ass, and has thus and thereby allowed the #1 fag-enabler and baby-killer ­ Barack Obama ­ to seize control of  world-wide power on behalf of filthy sodomites. Thanks to the publishing capacity of cyber space  technology, it may be possible to get this WBC Compendium of Bible Truth About Sodomites, A Work In Progress ­ to the masses. The Holy Ghost has given us a faithful historic ­ yet terrifying ­ account of Sodom, sodomy, and sodomites. The tale begins with evil personified in the ancestry of Sodom and Gomorrah; to wit:  "And the sons of Ham, Cush ...and Canaan, and Cush begat Nimrod ...He was a mighty hunter before the Lord (i.e., he famously and defiantly lifted a filthy middle finger in the face of God Almighty Himself); wherefore it is said, Even as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the Lord ...And the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as thou comest to Gerar, unto Gaza; as thou goest, unto SODOM, and GOMORRAH and Adma, and Zeboim, even unto Lasha." (Gen. 10:6-19)  Thus you see, Beloved, that the genealogy of Sodom, sodomy, and sodomites runs in an unbroken line of famously evil people from the Flood to the destruction of Sodom in 1898 BC (Ham, Cush, Nimrod, et al.). As soon as Ham got out of his father Noah's ark ­ which saved him from being drowned with the rest of mankind ­ the ingrate abandoned his father, his father's Godly teachings ­ (Noah was a "preacher of righteousness" 2 Pet. 2:5) ­ and his father Noah's God, Jehovah. In a very real sense, Ham was the spiritual father of doomed Sodom, sodomy, and sodomites ­ who survived the Flood, and brought the sins of the vile and filthy antediluvian world into the new world following the Flood. GILL: "Ham is represented by many writers as a very wicked, immodest, and profligate creature. Berosus makes him a magician, and to be the same with Zoroaster, and speaks of him as the public corrupter of mankind; and says that HE TAUGHT MEN TO LIVE AS BEFORE THE FLOOD, TO LIE WITH MOTHERS, SISTERS, DAUGHTERS, MALES, AND BRUTES, AND CREATURES OF ALL SORTS; AND HE ACTUALLY DID SO HIMSELF, AND THEREFORE WAS CAST OUT BY HIS FATHER NOAH." Gen. 9:23. Think of it, Beloved. This ungrateful monster Ham ­ (and probably his wife also) ­ cooped up for a year in a huge ark with all manner of beasts to fornicate with; and thereby to mock, rebel against, and defy the wonderful sermons and teachings of Noah. Or, do you think Ham was able to play the part of a clever hypocrite, living in such close quarters with others for a solid year, pretending to be a sincere believer and a faithful, righteous man? At any rate, you can be sure that the ark of Noah was a lively place during the year it was closed up and occupied with those eight persons and several thousands of beasts. And, Beloved, I am persuaded that the members of every true church of the Lord Jesus Christ have experiences analogous to those of the righteous souls, in their dealings with the hypocrites who somehow make their nefarious ways among them.  Now, back to our Compendium of Bible Truth About Sodomites; (which we now intend to post throughout the world); to wit: "Sodomites are wicked and sinners before the Lord exceedingly" (i.e., they lift a defiant middle finger to God). Gen. 13:13; are violent and doom nations. Gen. 19:125; to wit: "And there came two angels to Sodom at even, and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom; and Lot seeing them rose up to meet them; and he bowed himself with his face toward the ground; And he said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, I pray you, into your servant's  Sunday, May 15, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  house, and tarry all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on your  ways. And they said, Nay; but we will abide in the street all night. And he pressed upon  them, greatly; and they turned in unto him, and entered into his house; and he made  them a feast, and did bake unleavened bread, and they did eat. But before they lay down,  the men of the city, even the men of Sodom, compassed the house round, both old and  young, all the people from every quarter; And they called unto Lot, and said unto him,  Where are the men which came in to thee this night? Bring them out unto us, that we  may know them. And Lot went out at the door unto them, and shut the door after him,  and said, I pray you, brethren, do not so wickedly. Behold now, I have two daughters  which have not known man; let me, I pray you, bring them out unto you, and do ye to  them as is good in your eyes; only unto these men do nothing; for therefore came they  under the shadow of my roof. And they said, Stand back. And they said again, This one  fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge; now will we deal worse with thee,  than with them. And they pressed sore upon the man, even Lot, and came near to break  the door. But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the house to them, and  shut to the door. And they smote the men that were at the door of the house with  blindness, both small and great; so that they wearied themselves to find the door. And the  men said unto Lot, Hast thou here any besides? son in law, and thy sons, and thy  daughters, and whatsoever thou hast in the city, bring them out of this place; for we will  destroy this place, because the cry of them is waxen great before the face of the Lord; and  the Lord hath sent us to destroy it. And Lot went out, and spake unto his sons in law,  which married his daughters, and said, Up, get you out of this place; for the Lord will  destroy this city; But he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons in law. And when the  morning arose, then the angels hastened Lot, saying, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two  daughters, which are here; lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city. And while  he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and upon  the hand of his two daughters; the Lord being merciful unto him; and they brought him  forth, and set him without the city. And it came to pass, when they had brought them  forth abroad, that he said, Escape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay thou in  all the plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed. And Lot said unto them,  Oh, not so, my Lord; Behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and thou  hast magnified thy mercy, which thou has showed unto me in saving my life; and I  cannot escape to the mountain, lest some evil take me, and I die; behold now, this city is  near to flee unto, and it is a little one; Oh, let me escape thither (is it not a little one?) And  my soul shall live. And he said unto him, See, I have accepted thee concerning this thing  also, that I will not overthrow this city, for the which thou hast spoken. Haste thee,  escape thither; for I cannot do any thing till thou be come thither. Therefore the name of  the city was called Zoar. The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar.  THEN THE LORD RAINED UPON SODOM AND UPON GOMORRAH BRIMSTONE  AND FIRE FROM THE LORD OUT OF HEAVEN; AND HE OVERTHREW THOSE  CITIES, AND ALL THE PLAIN, AND ALL THE INHABITANTS OF THE CITIES,  AND THAT WHICH GREW UPON THE GROUND. But his wife looked back from  behind him, and she became a pillar of salt. And Abraham gat up early in the morning to  the place where he stood before the Lord; and he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah,  and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke of the country went  up as the smoke of a furnace. And it came to pass, when God destroyed the cities of the  plain, that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the which Lot dwelt." Gen. 19:1-29.  Sunday, May 15, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  So, Beloved, for 4,000 years Sodom and Gomorrah have stood as mute proof positive that sodomites are violent and doom nations; to wit:  "Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire." (Jude 7)  Further shocking evidence that sodomites and sodomite-enablers are violent and doom nations ­ is found in the amazing case of the Levite's wife, or concubine, faithfully recorded by the Holy Ghost in the last three chapters of the Book of Judges; i.e., Jdgs. 19,20, & 21. Notice how closely the story parallels the howling mob of horny sodomites assaulting Lot's house in Sodom 500 years earlier.  We must read and closely study these accounts so that we may accurately discern the attributes and tactics of these sodomite beasts and their enablers; to wit: In the Providence of God, night caught the traveling Levite and his concubine in the hateful little city of Gibeah, where a kindly old farmer man took them in for the night. "And the old man said, Peace be with thee; howsoever let all thy wants lie upon me; ONLY LODGE NOT IN THE STREET. So he brought him into his house, and gave provender unto the asses; and they washed their feet, and did eat and drink. Now as they were making their hearts merry, behold, the men of the city, certain sons of Belial, beset the house round about, and beat at the door, and spake to the master of the house, the old man, saying, BRING FORTH THE MAN THAT CAME INTO THINE HOUSE, THAT WE MAY KNOW HIM. (Shades of ancient Sodom !!!) And the man, the master of the house, went out unto them, and said unto them, Nay, my brethren, nay, I pray you, do not so wickedly; seeing that this man is come into mine house, do not this folly. (Shades of ancient Sodom !!!) Behold, here is my daughter a maiden, and his concubine; them will I bring out now, and humble ye them, and do with them what seemeth good unto you; but unto this man do not so vile a thing. (Shades of ancient Sodom !!!) But the men would not hearken unto him; so the man took his concubine, and brought her forth unto them; and THEY KNEW HER, AND ABUSED HER ALL THE NIGHT UNTIL THE MORNING; AND WHEN THE DAY BEGAN TO SPRING, THEY LET HER GO." (Jdgs. 19:20-25)  Whereupon, she died. So, the Levite took his dead wife home strapped to an ass, and, as soon as he entered his house "he took a knife, and divided her, together with her bones, into twelve pieces, and sent her into all the coasts of Israel. And it was so, that all that saw it said, There was no such deed done nor seen from the day that the children of Israel came up out of the land of Egypt unto this day; CONSIDER OF IT, TAKE ADVICE, AND SPEAK YOUR MINDS." Jdgs. 19:29,30. "Then all the children of Israel went out, and the congregation was gathered together as one man, from Dan even to Beersheba, with the land of Gilead, UNTO THE LORD IN MIZPEH. (Beloved. This urgent call to arms of all the tribes of Israel ought certainly to be a no-brainer, and the headquarters of this ad hoc military force to punish the murderous sodomite Benjamites ­ was to be MIZPEH. A no-brainer. Of course the murdering perverts in Gibeah must be identified and punished.) And the chief of all the people, even of all the tribes of Israel, presented themselves in the assembly of the people of God, four hundred thousand footmen that drew sword. (Now the children of Benjamin heard that the children of Israel were gone up to Mizpeh.) Then said the children of Israel, Tell us, how was this wickedness? And the Levite, the husband of the woman that was slain, answered and said, I came into Gibeah that belongeth to Benjamin, I and my concubine, to lodge. And the men of Gibeah rose against me, and beset the house round about  Sunday, May 15, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  upon me by night, and thought to have slain me; and my concubine have they forced, that she is  dead. And I took my concubine, and cut her in pieces, and sent her throughout all the country of  the inheritance of Israel; for they have committed lewdness and folly in Israel. Behold, ye are all  Children of Israel; give here your advice and counsel. And all the people arose as ONE MAN,  saying, WE WILL NOT ANY OF US GO TO HIS TENT, NEITHER WILL WE ANY OF US  TURN INTO HIS HOUSE. But now this shall be the thing which we will do to Gibeah; we will go up by lot against it." Jdgs. 20:1-9.  Whereupon, one of the strangest episodes in the centuries-long history of the Jews took place ­ a veritable, bloody, civil war ­ that well-nigh annihilated one of the twelve tribes of Israel (i.e., Benjamin) ­ triggered by the "power of the dog" (Psa. 22:20 ­ "Deliver my soul from the sword; my darling from the power of the dog." Meaning, the inexplicable political influence of militant sodomites out of all proportion to their numerical size.) Take the case at hand. Hundreds ­ at most ­ of Gibeah's population ­ were likely to have participated in the sodomitical murder of the Levite's concubine. They were guilty as dogs ­ no question ­ no-brainer. All the tribes of Israel rose up as one man and demanded that the guilty ­ and only the guilty ­ be punished. All rose up ­ that is ­ except the tribe of Benjamin. Listen; to wit:  "So all the men of Israel were gathered against the city, KNIT TOGETHER AS ONE MAN. And the tribes of Israel sent men through all the tribe of Benjamin, saying, What wickedness is this that is done among you? (As though to say to the Benjamites, What's going on here, guys? This is a no-brainer. What secret sin is being covered up here?) Now therefore, deliver us the men, the children of Belial, which are in Gibeah, that we may put them to death, and put away evil from Israel. But the children of Benjamin would not hearken to the voice of their brethren the children of Israel; But the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together out of the cities unto Gibeah, to go out to battle against the children of Israel." (Jdgs. 20:12-14)  Remember the thesis, that sodomites are violent and destroy nations. Sodom and Gomorrah and the cities of the plains were destroyed ­ directly due to the malevolent influences of sodomites, where not even ten righteous men could be found to spare the city.  "I will not destroy it for ten's sake." (Gen. 18:32)  And now comes the shameful elimination of stubborn, pro-gay Benjamin who fought without a cause not only to the depletion of their own stock of manpower, but also slew many thousands of the other eleven tribes; to wit:  "And the people came to the house of God, and abode there till even before God, and lifted up their voices , and wept sore; And said, O Lord God of Israel, why is this come to pass in Israel, that there should be to day one tribe lacking in Israel?" (Jdgs. 21:3)  All to defend a guilty little filthy gang of nightriding, fornicating, murdering, raping sodomites! Who can defend such a thing? Surely, nobody can ­ except those who are inebriated by the wine from the vine of Sodom; to wit:  "For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah; their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter; Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps." (Deut. 32:32,33)  I love you. Amen.  
