Sunday, July 11, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel; not with wisdom of words, lest the cross of Christ should be made of none effect. For the preaching of the cross is to them that perish (i.e., are perishing) foolishness; but unto us which are saved it is the power of God. For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer" ­ (i.e., the professional pundit and cute mocker and scoffer who pokes fun at the Bible for a living, ala Mark Twain [1835-1910], and Robert `Royal Bob' Ingersol [1834-1899]) ­ "the disputer OF THIS WORLD? Hath not God made foolish THE WISDOM OF THIS WORLD? For after that in the wisdom of God, THE WORLD BY WISDOM KNEW NOT GOD, it pleased God BY THE FOOLISHNESS OF PREACHING TO SAVE THEM THAT BELIEVE." 1 Cor. 1:17-21.  Beloved. America is a nation of mockers and scoffers against the Lord God, His Word, and His People. Among the last words of the apostle Peter is a warning about these scoffers, and is an advisory that their proliferation will be one signal that the end of the world is near; to wit: "This second epistle, beloved, I now write unto you; in both which I stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance; That ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets, and of the commandment of us the apostles of the Lord and Savior; KNOWING THIS FIRST, THAT THERE SHALL COME IN THE LAST DAYS SCOFFERS," ­ (i.e., those who mock, deride, jeer at the Lord God Almighty, His Word, and His People; mockers and scoffers) ­ "walking after their own lusts." 2 Pet. 3:1-3. There have always been these mockers and scoffers, since the world began. The message from Peter 2,000 years ago signals that as the end draws near, those of us who are privileged to be alive on earth and engaged in the Quarrel of the Covenant representing our dear Lord Jesus, will find ourselves inundated with these lust-filled monsters, systemic throughout all levels of society. "This know also, that IN THE LAST DAYS PERILOUS TIMES SHALL COME." (2 Tim. 3:1)  "But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived." (2 Tim. 3:13)  "Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils; Speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with a hot iron." (1 Tim. 4:1,2)  Two of these hot-shot "scoffers" and "disputers of this world" ­ who did the most to shape the antiGod and anti-Bible America and the world of today ­ were Mark Twain (1835-1910), and Royal Bob Ingersoll (1834-1899). One of his biographers said that when Twain died in 1910, he was an international superstar, an "American institution." He was America's shining knight, doing battle against all pomposity, sham, and hypocrisy ­ in places high and low ­ (and yet, Twain was the biggest hypocrite of them all ­ pretending to be sincere, while bilking huge audiences of millions of dollars to attend his lectures cleverly poking fun at the Bible, at the Lord's people, and at God Himself). Twain's signature white suit, shock of gray hair, walrus mustache, and ever present cigar ­ were etched in the national consciousness. Wherever he went ­ at home or abroad ­ huge crowds applauded his droll wit and his cornpone wisdom, and his Tom Sawyer/Huck Finn philosophy.  Twain and his contemporary, Royal Bob, ­ (a moniker bestowed on Robert G. Ingersoll by President James Abram Garfield [1831-1881]) ­ I say, Mark Twain and Royal Bob Ingersoll ­ two glib, famous, latter day "scoffers" and "disputers" who made it popular to poke fun at God, the Bible, and the Church ­ probably did more to shape the morals and mores of 20th Century America and the world than any others. Twain calculated that statistically, the Lord God is the "BIGGEST MASS MURDERER IN THE HISTORY OF MANKIND."  Sunday, July 11, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  He said that when God is offended He reflexively kills everything in sight: "All the men, all the beasts,  all the boys, all the babies, all the women and all the girls. ... What this INSANE FATHER requires is  blood and misery; he is indifferent as to who furnishes it. Nothing drove Jehovah's anger-meter higher  than minor lapses in hygiene. Anyone `who pisseth against the wall' was sure to provoke a wholesale  massacre. With a fine sarcasm we ennoble God with the title of Father ­ yet we know quite well that we  should HANG HIS STYLE OF FATHER WHEREVER WE MIGHT CATCH HIM. There is only one  CRIMINAL," Twain said, "and it is not man; it's God." Thus far we have identified Twain as branding  God a MASS MURDERER, an INSANE FATHER, and a CRIMINAL. Along about here, Beloved,  my mind runs to a favorite verse; to wit:  "And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment." (Heb. 9:27)  Twain ridiculed the idea of God's so-called need for two testaments ­ the Old Testament and the New Testament; to wit: "Before long, Twain's ire extended to Jesus Christ ­ a/k/a Jehovah, AFTER HE GOT RELIGION. The all-new Jehovah was not an improvement. Jehovah had added braggadocio and deceitfulness to his repertoire of defects. His Old Testament self is sweetness and gentleness and respectability when compared with his earthly self. In Heaven he claims not a single merit, and hasn't one ­ outside of those claimed by his mouth ­ whereas in the earth he claims every merit in the entire catalogue of merits, yet practices them only now and then, penuriously (i.e., stingily). With some historical legerdemain (i.e., hocus-pocus) Twain credited (or dis-credited) Jesus with the invention of Hell. This was the most egregious RASCALITY imaginable, because it deprived the wretched human race of its lone solace, eternal rest. Thus, THE MEEK AND GENTLE SAVIOR WAS A THOUSAND TIMES CRUELER THAN EVER HE WAS IN THE OLD TESTAMENT."  And so, Mark Twain, having branded our dear Lord Jesus as being a MASS MURDERER, an INSANE FATHER, and, a CRIMINAL, now declares the ever-blessed Son of the Living God, by inventing Hell, to be a SARCASTIC RASCAL WHO IS A THOUSAND TIMES CRUELER THAN EVER HE WAS IN THE OLD TESTAMENT, WHERE HE AMASSED THE FOREGOING TWAINIAN TITLES. HARD SPEECHES, INDEED. Beloved. These are the HARD SPEECHES that the prophet Enoch referred to, which the Lord will "execute judgment" upon convicted sinners for; to wit: "And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands (or, myriads) of his saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, AND OF ALL THEIR HARD SPEECHES WHICH UNGODLY SINNERS HAVE SPOKEN AGAINST HIM." (Jude 14,15)  John Turkey, a Twain scholar, said, "Then, in the 1890s, he was buffeted by a series of blows from which he never recovered. Speculative investments brought him to bankruptcy; his oldest daughter, Susy, died of meningitis; his youngest, Jean, was diagnosed an epileptic; his wife, Livy, began a slide into lasting invalidism; and Twain's own health was in eclipse. Having long derided the notion of special providence, he was now forced to consider himself the personal victim of a scheme of divine, providential retribution. When the crushing afflictions were visited on him, he struck back at the Almighty with his best weapon, words ­ feverishly, obsessively, endlessly discharged. Firing paper bullets of the brain momentarily eased his grief."  Parenthetically: Here Remember, Beloved, that Mark Twain is a hero to this nation, and a model upon which to pattern their lives ­ in thought, word and deed. He is a "scoffer" (2 Pet. 3:3), a "disputer" (1 Cor. 1:20), and a "mocker" (Jude 18) ­ against God, God's Word, and God's People; to wit: "Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days SCOFFERS, walking after their own lusts." (2 Pet. 3:3)  Sunday, July 11, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  "Where are the wise? where is the scribe? where is the DISPUTER of this world?  hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?" (1 Cor. 1:20)  "But, beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ; How that they told you there should be MOCKERS in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts." (Jude 17, 18)  The world of mockers, scoffers, and disputers ­ who slavishly follow such a pattern as Mark Twain ­ should be well advised that Twain died a bilious adversary of the Almighty; and that in his twilight years his prolific pen ­ like some evil volcano ­ belched ceaseless vitriol against his Maker; spewed forth into letters, notebooks, essays, dialogues, autobiographical dictations, and sundry fragments. Just think of that, Beloved. And is that not the situation we have seen this nation and this world to be in at this present hour? Dancing on the gallows, on steroids! Whistling through the graveyard ­ in pitchblack midnight darkness. Mortal man, on the very brink of death and Hell, still "mocking" God, "scoffing" at God, and "disputing" with God.  From Thomas Paine, ­ (another American "superhero" who profoundly and decisively influenced many so-called Founding Fathers), ­ I say, From Thomas Paine, Mark Twain adopted the goofy ideas of socalled "Enlightened Christianity;" to-wit: No Heaven or Hell; No Immortality of the Soul; No Divinity of Jesus Christ, i.e., Jesus was not God, He was only a sinful man; and, the final goofy idea that religions derive their authority from spurious claims by their founders that they had received revelations from God, transmitted to posterity as incontrovertible Holy Writ. Twain contended that Nature was the only true God; and he touted reason and logic as antidotes to ignorance, superstition, and humbuggery of every ilk.  Twain made fun of Calvinism ­ and Twain mocked, scoffed, and disputed with Presbyterianism because of its pure Calvinism, Predestination and Hell fire and brimstone doctrines invoking God's eternal retribution. Twain said he could not imagine himself as heartless as he supposed God to be; to wit: "I often put a dog on the fire and hold him down with the tongs, and enjoy his yelps and moans and strugglings and supplications (in reality, Twain says he was kind to animals), but with a man it would be different. I think that in the long run, if the man's wife and babies, who had not harmed me, should come crying and pleading, I couldn't stand it; I know I would forgive him and let him go, even if he had violated a monastery of virgin nuns. So, too, others; Most people are better, kinder, gentler, and more to be respected, honored, and esteemed than God."  Twain even blamed God for the Fall of Adam in the Garden of Eden. He portrays Satan as a heroic rebel against the real ARCH-FIEND ­ i.e., God! In his blasphemous piece titled "That Day in Eden," Twain does not hesitate to desecrate all that is holy, using Satan as a mouthpiece. Speaking through the Serpent's forked tongue, Twain offers Adam and Eve his kindest sympathies in their Fallen condition, baffled by God's punishment. "Poor ignorant things," Satan/Twain says, "the harsh commandment not to eat certain fruit in the garden had meant nothing to them. They were but children, and could not understand untried things and verbal abstractions standing for things outside their little living space which God had cooped them up in, and within their narrow experience."  Twain then made fun of a hateful God planting in Adam and Eve a conscience ­ which Twain called a Moral Sense (which he always capitalized). He chastised God for giving Adam and Eve a Moral Sense; to wit: "By allowing humans to distinguish Good and Bad, the sole effect was to tempt and to enable us to do evil. Without a Moral Sense, we would live in a state of idyllic innocence, unafflicted by stubborn conscience. With it, we are inferior to the creatures, spared the cursed faculty of Moral Sense: Whenever I look at the other animals and realize that whatever they do is blameless, I envy them the dignity of their estate, its purity and its loftiness, and recognize that the Moral Sense is a thoroughly disastrous thing."  Sunday, July 11, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  Twain said that God is nothing but a malicious cosmic Puppet Master, pulling the strings; and that "Man is a poor joke ­ the poorest joke that was ever conceived ­ an April-fool joke, played by a Malicious Urchin Creator with nothing better to waste his time upon. Being nothing but an automatic mechanism, man is not to blame for what he is. He didn't make himself. He has no control over himself. Yet the Cosmic Sadist punishes man for doing things which from the beginning of time He had intended that he should do. Hence, only unthinking fools believe they have an obligation to God and owe Him thanks, reverence, and worship."  After his wife's death, Twain wrote a friend, saying; to wit: "There is nothing. There is no God and no universe, there is only empty space, and in it a lost and homeless and wandering and companionless and indestructible Thought (capitalized by Twain). And I am that Thought. And God, and the Universe, and Time, and Life, and Death, and Joy and Sorrow and Pain only a grotesque and brutal dream, evolved from the frantic imagination of that same Thought." So you see, Beloved, that in his grief and despair, Twain arrived at an endgame of utterly pitiful annihilationism. "Thought" with a capital "T" indeed. What Twain needed was a good dose of God's thoughts; to wit: "Because they have not hearkened unto my words, saith the Lord, which I send unto them by my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them; but ye would not hear, saith the Lord." (Jer. 29:19) "Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his THOUGHTS; and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. For my THOUGHTS are not your THOUGHTS, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my THOUGHTS than your THOUGHTS." (Isa. 55:7-9) "For I know the THOUGHTS that I THINK toward you, saith the Lord, THOUGHTS of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end. Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you. And ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart." (Jer. 29:11-13)  Twain and his goofy, blasphemous notions of all things anti-God, anti-religion, and anti-Bible, and antichurch ­ eventually arrived at all-out condemnation of God Himself, calling God all manner of vile names; to wit: Since God is malevolent, whatever He does is malevolent and wrong. And Twain obsessively documented God's wrongness: "The day we are born He begins to persecute us. Even our littleness, our innocence, our helplessness cannot move Him to any pity, any gentleness. Day after day, week after week, month after month, the wanton torture goes on." Like Twain, Royal Bob Ingersoll was born into a strict Presbyterian family at a time pure Calvinism was taught. His father was a Calvinistic preacher with a fine library of Calvinistic books, which Royal Bob claims to have read as a boy growing up. They included Calvin's Institutes, The Will by Jonathan Edwards, Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, Foxe's Book of Martyrs, History of the Waldenses, etc. In his lecture "Why I Am An Agnostic" Ingersoll was heard to say over and over again throughout the United States; as follows: "From these early readings, which were heavily weighted on the Calvinistic side, I learned that God so loved the world that He made up His mind to damn a large majority of the human race. ... I compared Zeno, Epicurus, and Socrates, ­ three heathen wretches who never heard of the Bible or the 10 Commandments ­ with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, three favorites of Jehovah; and I was depraved enough to think that the Pagans were superior to the patriarchs ­ and to Jehovah Himself." I love you. Amen.  
