Sunday, October 25, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "But Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked; thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness; then he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation. They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with abominations provoked they him to anger. THEY SACRIFICED UNTO DEVILS, NOT TO GOD; to gods whom they knew not, to new gods that came newly up, whom your fathers feared not. Of the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and hast forgotten God that formed thee. And when the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the provoking (i.e., persecuting) of his sons and of his daughters. And he said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what their end shall be; for they are a very FROWARD ­ (i.e., froward means a great perversity, or fraud, from a word meaning a surging mass of water as from a deep sea's subterranean whole volume; sounds like a gigantic tsunami in today's parlance or vernacular) ­ I say, they are a VERY FROWARD generation, children in whom is NO FAITH. They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God; they have provoked me to anger with their vanities; and I will move them to jealousy with those which are not a people; I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation (i.e., filthy, wild, ignorant, unlearned, savage beasts whom the jews, in contempt, call Gentiles, or nasty Goyim). For a fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall burn unto the lowest hell, and shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire the foundations of the mountains." Dt. 32:15-22.  In the midst of all such declarations of death and destruction from God upon Israel for her apostacy, one great national sin stands out; to wit: DEVIL OR DEMON WORSHIP; to wit: "THEY SACRIFICED TO DEVILS, NOT TO GOD." Dt. 32:17. The Jews had a pernicious penchant for worshiping Satan, and this incurable habit was and is to this day a national addiction with the Jews. Indeed, Moses, to guard against DEVIL WORSHIP, often spent more time telling those wickedly stubborn people what NOT TO DO than what TO DO, in the matter of legitimate public worship; to wit:  "And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto Aaron, and unto his sons, and unto all the children of Israel, and say unto them; This is the thing which the Lord hath commanded, saying, What man soever there be of the house of Israel, that killeth an ox, or lamb, or goat, in the camp, or that killeth it out of the camp, And bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer an offering unto the Lord before the tabernacle of the Lord; blood shall be imputed unto that man; he hath shed blood; and that man shall be cut off from among his people (i.e., that man is irreversibly bound for everlasting Hell). TO THE END that the children of Israel may bring their sacrifices, which they offer in the open field, even that they may bring them unto the Lord, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest, and offer them for peace offerings unto the Lord. And the priest shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar of the Lord at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and burn the fat for a sweet savor unto the Lord. (Bang!) AND THEY SHALL NO MORE OFFER THEIR SACRIFICES UNTO DEVILS, after whom they have gone a whoring. This shall be a statute for ever unto them (NO MORE DEVIL WORSHIP) throughout their generations." Lev. 17:1-7.  But the Jews have an ever-present, powerful, pernicious penchant ­ an addiction ­ to WORSHIP THE DEVIL; to wit:  Sunday, October 25, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  "There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch, Or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer. For all that do these things are an abomination unto the Lord; and because of these abominations the Lord thy God doth drive them out from before thee. Thou shalt be perfect (upright, sincere) with the Lord thy God. For these nations, which thou shalt possess, hearkened unto observers of times; and unto diviners; but as for thee, THE LORD THY GOD HATH NOT SUFFERED THEE TO DO SO." (Dt. 18:10-14)  Indeed, the ancient Jews went a huge step beyond mere Devil-Worship when they offered their own sons and daughters in sacrifices unto Satan; to wit: "They did not destroy the nations, concerning whom the Lord commanded them; But were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works. And they served their idols; which were a snare unto them. Yea, THEY SACRIFICED THEIR SONS AND THEIR DAUGHTERS UNTO DEVILS, And shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan; and the land was polluted with blood." ­ (Think, millions of babies aborted by Obama, Executioner in Chief; Inquisitor/Persecutor of the Holy Prophets, enacting laws against hate speech aka Bible preaching). ­ "Thus were they defiled with their own works, and went a whoring with their own inventions. Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people, insomuch that he abhorred his own inheritance." Psa. 106:34-40.  There is a trail of Devil activity and Devil worship that runs right through the Bible that is startling when noticed for the first time. When Jeroboam ripped the ten northern tribes away from the rough-talking Rehoboam, Solomon's foolish son, he forbade anyone from returning to Jerusalem, even for a visit, lest he should lose his northern kingdom thereby. Jeroboam then made two golden calves and built two houses of worship for the ten northern tribes, thereby to compete with Rehoboam whose kingdom included Jerusalem and the legitimate temple of God and the only legitimate place for public worship in the whole world. Then we read, "And the priests and the Levites that were in all Israel resorted to him" ­ (i.e., they left the renegade King Jeroboam and his idols, and presented themselves for service to King Rehoboam and the temple of God in Jerusalem) ­ I say, "they resorted to him out of all their coasts. For the Levites left their suburbs and their possession, and came to Judah and Jerusalem; for Jeroboam and his sons had cast them off from executing the priest's office unto the Lord; And he ordained him priests" ­ (i.e., counterfeit sons-of-belial grade A scum of the lowest kind) ­ "for the high places, AND FOR THE DEVILS, and for the calves which he had made." 2 Chron. 11:13-15.  Joseph Seiss first published his great book, The Apocalypse, in 1900, 109 years ago. At that time Seiss was describing the condition of affairs in the last days as "a period of abounding demon-worship," and went on to describe conditions in his own day (i.e., 1900) as being about the same and getting worse all the time. DEVIL WORSHIP (!) Beloved, all around us. The description of Seiss is now 109 years worse ­ and counting. DEVIL WORSHIP (!)  Seiss: "It is demon-worship (spiritualism) brought to life again. It claims to have vast multitudes of adherents. It is influencing whole communities of men and women, who are prepared to commit themselves body and soul, for time and eternity, into the care of these lying demon guides. It has made inroads upon people of all classes, and is received by many as a  Sunday, October 25, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  distinct and the only true religion. Its oracles are loud and hopeful in the prediction, that it will  soon enlist to itself THE GOVERNMENTS and reigning classes of the whole world. The Word  of God also forewarns, that it will be vastly successful. `The spirit speaketh expressly, that in  the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and  DOCTRINES OF DEVILS, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience seared with a  hot iron, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats.' (1 Tim. 4:1-3).  Instead of fearing, loving, and trusting in God above all things, people will bestow their loving  confidence upon unclean spirits, invoking them for guidance, and placing religious dependence  in their impious falsities. Having no relish for the saving Gospel of Christ, God will send them  strong delusion that they may believe a lie, and be visited with the damnation their perverseness  deserves. And at the end of the world, the one-world religion will be this self-same worship of  demons, and following the same old Arminian doctrines of devils that even now saturate and  permeate all churches, temples, mosques, shrines, synagogues, and all other organized  religious systems whatsoever; and including all commercial enterprises, societal entities, and  governments. (!)" Hold it! Did you say GOVERNMENTS? Yes!  The Great Whore of Rev. 17 symbolizes all false religious systems, "With whom the kings of the earth" ­ (i.e., all governments; think Obama and his so-called `Partnerships' with the phony so-called `Faith Communities') ­ "have committed fornication," ­ (i.e., are in bed together, regularly engaging in illicit carnal intercourse), ­ "and the inhabitants of the earth (all mankind) have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication" ­ (i.e., all the earth's peoples, wherever they may dwell, are involved immorally and sinfully and perversely with some false religious system ­ all involving Devil-worship). Rev. 17:2.  The vast scope and sweep of end-time Devil-worship is enhanced by the plain and powerful language of Rev., chapter 18. Remember, the subject is END- TIME DEVIL-WORSHIP; to wit: "For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth" ­ (think, Obama, et al.) ­ "have committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth" ­ (think, vast, one-world commercial and financial global undertakings; e.g., Dubai, a tiny little country near Arabia, just opened a humongous big building, dwarfing all other big buildings on earth; TWICE as tall as The Empire State Building, cost $4 Billion) ­ I say, "the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies." Rev. 18:3.  The Dubai skyscraper signifies great strides, leaps and bounds, in a very short time, for the advancement and growth of global commerce. The speed with which mankind is now galloping to Doom's Day is wonderful to behold. There must be much to come crashing down in a horrendous ball of fire. The language of the Holy Ghost is far too expansive for us to think small. Think big. It's the fruit of END-TIME DEVIL-WORSHIP at play. "Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be utterly burned with fire; for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her...And the fruits that thy soul lusted after are departed from thee, and all things which were dainty and goodly are departed from thee, and thou shalt find them no more at all." (Rev. 18:8,14)  Seiss: "It may appear too disparaging to the understanding of this enlightened age, to entertain the possibility of a return to the ancient worship of (Satan). People may feel insulted at the thought. But the way for it is opening, and the process to effect it is already going on. The  Sunday, October 25, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  minds of anti-Christian religionists everywhere are fast relapsing into the old heathenish  philosophies, and I know not what is to hinder their acceptance of the religions with which  those philosophies are conjoined ­ (i.e., e.g., Islam, Catholicism, Voodoo, Hindu, Shinto,  Ancestor Worship)."  It would be impossible, Beloved, to exaggerate the evil symbolized by the presence of that murderous pervert who now occupies the Whitehouse; to wit: Barack Hussein Obama. The fact that he is there at all signifies that God is through with this evil nation of America ­ except for punishing her in the most painful way. America is a nation of abject END-TIME DEVILWORSHIPERS, presided over by a fornicating, switch-hitting, pro-gay, demon-possessed babykiller. Obama is a product of demon activity in Hawaii, Indonesia, Africa, Harvard and Chicago. He is a classic example of one who has given up true Christianity, departing from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy, and having his conscience seared with a hot iron. 1 Tim. 4:2,3.  We at Westboro Baptist Church know him very well through his writings, his speeches, and face to face confrontations where we picketed him. From books and papers written by and about him, and from his many speeches, I have gleaned many quotes, including the following ­ sufficient to form reasonable conclusions; to wit: I believe Obama is actively promoting ENDTIME DEVIL-WORSHIP, which Obama has cleverly dressed up as State Worship, American Church of Pluralism Worship, Official Cult of Reason, Temple of State Religion, the State As God, the State is the Divine Idea As It Exists On Earth; The State is the March of God Through the World, the Altars of State; We Must Worship the State, American Values Woven Into A Religion of Its Own; Traditional Faith Kneeling At the Altar of the State; The Idolatry of An American Shinto (Shinto = God's Way, Japanese worship of the spirits of nature and ancestors); Obama: "Alongside my own deep personal faith, I am a follower, as well, of our Civic Religion." See, Cathleen Falsani, "I Have a Deep Faith," The Chicago Sun-Times, Apr. 5, 2005. Sunday, Feb. 1, I said, `Remember, Beloved, that the state of society in the last of the last times is a period of abounding demon-worship, idolatry, murders, sorceries, fornication, and thefts;' to wit: "And the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues yet repented not of the works of their hands, THAT THEY SHOULD NOT WORSHIP DEVILS... Neither repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts." (Rev. 9:20,21)  Now, Beloved, based on that verse, and related verses, together with our good, sanctified, common sense, I have not the least hesitancy in saying that the State Worship of Obama is one and the same as the END-TIME DEVIL-WORSHIP of Scripture. And Paul says that taking the Lord's Supper ­ or engaging in any other religious fellowship ­ with heretics, is DEVILWORSHIP; to wit: "But I say, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God; and I would not that ye should have fellowship with devils. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils; ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's table, and of the table of devils." (1 Cor. 10:20,21) I love you.  Amen.  
