Sunday, October 4, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Thus saith the Lord God; This is Jerusalem; I have set it in the  midst of the nations and countries that are round about her."  Ezek. 5:5.  Remember that Jerusalem often symbolizes the church, and it often refers to the literal city in Palestine, and it often refers to the Jews, and oftentimes it refers to a literal city, gliding into a figurative city, and vice versa, and otherwise ­ depending on the context. Here it refers to the shaved head of the prophet, which, by a similitude, stands for the shameful, complete, eminent, literal and total destruction of the city and the Jewish nation, due to the monstrous abominations and perversions of that ungrateful people. They were planted as a highly favored and mightily blest nation, ­ in the center of the inhabited earth, ­ for the express purpose of beaming the truth of God to all mankind. They did the exact opposite ­ big time, as they say.  "God be merciful unto us, and bless us...Selah. That thy way may be known upon the earth, thy saving health among all nations... God shall bless us; and all the ends of the earth shall fear him." (Psa. 67:1,2,7)  Fausset says, "Failing in this, and falling into abominable idolatry, its guilt was far worse than that of the heathen. Perversion of that which in itself is the best, is worse than the perversion of that which is less perfect; it is, in fact, the worst of all kinds of perversion. Therefore their punishment was the severest." Trapp says, "`I have set it in the midst of the nations.' As the head, heart, and centre of the earth. And God had peculiar ends in it, that the law might go forth out of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, and that all nations might flow into it (Isa 2:2,3)." Beloved, has not God placed Westboro Baptist Church in the center of this nation of America, which is itself in the center of the inhabited earth?  Gill says, "Jarchi interprets it of the middle of the world; as if it was MATHEMATICALLY PLACED in the centre of the earth. Kimchi says it was in the midst of the continent; and these sort of writers often speak of the land of Israel being in the NAVEL or center of the earth; they say that the sanhedrin sat in the middle of the world; and therefore is compared to the navel, (Cant. 7:2; to wit: "Thy navel is like a round goblet.") because it sat in the temple which was in the middle of the world." You see, Beloved, what a big deal the Lord made about putting His dwelling place in the exact center of the inhabited earth; because, from His point of view, it was well designed to radiate His true Light over the nations in all directions; to wit:  "Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in the mountain of his holiness. Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great King. God is known in her palaces for a refuge. For, lo, the kings were assembled, they passed by together. They saw it, and so they marveled; they were troubled, and hasted away. Fear took hold upon them there, and pain, as of a woman in travail." (Psa. 48:1-6)  Note here, first of all, that the first descriptive language identifying the New Testament church is; to wit: "But ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem." Heb. 12:22. There can be no doubt but that we are now talking primarily about Westboro Baptist Church and every other genuine New Testament Church existing in the earth since the days of John the Baptist ­ when we are reading Psalm 48 and all other relevant portions of Old Testament Scripture. Of the six verses we have read so far in this sermon, three of them involve the kings of the earth ­ (i.e., the ultimate political leaders of all the nations) ­ and the effect the true church of Jesus Christ has upon them ­ (i.e., they saw it, they were troubled by it, they marveled at it, they hasted away from it, and they were occasioned intense pain because of it, "as of a woman in travail").  Sunday, October 4, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  Make no mistake, the preaching of this humble church ­ Westboro Baptist Church ­ is always uncomfortably "binding" the consciences of these kings, all these political and official leaders, and all their agitated subjects and constituencies who continually squawk and belly ache about us to their demagogic leaders. We find the situation explained in Psalm #2; to wit: "Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us. He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh; the Lord shall have them in derision. Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure. Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion" ­ (i.e., Westboro Baptist Church). "I will declare the decree; the Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee" ­ (which is the glorious message of WBC, which we proudly publish to every son and daughter of Adam, right in the fiercest teeth of every Christ-rejecting Jew and Gentile alike; because from this Mount Zion, (WBC), it has been prognosticated since the world began; to wit: "out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." Isa. 2:3.) As for these kings who were assembled and passed by Westboro Baptist Church together, saw it, were troubled by it, marveled at it, hasted away from it, and were occasioned intense pain because of it, "as a woman in travail," ­ I say, as for these kings ­ and all their cowardly subjects ­ who make up the population of this doomed earth ­ Westboro Baptist Church solemnly warns you, that very soon now the Lord God Almighty will break you with a rod of iron and dash you in pieces like a potter's vessel. "Be wise now therefore, O ye kings; be instructed, ye judges of the earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him." (Psa. 2:10-12) Note, here, second of all, that from their beautiful and strategic vantage point so wondrously positioned to spread the truth of God throughout the earth, viz. Mt. Zion/Jerusalem, the Jews perverted themselves to the max, bringing down the wrath of God upon themselves to the degree and extent never known before, no, nor ever to be repeated throughout the end of time; to wit: "Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I, even I, am against thee, and will execute judgments in the midst of thee in the sight of the nations. And I will do in thee that which I have not done, and whereunto I will not do any more the like, because of all thine abominations. Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons in the midst of thee, and the sons shall eat their fathers; and I will execute judgments in thee, and the whole remnant of thee will I scatter into all the winds. Wherefore, as I live, saith the Lord God; Surely, because thou hast defiled my sanctuary with all thy detestable things, and with all thine abominations, therefore will I also diminish thee; neither shall mine eye spare." (Ezek. 5:8-12) It is a simple proposition: God blessed the Jews immeasurably, and put them in the center of the inhabited earth with instructions to publish His word of light and truth to the ends of the earth. Rather than publish His word, they corrupted and perverted His word, and refused to repent. God therefore cursed the Jews with a dreadful curse in this world and the next, such as mankind has never been cursed before and will never be so cursed again, and scattered them throughout the whole world where they are universally hated and despised by all men wherever they go; to wit:  Sunday, October 4, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  "For ye also have suffered like things of your own countrymen, even as they have of the Jews; Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own prophets, and have persecuted us; and they please not God, and are contrary to all men; Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their sins alway; for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost." (1 Thes. 2:14-16) We at Westboro Baptist Church have had much to do with the ugly Jews of this present generation, attempting to preach the Gospel to them; and we can add a strong "Amen" to what the apostle has written. They are murderous, mean-spirited thugs, who attempt by violence to drive us from preaching in large cities where they have a large Jewish population, such as New York, Chicago, Washington, D.C. Many of them are fags and dykes ­ openly and notoriously bragging about their perversions ­ and they are also profane, filthy-talking, blasphemous rebels against God. As I say, we at WBC are competent witnesses against them, and we expect to give evidence at the Great White Throne. Here again is the case in part against the Jews; to wit: "This is Jerusalem; I have set it in the midst of the nations and countries that are round about her. And she hath CHANGED my judgments into wickedness more than the nations, and my statutes more than the countries that are round about her; for they have refused my judgments and my statutes, they have not walked in them." (Ezek. 5:5,6) Colorful John Trapp, Mr. Charles Spurgeon's favorite expositor, commented on this passage as follows: "This was a foul CHANGE; this was to do evil as she could" ­ (i.e., as much evil as apostate Jerusalem ever, possibly could, Jer. 3:5; ­ `Will he reserve his anger forever? will he keep it to the end? Behold, thou hast spoken and done evil things as thou couldest,' ­ i.e., just as evil as you possibly could do). "This was INGRATITUDE (by the Jews) of the worst sort, such as Socrates called, `MANIFEST INJUSTICE.' Such a wretched CHANGE is complained of, at Jer. 2:11 ­ `Hath a nation CHANGED their gods, which are yet no gods? But my people have CHANGED their glory for that which doth not profit;' and, Rom. 1:23 ­ `And CHANGED the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things;' and, Jude 4 ­ `For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, TURNING (changing) the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.' The prophet writes that God condemned the Jews in the extreme, saying, "Nowhere is to be found such ingratitude, because you Jews have abounded with blessings from God, yet made Him so ill a requital." Fausset: "The heathen have sinned, but the Jews `have OUTSINNED THEM ALL.' `Behold I, even I, am against thee (the Jews)' whether thou wilt believe it or not. Thou holdest it unlikely, but shalt find it true ­ `in the sight of the nations.'" (Ezek. 5:8). Trapp: "Behold, I am upon my march against thee (the Jews), and will punish thee (the Jews), surely, severely, and suddenly. `And I will do in thee (the Jews) that which I have not done.' In the sight of the heathen Gentiles, in whose sight thou hast so sinned, and who will rejoice at thy sufferings. None shall suffer so much here, in this world, or sink so deep in Hell in the next world, AS A PROFANE JEW, who is worse than others, because he ought to be better. Oh, the height and weight of those judgments that shall be heaped upon such (!)" See Lam. 4:2-13 ­ "The precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold, how are they esteemed as earthen pitchers, the work of the hands of the potter (!) Even the sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their young ones; the daughter of my people is become cruel, like the ostriches in the wilderness. The tongue of the sucking child cleaveth to the roof of his mouth for thirst; the young children ask bread, and no man breaketh it unto them. They that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets; they that were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghills. For the punishment  Sunday, October 4, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  of the iniquity of the daughter of my people is greater than the punishment of the sin of Sodom," ­  (NOTE, it's the particular and peculiar and perversely filthy SIN of Sodom that was the subject of  punishment ­ not just any old sin or combination of sins) ­ "Sodom, that was overthrown as in a moment, and no hands stayed on her. Her Nazarites were purer than snow" ­ (NOTE, the Nazarites, generally, were the sincerely devout, spiritual-minded and conscientious members of the Jewish community, who voluntarily took upon themselves various vows to do good works for various lengths of time) ­ "these were purer than snow, they were whiter than milk, they were more ruddy in body than rubies, their polishing was of sapphire. (But now) Their visage is blacker than a coal; they are not known in the streets; their skin cleaveth to their bones; it is withered, it is become like a stick. They that be slain with the sword are better than they that be slain with hunger; for these pine away, stricken through for want of the fruits of the field. The hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own children; they were their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my people. The Lord hath accomplished his fury;" ­ (cf., Ezek. 5:13 ­ `Thus shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will cause my fury to rest upon them (the Jews), and I will be comforted.' This is spoken after the manner of men, who are much comforted when they can be avenged. The same word in Hebrew that signifieth VENGEANCE, signifieth COMFORT also; for God will be comforted in the execution of His wrath. The Scriptures are filled with such language. But look at it this way, What a venomous and vile thing is rebellion against God that leads to abominable sins of the flesh, and ingratitude toward God, as with the Jews, that causes the most merciful God to finally reach the state of actually taking comfort in the everlasting doom and destruction of His slimy, vile, diseased, demon-possessed, serpentine creatures. But such is the case.) ­ `The Lord hath accomplished his fury; he hath poured out his fierce anger, and hath kindled a fire in Zion; and it hath devoured the foundation thereof. The kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world, would not have believed that the adversary and the enemy should have entered into the gates of Jerusalem. For the sins of her prophets, and the iniquities of her priests.'" Lam. 4:2-13. "And the whole remnant of thee will I scatter into all the winds." (Ezek. 5:10)  Remember Trapp's (c. 1600-1662) comment thereon; to wit: "A miserably dejected people the Jews are to this day, banished out of the world, as it were, by a common consent of nations." Such were conditions of things with the Jews about 400 years ago, and we can testify that things are worse with the Jews today. All as foretold by Moses about 3,500 years ago; to wit: "And the Lord shall scatter thee among all people, from the one end of the earth even unto the other; and there thou shalt serve other gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers have known, even wood and stone. And among these nations shalt thou find no ease, neither shall the sole of thy foot have rest; but the Lord shall give thee there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind; And thy life shall hang in doubt before thee; and thou shalt fear day and night, and shalt have none assurance of thy life; In the morning thou shalt say, Would God it were even! and at even thou shalt say, Would God it were morning! for the fear of thine heart wherewith thou shalt fear, and for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see." (Deut. 28:64-67) "Then answered all the people (the Jews), and said, His (Jesus') blood be on us, and on our children." (Mat. 27:25)  I love you.  Amen.  
