Sunday, January 2, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Now these things were our examples, to the intent we should not lust after  evil things, as they also lusted. Neither be ye idolaters, as were some of  them; as it is written, The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to  play...Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples; and they are  written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come. Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall. There hath no temptation" ­ (i.e., no testing; no trial of your faith) ­ "taken you (i.e., come upon you all of a sudden and seized you unawares, as in, "James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad, [BANG!] greeting. My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers temptations!" [Say what?!! Yes, here's what.] "KNOWING THIS, that the trying of your faith worketh patience. But let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing," - Jas. 1:1-4) "No temptation TAKEN you but such as is common to man ­ (i.e., God's man, the righteous man, God's Elect) ­ but God is faithful, who will not suffer YOU to be tempted above that ye are able; but will WITH THE TEMPTATION, ALSO MAKE A WAY TO ESCAPE, that ye may be able to bear  it." (The sense of this passage is that the testing or temptation itself bears  in its bosom the way out, which is unique and unconquerable to the  situation; such that, unless this particular temptation had come to the  Christian pilgrim in the battle ­ at this particular time and place ­ no victory  would have been possible; to wit: "God... will WITH THE TEMPTATION ALSO  make a way to escape.") 1 Cor. 10:6-13.  "WHEREFORE, my dearly beloved (i.e., God's Elect), flee from IDOLATRY. I speak as to wise men; judge ye what I say. 1 Cor. 10:14,15. The Holy Ghost has forever linked lewd and naked singing and dancing with gross and fatal IDOLATRY; and may I point out to you, Beloved, that this nation is awash with lewd and naked singing and dancing ­ and, indeed, leads the whole world with hundreds of billions of dollars of sales of such filth; to wit: "Neither be ye idolaters, as were some of them; as it is written, The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play." 1 Cor. 10:7. The Holy Ghost has also linked the fiasco of Aaron and his homemade golden calf idolatry ­ inextricably ­ with the New Testament, Christian wisdom, and disorder at the Lord's Supper; to wit:  "And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down out of the mount, the people gathered themselves together unto Aaron, and said unto him, Up, make us gods, which shall go before us; for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him. And Aaron said unto them, Break off the golden earrings, which are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters, and bring them unto me. And all the people brake off the golden earrings which were in their ears, and brought them unto Aaron." (Ex, 32:1-3)  (This could refer to the great wealth of the whole land and nation of Egypt, which the children of Israel extracted by deceit during the night of the First Passover; to wit: "And the children of Israel did according to the word of Moses; and they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and JEWELS OF GOLD, and raiment; And the Lord gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they lent unto them such things as they required. AND THEY SPOILED THE EGYPTIANS" ­ [think, BANKRUPTCY] Ex. 12:35,36.) "And he (Aaron) received them at their hand, and fashioned it with a graving tool, after he had made it a molten calf; and they said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. And when Aaron saw it, he built an altar before it; and Aaron made proclamation, and said, To morrow is a feast  Sunday, January 2, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  to the Lord." (Is this the first proclamation of the new religious system which forever linked lewd  and naked singing and dancing with gross and fatal idolatry? The worship of cows was a favorite of  the Egyptians from time immemorial just as it is today in India and among millions of Buddhists  generally. It seems to have run underground in Israel, culminating when king Jeroboam organized cow worship for the ten northern tribes to divert worship of the true and living God from Judah and Jerusalem for purely political reasons 1 Kgs. 12:26-28.) Exodus 32:4-5.  "And they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt offerings, and brought peace offerings; and the people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play." (Ex. 32:6)  Bingo! See, 1 Cor. 10:4-7.  "Neither be ye IDOLATERS, as were some of them; as it is written, The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play." (1 Cor. 10:7)  Here the Holy Ghost was saying that what those people were doing was IDOLATRY. So, let us look closely at what they were doing; to wit: "And he (i.e., the Lord) gave unto Moses, when he had made an end of communing with him upon mount Sinai, two tables of testimony, tables of stone, WRITTEN WITH THE FINGER OF GOD." Ex. 31:18. "And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down out of the mount, the people gathered themselves together unto Aaron, and said unto him, Up, make us gods, which shall go before us; for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him." ­ (Beloved, impatient murmuring against the predestinated time-table of an All-wise, Sovereign God is a most grievous ­ often fatal ­ sin. "Neither MURMUR ye, as some of them also MURMURED, and were destroyed of the destroyer;" 1 Cor. 10:10 [Num. 14:2-29]; and, "Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, THE ONLY WISE GOD, be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen." 1 Tim. 1:17.) ­ "And Aaron said unto them, Break off the golden earrings, which are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters, and bring them unto me. And all the people brake off the golden earrings which were in their ears, and brought them unto Aaron. And he received them at their hand, and fashioned it with a graving tool, after he had made it a molten calf; and THEY said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt." Ex. 32:1-4.  Rather than react with disgust and/or horror and/or fear of divine retribution at such gross idolatry; Aaron proceeds to cooperate with the sinful children of Israel by assisting them in the formalization of a new system of pagan religion, calculated to incur the outpoured wrath of Almighty God.  We read, "And when Aaron saw it" ­ (i.e., the golden calf, as though others than Aaron performed the actual work thereon; and this was the final presentation of the finished idol) ­ "HE BUILT AN ALTAR BEFORE IT; AND AARON MADE PROCLAMATION, AND SAID, TOMORROW IS A FEAST TO THE LORD." Ex. 32:5. Now, Beloved, what is this altar upon which to offer sacrifices to the calf, and the proclamation to announce a religious festival ­ I say, what is all this but the beginning of a brand new religion in competition with that of Moses, as detailed from God on the mount Sinai? Only call it by the Name of the Lord; to wit: "To morrow is a feast to the Lord;" thereby to deceive the people. Ex. 32:5(b). Recall how we earlier said that the Holy Ghost has forever linked lewd, loud, and naked singing and dancing, with gross and fatal idolatry. Well, it was part and parcel with Aaron's new religious system. There is something questionable about how that calf materialized so quickly out there in the wilderness. Ordinarily, such a thing requires skilled craftsmen, dies or forms within which to pour the liquid gold, and "detailers" to put the finishing touches with "graving tools."  Sunday, January 2, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  Moreover, usually a furnace would be required to melt down the massive quantity of golden earrings; and where would the dies or forms come from within to pour the melted gold? I say, Beloved, isn't it possible that those crafty Jews brought all of those items with them when they cut out for Egypt? After all, it is likely that such items abounded in Egypt, because Egypt was known as the Land of Idols, where there would be ­ logically ­ a great demand for such items. Moreover, the Israeli slave population in Egypt probably included many such skilled craftsmen, plying their masters' trade ­ as with the prosperous silver trade that developed around the goddess Diana of the Ephesians (Acts 19:24-35). Loud and raucous singing, dancing, and stripping naked seem to be included in Aaron's new calfworshiping religious system ­ as well as customary and usual religious-sounding things, however corrupt. While Moses and Joshua were in the mount receiving the Ten Commandments and other important things from the Lord, they got word of the calf folly; to wit: "And when Aaron saw it (golden calf), he built an altar before it; and Aaron made proclamation, and said, To morrow is a feast to the Lord. And they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt offerings, and brought peace offerings; AND THE PEOPLE SAT DOWN TO EAT AND TO DRINK, AND ROSE UP TO PLAY. And the Lord said unto Moses, Go, get thee down; for thy people, which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves. They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them; they have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and have sacrificed thereunto, and said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which have brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. And the Lord said unto Moses, I have seen this people, and, behold, it is a stiffnecked people (think, USA and current World populations). Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them; and I will make of thee a great nation. And Moses besought the Lord his God, and said, Lord, why doth thy wrath wax hot against thy people," ­ (WHY, INDEED?) ­ "which thou hast brought forth out of the land of Egypt with great power, and with a mighty hand? Wherefore should the Egyptians speak, and say, For mischief did he bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against thy people. Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thine own self, and saidst unto them, I will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that I have spoken of will I give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever. AND THE LORD REPENTED OF THE EVIL WHICH HE THOUGHT TO DO UNTO HIS PEOPLE." (Ex. 32:5-14) But see, "God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should repent; hath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken, and shall he not make it good?" Num. 23:19. When, in Scripture, God is said to have repented, it means that it is as man would have done under the same or similar circumstances.  John Gill: (1697-1771, 73 years of age when he died) "And the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people. He did not do what he threatened to do, and seemed to have in his thoughts and designs, but did what Moses desired he would, not that any of God's thoughts or the determinations of his mind are alterable; for the thoughts of his heart are to all generations; but he changes the outward dispensations of his providence, or his methods of acting with men, which he has been taking or threatened to take; and this being similar to what they do when they repent of anything, who alter their course, hence repentance is ascribed to God; though, properly speaking, it does not belong to him; see Jer. 18:8:"  Sunday, January 2, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  "If that nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them." (Jer. 18:8)  Beloved. Do you see yet why I say that the Holy Ghost has forever linked lewd, loud, raucous singing and naked dancing with gross and fatal IDOLATRY? Think, modern American, multibillion dollar so-called "CONCERTS." And, if the multi-million dollar revenue stream was not enough for the greedy performers and producers, I understand that Sec. of State Hillary Clinton is sending billions more overseas to export this shameful American debauchery to the whole World ­ in a pitiful effort to make friends out of the wild young perverts who are fast becoming the leaders of tomorrow and who hate us, bitterly.  As Moses and Joshua descended from the holy mountain, they were met afar off by human noises so deafening as to make them wonder whether a war was in progress; to wit: "And when Joshua heard the noise of the people as they SHOUTED, he said unto Moses, There is a NOISE OF WAR IN THE CAMP." (Ex. 32:17) Moses opined that it was "the NOISE of them that SING. And it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that he saw the calf, and the DANCING; and Moses anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them beneath the mount...And when Moses saw that the people were NAKED; (for Aaron had made them NAKED unto their shame among their enemies) Then Moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, Who is on the Lords side? let him come unto me. And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him. And he said unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Put every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbor. And the children of Levi did according to the word of Moses; and there fell of the people that day about three thousand men." Ex. 32:25-28.  Mighty few ­ "about 3,000 men" ­ for so great a crime and sin against God! But, you should look upon this as a kind of tiny down payment on a horrendous debt ­ to be paid off in full, in devastating installments, from the date of "the sin of the calf" (c. 1,500 BC) to the end of the world (c. 3,600 years to date, and counting); to wit: "Therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which I have spoken unto thee (i.e., Canaan); behold, mine Angel shall go before thee; NEVERTHELESS, IN THE DAY WHEN I VISIT, I WILL VISIT THEIR SIN UPON THEM. AND THE LORD PLAGUED THE PEOPLE, BECAUSE THEY MADE THE CALF, WHICH AARON MADE." (Ex. 32:34,35) The Jews call it "The Sin of the Calf," to wit: Moses to the Lord: "Oh, this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of gold." Ex. 32:31. It means, in a word, that every calamity that has befallen the Jews for the last 3,600 years, and counting, has a little of The Sin-of-the-Calf tacked onto it for additional punishment.  R. Jarchi: "When I visit upon them their iniquities, I will visit upon them a little of this iniquity, with the rest of iniquities; and there is no punishment comes upon Israel, in which there is not something of the punishment of THE SIN OF THE CALF; and the Jews have a saying that THERE IS NOT A GENERATION IN WHICH THERE IS NOT AN OUNCE OF THE SIN OF THE CALF."  Gill: ",,AND THE LORD PLAGUED THE PEOPLE, Ex. 32:35. That is, continued to do so at certain times, with the pestilence, or other dire, calamities; because they made the calf which Aaron made." That is, they provided Aaron materials to make it and would not rest from haranguing him about it until he made it. Beloved, this Sin-of-the-Calf curse ­ the Holocaust on steroids ­ has rested on the Jews from then till now ­ and to the end of the World ­ and the blessing of the 144,000. I love you. Amen.  
