Sunday, June 6, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject  unto us through thy name. And he said unto them, I beheld SATAN as lightning fall  from heaven." (Lk. 10:17,18)  "Hold not thy peace, O God of my praise; For the mouth of the wicked and the mouth  of the deceitful are opened against me; they have spoken against me with a lying  tongue. They compassed me about also with words of hatred; and fought against  me without a cause. For my love they are my adversaries; but I give myself unto  prayer. And they have rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my love. Set thou a  wicked man over him; and let SATAN stand at his right hand. When he shall be  judged, let him be condemned; and let his prayer become sin." (Psa. 109:1-7)  "And SATAN stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel. ... And God was displeased with this thing; therefore he smote Israel. And David said unto God, I have sinned greatly, because I have done this thing; but now, I beseech thee, do away the iniquity of thy servant; for I have done very foolishly." (1 Chron. 21:1,7,8)  "And he showed me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of the Lord, and SATAN standing at his right hand to resist him. And the Lord said unto SATAN, The Lord rebuke thee, O SATAN, even the Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee; is not this a brand plucked out of the fire? Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments, and stood before the angel." (Zec. 3:1-3)  "Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil. ... Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, SATAN; for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. Then the devil leaveth him, and, behold, angels came and ministered unto him." (Mat. 4:1,10,11)  "From that time forth began Jesus to show unto his disciples, how that he must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day. Then Peter took him, and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord; this shall not be unto thee. But he turned, and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me, SATAN; thou art an offense unto me; for thou savorest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men. Then said Jesus unto his disciples, If any man will come after me, let him take up his cross, and follow me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it." (Mat. 16:21-25)  (The word "DAILY" appears in Luke's account, and is very important; to wit: "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross DAILY, and follow me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; but whosoever will lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it." Lk. 9:23,24. Likewise, Mark's account of the same passage adds the helpful words, AND THE GOSPEL'S; to wit: "And when he had called the people unto him with his disciples also, he said unto them, Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake AND THE GOSPEL'S, the same shall save it." Mk. 8:34,35.)  "Now before the feast of the passover, when Jesus knew that his hour was come that he should depart out of this world unto the Father, having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end. And supper being ended, the DEVIL now put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, to betray him; ...He then lying on Jesus' breast saith unto him, Lord, who is it? Jesus answered, He it is, to whom I shall give a sop, when I have dipped it. And when he had dipped the sop, he gave it to Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon. And after the sop SATAN entered into him. Then said Jesus unto him, That thou doest, do quickly." (Jn. 13:1,2,25-27)  Sunday, June 6, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  Beloved, the Holy Ghost has declared it as a fact, that we are not ignorant of Satan's devices; to wit:  "Lest SATAN should get an advantage of us; for WE ARE NOT IGNORANT OF HIS DEVICES."  2 Cor. 2:11. Thomas Brooks (1608-1680, i.e.,72 years of age at death) wrote what he called a Treatise  on Satan and his schemes, taking his primary text from Eph. 6:11; to wit: "Put on the whole armor of  God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the DEVIL." Eph. 6:11. He titled his Treatise,  Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices. Bro. Brooks speaks therein of certain "STRANGE  OPPOSITION" from Satan as he studied for and wrote his Treatise, all as though Satan goes wild with  rage if mankind ever gets too knowledgeable of his vile schemes or devices; to wit: "The STRANGE  OPPOSITION that I met with from SATAN, in the study of this following discourse, hath put an edge  upon my spirit; knowing that Satan strives mightily to keep those things from seeing the light, that tend  eminently to shake and break his kingdom of darkness, and to lift up the kingdom and glory of the Lord  Jesus Christ, in the souls and lives of the children of men."  Beloved, we may expect the same sort of STRANGE OPPOSITIION from SATAN; and, we may expect the same kind of victories over SATAN, pursuant to the "exceeding great and precious promises" (2 Pet. 1:4) of our dear Lord Jesus; to wit: "And the God of peace shall bruise (i.e., crush) SATAN under your feet shortly." Rom. 16:20; "Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the DEVIL, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour; Whom resist stedfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world. But the God of all grace, who hath called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen." 1 Pet. 5:8-11; "Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist the DEVIL, and he will flee from you. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you." Jas. 4:7,8. Nor is anyone exempt from the vicious onslaughts, plots, and brilliant strategies, and clever tactics of SATAN ("Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall." 1 Cor. 10:12.)  In this regard, Brooks says; to wit: "From the power, malice, and skill of SATAN, doth proceed all the soul-killing plots, devices, stratagems, and machinations, that be in the world. Several devices he hath to draw souls to sin, and several plots he hath to keep souls from all holy and heavenly services, and several stratagems he hath to keep souls in a mourning, staggering, doubting, and questioning condition. He hath several devices to destroy the great and honorable, the wise and learned, the blind and ignorant, the rich and the poor, the real and the nominal saints. One while he will restrain from tempting, that we may think ourselves secure, and neglect our watch; another while he will seem to fly, that he may make us sinfully proud of the victory; one while he will fix men's eyes more on others' reputed sins than their own, that he may puff them up; another while he may fix their eyes more on others' graces than their own, that he may overwhelm them. A man may as well tell the stars, and number the sands of the sea, as reckon up all the Devices of SATAN."  Beloved. Bro. Brooks also lamented the fact that few have undertaken to study, write and preach on the subject of SATAN's DEVICES; to wit: "I know not of any one or other that have writ of this subject; all that ever I have seen have only touched upon this string, which hath been no small provocation to me, to attempt to do something this way. That others, that have better heads and hearts, may be the more stirred to improve their talents in a further discovery of SATAN'S DEVICES, and in making known of such choice REMEDIES, as will enable the souls of men to triumph over all his plots and stratagems. Lastly, Not knowing how soon my glass may be out, ("The Sands of Time Are Sinking; the Dawn Of Heaven Breaks"), and how soon I may be cut off by the hand of death, from all opportunities of doing further services for Christ or your souls in this world, I was willing to sow a little handful of spiritual seed among you; that so, when I put off this earthly tabernacle, my love to you, and that dear remembrance of you, which I have in my soul," may strongly engage your minds and spirits to continue the robust study of Satan's Devices and the Precious Remedies available in God's Word to roundly defeat such Devices. For example let us briefly consider the cases of Adam, Lot, and Peter.  Sunday, June 6, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  It has been said that the first voice of SATAN finds SATAN slandering God to man (Adam, Gen.  3:4,5); next, SATAN is slandering man to God, sine die (Job, Job 1:9-11, et al.); and, finally, SATAN  is accusing all God's Elect, before God, incessantly, day and night (Rev. 12:10). Adam. SATAN,  slandering God to man; to wit: "Now the serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field which the  Lord God had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree  of the garden? And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the  garden; But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat  of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die. And the serpent said unto the woman, YE SHALL NOT  SURELY DIE; for God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and  ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil." God Almighty said, If ye eat of the forbidden fruit, YE  SHALL SURELY DIE. Comes now SATAN, ­ the arch-deceiver of the whole world (Rev. 12:9) ­  and says, GOD IS A LIAR, YE SHALL NOT SURELY DIE (!) SATAN, slandering God to man.  Gen. 3:3-5.  We see herein the ancient pattern of certain Satanic DEVICES. For example, God also says; to wit: "Thou shalt not lie with mankind as with womankind; it is abomination. Neither shalt thou lie with any beast to defile thyself therewith; neither shall any woman stand before a beast to lie down thereto; it is confusion." (Lev. 18:22,23) And, Beloved, the death penalty was prescribed for such offences to the holiness of God and the decency of mankind; to wit: "If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination; THEY SHALL SURELY BE PUT TO DEATH; THEIR BLOOD SHALL BE UPON THEM. ... And if a man lie with a beast, he shall surely be put to death; and ye shall slay the beast. And if a woman approach unto any beast, and lie down thereto, thou shalt kill the woman, and the beast; they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them," (Lev. 20:13,15,16). Beloved. There is no way to honestly and honorably water down such plain language employed by the Holy Ghost in describing such sinful and criminal conduct. Those who engage in such filthy conduct as sodomy, bestiality, incest and adultery ­ in the opinion and solemn judgment of their Creator ­ deserve the death penalty; to wit: "Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same (fags), but have pleasure (i.e., consent with them) in them that do them (fag-enablers)." Romans 1:32.  Thus you see, that all the world is divided into fags and fag-enablers. Thus you see, further, how that the preaching of WBC sharply separates the precious little sheep from the rebellious, stone-headed goats. And thus you see how that SATAN is busy every moment, with his minions, slandering man to God; to wit: "Now there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and SATAN came also among them. And the Lord said unto SATAN Whence comest thou? Then SATAN answered the Lord, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it. And the Lord said unto SATAN, Hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil? Then SATAN answered the Lord, and said, Doth Job fear God for nought? Hast not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he hath on every side? Thou hast blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the land. But put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he hath, and he will curse thee to thy face." Job 1:6-11.  In this remarkable soliloquy SATAN is seen to have some form of limited access to God for discussing current affairs and people on earth. This may throw light upon the where, when and how it was communicated unto the Lord Jesus that SATAN desired to have Peter to sift as wheat; to wit: "And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, SATAN hath desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat; but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not; and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren." Lk. 22:31,32. Beloved. I have no doubt at all but that SATAN has discussed each member of WBC ­ and WBC ­ many times over the years. Remember that our dear Lord Jesus is ever at God's right hand successfully interceding for us, and pleading our blood-bought case for us; to wit:  Sunday, June 6, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  "Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that  condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea, rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of  God, WHO ALSO MAKETH INTERCESSION FOR US. Who shall separate us from the love of  Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As  it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.  Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us. For I am persuaded,  that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers (SATAN), nor things present,  nor things to come, Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature (SATAN), shall be able to separate  us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." Rom. 8:33-39.  Beloved, lest there be any lingering doubt whatsoever about whether or not our blessed Savior has absolute and complete power and authority over all things whatsoever ­ including his majesty the DEVIL ­ I offer up three more passages from God's infallible word; than which nothing is more comforting to the suffering saint under the smarting rod; to wit: "Giving thanks unto the Father, which hath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light; Who hath delivered us, from the power of darkness (SATAN), and hath translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son; In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins; Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature; For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, dominions, principalities, or powers (i.e., satanic powers of the rulers of the darkness of this world); all things were created by him, and for him; And he is before all things, and by him all things consist (i.e., cohere, or hold together). And he is the head of the body, the church; who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the preeminence. For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell." Col. 1:12-19. And, "God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds; Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high." Heb. 1:1-3. And, "Who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God; angels and authorities and powers being made subject unto him." 1 Pet. 3:22.  Lastly, SATAN is even now accusing all God's Elect before God, incessantly, day and night; like some pettifogging lawyer with thousands of years of shyster tricks and experience making life miserable for sensitive saints by dragging up sins long since forgiven and washed in the blood of the Lamb. But why? The tender consciences of God's Elect make SATAN's cheap and dastardly attacks upon them like shooting fish in a rain barrel. So, why does SATAN keep it up? He never won a case, because of our powerful Advocate, the Lord Jesus Christ; to wit: "And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the death." Rev. 12:11.  So, what keeps Satan going? Brooks: "Beloved, SATAN being fallen from light to darkness, from felicity to misery, from heaven to hell, from an angel to a devil, is so full of malice and envy that he will leave no means unattempted, whereby he may make all others eternally miserable with himself; he being shut out of heaven, and shut up under the chains of darkness till the judgment of the great day [Jude 6], makes use of all his power and skill to bring all the sons of men into the same condition and condemnation, with himself. SATAN hath cast such sinful seed into our souls, that now he can no sooner tempt, but we are ready to assent; he can no sooner have a plot upon us, but he makes a conquest upon us. If he doth but show men a little of the beauty and bravery of the world, how ready are they to fall down and worship him! Whatever sin the heart of man is most prone to, that the devil will help forward." Beloved. These are only a few of SATAN's DEVICES. Let us study others, and enrage him more. I love you. Amen.  
