Sunday, November 7, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may  be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the  gainsayers. For there are many unruly and vain talkers and  deceivers, specially they of the circumcision; Whose mouths must be  stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they  ought not, for filthy lucre's sake." Titus 1:9-11.  These are those same perilous times that are prophesied as certain to come in the last days, in which men will creep into houses and lead captive silly women laden with sins; to wit: "This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, Without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, DESPISERS OF THOSE THAT ARE GOOD, traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; from such turn away. For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women, laden with sins, led away with divers lusts, Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth." (2 Tim. 3:1-7)  The apostle Paul has listed some 20 categories of evil that will inundate mankind in the last days that will cause perilous times (i.e., perilous times means times in which it is often VERY difficult to know what to do, or what one CAN do safely). To combat these 20 deadly evils, the safest course would probably be that ordered for young Titus; to wit: "Holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince" ­ (i.e., confute, meaning to overwhelm with irrefutable argumentation, to silence with cogent logic and truth) ­ confute the GAINSAYERS (i.e., the GAINSAYERS, meaning those who contradict, dispute, and speak against)." Titus 1:9.  Beloved, there is a little 43-year old cockroach running around with a microphone and a TV camera in his hands, contradicting the Word of God, disputing the Word of God, and speaking against the Word of God. His name is Anderson Hays Vanderbilt Cooper, and he works for the blasphemous, atheistic Cable News Network (CNN). In the words of the apostle Paul, His gainsaying mouth must be stopped by exposing his doctrinal heresies by preaching to him the unvarnished Word of God. Cooper is probably a practicing sodomite himself, as this sermon will demonstrate. He certainly promotes the sodomite cause and agenda, with both hands, diligently.  Pretending to be a fair, disinterested reporter and newsman, Cooper creeps into houses and leads captive silly women via CNN-TV, who subverts whole houses, teaching things which he ought not for filthy lucre's sake. Because of a string of suicides by anti-Bible young sodomites, (and perhaps in honor of his older brother's ­ i.e., Carter Vanderbilt Cooper's suicide when he was 23 years old) ­ Cooper decided to support a so-called "Wear Purple Day," that was launched to show solidarity with the sodomite community, all in blatant defiance of the plain Word of God; to wit: "Thou shalt not lie with mankind as with womankind; it is abomination." (Lev. 18:22) "If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination; they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them." (Lev. 20:13) These passages set God's standard for all mankind, and they certainly express God's attitude toward the filthy sin of sodomy. Sodomy is certainly not merely an alternate lifestyle that one is morally free to accept or reject.  Sunday, November 7, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  It is certainly not OK to be gay, as our American young people are taught in our public schools from kindergarten on up, and as our American mass media ­ including Mr. Anderson V. Cooper ­ shamelessly promote 24/7. Cooper is symbolic of virtually all mass media, and I am using him here as a fair representative of them all ­ on the subject of the vile, deadly sin of homosexuality, which is called sodomy in God's Word the Bible, and which binds every child of Adam for time and eternity. Including all the mass media muckrakers, whether they like it or not; and whether they acquiesce in the proposition or not ­ and especially does it bind the media hotshot, Anderson Cooper.  The evidence is good for it, that Cooper himself is a sodomite, and I will show you the proof. He is certainly the world's champion hypocrite, pretending to be a neutral seeker of truth in the interest of fair and honest reporting; when all the time he is a fierce advocate for the militant sodomite cause, and all the time he is a ferocious enemy of God, God's Word, and God's People; which he could not help revealing in his so-called "interview" with Clint McCance last Thursday, October 28, in Arkansas, as reported by The Huffington Post. Cooper is also the classical vicious GAINSAYER, as that personality is identified and exposed by the humble, Bible-believing Clint McCance at Titus 1:9; to wit: "Holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to confute the gainsayer" (remember, the GAINSAYER is one who lives to contradict the Bible, and lives to speak against the Bible, and lives to dispute the Holy Bible ­ a veritable word picture of Anderson Cooper!). Titus 1:9.  Who can deny that it is the duty of God's servants on earth to vigorously expose such Satanic creatures as the demon-possessed beasts they are? Our dear Lord Jesus praised the church at Ephesus because they could not bear them which are evil, but put them on trial and found them liars; to wit: "Unto the angel of the church of Ephesus write; These things saith he that holdeth the seven stars in his right hand, who walketh in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks; I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou canst not bear them which are evil; and thou hast tried them which say they are apostles, and are not, and hast found them LIARS." (Rev. 2:1,2)  Westboro Baptist Church has, as it were, put Anderson Cooper on ecclesiastical trial before God, His People, and an innumerable company of Angels (Heb. 12:22). It was with Anderson Cooper as it was with Belshazzar the king, as Daniel read to him the hand-writing on the banquet wall; to wit:  "And this was the writing that was written, MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN. This is the interpretation of the thing; MENE; God hath numbered thy kingdom, and finished it. TEKEL; Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting. PERES; Thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians." (Dan. 5:25-28) There stands Baby Face Anderson Cooper ­ King of the Hypocrites ­ holding himself out as an honest reporter, totally unbiased and free of prejudice. Just getting the story, and then reporting it, true blue, right down the middle. That way, people will learn to trust you. Otherwise, our form of government will suffer, because it depends on an informed electorate to make wise choices and survive. Blah, blah, blah. Cooper doesn't believe a word of it.  Independent news media have reported that Cooper is gay. His reporting is outrageously biased and prejudiced in favor of so-called gay rights, and savagely, fiercely opposed to anybody who even timidly questions whether there might be something wrong with the so-called gay lifestyle. Once, when asked about his own sexuality, Cooper filled the air with shucking and jiving, evasive flack, and obfuscating, hypocritical nonsense.  Sunday, November 7, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  Cooper said: "I understand why people might be interested (i.e., in Cooper's sex life). But I just dont talk about my personal life. Its a decision I made a long time ago, before I ever even knew  anyone would be interested in my personal life. THE WHOLE THING ABOUT BEING A REPORTER IS THAT YOURE SUPPOSED TO BE AN OBSERVER, AND TO BE ABLE TO ADAPT WITH ANY GROUP YOURE IN, AND I DONT WANT TO DO ANYTHING THAT THREATENS THAT." Such noble words ­ coming out of a lying, mouth ­ a practicing sodomite's  mouth.  So, what happens when Cooper runs into a Bible-believing man from Arkansas, who, at a minimum, doesn't agree with atheistic Cooper's sloppy ideas about sodomites? The Arkansas man's name is Clint McCance. Clint took a dim view of wearing purple all day on the aforementioned "Wear Purple Day," to show solidarity with all the school kids who wanted to experiment with calling themselves gays and lesbians. Clint didn't believe in encouraging young people in the notion that sodomy is romantic or anything other than soul-damning sin against God. Clint does not believe it's OK to be gay; he believes it will certainly destroy the life and damn the soul. Nothing is more certain to Clint. Therefore, pursuant to his knowledge of, and belief in, the Bible, Clint felt it his Christian duty to respond to sodomite propaganda efforts to push their "Wear Purple Day" nonsense down his, and everybody's, throat. (Note: Militant homosexual activists are forever pushing their anti-Christic, anti-Bible tripe and nonsense down everybody's throat).  Clint wrote his truthful, Bible-based answer on Facebook as follows; to wit: "They (fag activists) want me to wear purple because five queers committed suicide. The only way Im wearing purple for them is if they all commit suicide. I cant believe the people of this world have gotten this stupid." I say, Beautiful (!)(!) I say, What a Masterpiece of elegant prose and current religious commentary (!). It certainly was no business of an activist homosexual like Anderson Cooper, ­ hiding behind his lying pretended "neutrality-as-a-journalist" status ­ to brow-beat Clint and demand that he apologize for his deeply-held religious beliefs. The Huffington Post reported; to wit: "By the end of the interview, Cooper also got McCance to call his Facebook comments ,,hateful and to apologize for hurting people ,,on a broad, broad spectrum." I say, Outrageous (!)(!). In this verbal contest with the arch-hypocrite Cooper, Clint's words express wholesome, sound, Bible sentiments; Cooper's words have the "hiss" of the serpent from Hell. Let us examine the exchange. Cooper first complains, apparently, about Clint's referring to the recent string of suicides as "five queers committed suicide." Cooper ­ (the neutral news man whose job is only to observe and to report) ­ I say, "Cooper confronted him (i.e., Clint the faithful Christian) about the extreme anti-gay sentiments he expressed. 'You have written some really terrible things,' Cooper told Clint. Do you really hate gay people that much, that you like to see them die?" First take Cooper's hostility to referring to sodomites as QUEERS. Again, what business does the objective, only observing-and- reporting-fairly news man have in angrily making a value judgment that goes to the heart of the situation, involving the deeply-held religious beliefs of the interviewee? As to referring to these sick, miserable sodomite creatures as QUEERS, a few minutes spent with a good dictionary might do Cooper a world of good; to wit: My dictionary is Webster's unabridged, and it provides at least seven distinct and separate commentaries, ending with only one popular meaning of the word "QUEER" as being "homosexual, without derogatory embellishment." Plus, any one of the following words would be an acceptable synonym to the word QUEER; to wit: "strange, peculiar, odd, eccentric, arousing suspicion, unwell, sick." I put it to you, Beloved; Words are stubborn things.  Sunday, November 7, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  Cooper has no legitimate beef with Clint McCance for calling sodomites, QUEERS. We know from the record in our library that Cooper is probably himself a sodomite. He cannot control himself and obey the rules of his journalistic profession, when it comes to fags, queers, and other names that he considers disrespectful; but which the Bible calls sodomites. Cooper, a son of Adam, is bound by the Bible, whether he likes it or not. Let God be true, and every man a liar. No sodomite can conceal his identity for long. He is stamped and branded by his sodomitical characteristics. As the Bible puts it: "The show of their countenance doth witness against them; and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their soul! for they have rewarded evil unto themselves." (Isa. 3:9,10)  Now back to Clint McCance and his classical Facebook message that shocked the whole world and incurred the sinful anger of Baby Face faggot news man, Anderson Hays Vanderbilt Cooper. Cooper, like all fags and fag-enablers, labors under the Satanic delusion that God loves everybody, hates nobody, and is too kind and merciful to exact the death penalty upon practicing sodomites ­ even though He plainly says that He will do so, and that practicing sodomites and their enablers deserve the death penalty at the hands of the civil authorities, and deserve to die providentially at the immediate Hands of an angry God inflicting AIDS and other deadly diseases, wars, storms, tornados, epidemics, etc.; to wit: "Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them (or, consent with them that do them)." (Rom. 1:32) More of Clint's wonderful sermonette; to wit: "I cant believe the people of this world have gotten this stupid. It pisses me off, though, that we make special purple fag day for them. I like it that fags cant procreate. I also enjoy that they often give each other AIDS and die. I would disown my kids if they were gay. They will not be welcome at my home or in my vicinity. I will absolutely run them off." We often say at Westboro Baptist Church that America and the whole world has been taken over by the sodomites, to a remarkable degree, and that this revolting development marks the soon return of our Lord Jesus Christ in power and glory, according to such Bible passages as Luke 17:30; to wit: "Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot, they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed." (Luke 17:28-30)  Sadly, after writing and publishing on Facebook one of the finest and most Scriptural sermonettes I have run across on the soul-damning sin of sodomy, Bro. Clint McCance, of Arkansas, was set upon by the practicing sodomite news man, Anderson Cooper, who unethically brow-beat Clint, on camera, until he recanted, ­ and resigned his position on the school board, saying he was ashamed and embarrassed by his actions. Pitiful.  COOPER SHOULD FORTHWITH RESIGN HIS JOB AS A NEWS MAN. His treatment of Bro. McCance demonstrates that where sodomites and sodomy are involved, he is utterly unable to maintain any kind of objectivity. In The Huffington Post: "During McCances appearance on his show, Cooper confronted him about the extreme anti-gay sentiments he expressed. 'You have written some really terrible things,' he told McCance. By the end of the interview, Cooper also got McCance to call his Facebook (sermonette) ,,hateful and to apologize for hurting people ,,on a broad, broad spectrum." Beloved, here you see the face of the Wars of the Lord.  I love you. Amen.  
