Sunday, January 16, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of  man, what is that proverb that ye have in the land of  Israel, saying, The days are prolonged, and every vision  faileth?" Ezek. 12:21,22.  This proverb was used as a sharp stick in the eye of God, and a campaign of contempt and ridicule hurled upon the faithful servants of God. This kind of ribald mockery of God's time-table for executing His judgments and His punishments of condemned rebels, was one of the last things warned about by the aged apostle Peter; to wit: "This second epistle, beloved, I now write unto you, in both which I stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance; That ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets, and of the commandment of us the apostles of the Lord and Savior; Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, And saying, Where is the promise of his coming? For since the fathers fell asleep" ­ (spoken in a condescending, scoffing, mocking manner, as if to say, Sleeping my foot; those so-called fathers are dead, dead, dead ­ you ignorant sucker! Get over it!) ­ "For since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of creation. For this they willingly are ignorant of, that by the word of God the heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water and in the water; Whereby the world that then was, being over-flowed with water, perished." 2 Pet. 3:1-6. Even so, those who dealt in anti-God proverbs in Ezekiel's day were "willingly ignorant." They have fallen into one of Satan's deadliest traps; to wit: "Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil." (Eccl. 8:11) Another thing to be factored in ­ also among the last words of Peter; to wit: "But, beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day." 2 Pet. 3:8. Thus, you see, that, utilizing Heaven's own calculus or arithmetic, those smart-alecs of Ezekiel's day ­ and their clever popular proverb; i.e., "The days are prolonged" ­ that is, the days of getting away with sin and rebellion against God, and therefore they were ready to flatter themselves that they would get by without punishment, as Ezekiel had warned; "and every vision faileth" (i.e., everything Ezekiel warned us about has failed to come to pass) ­ and thus they abused the patience and longsuffering of God; and they used this and the following expression so often, and so long, that they became proverbial to them. Mockers and scoffers in the extreme. A nation of ribald, institutionalized mockers and scoffers ­ much as the USA today ­ not to mention the other nations of this God-forsaken World ­ led by the ungrateful, apostate United States of America. But the Lord's word to Ezekiel for delivery to the grievously backslidden Jews is that there will be no more smash-jaw insults to the Godhead. No more cheap shots with insulting proverbs. To wit: "Tell them therefore, Thus saith the Lord God; I will make this proverb to cease, and they shall no more use it as a proverb in Israel; but say unto them, The days are at hand and the effect of every vision. (And there will be no more delays in executing judgment.) For there shall be no more any vain vision nor flattering divination within the house of Israel. For I am the Lord; I will speak, and the word that I shall speak shall come to pass; it shall be no more prolonged; for in your days, O rebellious house, will I say the word, and will perform it, saith the Lord God. Again the word of the Lord came to me, saying, Son of man, behold, they of the house of Israel say, The vision that he seeth is for many days to come, and he prophesieth of the times that are far off. Therefore say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; There shall none of my words be prolonged any more, but the word which I have spoken shall be done, saith the Lord God." Ezek. 12:23-28.  Sunday, January 16, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  And so you see that the profane, blasphemous proverb of mocking and scoffing by the wicked in Ezekiel's day, is usually institutionalized by every society of educated mankind; to wit:  "Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, NOR SITTETH IN THE SEAT OF THE SCORNFUL." (Psa. 1:1)  Thus is the precious Book of the 150 glorious Psalms launched, by a description of the blessed man, God's Elect; by a comparison to the cursed man, the non-Elect. Make no mistake. The ungodly sinners ­ who are certainly, inevitably headed for Hell with every breath they take ­ are identified as surely in this short little Psalm (only 6 verses) as the righteous; to wit: "For the Lord knoweth" ­ (i.e., loveth, or, knoweth with approbation and favor) ­ "the way of the righteous; but the way of the ungodly shall perish." Psa. 1:6. The last thing God's Elect will ever do is to SIT IN THE SEAT OF THE SCORNFUL, which is to institutionalize the mocking, scoffing, and scorning of God and His Word. With respect to the term "seat," to sit in the seat, is to teach with authority, to act the part of an instructor, and professor; as in Mat. 23; to wit: "Then spake Jesus to the multitude, and to his disciples, Saying, The scribes and the Pharisees SIT IN MOSES' SEAT; All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their works; for they say, and do not." (Mat. 23:1-3) Martin Luther said that the seat of the scornful is in fact the seat of pestilence ­ (a deadly epidemic disease) ­ scattering misery all around upon mankind. He said that "the scorners sit in the seat of pestilence, who fill the church with the opinions of philosophers, with the traditions of men, and with the counsels of their own brains, and oppress miserable consciences, setting aside, all the while, the word of God, by which alone the soul is fed, lives, and is preserved." (Luther wrote from 1536 to 1546.) Thus you see, blessed is the man that does not buy into the lying arguments of the so-called intelligentsia ­ the college professor types ­ the world of proud academia, denounced by the apostle Paul in closing his first book of instructions to young Timothy; to wit: "O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain babblings, and oppositions of science" ­ (Greek, gnosis, knowledge, to know a thing) ­ "FALSELY SO CALLED; WHICH SOME PROFESSING HAVE ERRED CONCERNING THE FAITH. Grace be with thee. Amen." 1 Tim. 6:20,21.  Beloved. To sit in the seat of the scornful is a very dangerous thing. It institutionalizes the vile activity of mocking, scoffing, and scorning God. When the apostle Jeremiah was in a backslidden condition, and seeking ways to make peace with his heavenly Father, one of his best arguments for reconciliation was that however low he had sunk, he had never joined the ribald mockers and scoffers in speaking scornfully to or about God; to wit: "I SAT NOT IN THE ASSEMBLY OF THE MOCKERS, NOR REJOICED; I SAT ALONE BECAUSE OF THY HAND; FOR THOU HAST FILLED ME WITH INDIGNATION." (Jer. 15:17)  Jeremiah had said many foolish and even maybe blasphemous things; and came close to suggesting that God may have lied to him (Jer.15:18), and deceived him (Jer. 20:7); on account of which the Lord reprimanded Jeremiah and laid down terms for reconciliation; to wit: "Therefore thus saith the Lord, If thou return, then will I bring thee again, and thou shalt stand before me; and if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth; let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them. And I will make thee unto this people a fenced brasen wall; and they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee to save thee and to deliver thee, saith the Lord. And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked, and I will redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible." (Jer. 15:19-21)  Sunday, January 16, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  And yet, and yet ­ after all that had happened, what carried the day for poor old battered and backslidden Jeremiah ­ in getting him right with God ­ seems to have been Jeremiah's double-dog guarantee to the Lord that he (Jeremiah) had not walked in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stood in the way of sinners, NOR SAT IN THE SEAT OF THE SCORNFUL. See, Psa. 1:1. Just see how  solicitously Jeremiah, the returning backslider, makes his case before his heavenly Father; to wit:  "O Lord, thou knowest; remember me, and visit me, and revenge me of my persecutors; take me not away in thy longsuffering; know that for thy sake I have suffered rebuke. Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart; for I am called by thy name, O Lord God of hosts." (Jer.15:15,16)  All good arguments; but now comes the piece de resistance; to wit: "I SAT NOT IN THE  ASSEMBLY OF THE MOCKERS, NOR REJOICED; I SAT ALONE BECAUSE OF THY HAND; FOR THOU HAST FILLED ME WITH INDIGNATION." Jer. 15:17. As though  Jeremiah said to the Lord, I have been a sinful rebel against the King of Glory. Moreover, I have  been a coward in the fight, whining when things got tough, AWOL, a deserter, and fleeing the field.  And all this in the face of thine overwhelming love and kindness toward me. I do not deserve  another chance to be thy servant. In fact, speaking of deserts, I deserve to go forthwith into Hell. However please grant thy unworthy servant leave to make one more point; to wit: "I SAT NOT IN THE ASSEMBLY OF THE MOCKERS, NOR REJOICED." However hot and long the battle grew, and however tempted, tested, and tried I became, I am so thankful to report, O God, that I never mocked, scoffed, scorned, or otherwise disparaged Thee, O Lord, Thy Word, or Thy People ­ either in a ribald way as with a bawdy gang in a tavern-type setting ­ or in a professorial way in a  university-type setting. By way of recapitulation:  "For Moses of old time hath in every city them that preach him, being read in the synagogues every sabbath day." (Acts 15:21)  Tens of thousands of synagogues, all known as "Moses' SEAT," because Moses in a figure sits there and teaches the Law authoritatively from that SEAT. Jesus said the scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses' SEAT also teaching the law, although as hypocrites, for they say and do not. Mat. 23:1-3. Hence, authoritative teaching came to be respectfully associated with the SEAT; and when with the  passage of time the hateful practice of mocking and scoffing and heaping scorn upon God, His Word, and His People ­ "the ungodly" usurped the SEAT, and perverted it throughout. Hence, the glorious Psa. 1:1; to wit: "BLESSED IS THE MAN THAT SITTETH NOT IN THE SEAT OF THE SCORNFUL." Ergo, per force: CURSED IS THE MAN THAT SITTETH IN THE SEAT OF THE SCORNFUL.  Beloved, from this little study, in preparation for this sermon, I have been impressed as never before with how terribly wrong and sinful it is for the wicked to mock, scoff, scorn, and otherwise disparage God, His Word, His People representing Him, and His Providences. This is often illustrated in the Scriptures; as, for example, in the story of Elisha and the two she bears; to wit: "And he (Elisha) went up from thence unto Bethel; and as he was going up by the way, there came forth little children out of the city, and MOCKED him (Elisha), and said unto him, Go up, thou bald head; go up, thou bald head. And he (Elisha) turned back, and looked on them, and cursed them in the Name of the Lord. And there came forth two she bears out of the wood, and tare forty and two children of them." (2 Kgs. 2:23-24)  One can fairly hear the maudlin wails arising out of old Bethel and environs, from the parents, relatives and friends, officials of the city, religious leaders, editorial writers ­ really, virtually the entire population of the city and nation of Israel.  Sunday, January 16, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  One raucous chorus; to wit: They were just little children having fun. They didn't mean any harm. God loves everyone, and He certainly would not kill those little children just for poking a little fun at a bald-headed religious fanatic going around with a wild story about God taking someone to Heaven in a chariot of fire drawn by horses of fire. C'mon. Give me a break. Those little children didn't do or say anything that everyone in this religious community hasn't done or said or thought  about doing or saying. Beloved, we have seen and heard these filthy-talking American brat-beasts  and monsters many, many times on the mean streets of this doomed nation. I tell you, without the  least hesitation, THEY ARE HEADED STRAIGHT FOR HELL.  Furthermore, they are one thousand times worse than the word-picture the Holy Ghost has painted of those 42 little Jew kids mauled by the two she bears so long ago. Beloved, if the church of the Lord Jesus Christ ­ which the Holy Ghost calls "the pillar and ground of the truth" (1 Tim. 3:15) ­ doesn't speak plainly and truthfully about such eternal matters as life and death, sin and righteousness, Judgment to come, Heaven and Hell ­ pray tell us who WILL speak plainly? The Holy Ghost deemed it best to tell the horrific historical account of how and why the two she bears killed the 42 little mocking and scoffing brats, utilizing only three verses of Holy Writ (2 Ks. 2:2325).  What is left out is powerfully implied. Indeed, NECESSARILY implied. A holy prophet of God (Elisha) is passing by, fresh from witnessing the translation of Elijah, taken alive from Earth to Heaven in a chariot of fire, drawn by horses of fire. The news of this spectacular event spread rapidly ­ and almost nobody believed it! It points to and symbolizes The Rapture, when the Lord Jesus Christ is set to return to Earth the Second Time in Power and Glory, otherwise called The Second Coming, the End of the World, The Judgment Day ­ to wit: "Behold, he cometh with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him; and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. Even so, Amen." (Rev. 1:7) Nothing ­ no future event ­ is more important. It is therefore Satan's primary target of the most mocking, scoffing, derision, and scorn; to wit: "Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days SCOFFERS, walking after their own lusts, And saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation. For this they willingly are ignorant of." (2 Pet. 3:3-5)  And what is it that formed the core of the mockery which brought about the divine wrath, judgment and death of the 42 monster-brats? Was it not the Rapture? The Second Coming in power and glory of our dear Lord Jesus Christ? To wit: "For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first; Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these words." (1Thes. 4:16-18)  Look again carefully, and I think you will see that the object of their sinful mockery was the Rapture; to wit: "Go up, thou bald head; Go up, thou bald head." 2 Kgs. 2:23. Which is the "Go up" wording of Elijah's and Paul's Rapture doctrine: "And Elijah went up;" and, "We shall be caught up in the clouds."  I love you.  Amen.  
