Sunday, June 28, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and his wife, and all that he had,  and Lot with him, into the south. And Abram was very rich in cattle, in  silver, and in gold... And Lot also, which went with Abram, had flocks,  and herds, and tents. And the land was not able to bear them, that they  might dwell together; for their substance was great, so that they could  not dwell together. And there was a strife between the herdmen of  Abram's cattle and the herdmen of Lot's cattle; and the Canaanite and  the Perizzite dwelled then in the land. And Abram said unto Lot, Let  there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my  herdmen and thy herdmen; for we be brethren. Is not the whole land  before thee? separate thyself, I pray thee, from me; if thou wilt take the  left hand, then I will go to the right; or if thou depart to the right hand,  then I will go to the left. And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the  plain of Jordan, that it was well watered every where, before the Lord  destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, even as the garden of the Lord, like  the land of Egypt, as thou comest unto Zoar. Then Lot chose him all the  plain of Jordan; and Lot journeyed east; and they separated  themselves the one from the other. Abram dwelled in the land of  Canaan, and Lot dwelled in the cities of the plain, and PITCHED HIS  TENT TOWARD SODOM. But the men of Sodom were WICKED AND  SINNERS BEFORE THE LORD EXCEEDINGLY." Gen. 13:1-13.  This sermon will be about Sodom, ­ (which also includes sodomy and sodomites, and which necessarily includes Gomorrah and the other so-called cities of the plain). It is of the gravest importance to all mankind, since those cities have been exerting their pernicious influence over the entire human race from the dawning of the human race to the present time. By the time of the days of Abraham and Lot, (c. 2,000 BC), those cities had become a hot-bed of vice ­ a very sink of stinking iniquity; even traceable to their Hamitic ancestry, curse and all, since exiting the Ark of Noah (c. 2,348 BC). God exterminated them in a real, genuine, fiery holocaust ­ (c. 1898 BC, every living soul burned alive, from the tiniest suckling infant to the oldest man or woman, burned to a cinder), ­ in order that their foul posterity might no longer defile the earth with their presence.  Beloved. There are no descendants of the anal copulators and their kin of Sodom. But so powerful a lesson to mankind is seen in the fact that God calls it an everlasting example; to wit: "Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth FOR AN EXAMPLE, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire." Jude 7. And their hateful name (Sodom and Gomorrah) is introduced into every prophetic denunciation ­ i.e., forms the type of every blasted scene of moral desolation. That is, God the Holy Ghost, in writing the Bible, found no terms more emphatic to describe the judgment of heaven upon a wicked people, than to compare the final doom of that people to the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah. For example, "And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees' excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah." Isa. 13:19. And, Beloved, as the doom of Babylon was so often prognosticated by the holy prophets, even so it came to pass, precisely, on the fateful night of Belshazzar's inglorious, blasphemous feast; to wit:  Sunday, June 28, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  "In the same hour came forth fingers of a man's hand, and wrote over against the  candlestick upon the plaster of the wall of the king's palace; and the king saw the  part of the hand that wrote. Then the king's countenance was changed, and his  thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees  smote one against another... And this is the writing that was written, MENE,  MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN. This is the interpretation of the thing...God hath numbered thy kingdom, and finished it...Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting...In that night was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans slain. And Darius the Median took the kingdom, being about threescore and two years old."  (Dan. 5:1-31)  A fiery bloodbath accompanied the death of king Belshazzar and the destruction of mighty  Babylon that fateful night ­ all as prophesied to be like unto Sodom and Gomorrah; to wit: "As  God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbor cities thereof, saith the Lord; so shall  no man abide there, neither shall any son of man dwell therein." Jer. 50:40. "And Babylon, the  glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees' excellency, shall be as when God overthrew  Sodom and Gomorrah." Isa. 13:19. Near the ruins of ancient Babylon is an Iranian city of some  60,000 in population, and the mayor of that city said just the other day, that he is looking forward  to millions in tourist dollars in the near future.  In fact, he believes the artifacts in the sands of ancient Babylon will one day support an Iranian industry second only to oil. And he quipped that their little city will one day have Holiday Inns for tourists. The Hanging Gardens of Babylon, only a small part of ancient Babylon, was one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. These things serve to give us an accurate understanding of the majesty and grandeur of ancient Babylon. And yet, when the Holy Ghost would describe for us the final and complete destruction of ancient Babylon, He likens it to the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah.  Now, throw into the discussion of ancient Babylon/Sodom the new, just completed multi-billion dollar American embassy, situated in the so-called Green Zone, within Baghdad, Iraq ­ making the Embassy a heavily fortified city within a heavily fortified city, within heavily fortified Baghdad. We have some pictures of that thing on the table in front of the pulpit. It looks like a huge fortress the size of the humongous Pentagon. Although Iraq is very small as countries go, it now has the largest embassy of all ­ in the whole world. Some 20,000 American citizens will be employed there ­ and I would make that 40,000 before the dust settles. Mind you, the new embassy is in addition to the many city-size and comfort-equipped fortifications now and in the indefinite future supporting the thousands of troops in and around Iraq.  Beloved. Our God is a Man of War; the Lord is his name; and He is on the move (!). Ex. 15:3. America has poured trillions of dollars into Iraq, ­ modern Babylon ­ with the likelihood of pouring many trillions more in the future. AMERICA IS BABYLON, and as such is soon to be destroyed, "as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah." Isa. 13:19. "And great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath." (Rev. 16:19)  It is of the utmost importance that we make a diligent study of Sodom, and that our mouths often make mention of Sodom (for, Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks).  Sunday, June 28, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  Is it not a strange thing that notwithstanding the fact, that the Lord God Almighty gave mankind a  famous example of great masses of degenerate people ­ called, collectively, Sodom ­ going after  strange flesh, fornicating, and going to Hell precipitously and suddenly and at once, for it? ­ I say,  is it not strange that mankind has a universal aversion to ever even talking about Sodom? to wit:  "Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves  over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are SET FORTH FOR AN EXAMPLE,  suffering the vengeance of eternal fire." Jude 7. "FOR THY SISTER SODOM WAS NOT  MENTIONED BY THY MOUTH IN THE DAY OF THY PRIDE." Ezek. 16:56.  Remember, Beloved, that Westboro Baptist Church is also known as the Golden Candlestick University, and we offer doctoral degrees in: "Sodom, Her Origins and Her Destiny;" and, "Sodom, Her Nature and Her Attributes;" and, "Sodom, in Poetry and Song." We have committees developing even more post-graduate degree programs in extraordinarily potent passages such as Gen. 10:19,20; to wit: "And the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as thou comest to Gerar, unto Gaza; as thou goest, unto SODOM, AND GOMORRAH, and Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lasha. These are the sons of Ham, after their families, after their tongues, in their countries, and in their nations." And, Gen. 13:13; to wit: "But the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners before the Lord exceedingly." And, Gen. 19:14; to wit: "And Lot went out, and spake unto his sons in law, which married his daughters, and said, Up, get you out of this place; for the Lord will destroy this city. But he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons in law." And, Gen. 19:26; to wit: "But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt;" to which may be added Lk. 17:32; to wit: "Remember Lot's wife."  Beloved, the foregoing is only a slight bit of humor; because the truth is, that considering the Zeitgeist ­ (the taste and outlook characteristic of a period or a generation) ­ I say, that considering the taste and outlook characteristic of this Hell-bound generation ­ their Zeitgeist ! ­ IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO MAKE TOO MUCH OF SODOM (!) Our Lord Jesus said, As it was in the days of Lot...so shall it be when the Son of man is revealed (Lk. 17:28-30). Well, Beloved, How was it in the days of Lot?? Fag beasts roamed the streets of Sodom looking for somebody to gang rape, fag sex up the rump. And these fag beasts were from every part of town. Gen. 19:4,5; to wit: "But before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of Sodom, compassed the house round, both old and young, all the people from every quarter." (Most places in big cities in this country have a section of town where fag flags hang out, and other open and notorious means of identification, mark that section as fag territory; but in Sodom all the people from every quarter were violent, predatory fag rapists.)  Even Lot's sons in law mocked their father in law ­ and descended into Hell that night. Even Lot's wife was more in tune with the hellish Zeitgeist of Sodom, than with her own husband and children ­ as the aftermath proved, when she looked back and became a pillar of salt. I repeat, It is impossible to know too much about Sodom, or, practically, to speak too much about Sodom. There are many, many aspects to the story and history of Sodom, that would profitably bear deeper, prayerful investigation. Why did the Savior say ­ in the second shortest verse in the English Bible, "Remember Lot's wife?" Mind you, not, Remember Lot's sons in law. Nor, Remember Lot's two foolish daughters, whose bastard sons by Lot became two mighty nations who went against Israel in years to come. Not even, Remember Lot, though for different reasons,  Sunday, June 28, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  whom God called, "that righteous man." 2 Pet. 2:8. Much information both within and without  the Bible is available on the subject of Sodom. Take, "Remember Lot's wife." Lk. 17:32.  Gill: "`But his wife looked back from behind him.' That is the wife of Lot, whose name the Jewish writers say was Adith, or as others Irith; and, according to the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem, she was a native of Sodom; now, as they were going from Sodom to Zoar, she was behind Lot, his back was to her, so that he could not see her; this was a temptation to her to look back, since her husband could not see her; and this she did, either, as the above paraphrases suggest, that she might see what would be the end of her father's house and family, or whether her married daughters, if she had any, were following her, after whom her bowels yearned; or being grieved for the goods and substance left behind, and for the people of Sodom in general, for whom she had too much concern; however, be it on what account it may, she was severely punished for it; `and she became a pillar of salt;' was struck dead at once, either by the immediate hand of God, or by the shower of fire and brimstone; and her body was at once changed into a metallic substance, a kind of salt, hard and durable, such as Pliny speaks of, cut out of rocks, with which houses were built, and hardened with the sun, and could scarcely be cut with an iron instrument."  Jamieson, Fausset and Brown: "It is deserving of notice, that she became a pillar of salt ­ i.e., having not only `looked behind,' but actually turned back (our Lord's admonition, Luke 17:32, is founded on the fact of her attempting to retrace her steps) - she was suffocated and then overwhelmed by the torrent of bituminous and sulphurous matter; which, as it formed an increasing incrustation over her body, rendered her a lasting monument of the fatal effects of a too deeply rooted affection for worldly attractions, and of wilful disobedience to the Divine instructions."  Matthew Henry: "The sin of Lot's wife: `She looked back from behind him.' This seemed a small thing, but we are sure, by the punishment of it, that it was a great sin, and exceedingly sinful. 1. She disobeyed an express command, and so sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression, which ruined us all. 2. Unbelief was at the bottom of it; she questioned whether Sodom would be destroyed, and thought she might still have been safe in it. 3. She looked back upon her neighbors whom she had left behind with more concern than was fit, now that their day of grace was over, and divine justice was glorifying itself in their ruin. See Isa. 66:24; to wit: `And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of the men that have transgressed against me; for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh.' 4. Probably she hankered after her house and goods in Sodom, and was loath to leave them. Christ intimates this to be her sin" (Luke 17:31,32; to wit: "In that day, he which shall be upon the house top, and his STUFF IN THE HOUSE, let him not come down to take it away; and he that is in the field, let him likewise not return back. Remember Lot's wife.") "she too much regarded her STUFF IN THE HOUSE. 5. Her looking back evinced an inclination to go back; and therefore our Savior uses it as a warning against apostasy from our Christian profession. We have all renounced the world, the flesh and the devil, and have set our faces heaven-ward; we are in the plain, upon our probation; and it is at our peril if we return into the interests we profess to have abandoned. Drawing back is to perdition, and looking back is towards it. `Let us therefore fear,' Heb. 4:1;" to wit: "Let us therefore fear, lest, a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it."  "But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition; but of them that believe to the saving of the soul." (Heb. 10:39) I love you. Amen.  
