Sunday, March 20, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to them that are sanctified ­ (i.e., those that are separated from the corrupt mass of mankind, and separated unto the full-time service of the Lord Jesus Christ) ­ by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called; Mercy unto you, and peace and love, be multiplied. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you that ye should earnestly contend for THE FAITH which was once delivered unto the saints." Jude 1:1-3.  Beloved this expression, "THE FAITH," is elliptical ­ enormously elliptical. And each part of its extended form and version is vital ­ to the max. What is "THE FAITH," as used here? and what does it include? Well, for starters, it includes the whole scheme of 5-Point Calvinistic, Evangelical, and other doctrines, such as the doctrine of the Trinity, the deity and sonship of Christ, the divinity and personality of the Holy Spirit; what regards the state and condition of man by nature, as the doctrines of the imputation of Adam's sin to his posterity, the corruption of nature, and the  impotence of men to that which is good; what concerns the acts of grace in the Father, Son, and Spirit towards and upon the sons of men; as the doctrines of everlasting love, eternal election, the covenant of grace, particular redemption, justification by the imputed righteousness of Christ, pardon and reconciliation by His blood, regeneration and sanctification by the grace of the Spirit, final perseverance, the resurrection of the dead, and the future glory of the saints with Christ. To all which may be added the Westminster Confession of Faith (1646), Christ Church North Carolina Confession of Faith, The First London Confession of Faith, The Savoy Declaration, and, The Philadelphia Confession of Faith.  All this is "THE FAITH" ­ and every least part thereof, that we are to earnestly strive and contend for. And this is said to be "delivered once and for all unto the saints." Probably the apostles, and by them to the churches, both by word and writing.  Gill: "And this delivery of it supposes that it is not an invention of men, that it is of God, and a gift of His, and given in trust, in order to be kept, held forth, and held fast; and it was BUT `ONCE' DELIVERED, in opposition to the sundry times and divers manners in which the mind of God was formerly made known; (to wit: ­ 'God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds.' Heb. 1:1,2.) And designs the uniformity, perfection, and continuance of the doctrine of faith; there is no alteration to be made in it, or addition to it; no new revelations are to be expected, it is to be delivered all at once; and therefore should be `earnestly contended for'; for could it be lost, another could not be had;  and the whole of it is to be contended for; not only the fundamentals, but the lesser matters of faith; and not things essential only, but also things which are circumstantial to faith and religion; every truth, ordinance, and duty, and particularly the purity of faith, and its consistency; and this contention includes a care and solicitude for it, to have it, own it, and hold it fast, and adorn it; and, for the preservation of it, and for the spread of it, and that it might be transmitted to posterity; and it denotes a conflict, a combat, or a fighting for it, a striving even to an agony; the persons to be contended with on account of it, are such who deny, or depreciate any of the Persons in the Godhead, the assertors of the purity and power of human nature, and the deniers of sovereign, efficacious, and persevering grace; the persons who are to contend with them are all the saints in  Sunday, March 20, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  general, to whom it is delivered; which they may do by bearing an experimental testimony, by  praying for the continuance and success of it, by standing fast in one spirit in it, and by dying for it;  and particularly the ministers of the Gospel, by preaching it boldly, openly, fully, and faithfully, by  disputing for it, and by writing in the defence of it, and by laying down their lives, when called for;  the manner in which this is to be done, is earnestly, heartily, in good earnest, and without deceit, zealously, and constantly."  "Holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and convince" ­ i.e., confute, i.e., overwhelm with powerful Bible arguments ala Ezra, Apollos, and all querists generally; to wit:  1) Ezra. "This Ezra went up from Babylon; and he was a READY SCRIBE IN THE LAW OF MOSES, which the Lord God of Israel had given; and the king granted him all his request, according to the hand of the Lord his God upon him." Ezra 7:6. 2) Apollos. "And a certain Jew named Apollos, born at Alexandria, an eloquent man, and MIGHTY IN THE SCRIPTURES, came to Ephesus." Acts 18:24.  3) "But and if ye suffer for righteousness' sake, happy are ye; and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled; But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts; and BE READY ALWAYS TO GIVE AN ANSWER ALWAYS TO EVERY MAN THAT ASKETH YOU A REASON OF THE HOPE THAT IS IN YOU, WITH MEEKNESS AND FEAR." 1 Pet. 3:15.  "...To exhort and to convince the gainsayers. For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, specially they of the circumcision; Whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake." Titus 1:9-11. "For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ." (Jude 1:4) There is a note of extreme urgency in the apostle Jude's words; because some very dangerous heretics ­ called here, "certain men" ­ have crept in, or slithered in like slimy, venomous snakes, and alligators, and Komodo Dragons ­ and are NOW UPON THE SCENE, THREATENING TO TAKE OVER POSSESSION AND CONTROL OF THE CHURCH OF THE LORD JESUS CHRIST. Beloved, "There are certain men CREPT IN unawares." But, Beloved, do snakes CREEP? They certainly slither upon their bellies, since the curse of God was visited upon them; to wit: "And the Lord God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life." (Gen. 3:14) And so, there was a large group of Robert H. Schuller-style preachers ­ wild-eyed heretics with the gift of gab ­ in the days of the apostle Jude ­ who had infiltrated the churches and were threatening to destroy them. In describing the way these heretics ("certain men") managed to gain such success, such traction, in infiltrating the churches in an age of such relative purity in primitive Christianity, the Holy Spirit and the apostle Jude said that they "CREPT IN UNAWARES."  Beloved. I believe this is important. I believe that the Holy Spirit was precise with His choice of words. If He intended to introduce these dangerous men as snakes, He could have used the word SLITHER; and, so, THEY SLITHERED IN UNAWARES. Komodo Dragons creep. They are ponderous, yet agile and swift, at 200 pounds and ten feet long. With razor-edged shark's teeth and venomous saliva, Komodo can bring down and devour a full grown water buffalo, and his murderous visage is devastatingly fierce.  Sunday, March 20, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  To add one more disgusting entry from Komodo's catalogue of horror, this monster has a keen sense of smell, enabling him to seek out and devour carrion (dead and decaying flesh) five miles away.  I digress briefly to make a few symbolic applications; to wit: Mankind, typically, apparently loves these cute little baby dolls, and has passed laws to protect them from harm ­ at an ever-increasing cost of millions of dollars ­ paid for mostly with American taxpayer borrowed money. The point here is that notwithstanding the fact that this nation for all practical purposes ­ is bankrupt ­ we can always come up with plenty of money for our perverted Satanic programs and purposes; e.g., abortions, so-called gay rights programs, and to prosecute and persecute Westboro Baptist Church.  They mourn the fact that there are only 3,000 to 5,000 of these god-awful creatures alive in the world today. The following is from government literature; to wit: "Commercial trade in specimens or skins is illegal under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES)." First, we goofy Americans gathered up a bunch of these Komodo monsters and placed them in the Honolulu Zoo ­ at a taxpayer cost of millions. This was in 1993; about two years after WBC began our anti-fag and anti-sodomite picketing program.  Meanwhile, our nitwit political leaders apparently developed a fond affection for the Satanic Komodos, calling them, "Our Dragons" in official literature. Then, somewhere deep in the bowels of the United States Federal Bureaucracy, where the fags and the sodomites roam, our earthdwelling, bottom-feeding pols came up with the idea that Washington, D.C., should be the world capitol of a multimillion dollar breeding program for the Komodo Dragons ­ call it, The World Capitol of the Satanic Two-legged Breeders of the Satanic Four-legged Creepers; to wit: "For of this sort are they which CREEP into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with divers lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth." (2 Tim. 3:6,7)  The image here is powerful. There is no better symbol of the false prophet than the fearsome, CREEPING, death-dealing Komodo Dragon. Beloved. Just look at the creature! He is a killing machine: his hands, his feet, his teeth, even his saliva. Just one nip, ­ pricking the flesh of his prey, ­ and very shortly thereafter, the venom in Komodo's saliva dispatches the victim.  Thus, death resides in the dragon's mouth, just as with the false prophet. And God's Elect have their spiritual senses exercised to discern between good and evil. (Heb. 5:14) They look at the old Crystal Cathedral heretic, Robert H. Schuller, dressed in his ecclesiastical finery, and grinning with his big, lying mouth stretched wide; and what do the Elect see? Why, they see the Komodo Dragon, with his mouth dripping with toxic slobber! Is it not a compelling similitude? False prophets kill people with lying words out of their mouths. Take Schuller, for example. Schuller, with a folksy Iowa gift of gab, preached more than 50 years, spreading Arminian heresy. He preached on TV to 20 million people, worldwide, weekly. That's a whole lot of venomous slobber out of Schuller's mouth. In 2008, the New Yorker magazine said Schuller's ministry was the phenomenon that sparked the mega-church movement (think, Joel Osteen, et al) with all that deadly slobber. In 1970 Schuller founded the Robert H. Schuller Institute for Successful Church Leadership, which has more than 20,000 graduates from various Protestant, Catholic, many other denominations and individuals. Then those 20,000+ so-called graduates (or, disciples) who sat at Schuller's feet, much like the 400 false prophets who sat at Jezebel's table; to wit: "Now therefore send, and gather to me all Israel unto Mount Carmel, and the prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty, and the prophets of the groves four hundred, which eat at Jezebel's table." (1 Kgs. 18:19)  Sunday, March 20, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  Beloved. There is no question but that there is a close association between the prominence of the Dragon in the Book of Revelation and the recent amazing history of the Komodo Dragon. And there is no question but that the amazing modern history of Komodo lifted that fearsome monster from relative obscurity in Indonesia to world prominence as the pampered resident of the prestigious National Zoo in Washington, D.C. Take a look at what God says about the latter day interconnection between human government and the Great Red Dragon; to wit: "And there appeared another wonder in heaven; and behold A GREAT RED DRAGON, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his head. (Crowned Heads and horns bespeak human governmental powers, and hence the interpretation of this Great Red Dragon should be made in that light.) In the last days, human government will be cruel and tyrannical and at bloody war with the church and people of God ­ all represented typically by the Dragon [Komodo?]). And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth; and the Dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered, for to devour her child as soon as it was born. And she brought forth a man child, who was to rule all nations with a rod of iron; and her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne. And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she hath a place prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore days (i.e., 1,260 days = 3½ years). And there was war in heaven; Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the Dragon fought and his angels, And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon was cast out, that old (i.e., ancient) serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world; he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him." (Rev. 12:1-9)  (To me, Beloved, it is highly significant that soon after we at WBC began a full-court press ­ so to speak ­ to expose the fag/sodomite takeover of the United States and the World, in 1991, a process was put in motion to make Washington D.C., World Capitol of the Breeders of the Creepers (dragons); which precipitated the all-out Draconian war between the Dragon and the people of God, such as is described in Revelation, chapter 12.)  "And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ; for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night. And they overcame him (the Dragon) by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the death. Therefore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them. Woe to the inhabiters of the earth and of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time. And when the Dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the woman which brought forth the man child. And to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent. And the serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood after the woman. And the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood which the Dragon cast out of his mouth. And the Dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ." (Rev. 12:10-17)  I love you. Amen.  
