Sunday, June 20, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Take good heed therefore unto yourselves, that ye love the Lord your God. Else if ye do in any wise go back, and cleave unto the remnant of these nations, even these that remain among you, and shall make marriages with them, and go in unto them, and they to you; KNOW FOR A CERTAINTY that the Lord your God will no more drive out any of these nations from before you; but they shall be snares and traps unto you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until ye perish from off this good land which the Lord your God hath given you. And, behold, this day I am going the way of all the earth; and ye know in all your hearts and in all your souls, that not one thing hath failed of all the good things which the Lord your God spake concerning you; all are come to pass unto you, and not one thing hath failed thereof. Therefore it shall come to pass, that as all good things are come upon you, which the Lord your God promised you; so shall the Lord bring upon you all evil things, until he have destroyed you from off this good land which the Lord your God hath given you. When ye have transgressed the covenant of the Lord your God, which he commanded you, and have gone and served other Gods, and bowed yourselves to them; then shall the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and ye shall perish quickly from off the good land which he hath given unto you." Josh. 23:11-16.  Beloved, the Bible's story of the glorious historical Conquest of Canaan is saturated with sacred, eternal truths vital to our spiritual welfare and storehouse of heavenly knowledge. E.g., "And Joshua said, Hereby ye shall know that the living God is among you, and that he will without fail drive out from before you the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Hivites, and the Perizzites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Jebusites" ­ seven nations, in the aggregate ­ "greater and mightier than Israel." Josh. 3:10. JFB (Jamieson, Fausset & Brown) comments that ten nations were formerly mentioned: "But in the lapse of near 500 years, it cannot be surprising that some of them had been extinguished in the many intestine feuds that prevailed amongst those warlike tribes; and it is more than probable that some, stationed on the east of Jordan, had fallen under the victorious arms of the Israelites." "Thou shalt UTTERLY destroy them." Deut. 7:2. Or, rather, Thou shalt EXTERMINATE them. Or, Thou shalt devote them to UTTER destruction, as being accursed. The Septuagint has it, Thou shalt make them UTTERLY disappear.  Beloved. Here, the usually trustworthy and reliably conservative JFB (Jamieson, Fausset & Brown) Bible Commentary pursues a strange line of argument; to wit: "This relentless doom of extermination which God denounced against those tribes of Canaan, cannot be reconciled with the attributes of the Divine character, except on the assumption that their GROSS IDOLATRY and enormous wickedness left no reasonable hope of their repentance and amendment." Still, it seems disrespectful ­ if not sacrilegious ­ to refer to God's final judgment upon the vile, filthy, and totally depraved Canaanites as "this RELENTLESS DOOM OF EXTERMINATION." And so, at first blush, JFB seems to be secondguessing God in God's ordering the invading Israelites not only to conquer Canaan, but to mercilessly kill every man, woman, child and suckling in the process. Famous Arminian preacher Harry Emerson Fosdick called the God of the Old Testament a "Dirty Bully."  Robert Jamieson: "If they were to be swept away like the antediluvians, or the people of Sodom and Gomorrah, as incorrigible sinners who had filled up the measure of their iniquities," ­ (America, et al.?) ­ "it mattered not in what way the judgment was inflicted; and God, as the Sovereign Disposer, had a right to employ any instruments that pleased him for executing his judgments. Some think that they were to be EXTERMINATED as unprincipled usurpers which God had assigned to others, but which had been occupied ages before by wandering shepherds of the Hebrew race, till, on the migration of Jacob's family to Egypt, through the pressure of famine, the Canaanites overspread the  Sunday, June 20, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 2  whole land, though they had no legitimate claim to it, and endeavored to retain possession of it by force.  In this view their expulsion is considered by many to be just and proper."  The fatal difficulty with this Johnny-come-lately argument is that not even Moses or Joshua or any other legitimate Israelitish leaders ever promoted it. "These leaders never sought to justify the invasion of Canaan by Israel upon that ground. They uniformly and consistently represented it as the free gift from God to Abraham and his seed, and the right to occupy which had been forfeited by a race whose unnatural sins and monstrous crimes had put them out of the pale of humanity." So spake Dr. Robert Jamieson of the filthy Canaanite nations.  Now hear how the Holy Ghost describes these filthy Canaanite brutes, their vile secret sodomite sins, and their final doom; to wit: First there is a general preamble to a sick, sick scene of moral decadence and depravity institutionalized for some 450 years in idolatrous Egypt and for more than 1,000 years in the seven nations of the Canaanites now inhabited by the Jews; to wit (preamble): "And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, I am the Lord your God. After the DOINGS (i.e., after the incestuous, sodomitical DOINGS) of the land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, SHALL YE NOT DO; and after the DOINGS of the land of Canaan, whither I bring you, SHALL YE NOT DO; neither shall ye walk in their ordinances. Ye shall do my judgments, and keep mine ordinances, to walk therein: I am the Lord your God. Ye shall therefore keep my statutes, and my judgments: which if a man do, he shall live in them: I am the Lord. (Lev. 18:1-5)  There follows a listing of some 20 specific acts of forbidden INCEST, all of which ­ and many more ­ were regularly and commonly practiced in Most of the ancient world, especially in Egypt, Babylon, Media, Persia, Rome, Greece, Ethiopia, India, Mexico, Central and South American empires. "None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him, to uncover their nakedness; I am the Lord. The nakedness of thy father, or the nakedness of thy mother, shalt thou not uncover; she is thy mother; thou shalt not uncover her nakedness. The nakedness of thy father's wife shalt thou not uncover; it is thy father's nakedness. The nakedness of thy sister, the daughter of thy father, or daughter of thy mother, whether she be born at home, or born abroad, even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover." (Lev. 18:6-9)  Moreover, sinful and criminal incest includes sex with thy son's daughter, thy daughter's daughter, thy father's wife's daughter, thy sister, thy father's sister, thy mother's sister, thy father's brother, thine aunt, thy daughter in law, thy son's wife, thy brother's wife, a woman and her daughter, her son's daughter or her daughter's daughter, neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister to vex her, or to vex the other woman, in her life time.  Here are at least 20 specific instances of INCEST, alone, set forth in the 18th Chapter of Leviticus; to which are added certain other filthy sex practices of the Egyptians which the Israelites were liable to have soaked up during their 450-years of bondage in Egypt; and which the Israelites were certain to be exposed to and tempted by their forthcoming Conquest of Canaan, if the Israelites did not utterly destroy the filthy Canaanites as ordered by the Lord. Hence the urgency of the need to "UTTERLY DESTROY" the Canaanites, "WITHOUT MERCY;" to wit: "When the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land, whither thou goest to possess it, and hast cast out many nations before thee, ... seven nations greater and mightier than thou; And when the Lord thy God shall deliver them before thee; thou shalt smite them, and UTTERLY DESTROY THEM; thou shalt make no covenant with them, NOR SHOW MERCY UNTO THEM. ...But thus shall ye deal with them; ye shall destroy their altars, and break down their images, and cut down their groves, and  Sunday, June 20, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 3  burn their graven images with fire. FOR THOU ART AN HOLY PEOPLE unto the Lord  thy God; the Lord thy God hath chosen thee to be a special people unto himself,  above all people that are upon the face of the earth. ...But the Lord thy God shall  deliver them unto thee, and shall destroy them with a MIGHTY destruction, until they  be destroyed. And he shall deliver their kings into thine hand, and thou shalt destroy  their name from under heaven; there shall no man be able to stand before thee, until  thou have destroyed them." (Deut. 7:1,2,5,6,23,24)  In addition to the sins of false swearing and passing infants through the fires of dedication to the pagan god Molech (both of which take up only one verse of Lev. 18; to wit: vs. 21); only the filthy, perverted sex sins of ADULTERY, SODOMY & BESTIALITY remain for exposition; to wit: "Moreover thou shalt not lie carnally with thy neighbor's wife, to defile thyself with her. ... THOU SHALT NOT LIE WITH MANKIND AS WITH WOMAN; IT IS ABOMINATION (death penalty, Lev. 18:22; and 20:13) ...NEITHER SHALT THOU LIE WITH ANY BEAST TO DEFILE THYSELF THEREWITH: neither shall any woman stand before a beast to lie down thereto; it is CONFUSION (death penalty, Lev. 18:23; and 20:16).  (Note: The filthy sex sin and crime of INCEST received some 13 verses of attention from the Holy Ghost, whereas all other such sins and crimes received only about 6 verses of such attention in the aggregate. I am inclined to believe that there is massive over-lapping going on here. That is, a huge percentage of sodomites (i.e., fags and dykes) molest little children and other available victims on a regular basis. In any case, the Holy Ghost has spoken on the matter, leaving us with no fear of successful human or demonic contradiction. And here, Beloved, is what the Holy Ghost has said; to wit: "Defile not ye yourselves in ANY of these things (i.e., these things just enumerated in Lev. 18); for in all these the nations are defiled which I cast out before you (i.e., seven nations greater and mightier than Israel)." Lev. 18:24) Words cannot be plainer. Whole nations have been wiped out ­ annihilated ­ never to be heard from again, to wit: "Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire." (Jude 7)  I say, WHOLE NATIONS WIPED OUT, like the United States of America, going the way of ancient Sodom. Beloved. If the all-wise, omniscient Creator ­ and tapping His Omnipotence, to boot, looking down the long corridor of time ­ decrees that the horrific doom of Sodom and Gomorrah (in 1898 B.C.) was expressly for the purpose of making them an example some 4,000 years or so, later, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire ­ I say, who would be a likelier candidate as a nation promoting the Sodomite agenda. Look about you, Beloved, and answer this question, candidly; to wit; Of all the nations on earth during these last of the last days, what nation comes closest to following the example of ancient Sodom, than the United States of America, as that example is described by the dear Lord Jesus at Lk. 17:28-30; to wit: "Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. EVEN THUS SHALL IT BE IN THE DAY WHEN THE SON OF MAN IS REVEALED." (Lk. 17:28-30)  Can any one deny that this word picture ­ painted by the Holy Ghost ­ portrays Sodom and Gomorrah as vibrant centers of enormous wealth and prosperity at the time when the wrath of God destroyed them with total annihilation? First, they abounded in agricultural successes and excesses, so that they could eat like kings, with a minimum of labor, giving the citizens plenty of free time to pursue their perverted, murderous, sodomitical lusts; all as demonstrated by the following four passages of Scripture; to wit:  Sunday, June 20, 2010  Sermon Outline...page 4  [1] Ezek. 16:49 - "Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, FULNESS OF BREAD, AND ABUNDANCE OF IDLENESS;" [2] Gen. 13:10,11 - "And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it was well watered everywhere, before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, even as the garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt, as thou comest unto Zoar. Then Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan; and Lot journeyed east: and they separated themselves the one from the other. Abraham dwelled in the land of Canaan, and Lot dwelled in the cities of the plain, and pitched his tent toward Sodom;" [3] Gen. 19:4-10 - "But before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of Sodom, compassed the house round, both old and young, all the people from every quarter; And they called unto Lot, and said unto him, Where are the men which came in to thee this night? Bring them out unto us, that we might know them." (I.e., the men of Sodom threatened to gang-rape two angels, by force and violence, anally. Note: Fags and fag-enablers are violent.) "And Lot went out at the door unto them, and shut the door after him, And said, I pray you, brethren, do not so wickedly."  There followed outrageous and pitiful pleading and bargaining by Lot to save the angels, and finally, it was only by the Lord striking the sodomites blind that Lot, his family, and the angels escaped; to wit: "And they smote the men that were at the door of the house with blindness, both small and great; so that they wearied themselves to find the door;" and, [4] Lk. 17:28-30 - "Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed."  From these four passages of Scripture, written by the Holy Ghost, we may discern and acquire accurate notions of the unrighteous and godless people and their worldwide apostasy and moral filthiness throughout the population of the earth; to wit: In the very teeth of God, mankind will fairly exude a false and unwarranted patriotic PRIDE (call it Sodom's pride of race, whether born in the USA or the Amazon rain forest); mankind has almost reached ancient Sodom's "Fullness-of-Bread and Abundance of Idleness" standard of the sluggard (helped along by mechanized food productivity and global distribution); as it was in Sodom in 1898 B.C., so shall it be at the Second Coming of Jesus Christ (as prognosticated by the Savior Himself c. 30 A.D.); to wit: "Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot, they did eat, they drank (fulness of bread and abundance of idleness, i.e., plenty of free time for engaging in perverted sex); they bought, they sold (worldwide merchandising prosperity just prior to total worldwide devastation)," "How much she hath glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her...for no man buyeth their merchandise any more," per Rev. 18; they planted, they builded (trading in Futures and the New York Stock Exchange ­ and all such, worldwide ­ is brisk; and building starts are at an all-time high, financed by worthless "Funny Money".) "Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed." Lk. 17:28-30.  Beloved. Pray tell. How could language be plainer? The Holy Ghost has posted unmistakable daily Signs of the Times, and has given His people anointed eyes to see and rightly divide the Word of Truth. We are told that to date some eleven (11) great and mighty nations have been vomited out of the very land they existed upon ­ because fags and fag-enablers had usurped control of those nations by a Satanic de facto coup d'e-tat.  All nations ­ including the USA ­ have been warned of the same fate. WBC hereby warns you again. Shortly now, the Great God Almighty will spew you out of the land ­ into Hell.  I love you.  Amen.  
