Sunday, September 20, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Little children, it is the last time; and as ye have heard that ANTICHRIST shall  come, even now are there many ANTICHRISTS; whereby we know that it is the  last time...Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? He is  ANTICHRIST, that denieth the Father and the Son." 1 Jn. 2:18,22. "Beloved,  believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God; because  many false prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby know ye the Spirit of  God; every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God;  And every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not  of God; and this is that spirit of ANTICHRIST, whereof ye have heard that it  should come; and even now already is it in the world. Ye are of God, little  children, and have overcome them; because greater is he that is in you, than he  that is in the world. They are of the world; therefore speak they of the world, and  the world heareth them. We are of God; he that knoweth God heareth us; he that  is not of God heareth not us. Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of  error." 1 Jn. 4:1-6.  There you have it, Beloved. We are duty-bound to try the spirits, and we are given infallible guidelines to aid us in the task. We are also duty-bound to identify and war against Antichrist; and the same infallible guidelines will aid us in this task also. We are ordered to diligently search the Scriptures, rightly divide the Scriptures, and apply appropriate Scriptures to the circumstances, on the ground, as they say ­ day by day while it is called, Today ­ thereby discerning "the signs of the times." (2 Tim. 2:15 and Matt. 16:3). The apostle has assured us that evil men and seducers are going to wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. And John the Revelator says plainly that he was writing First John "concerning them that seduce you," not them that "SEEK to seduce you." (2 Tim. 3:13, and 1 John 2:26). At any rate, Beloved, we live in perilous times, wherein we are commanded to look for the rise of Antichrist aka the Beast of Rev. 13 rising out of the sea of agitated humanity, aka, That Wicked One, "whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders." 2 Thes. 2:9.  Think, OBAMA; aka, the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition, the ANTICHRIST; in the embryonic stage (i.e., an organism in its early stages of development). In the last days, the last, and prototype, ANTICHRIST (1 Jn. 2:18), the summation of all earlier antichrists, exceeding them all ­ in the aggregate ­ intensity of evil. Each of the millions of preliminary ANTICHRISTS is a type, or prototype, or adumbration of the FINAL ANTICHRIST ­ i.e., the Beast of Rev. 13. Again, Think, Obama. Obama opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, showing himself that he is God. He did that when he spoke evil of WBC, and promised laws criminalizing "hate speech," by which he means "Bible speech."  In effect, he said that if you preach against fags and dykes, and baby-killers, he and his demonpossessed cohorts in Congress, will pass laws to negate the Constitutional defense under the First Amendment and put you in jail. Obama, ANTICHRIST, call him NIMROD Reincarnated. The Concentrated Embodiment of all sin and lawless iniquity. We have picketed Obama many times already during the first year of his presidency, to warn America and the World, and to thereby leave all mankind without excuse on the Great and Dreadful Judgment Day, ­ our said picketings have been from New York, to Chicago, to Kansas City, to Washington, D.C., to California, etc. For us to do any less ­ in light of the urgency with which the Holy Ghost has written His mighty warnings concerning the typical ANTICHRISTS and the FINAL ANTICHRIST ­ would be nothing less than a blasphemous insult to the Triune God (!)  The guidelines are simply too plain to ignore or mistake; e.g., "Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? HE IS ANTICHRIST, THAT DENIETH THE FATHER AND THE SON." 1 Jn. 2:22. What does it mean to deny that Jesus is the Christ? What does it mean to deny  Sunday, September 20, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  the Father and the Son? He that denies either or both of these AS THEY ARE REVEALED IN  SCRIPTURE ­ or any part thereof (!) ­ is ANTICHRIST. In short, he that denies what are  commonly and/or conveniently called The Five Points of Calvinism, or the doctrines of grace, ­ in  the least particular, in any part or portion thereof ­ is ANTICHRIST. Take the First Point; to wit:  Total Depravity. Man in his natural state since the Fall of Adam in the Garden of Eden is totally  dead in trespass and sin and can do absolutely nothing to save ­ or do anything whatsoever to  assist with saving ­ himself; to wit:  "And you hath he quickened, who were DEAD in trespasses and sins...But God,  who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, Even when we  were DEAD in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ, (by grace ye are  saved;) And hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly  places in Christ Jesus; That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding  riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. For BY GRACE  ARE YE SAVED through FAITH; and THAT NOT OF YOURSELVES; it is the gift of  God; Not of works, lest any man should boast." (Eph. 2:1,4-9)  (Note that the subject, or object, immediately antecedent to the word, "THAT," is "FAITH." Eph. 2:8.) The unregenerate sinner is so absolutely and completely dead, that he cannot even provide the faith whereby to be saved. The Arminian heretic says that the unregenerate sinner must exercise that common faith possessed by all mankind, and God will do all the rest to effectuate the sinner's salvation. Let me provide you with five homely anecdotes (similitudes [?] Hos. 12:10, "I have used similitudes.") to illustrate the point; to wit:  Anecdote #1) Billy Graham says to his huge mixed-multitude audiences filling football stadiums all across the land, for many years, that good ol' God has done almost everything for their salvation, and that all they have to do is exercise a little bit of their ordinary and common faith that everybody is born with and exercises every day in ordinary matters; and just turn that faith toward the Lord Jesus Christ and believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and they will be saved. Graham goes on to further illustrate his point; to wit: You came in here and sat down. You didn't examine the chair, holding it upside down, checking to be sure it was safe to sit down on. You know why? Because you had faith. Faith in those who made the chair, faith in those who bought the chair, faith in those who provided the chair for you to sit on tonight. You drove here tonight, down streets and highways, that you had faith would be safe for you to travel on. You came to a hill, and you could not see for yourself that the highway continued safely for you to travel on as you crested the hill. You did not pull over and stop, so that you could walk up to the top of the hill just to check and be sure the highway kept going. No. You had faith in a large number of people who poured that concrete highway and who keep that highway in a state of good repair and safety. Now, says Graham, you just take that ordinary faith that you have in common with all mankind, and turn that faith on the Lord Jesus Christ, and you will be saved. God has done everything else for your salvation. You must provide the faith. You have the power to believe, thereby to take the first step; and when you take the first step, God will do all the rest. Man is not totally depraved. He has the power of faith, to simply believe. Hence, you see that Billy Graham and the millions of his false prophet wannabees are ANTICHRISTS "gone out into the world, denying that Jesus" (who preaches the doctrine of the Total Depravity of all mankind, and it is a profane blasphemy and an in-your-face insult to the Godhead to contend otherwise) "is the Christ." The Jesus of these false prophets is a Kissy-Pooh Jesus, a Sloppy-Agape Jesus, a Pretty Boy Jesus, ­ all out of their own fertile, satanic imaginations.  Anecdote #2) There is a lying Roman Catholic legend about St. Dennis, the Martyr. The story goes that when his head was cut off, Dennis picked up his head and walked for a thousand (1,000) miles carrying his head in his hands. Mr. Spurgeon said that the thousand miles was nothing; that  Sunday, September 20, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  he would give the lying Pope who fabricated the yarn ­ that he would give him the thousand  miles, ­ if only St. Dennis would pick up his severed head and walk ONE FOOT holding his head  in his hands. (!) Beloved. It might not be too late for us to do Spurgeon one better; to wit: If the  lying Roman Catholic Church hierarchy can produce one person who ever picked up his severed  head and took ONE STEP holding his head in his hand, we might be tempted to reconsider the  satanic nature of this world's greatest pedophile machine masquerading as a truly celibate Roman  Catholic priesthood. Beloved. The FIRST STEP IS THE ONLY ONE THAT COUNTS. (!) Don't  you see, if the soul that is dead in trespasses and sins can rise from the dead and set out walking ­  i.e., TAKE THE FIRST STEP, the second step will be a piece of cake; and next and from then on  will come steps leading to the Boston Marathon. Who needs Almighty God to be a Savior?  Anecdote #3) As an 18-year-old ministerial student, I traveled to Plainview, Texas, to see about matriculating at Wayland Baptist College; and took a job at a huge wholesale grocery warehousing and distribution center, that involved lifting 160-pound sacks of wheat and other very heavy boxes of food cans and other items ­ all day long. At breaktimes, we laboring men sat around and talked. It so happened that one of my fellow-laborers was a member of a little Primitive Baptist church which the Lord had located in the Panhandle of Texas. (And I believe for my benefit.) Upon learning that I was a ministerial student in Texas to study at a Missionary Baptist school that was Arminian to the core, as all Southern Baptists are, he bided his time to put a friendly question to me.  I tell you, Beloved ­ looking back ­ the short time I spent in that little Texas town was very momentous for me. For one thing, the Korean War having broken out, I registered for the draft in Plainview, and told them that I would not seek any kind of deferment ­ ministerial student or otherwise. For another thing, there I met a humble, friendly, middle-age man whose education qualified him to do nothing but hard, manual work to feed his family; but who was used of God to plant a simple question in my mind that was, to me, a sound theological education second to none. He pointed to Ephesians 2:8, "For by grace are ye saved through faith, AND THAT not of yourselves, it is the gift of God;" and said, "Doesn't the `THAT' in the verse refer to the `FAITH?' Of course it does ­ leading to the inescapable conclusion; to wit: Saving Faith is the supernatural gift of God. It is not Graham's ordinary, everyday, faith that all men have by nature.  Listen: "ALL MEN HAVE NOT FAITH." 2 Thes. 3:2.; to wit: "And that we may be delivered from unreasonable (i.e., absurd) and wicked men; FOR ALL MEN (I.E., THE NON-ELECT) HAVE NOT (SAVING, SUPERNATURAL) FAITH." 2 Thes. 3:2. Again, "I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by THE FAITH OF THE SON OF GOD, who loved me, and gave himself for me." Gal. 2:20. And again, "And be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through THE FAITH OF CHRIST, the righteousness which is of God by faith." Phil. 3:9. The Arminian mess has filled the world with the false image of a Pretty-Boy Jesus, upon whom it is an easy and pleasurable thing to believe, with that faith which grows without cultivation in the filthy soil of the depraved human heart; to wit: "He hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is NO BEAUTY THAT WE SHOULD DESIRE HIM." Isa. 53:2. The Jesus of the Bible is no Kissy-pooh Pretty-Boy. "He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief; and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not." (Isa. 53:3)  Anecdote #4) You remember the 4-night debate I had with the Cambellites at their new church at Huntoon & College, that ended the night Shirley was born, Oct. 31, 1957. At one point during the debate ­ (which was in reality a debate between Doyle Cannon's Arminian so-called Church of  Sunday, September 20, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  Christ theology and my Calvinistic Baptist theology) ­ I say, at one point during the debate, when  I was speaking on the doctrines of total depravity, election, limited atonement, irresistible grace,  etc., Doyle Cannon jumped to his feet, and fairly screamed/screeched, "Fred has now got God  doing the BELIEVING for you!!!" To which I said, "By George, he's got it. He's finally got it. That's exactly what I've got God doing (if Cannon wants to put it that way), because that's exactly what God IS doing." And our loving Father has given us (His Elect Sheep) His wonderful, eternal assurance, like this; to wit: "For unto you it is given (a gift, the gift of faith) in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake." Phil. 1:29. There we have, in  the plainest terms, that our Father has blessed His people with two glorious gifts; to wit: 1) the gift  of saving Faith; and 2) the precious gift of suffering for his sake. And, Beloved, it is given us as a maxim in Scripture that the carnal, unregenerate mind is at constant warfare with God, is not and cannot be subject to the law of God, and is at active enmity against God, such that he cannot please God in any way whatsoever; to wit:  "Because the carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God." (Rom. 8:7,8)  When addressing the impossibility of the unregenerate, reprobate, non-elect man warmly receiving  and savingly believing the truths of God, Gilbert Beebe boldly declared that it was not his job to try by his preaching to change anybody (!) He wrote: "Let it be understood that our work is only to state the doctrine, and to prove it to be in accordance with the testimony of the God of truth; we do not undertake to make the unregenerate understand or love the truth; for such a work we freely  confess ourself inadequate; nor do we consider it any disparagement for us to admit that God alone is able to bestow the knowledge and love of truth upon those who possess it not." Beloved,  we have fallen upon the last of the last days, as we discern the "Signs of the Times," in the light of  the Scriptures as God has given us the wisdom and understanding to study them. We have testimony to give against this generation, and we are most competent witnesses. We roundly denounce and condemn them as Noah did the antediluvian world, as Lot did Sodom, and as Jonah did Ninevah. They know nothing ­ absolutely nothing ­ about the Bible truths and true meanings. Nor do they love its precepts ­ but rather do they hate its precepts. Nor does it bother them in any  appropriate manner or degree that they are virtually certain ­ in a relatively short time ­ to enter  Hell with its endless torments.  Anecdote # 5) A preacher friend who is pastor of a church in Texas ­ but who once pastored a church in Kansas ­ has a fairly good working knowledge of the Five Points of Calvinism, and their counterpoints in the Arminian scheme of things. But it goes no further than his head, and he customarily checks his brains at the door ­ as they say. Once when we were traveling to a Bible conference in Little Rock, we quite naturally fell to talking about the doctrine of Total Depravity. He shortly threw in the towel ­ as they say. He said something like this; to wit: I know you are right. But YOU MAKE THAT DEAD MAN TOO DEAD. I want him to have life and energy enough at least to BELIEVE. Listen, "And you hath he quickened (i.e., raised from the dead) who were DEAD in trespasses and sins." Eph. 2:1.  Beloved, there are no degrees of DEAD. A man is either dead or he is alive. Clever cavils and cutesy little quips such as, You make that dead man too dead, when we are dealing with the weightiest of all matters, like life and death, Heaven and Hell, sin, and righteousness, and judgment to come. And, behind his cavalier attitude, my pastor friend hides the very real fear of losing his church members, his job, and his income, and retirement money ­ if he preaches Calvinistic truth too faithfully. I love you. Amen.  
