Sunday, December 13, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Mine heart within me is broken because of the prophets; all my  bones shake; I am like a drunken man, and like a man whom wine  hath overcome, because of the Lord, and because of the words of his  holiness. For the land is full of adulterers; for because of swearing  the land mourneth; the pleasant places of the wilderness are dried  up, and their COURSE IS EVIL, and their FORCE IS NOT RIGHT. For  both prophet and priest are profane; yea, in my house have I found  their wickedness, saith the Lord. Wherefore their way shall be unto  them as slippery ways in the darkness; they shall be driven on, and  fall therein; for I will bring evil upon them, even the year of their  visitation, saith the Lord." Jer. 23:9-12.  Jeremiah, chapter 23, is a most scathing denunciation of the false prophets, portraying them to be the primary cause and primarily to blame for the backsliding and doom of the Jewish state and people. And so it is today with the scandalous, fag-ridden crop of hateful rabbis ­ mostly cropheaded FEMALE RABBIS. And, they have mostly FAGS AND DYKES to lead them. No wonder the chapter (Jer. 23:1) opens, "Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture! saith the Lord." These filthy modern rabbis are the direct moral and spiritual descendants of the Christ-rejecting throng of Hell-bound smart-alecks who crucified the dear Lord Jesus; and to whom the Lord prescribed their irreversible doom; to wit: "Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell?" (Mat. 23:33)  A holy, rhetorical question. Bearing its own answer; to wit: "How can ye escape the damnation of hell? You can't. It is impossible for you to escape the damnation of hell. You have been predestinated from before the foundation of the world to live in sin and hypocrisy, and to die in your sins, and to go, thereupon, straight into everlasting hell fire and brimstone." I say, these modern rabbis ­ (and to whom may be added, these modern priests, preachers, and assorted religious leaders, and all of them, by whatever title called, and to whatsoever religious group they belong) ­ I say, they are all the moral and spiritual descendants of those filthy scribes, and Pharisees, and hypocrites to whom the dear Lord Jesus spoke those words in Mat. 23:33; and to whom, as an absolute matter of fact, the Lord Jesus is speaking those words today, by and through Westboro Baptist Church; and you had better listen, if you give a tinker's damn for your neverdying soul; to wit: "Woe unto you; scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! ... Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell?" (Mat. 23:33)  Can anybody imagine that the Lord Jesus Christ spoke those words of final and irreversible condemnation without feelings and passion? And what about Jeremiah? When he delivered the 40-verse message of Jeremiah 23:1-40? Look again at our text for today; to wit: "Mine heart within me is broken because of the (false) prophets; all my bones shake(!)" Jer. 23:9. I do not believe these words are hyperbole from Jeremiah. I believe they express the true feelings of the prophet at the time.  A situation confronted Jeremiah with regard to the hordes of false prophets of his day, such as confronts us today; to wit: Everywhere he looked he saw all religions to be consisting of nothing but irreversible corruption, illicit sex, perjury at every level, sacrilegious folly, a universal religious course of supreme evil, a religious force or power utilized only for unrelieved badness, and an underlying folly in all existing religious systems.  Sunday, December 13, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 2  As I say, Jeremiah blamed the false prophets for this sad state of affairs. Even so it is with us  today. Ergo, "Mine heart within me is broken because of the prophets; all my bones shake ...I  have seen also in the prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing; they commit adultery, and walk  in lies; they strengthen also the hands of evildoers (i.e., they enable fags, Rom. 1:32.), that none  doth return from his wickedness; they are ALL OF THEM unto me as Sodom, and the  inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah." Jer. 23:9,14.  About six months ago a big news story broke out all over the world, which originated in Ireland in the UK, or the United Kingdom. It was of major interest to the whole world, because it concerned accusations of child abuse by the clergy of the Roman Catholic Church, which is a great worldwide so-called Christian institution with some HALF A BILLION members; and the child abuse accusations also included claims of official cover-up of the sins and crimes up to the very highest levels of church and state. We did most certainly expect that now that an official report, arising from an official investigation, had been splashed in headlines all over the world, something decisive would be done to stop that abominable practice of sex abuse by the clergy of little children committed to church care; and that many, many priests and other officials would most surely be prosecuted and the guilty punished, and that the abominable practice be abolished forcefully and completely ­ permanently. The episode was further proof positive that the false prophets (include priests, preachers, rabbis, and all religious leaders by whatsoever title) are mostly to blame for the Dooms Day condition of affairs in the world today. "Mine heart within me is broken (aghast and appalled and shattered) because of the (false) prophets; all my bones shake." Jer. 23:9.  As I say, about six months ago the story broke worldwide of sex abuse of little children by Roman Catholic priests, and official cover up at highest levels. Well my dear. Would you believe? After six months, a new official report has hit the worldwide media, about sex abuse in Ireland of little children by Roman Catholic priests and cover-up by church officials in collusion with government officials ­ and the new report is virtually a carbon copy of the report six months ago (!) "My heart within me is broken because of the prophets, (whether priests, preachers, rabbis, etc.); all my bones shake." Jer. 23:9. The new child-abuse report is typical of conduct describing all false prophets, and therefore by it all false prophets are exposed and condemned by its language. E.g., the headline by the Nov. 26 newspaper story reads thusly; to wit: "Irish Church accused of abuse cover-up. A damning report into child abuse in the Dublin archdiocese has criticized the Catholic Church hierarchy for covering up the abuse."  Remember, the Roman Catholic Church is one huge, monstrous, worldwide body, boasting some 500 million members, with a powerful presence in every nation on earth. What has been lately exposed about satanic evil in Ireland ­ (i.e., sexual abuse of children by priests, and subsequent cover-up by church officials in collusion with police authorities), ­ applies with equal force, not only to Roman Catholicism, but also to all other false religious systems as vital and integral parts of the Great Whore of Rev. 17; to wit: "And there came one of the seven angels which had the seven vials, and talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither; I will show unto thee the judgment of the great whore that sitteth upon many waters; With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication. So he carried me away in the spirit into the wilderness and I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet colored beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns. And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet color, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of her  Sunday, December 13, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 3  fornication; And upon her forehead was a name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON  THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.  And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of  the martyrs of Jesus; and when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration."  (Rev. 17:1-6)  Thus you see that this Great Whore stands as a composite for all false religious systems. The Great Whore is One (!) When one member of the whorish Body speaks or acts, they are all bound to the guilt and eternal consequences of said speech or act. Ergo, when the Catholic priests in Ireland sexually molested the little boys in their charge, and then unlawfully conspired with police authorities to cover up their heinous sins and crimes ­ they ALL DID THE FILTHY DEED. Thus you see that Jeremiah did not exaggerate or resort to hyperbole when he cried out: "Mine heart within me is broken because of the prophets; all my bones shake." Jer. 23:9. More was written about the abuse of the kids by the priests and about the cover-up; to wit: "The report investigated how Church and state authorities handled allegations of child abuse against 46 priests. It found that the Church placed its own reputation above the protection of children in its care. It also said that STATE AUTHORITIES FACILITATED THE COVER-UP by allowing the Church to operate outside the law."  Beloved. This is a perfect example of just exactly what the Bible means when it says of the Great Whore (all false religious systems), of Rev. 17, "With whom the kings (human government) of the earth have committed fornication (close, intimate, ILLICIT RELATIONS)." Rev. 17:2(a). Beloved. The Irish police authorities have got no business facilitating the cover-up "by allowing the Church to operate outside the law," or in any other way conspiring with the Church. It is called ILLICIT, fornication, sex with other than one's lawful spouse. Beloved, could we not produce many, many examples of these false prophets and false religious systems working with the police authorities and public officials to oppose and hinder the blessed Gospel preaching campaigns of this humble church on the mean streets and other public areas of backslidden America?  Could any sin be more grievous in the sight of a Holy God who has exalted His Word above all His Name? Psa. 119. ("I will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name for thy lovingkindness and for thy truth; FOR THOU HAST MAGNIFIED THY WORD ABOVE ALL THY NAME.") Psa. 138:2(b). Could any sin be more dangerous by cutting off all Gospel preaching throughout the world, than the sin of the false prophets, priests, preachers, rabbis, mullahs, ayatollahs, unitarians, atheists, sui generis ­ getting laws passed and otherwise utilizing government to restrict Gospel preaching with which they disagree? They are Hell-bound hypocritical Jews and Americans who complain about serving in Saudi Arabia and other muslim countries where it is a violation of the criminal law even to possess a Bible, let alone to freely preach from a Bible on the streets or anywhere else in those countries. But is it not the same in this country, despite the First Amendment? Only in degree ­ not in kind.  Many states and the national government have passed laws severely restricting our so-called First Amendment rights. And many more restrictions, ad hoc, have been imposed upon our preaching by ignorant and demon-possessed cops on the street. We at Westboro Baptist Church probably have more on-the-ground experience with the First Amendment than any other church, maybe in history; and we are prepared to give evidence against the United States on Judgment Day, for colluding with false prophets in denying us the Constitutional rights of freedom of religious establishment and exercise, and freedom of speech as guaranteed by the 1st Amendment; to wit: "Congress shall make no law respecting the establishment of a religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof, or abridging the freedom of speech."  Sunday, December 13, 2009  Sermon Outline...page 4  Notwithstanding the plain language of the First Amendment, the false prophets have often  succeeded in restricting the "free exercise" and "abridging the freedom of speech" of the Gospel  message of Westboro Baptist Church which we believe to be no less than the final message from  God to a doomed world. The false prophets did that, and they continue to do that; and hence  Jeremiah's weeping Jeremiad; to wit: "Mine heart within me is broken because of the (false)  prophets; all my bones shake... because of the Lord, and because of the words of his holiness."  Jer. 23:9. Wherefore, as one might expect, God has stored up great wrath and terror against these  prophets, priests, rabbis, preachers, et al.; to wit:  "For both prophet and priest are profane; yea, IN MY HOUSE HAVE I FOUND THEIR WICKEDNESS, saith the Lord... Wherefore their way shall be unto them as slippery ways in the darkness; they shall be driven on and fall therein; for I will bring evil upon them, even the year of their visitation, saith the Lord." (Jer. 23:11,12)  The slippery path to walk on is Bible/Speak for imminent and irreversible danger and doom at the hands of an angry God. See, e.g., Dt. 32:35; to wit: "To me belongeth vengeance, and recompence; THEIR FOOT SHALL SLIDE IN DUE TIME; for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make haste." Remember that the thesis for this sermon is that the primary blame for mankind's total corruption, and resulting, impending and irreversible doom ­ is the worldwide flood of false prophets. Put another way, If the prophets had done their job faithfully, there would have been no general apostasy, no irreversible corruption, and no impending doom; to wit: "I have not sent these prophets, yet they ran; I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied. But if they had stood in my counsel, and had caused my people to hear my words, then they should have turned them from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings." (Jer. 23:21,22)  Beloved. Here is a truly amazing thing; a fearful indictment upon all those holding themselves out as spiritual leaders, whether pastors, preachers, priests, elders, deacons, rabbis, teachers, mullahs, ayatollahs, etc., sui generis; all pursuant to the solemn warning of the apostle James; to wit: "My brethren, BE NOT MANY MASTERS (i.e., TEACHERS, in the broadest of applications), knowing that we shall receive the greater condemnation." Jas. 3:1. Beloved. Jer. 23:22 is authority for the proposition that the sorry mess this country is in ­ and this world is in ­ is primarily the fault of the false prophets, and their condemnation will be proportionately greater.  In commenting on Jer. 23:22, Gill says that the wicked ministry of these false prophets had no least tendency to turn men to righteousness and godliness ­ nor did these false prophets ever intend that it should, "but, on the contrary, encouraged and hardened men in sin." This may help explain why these false prophets ­ to the last man-Jack of them ­ viscerally hate, vilify and demean WBC. "They hate him that rebuketh in the gate, and they abhor him that speaketh uprightly." (Amos 5:10)  Praise the Lord for this solid line of evidence that our calling and election is sure (2 Pet. 1:10), and that we thereby make full proof of our ministry, that it is wrought in and from God (2 Tim. 1:5) ­ rather than man. To the prophets: "Ye have perverted the words of the living God, of the Lord of Hosts our God." (Jer. 23:36)  I love you. Amen.  
