Sunday, July 1, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  "But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory thru our Lord Jesus  Christ. Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable,  always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that  your labor is not in vain in the Lord." (1st Cor. 15:57,58.)  "For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but  he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. And  let us not be weary in well doing; for in due season we shall reap, if we  faint not." (Gal. 6:8,9.)  "For the grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men  (mankind), teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we  should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world;  looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great  God and our Savior Jesus Christ; Who gave himself for us, that He  might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. These things speak, and exhort, and  rebuke with all authority. Let no man despise thee." (Tit. 2:11-15.)  [Note: These verses and many others of a similar vein ­ coupled with the umbrella passage of  plenary authority to the New Testament Church to preach to the world "even unto the end of the  world," Matt. 28:20; to wit: "Then the eleven disciples went away into Galilee, into a mountain  where Jesus had appointed them. And when they saw him, they worshipped him; but some  doubted. And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in heaven and  in earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of  the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have  commanded you; and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world. Amen." Matt.  28:16-20.]  It is a relatively simple matter for a sincere believer to recognize and identify a New Testament Church. First, only pure 5-Point Calvinism is tolerated or preached (i.e., salvation by grace alone, plus nothing, minus nothing. Arminianism is avoided like the Black Plague.) You get around one of these Arminian Hell-holes, masquerading as churches, and the first thing you notice is the leprous, fire and brimstone smell of the place. The next thing to watch for is the Satanic subject matter of every Arminian church that ever existed. The pastor is certain to work in the lie that God loves every individual of mankind several times before he's done. To be followed by the blasphemous heresy that Jesus died and shed His precious blood for every individual of mankind, and including billions of souls already in Hell at the time Jesus allegedly died for them.  If you hang around long enough, the lying Arminian preacher will surely tell you that you are a free moral agent, and that all you need to do to go to Heaven when you die is to exercise your free will and take good ole Jesus as your savior. It's all up to you. Jesus will not force himself on you, but He will shed great copious tears if you turn down His offer, and go to Hell, in spite of all He's done to keep you out.  Paul told young Titus to "Let no man despise thee," Titus 2:15. Indeed, we are in the doctrinal area where it is very dangerous to despise the true man of God because down through the years the prophet has a very unpopular message for the masses, and where God's servant is equally glorious in his joyous determination to courageously deliver God's unpopular WORDS ­ EVERY ONE OF THEM ­ AND RUB THEM ALL IN (!) FAIRLY DARING THE SINNER TO "HEAR THE WORD OF THE LORD!" To wit:  Sunday, July 1, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  "For if we sin wilfully after that we have received a knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, But a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. He that DESPISED Moses' law died without mercy under two or three witnesses; Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done despite (i.e., despised the Holy Spirit) unto the Spirit of grace? For we know him that hath said, Vengeance belongeth unto me, I will recompense, saith the Lord. And again, The Lord shall judge (avenge) his people. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God." (Heb. 10:26-31)  Notice how the word "DESPISED" comes into play when the subject is the intensity of the degree of God's hostility toward those who mistreat His people ­ and only because His people have been proclaiming His WORDS of WRATH UPON THEM FOR THEIR SINS. Beloved, Damascus, Syria, is today being bathed in blood ­ day after day ­ for their sins against the early church and against Paul. Damascus is the oldest city in the world, and the Lord God keeps careful records of all such things; to wit: "He suffered no man to do them wrong; yea, He reproved kings for their sakes; saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm." (Psa. 105:14,15) "The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is blessed for evermore, knoweth that I lie not. In Damascus the governor under Aretas the king kept the city of the Damascenes with a garrison, desirous to apprehend me (Paul); and through a window in a basket was I (Paul) let down by the wall, and escaped his hands." (2 Cor. 11:31-33)  Beloved, God is today punishing bloody Syria for spilling the innocent blood of His people, "for they have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou hast given them blood to drink; for they are worthy. And I heard another out of the altar say, Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments." (Rev. 16:6,7.) "And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held; And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? And white robes were given unto every one of them; and it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season, until their fellowservants also and their brethren, that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled." (Rev. 6:9-11) Meanwhile, financial and mercantile turmoil ­ world-wide ­ grips the nations. Pertaining to or engaged in commerce or trade that affects all mankind in a life and death struggle between the scandalously poor and the sinfully rich; to wit: Carlos Slim, Mexico, 74 billion; telecommunications; Bill Gates, United States, 56 billion, Microsoft; Warren Buffett, United States, 50 billion, Berkshire Hathaway; Bernard Amault, France, 41 billion; LBMH; Larry Ellison, United States, 39.5 billion, Oracle Corp.; Lakshmi Mittal, India, 31.1 billion, Steel; Amancio Ortega, Spain, 31 billion, retail; Eike Batista, Brazil, 30 billion, mining and oil; Nukesh Ambani, India, 27 billion, Petro Chemicals, oil and gas; Christy Walton and family, United States, 26.5 billion. The above constitutes the ten wealthiest people in the world today. The situation is about to explode.  Sunday, July 1, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  Chapter 18 of the Revelation of Jesus Christ suggests some things we should look for in international trade and commerce and finance ­ as the end of the world draws nigh; to wit: "And  after these things I saw another angel come down from heaven, having great power, and the  earth was lightened with his glory. And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the  great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit,  and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath  of her fornication, and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the  merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies. And I heard  another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her  sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God  hath remembered her iniquities. Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her  double according to her works; in the cup which she hath filled fill to her double. How much she  hath glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her; for she saith  in her heart, I sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. Therefore shall her  plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be utterly burned with  fire; for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her. And the kings of the earth, who have committed  fornication and lived deliciously with her (i.e., maintained outrageous, sinful, and illicit  relationships with this international whore; it is axiomatic; government has no business getting cozy  with, going to bed with, or carrying on trade and commerce with, religion), shall bewail her, and  lament for her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning, Standing afar off for the fear of  her torment, saying, Alas, alas, that great city Babylon, that mighty city! For in one hour is thy  judgment come; And the merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her; for no man  buyeth their merchandise any more; the merchandise of gold, and silver, and precious stones,  and of pearls, and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all thyine wood, and all  manner vessels of ivory, and all manner vessels of most precious wood, and of brass, and iron,  and marble, and cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and oil, and  fine flour, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and chariots, and slaves, and souls of  men. And the fruits that thy soul lusted after are departed from thee, and all things which were  dainty and goodly are departed from thee, and thou shalt find them no more at all. The  merchants of these things, which were made rich by her, shall stand afar off for the fear of her  torment, weeping and wailing, and saying, Alas, alas that great city, that was clothed in fine  linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls! For in one  hour so great riches is come to nought. And every shipmaster, and all the company in ships, and  sailors, and as many as trade by sea, stood afar off, and cried when they saw the smoke of her  burning, saying, What city is like unto this great city! And they cast dust on their heads, and  cried, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas that great city wherein were made rich all that had  ships in the sea by reason of her costliness! for in one hour is she made desolate. Rejoice over  her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God hath avenged you on her. And a  mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with  violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all. And the  voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in  thee; and no craftsman, of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in thee, and the  sound of a millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee; And the light of a candle shall shine  no more at all in thee; and the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more at  all in thee: for thy merchants were the great men of the earth; for by thy sorceries were all  nations deceived. And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that were  slain upon the earth." (Rev. 18:1-24.)  Beloved, what is the Lord telling His church today that is applicable to His Judgment Day events, or to His certain events leading up to the end of the world?  Sunday, July 1, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  Well, the first thing that stands out is the inordinate wealth that a relatively few people garner as the  end draws near...only to lose every dime over night, so to speak. Listen:  "For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, AND THE MERCHANTS OF THE EARTH ARE WAXED RICH THROUGH THE ABUNDANCE OF HER DELICACIES." (Rev. 18:3)  "Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burned with fire; for strong is the Lord God who judgeth (condemns) her." (Rev. 18:8)  "The merchants of these things, WHICH WERE MADE RICH by her, shall stand afar off for the fear of her torment, weeping and wailing." (Rev. 18:15)  "For in one hour so great riches is come to nought. And every shipmaster, and all the company in ships, and sailors, and as many as trade by sea, stood afar off, and cried..." (Rev. 18:17-18)  "And they cast dust upon their heads, and cried, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas that great city, WHEREIN WERE MADE RICH all that had ships in the sea by reason of her costliness! for in one hour is she made desolate." (Rev. 18:19)  Earlier in preparation for this sermon I listed the ten wealthiest people in the world, topping off that list with Mr. Carlos Slim of Mexico, worth 74 billion dollars. Later in May, what may be called the Facebook story, and what the Kansas City Star in fact called, YOUNG FACEBOOK BILLIONAIRES. They were listed as follows: Mark Zuckerberg, Dustin Moskovitz, Sean Parker, Eduardo Saverin, Sheryl Sandberg, Chris Hughes, and Peter Thiel. It has been reported that the wealth of these seventeen (17) people may surpass the entire wealth of several entire nations.  Just think of it, Beloved, in light of the fact that sudden riches is condemned by the Lord God Himself throughout the eighteenth chapter of the Revelation. Voltaire said that where you see a great wealth, there has been a great crime. James, under divine revelation, puts it another way; to wit: "Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments are motheaten. Your gold and silver is cankered; and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. Ye have heaped treasure together for the last days. Behold, the hire of the laborers who have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, crieth; and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter. Ye have condemned and killed the just; and he doth not resist you. Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord. Behold, the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth, and hath long patience for it, until he receive the early and latter rain. Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts; for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh. Grudge not one against another, brethren, lest ye be condemned; behold the judge standeth before the door. Take, my brethren, the prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience. Behold, we count them happy which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. But above all things, my brethren, swear not; neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other oath; but let your yea be yea; and your nay, nay; lest ye fall into condemnation." (Jas. 5:1-12)  I love you. Amen.  
