Sunday, July 17, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And when he had called the people unto him with his disciples also, he said unto them, Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel's, the same shall save it. For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? WHOSOEVER THEREFORE SHALL BE ASHAMED OF ME AND OF MY WORDS IN THIS ADULTEROUS AND SINFUL GENERATION; OF HIM ALSO SHALL THE SON OF MAN BE ASHAMED, WHEN HE COMETH IN THE GLORY OF HIS FATHER WITH THE HOLY ANGELS." Mk. 8:34-38.  In this Marks account of what has come to be called the Mount of Transfiguration, that holy experience is the context. It is likewise the context of Lukes account (Lk. 9:28-36); and, the dying apostle Peter was yet finding great comfort in recalling the Mount of Transfiguration blessing; to wit:  "Moreover I will endeavor that ye may be able after my decease to have these things always in remembrance. For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, BUT WERE EYEWITNESSES OF HIS MAJESTY. FOR HE RECEIVED FROM GOD THE FATHER HONOR AND GLORY, WHEN THERE CAME SUCH A VOICE TO HIM FROM THE EXCELLENT GLORY, THIS IS MY BELOVED SON, IN WHOM I AM WELL PLEASED. And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount." (2 Pet. 1:15-18)  This account of a most glorious revelation ­ giving lively insight into Heaven itself ­ punctuated the fearful message just delivered by the Son of God Himself about the certainty of the loss of the soul for all those who are ashamed of the Lord Jesus Christ in this life; to wit:  "Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy angels." (Mk. 8:38)  Joseph Grigg captured the sentiments of Gods Elect in his beautiful hymn, "Jesus, And Shall It Ever Be;" (1765) to wit: "Jesus, and shall it ever be, A mortal man, ashamed of Thee? Ashamed of Thee, whom angels praise, Whose glories shine through endless days? Ashamed of Jesus! That dear friend, On Whom my hopes of Heav'n depend! No; when I blush, be this my shame, That I no more revere His Name. Ashamed of Jesus! Yes, I may, When I've no sins to wash away; No tears to wipe, no good to crave, No fears to quell, no soul to save."  Further; when the pretty psalms and hymns and spiritual songs are all ended ­ (Eph. 5:19) ­ the hard, knotty, unyielding facts remain; to wit: If you, during this life and in this present, evil world, have been ashamed of the Lord Jesus Christ; then you ­ my mocking and scoffing and blaspheming friend ­ ARE GOING TO HELL. PERIOD. END OF STORY. Beloved. It is axiomatic. "He that hath the Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son hath not life." 1 Jn.5:12. Look at the context, use the common sense that you share with all mankind, and cut to the chase. E.g.:  "And he said to them all, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me." (Lk. 9:23)  Does anybody indulge himself the foolish speculation that he can refuse to deny himself, that he can refuse to take up his cross daily, and that he can refuse to follow the Lord Jesus Christ ­ AND  Sunday, July 17, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  STILL GO TO HEAVEN WHEN HE DIES? Chances are not good for it. Heavens Roadmap  doesnt run that way.  "Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and longsuffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance? But after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God; who will render to every man according to his deeds; to them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honor and immortality, eternal life; But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man that doeth evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile; But glory, honor, and peace, to every man that worketh good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile; For there is no respect of persons with God. ...In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my gospel." (Rom. 2:4-16) What a marvelous way for Heavens Roadmap to begin. But there must be a humble and willing heart, or all the Holy Roadmaps in the world will mislead the wicked pilgrim; to wit:  "But this people hath a revolting and a rebellious heart; they are revolted and gone. Neither say they in their heart, Let us now fear the Lord our God, that giveth rain, both the former and the latter, in his season; he reserveth unto us the appointed weeks of the harvest." (Jer. 5:23,24)  That is, the bounty of timely rains, thereby guaranteeing seed time and harvest, was a blessing from a sovereign God which symbolized many such good things ­ and which the nation had forfeited due to their iniquities; to wit: "Your iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins have withholden good things from you. (I am talking to you, America. These are the Road Signs from the Road Map that spell national disaster for you!) For among my people are found wicked men; they lay wait (i.e., for WBC messengers sent to them from God), as he that setteth snares; they set a trap, they catch men (i.e., Gods men). As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit; therefore they are become great, and waxen rich. They are waxen fat, they shine; yea they overpass the deeds of the wicked; they judge not the cause, THE CAUSE, of the fatherless (i.e., Gods Elect; to wit: ,,Do you indeed speak righteousness, O congregation [i.e., gatherings of bar and judicial associations?] Do ye judge uprightly, O ye sons of men?' [a rhetorical question, bringing the obvious answer in its teeth as it comes; to wit: ,,NO] Psa. 58:1) Yet they prosper; and the right of the needy do they not judge. Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord; shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land; The prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means; and my people love to have it so; and what will ye do in the end thereof?" Jer. 5:25-31.  The expression is powerful (a wonderful and horrible thing is committed in America; a "thing" so amazing that it can hardly be conceived of, and so shameful and filthy as not to be expressed WHEN conceived of ­ in other words, the "thing" is abominable. Surely, the shameless, unblushing sodomite is the only creature ­ man or beast ­ vile enough to fill such a bill; to wit: "Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush; therefore they shall fall among them that fall (i.e., they shall fall into Hell at death, with no hope or possibility of salvation). At the time that I visit them they shall be cast down, saith the Lord.") More Road Signs for pilgrims; to wit:  "Thus saith the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. But they said, WE WILL NOT WALK THEREIN. Also I set watchmen over you, saying, Hearken to the sound of the trumpet. But they said, WE WILL NOT HEARKEN." (Jer. 6:15-17)  Sunday, July 17, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  Beloved, is not this our experience? From the outset some 56 years ago, amidst a sea of troubles, a Sovereign God planted this humble little church, meeting in the City of Topeka, State of Kansas, United States of America, Continent of North America, Planet Earth, Universe of God. Now, in another (parallel) universe, citizenship, and family, we say:  "For our citizenship is in Heaven; from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ; Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto His glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto Himself ." (Phil. 3:20,21)  "For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom THE WHOLE FAMILY IN HEAVEN AND EARTH IS NAMED." (Eph. 3:14,15) All these extended addresses ­ from the humble meeting house in Topeka, to the infinite, nethermost reaches of the boundless and fathomless universe ­ are listed in this sermon for the solemn purpose of impressing all my auditors with the rock-solid fact that soon, and very soon all mankind, from Adam to the end, will be living and trafficking amongst those addresses to one degree or another; and Gods Elect will be rejoicing with joy unspeakable and full of glory (1 Pet. 1:8; 1 Pet. 4:13,14 ­ "But rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that, when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you; on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part, is glorified."), or weeping and wailing and gnashing the teeth of the damned (Mat. 22:11-13 ­ "And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man which had not on a wedding garment; And he saith unto him, Friend, how camest thou in hither not having a wedding garment? And he was speechless. Then said the king to his servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth;" Mat. 24:48-51 ­ "But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming; And shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken; The lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, And shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth"); and, to whom, or about whom, is the dear Lord Jesus speaking?  "Then he which had received the one talent came and said, Lord, I knew thee that thou art a hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown, and gathering where thou hast not strawed; and I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth; lo, there thou hast that is thine. His lord answered and said unto him, Thou wicked and slothful servant, thou knewest that I reap where I sewed not, and gather where I have not strawed; Thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to the exchangers, and then at my coming I should have received mine own with usury. Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which hath ten talents. ...And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." (Mat. 25:24-30)  Again I ask, who are these people, and what have they done, warranting such treatment? More importantly, what are we to learn from such cases, as, for instance, a king, who ordered a man to be immediately bound hand and foot and cast into outer darkness, and there reduced to weeping and gnashing of teeth ­ all because the king did not like what the man was wearing!? To wit:  "And when the king came in to see the guests, HE SAW THERE A MAN WHICH HAD NOT ON A WEDDING GARMENT." (Mat. 22:11)  Well, now, Beloved. Thats a different kettle of fish. Altogether different. Whenever a parable is recognizable as a possible exposition of the Marriage Supper of the Lamb, all other possible  Sunday, July 17, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  expositions are trumped; to wit: "And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the  voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings" ­ (i.e., the manner often employed  by the Holy Ghost when a matter of great moment is about to be introduced) ­ "saying, Alleluia;  for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him; FOR  THE MARRIAGE OF THE LAMB IS COME, AND HIS WIFE HATH MADE HERSELF READY." (Rev 19:6-7). Beloved, see how grand, and glorious and pure she is; a glorious church  without spot or wrinkle; to wit:  "That he might present it to Himself a glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish." (Eph 5:27)  And now, how important does the apparel and the dress code of the king in our parable ­ How important does it all become? To wit: "And to her (i.e., the Bride of the Lamb) was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white; for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints." Rev. 19:8. Beloved, in preparation for this sermon, I studied afresh the words going to make up the parable at Mat., Ch. 22, together with Rev. 19:7-9, all having to do with the incomparably glorious Marriage Supper Of The Lamb. Beloved, a sovereign God has placed this little church, for this hour, in the middle of America, to warn this evil nation ­ and the world ­ that if you adopt same-sex marriage, your doom will be finalized.  "Christ loved the church, and gave Himself for it." (Eph. 5:25)  "Blessed are they which are called unto the marriage supper of the Lamb. And he saith unto me, These are the true sayings of God." (Rev. 19:9) And ONLY these are the true sayings of God; to wit: "And it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished these sayings, he departed from Galilee, and came into the coasts of Judea beyond Jordan; And great multitudes followed him; and he healed them there. The Pharisees also came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause? And he answered and said unto them, Have ye not read, that he which made them" ­ (i.e., created them; their almighty Creator) ­ "at the beginning created them male and female (NOT, male and male, female and female, or any other foolish configuration). And said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cling to his wife; and THEY TWAIN SHALL BE ONE FLESH." (And, Beloved, ONLY THEY twain shall ever be ONE FLESH, PURSUANT TO THE CREATION OF GOD.) "Wherefore, they are no more twain, but one flesh." Mat. 19:1-6.  Nail it down. This doctrine is blessedly simple. All other flesh is "strange flesh." Jude 7; to wit: "Even as Sodom and Gomorrah and the cities about them in like manner giving themselves over to fornication and going after STRANGE FLESH, are set forth for an EXAMPLE, SUFFERING THE VENGEANCE OF ETERNAL FIRE." Jude 7. Is not this doctrine utterly, blessedly simple?  "And an highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called The way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it; but it shall be for those; the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein." (Isa. 35:8)  Westboro Baptist Church has a message for this nation and this world. It is utterly and blessedly simple; to wit: Led by the pitiful likes of Barack Obama, you have incurred the irreversible wrath of God by giving an official state stamp of approval to same-sex marriages. Only one other time in history were men given in marriage to men, women to women ­ for that sin against the Godhead, Noahs Flood destroyed that world. Likewise, and for the same reason, God has sworn that this world will be destroyed by fire ­ imminently!  I love you. Amen.  
