Sunday, April 1, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  Many mighty kings and monarchs contributed to the grandeur and magnificence of ancient Babylon. But still, King Nebuchadnezzar could in truth say, "Is not this great Babylon that I have built?" According to Herodotus, the city of Babylon was fourteen miles square, and surrounded by walls 311 feet high and 87 feet thick. Clesias makes the circumference of the city fifty-six miles. The walls were pierced by 100 gateways with gates of bronze.  For more than two thousand years, builders have taken bricks, for purposes of construction from the ruins of Babylon. Today no trace can be found of those great outer walls. The Euphrates ran through the city. Its banks were lined and walled with brick. In the wall on either side of the river were thirty-five gates. There was a bridge 1,080 yards long and thirty-five across the river. At either end of this bridge was a royal palace. The more magnificent of these palaces was surrounded by three walls. The middle wall was 300 feet high with towers 420 feet in height. The inner wall was yet higher. The two inner walls, Clesias tells us, were of colored brick. Upon them were portrayed hunting scenes ­ the chase of the leopard and the lion.  King Nebuchadnezzar, of course only added to the city that he found already built. Many kings had contributed to its strength and its beauty. Among the most magnificent and world-famous of Nebuchadnezzar's building operations, were the erection of great temples and shrines, a splendid new palace, great new fortifications, canals and irrigation dams, and dams for flooding the country as a protection against its enemies. The hanging gardens of Babylon was one of the Wonders of the Ancient World. It was too much ­ altogether too much. The autocratic power given to Nebuchadnezzar, together with his vast achievements at home and on the battle-fields abroad, were more than he could bear. He ruled as a despot, in overweening pride, and godless mercilessness; to wit: "Pride goeth before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall." (Prov. 16:18)  After his huge conquests, he persecuted the worshippers of Jehovah, exalted himself to the place of deity, and made emperor worship compulsory. After he had completed the enlarging and adorning of Babylon, he arrogantly asserted not only that he had built the city by his own independent power, but that he had done so for his own glory. In him (Nebuchadnezzar) were repeated the attributes of Nimrod, the first fallen man to be World-Emperor; and in him was seen the type of the last Gentile World-Dictator ­ i.e., the Antichrist. But even as he boasted, "Is not this great Babylon that I have built for the house of the kingdom by the might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty?" a voice from Heaven announced the execution upon him of God's decree of judgment: "O King Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken; The kingdom is departed from thee. And they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field; they shall make thee to eat grass as oxen, and seven times shall pass over thee, until thou know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever He will. The same hour was the thing fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar; and he was driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown like eagles' feathers, and his nails like birds' claws." (Dan. 4:30-33)  He who had thought himself to be a superman became as a beast. His inner character, and the character of his rule, were revealed and typified by his condition. He who in his mighty (so-called) achievements and his pride was a type of World-Empire, became in his insanity a type of the bestial character of God-denying World-Empire. Nebuchadnezzar's insanity lasted for seven years. It is a remarkable thing that no mention is made in secular history of Nebuchadnezzar's unique affliction. This is an amazing thing, and is further proof the Frenchman Voltaire's truism; to wit: "History is nothing but a fable agreed upon."  Sunday, April 1, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  Beloved, we should be so very thankful, that we have a more sure word of prophesy, and that holy men spake as they were moved by the Holy Spirit. Such that it is as though the Holy Spirit dictates every word and Holy Spirit-filled men take every word down and distribute copies to Holy Spiritfilled New Testament churches; to wit: "And this voice which came from Heaven we heard, when we were with Him in the holy mount. We have also a more sure word of prophesy; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts; knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man; but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." (2nd Pet. 1:18-21) As I said, King Nebuchadnezzar's insanity lasted for seven years, and, amazingly, nobody successfully took his job, though he had many enemies who worked, anonymously ­ identified as "they" ­ working to "drive thee from men." To wit: "THEY shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field, and THEY shall make thee to eat grass as oxen, and THEY shall wet thee with the dew of heaven." (Dan. 4:25)  But, with God all things are possible. If a sovereign God wants to raise up a bloody tyrant to preach His Word without an ounce of fear, timidity, or compromise, let us all say, Praise the Lord(!) First, the Lord knows how to bring such a preacher to his knees in utmost humility. Nothing like a sevenyear course of roughing it with the wild beasts in the wilderness, and living on grass ­ with everybody in the world laughing at you as you munch on a hearty meal of dew.  Think of it, Beloved. Did ever such a spectacle as this perform on the human stage of life? And, if we have it correct that the holy ones and the watchers are God's elect whom He calls upon to handle various projects; and that this seven-year course of study and preparation is just such a project to teach King Nebuchadnezzar how to preach the Five Points of Calvinism; It is a certainty that SOMEBODY taught Nebuchadnezzar some rock-solid Bible truth. The judgment, the punishment, upon Nebuchadnezzar accomplished its intended purpose. Consider these cold, hard facts; to wit: Nebuchadnezzar was brought to know God; and to know his own sin; and to cry unto God for pardon. The Septuagint version reads, "And after seven years I gave my soul to prayer, and besought concerning my sins in the presence of the Lord."  Dr. David M. Panton, a renowned English historian of ancient history fame, says: "So now, through Nebuchadnezzar's lips, is poured a magnificent hymn of praise to God (doxology), which summarizes for all time the soul of a righteous Empire. Whether a government is constitutional or proletarian (democratic) or despotic, is largely immaterial if only it is a flower opening Godward, a parliament or a palace, basking in the sunshine of Heaven. Nebuchadnezzar's rescript (a rescript is any official order or announcement by a ruler or government). This one by Nebuchadnezzar is one of the oldest, as it is one of the most wonderful, documents in the world; IT IS ISSUED TO ALL NATIONS BY THE ONE MAN WHO COULD SEE THAT IT REACHED EVERY RACE AND CLIME; it is as extraordinary a STATE PAPER as was ever issued; it is the record of the purging of the most absolute dictatorship the world has known; it is one of the noblest confessions ever made; it is as tender and touching in its humility as the Throne is splendid and exalted from which it issues; and is a description of God's sovereignty probably never excelled." And, a copy of Dr. Panton's most magnificent Babylonian State Paper, a copy of which was made available to all mankind ­ and which has continued to be so to the present time ­ appears below. It may also be cited to the Scriptures as follows; to wit: Dan. 4:1-3,34,35,37. To wit:  Sunday, April 1, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  "NEBUCHADNEZZAR THE KING, UNTO ALL THE PEOPLES, NATIONS, AND LANGUAGES THAT DWELL IN ALL THE EARTH; PEACE BE MULTIPLIED TO YOU. IT HATH SEEMED GOOD UNTO ME TO SHOW THE SIGNS AND WONDERS THAT THE MOST HIGH GOD HATH WROUGHT TOWARD ME. HOW GREAT ARE HIS SIGNS! AND HOW MIGHTY ARE HIS WONDERS! HIS KINGDOM IS AN EVERLASTING KINGDOM, AND HIS DOMINION IS FROM GENERATION TO GENERATION. AT THE END OF THE DAYS I NEBUCHADNEZZAR LIFTED UP MINE EYES UNTO HEAVEN, AND MINE UNDERSTANDING RETURNED TO ME, AND I BLESSED THE MOST HIGH, AND I PRAISED AND HONORED HIM THAT LIVETH FOR EVER; FOR HIS DOMINION IS AN EVERLASTING DOMINION, AND HIS KINGDOM FROM GENERATION TO GENERATION; AND ALL THE INHABITANTS OF THE EARTH ARE REPUTED AS NOTHING; AND HE DOETH ACCORDING TO HIS WILL IN THE ARMY OF HEAVEN, AND AMONG THE INHABITANTS OF THE EARTH; AND NONE CAN STAY HIS HAND, OR SAY UNTO HIM, WHAT DOEST THOU? NOW I NEBUCHADNEZZAR PRAISE AND EXTOL AND HONOR THE KING OF HEAVEN; FOR ALL HIS WORKS ARE TRUTH, AND HIS WAYS JUDGMENT; AND THOSE THAT WALK IN PRIDE HE IS ABLE TO ABASE."  (Dan. 4:1-3,34,35,37)  Nebuchadnezzar was expressly declared by God Himself to be the "servant of God" to wit: "Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts; Because ye have not heard my words, Behold, I will send and take all the families of the north, saith the Lord, and Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, MY SERVANT, and will bring them against this land, and against the inhabitants thereof, and against all these nations round about, and will utterly destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and an hissing, and perpetual desolations. And this whole land shall be a desolation, and an astonishment; and these nations shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years." (Jer. 25:8-11.) The glory and power of Nebuchadnezzar's Babylon passed away with his death. There were no more great Babylonian monarchs. God had raised up Nebuchadnezzar to execute His will in bringing chastening judgment upon Judah for her sins; and the vengeance of God upon the surrounding Gentile nations for their pride, their cruelty, and their hatred toward His people. Further evidence that the empire was weakening after the death of Nebuchadnezzar is seen in the disintegration of the alliance between Babylon and the Medes. Rebellions also broke out in various parts of the empire. God is at work with His people ­ The Elect of God. The seventy years appointed of God for the servitude of His people to Babylon (Jer. 25:11) were drawing to a close. God was about to punish Babylon according to His Word (Jer. 25:12).  Beloved, God is at work behind the scenes. Our Father owns and controls it all. During the entire period of the so-called Second Babylonian Empire, the witness to the true God had gone abroad, not only throughout Babylonia, but throughout the empire. The Jews were settled in colonies in various parts of Chaldea and Mesopotamia. The prophet Ezekiel prophesied by the river Chebar. Daniel held a prominent post in Babylon. Jeremiah's prophesies were sent from Jerusalem to Babylon. The divine protection of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego was proclaimed from one end of the empire to the other. No tongue must utter a word against their God. Furthermore, Nebuchadnezzar's humiliation, conversion, and proclamation must have been known to the end of the world ­ told and retold in every nation, kindred, tongue and tribe. Thinking men could not but weigh Jehovah's right to their trust and obedience. Doubtless, many believed on the Lord to the saving of their souls through this witness. After all, "the king was astonied, and rose up in haste, and spake, and said unto his counsellors, Did not we cast three men bound into the midst of the fire? They answered and said unto the king, True, O king. He answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God." (Dan. 3:24,25.) I love you. Amen.  
