Sunday, September 25, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Ye are the light of the world. (Quoth the Lord Jesus Christ, to Westboro Baptist Church.) A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house. (It is natural in the ordinary course of things that it should be so; and even more so with what follows; to wit:) Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven." Mat. 5:14-16.  What are the so-called "GOOD WORKS" that constitute letting "your light so shine before men that they may see your good works and glorify your Father which is in Heaven?" First off, settle it in your mind, God's GOOD WORKS do not include support for the Red Cross, the Salvation Army, United Way, Topeka Rescue Mission, or any of the multiplicity of religious and secular so- called charities that dot the landscape of life. John Wesley called all such charities nothing but dignified selfishness ­ it makes the donor "feel better." Second, settle it in your mind; God's GOOD WORKS implicate the publication of God's precious Word; to wit:  "Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord." (1 Cor. 15:58)  "They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him." (Psa. 126:5,6)  "And let us not be weary in well-doing; for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not." (Gal. 6:9)  Beloved. "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your GOOD WORKS, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven." Mat. 5:16. What does it mean? You dare not be mistaken about what it means! We at Westboro Baptist Church are happily spending our days and nights making beautiful, state-of-the-art signs, and publishing the message thereon throughout the world; e.g., to wit: God Hates Fags, Fags Doom Nations, etc. I say ­ without any fear of being mistaken ­ that the ministry of Westboro Baptist Church is a worldwide, shining light, whereby all mankind may see our GOOD WORKS, from the Supreme Court of the United States, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven. Yes, in hundreds of thousands of law libraries, law schools, universities, law offices, colleges, municipal libraries ­ these blessed words may be found and read and glorify our dear Father which is in Heaven; i.e., Snyder vs. Phelps, #09-751, which may be cited in the U.S. Supreme Court Reports as 562 U.S. ___(2011); to wit:  "Chief Justice Roberts delivered the opinion of the Court. A jury held members of the Westboro Baptist Church liable for millions of dollars in damages for picketing near a soldiers funeral service. The picket signs reflected the churchs view that the United States  is overly tolerant of sin and that God kills American soldiers as punishment. The question presented is whether the First Amendment shields the church members from tort liability for their speech in this case. Fred Phelps founded the Westboro Baptist Church in Topeka, Kansas, in 1955. The churchs congregation believes that God hates and punishes the United States for its tolerance of homosexuality, particularly in Americas military. The church frequently communicates its views by picketing, often at military funerals. In the more than 20 years that the members of Westboro Baptist have publicized their message, they have picketed nearly 600 funerals. Brief for Rutherford Institute as Amicus Curiae 7, n.  Sunday, September 25, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  14. For the past 20 years, the congregation of the Westboro Baptist Church has picketed  Military funerals to communicate its belief that God hates the United States for its tolerance of homosexuality, particularly in Americas military. The churchs picketing has also  condemned the Catholic Church for scandals involving its clergy. Fred Phelps, who  founded the church, and six Westboro Baptist parishioners (all relatives of Phelps) travelled  to Maryland to picket the funeral of Marine Lance Corporal Matthew Snyder, who was  killed in Iraq in the line of duty. The picketing took place on public land approximately  1000 feet from the church where the funeral was held, in accordance with guidance from local law enforcement officers. The picketers peacefully displayed their signs ­ stating, e.g., ,,Thank God for Dead Soldiers, ,,Fags Doom Nations, ,,America Is Doomed, ,,Priests Rape Boys, and, ,,Youre Going to Hell, ­ for about 30 minutes before the funeral began. Matthew Snyders father (Snyder), petitioner here, saw the tops of the picketers signs when  driving to the funeral, but did not learn what was written on the signs until watching a news broadcast later that night. Snyder filed a diversity action against Phelps, his daughters ­ who participated in the picketing ­ (collectively Westboro) alleging, as relevant here, state  tort claims of intentional infliction of emotional distress, intrusion of seclusion, and civil  conspiracy. A jury held Westboro liable for millions of dollars in compensatory and  punitive damages. Westboro challenged the verdict as grossly excessive and sought  judgment as a matter of law on the ground that the First Amendment fully protected its  speech. The District Court reduced the punitive damages award, but left the verdict otherwise intact. The Fourth Circuit reversed, concluding that Westboros statements were  entitled to First Amendment protection because those statements were on matters of public concern, were not provably false, and were expressed solely through hyperbolic rhetoric."  The SUPREME COURT HELD: "THE FIRST AMENDMENT SHIELDS WESTBORO FROM TORT LIABILITY FOR ITS PICKETING IN THIS CASE."  Beloved. Have we come full circle to the old Primitive Baptist Preacher John Leland? Responsible for the First Amendment even being in the Constitution!? John Leland was born in 1754 in Grafton, Mass., but spent most of his life in Virginia, dying at the age of 67 in 1821. This humble Baptist preacher ­ as I believe most faithful Baptist preachers and people have been ­ down through the ages was something of a Seer or Prophet. He clearly saw these days wherein this nation would apostatize most grievously, turn away from God, and proceed to destroy those few of us clinging to the faith once delivered to the saints. He saw that they would desperately need the First Amendment, and his friendship with Thomas Jefferson and James Madison could be used ­ in the providence of God ­ to effectuate help and protection for us in these last days of the last days, when no such friendships for the righteous would be available. "Little is known about the man considered responsible for the sacred principle embodied in the First Amendment to the Constitution; to wit: ,,Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof. At Orange, Virginia, there is a small park commemorating the work done by this early Primitive Baptist preacher, and a plaque there notes that in 1788 Elder Leland and James Madison met to discuss the adoption of the Constitution of the United States; ONLY WITH THE ADDITION OF A BILL OF RIGHTS WOULD LELAND AND HIS FOLLOWERS SUPPORT IT. Called, The Leland-Madison Memorial Park. See, ,,Of Primitive Faith And Order, A History of The  Sunday, September 25, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  Mississippi Primitive Baptist Church, 1780-1974, by Gordon A. Cotton, pp. 115-116, Keith  Press, Raymond, Mississippi, 1974."  When I found that little book among a then- lately-deceased Baptist preacher's books, which I purchased from his widow in Texas, I called the author, Bro. Gordon Cotton, who was a reporter for the local newspaper in Vicksburg, Miss., and who lives on the family farm outside Vicksburg, which his family has lived on and worked for three generations ­ all as Primitive Baptists. I talked with Bro. Cotton for several hours, picking his brains, as they say, about Baptist history.  He meant from the heart the little anecdote he put near the front of his little book; to wit: ",,What would you be if you were not a Primitive Baptist? a friend of mine who is a member of another denomination asked Brother S.T. Hawkins, an elderly member of Mt. Herman Primitive Baptist Church in Calhoun County, Mississippi. ,,Id be ashamed, Brother Hawkins unhesitatingly replied. ,,Such devotion to the truths taught by the Primitive Baptists causes me to share Brother Hawkins attitude and to want to record for posterity the inspiring past of the church in Mississippi," ­ wrote Brother Cotton. I called Brother Cotton a while back to see if we could buy some more of his little history books, thinking that I had lost my copy. With a twinge of sadness in his voice he told me that nobody seemed to be interested.  Beloved, let us rejoice in the Lord that WE are mightily interested. This is an amazing thing that God has done in raising up this little church, as lively stones, built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ AND KEPT BY POWER DIVINE. Think of it, Beloved. When Satan's forces ­ (aka the gates of Hell) ­ gathered themselves together to destroy WBC; little known to Satan and his malicious troops of evil, God almighty already had in place ­ as of 1788 ­ the nuclear, state-of-the-art, weapon of Satan's destruction; to wit: Call it The First Amendment. Think back, Beloved, and PRAISE THE LORD. A demon-possessed jury, pettifogging lawyers, and a greedy plaintiff, and a Pilgrim's Progress judge had just announced to the world that we must pay millions, and we had virtually nothing. They said then they would take the church and turn it into a Fag Bar or some equally insulting place. This is no longer a speculating thing. This is real. These people hate us, just as the Savior said they would; and just as they say they do ­ all day, every day, 24/7.  The judge himself, sua sponte (on his own motion) eagerly began collection procedures, taking steps to attach our property, and the media was quickly advised so that the whole world could rejoice at what seemed to them was the end of the line for Westboro Baptist Church ­ acting as though there was no such thing as orderly appellate procedures ­ let alone a Holy First Amendment or a prophetic utterance from Isaiah (Isa. 54:11-17) ­ both put in place centuries ago FOR JUST THIS HOUR; to wit: "O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundations with sapphires. And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones. (A mystical description & identification of Westboro Baptist Church, as seen by the Holy Ghost and the relevant Holy Prophets, looking down the long corridors of time). And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children. In righteousness shalt thou be established; thou shalt be far from oppression; for thou shalt not fear; and from terror; for it shall not come near thee. BEHOLD, THEY SHALL SURELY GATHER TOGETHER (i.e., Snyder, et al.), BUT NOT BY ME; WHOSOEVER SHALL GATHER TOGETHER AGAINST THEE SHALL FALL FOR  Sunday, September 25, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  THY SAKE. Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in the fire, and  that bringeth forth an instrument for his work; and I have created the waster to  destroy. NO WEAPON THAT IS FORMED AGAINST THEE SHALL PROSPER; AND  EVERY TONGUE THAT SHALL RISE AGAINST THEE IN JUDGMENT THOU SHALT  CONDEMN. THIS IS THE HERITAGE OF THE SERVANTS OF THE LORD, AND THEIR  RIGHTEOUSNESS IS OF ME, SAITH THE LORD." (Isa. 54:11-17)  Beloved, I have no doubt that this case (i.e., Snyder vs. Westboro Baptist Church) has set the bells of Heaven to ringing with joy unspeakable and full of glory, and Brother John Leland must be leading the chorus. It was a victory for the First Amendment, which has been chipped away by lower courts recently to an amazing degree. The judges need to be told of Elder John Leland and his part in its adoption. The judges threaten to destroy the First Amendment; and the judges need to be preached to; and who is more positioned for that job than WBC?  The human judiciary is an institution of divine origin, empowered by God for the express purpose of delivering God's servants from ­ and punishing ­ their oppressors (Rom. 13:1-4); human judges are called "gods" with a small "g" because of their relatively absolute power over the lives, property, reputations and happiness of their fellow creatures (Psa. 82:1,6); with the Fall of Adam came also a perversion of human judges and human justice, as with Samuel's sons who turned aside after lucre, took bribes, and perverted judgment (1 Sam. 8:1-3); with rare exceptions judges are unjust, with no fear of God and no regard for their fellow human beings (Lk. 18:1-8); when Human judges meet on earth, God Himself meets with them, judging their judicial conduct (Psa. 82:1); human judges ­ in a flagrant and blatant perversion of their original divine constitution ­ judge unjustly in respecting the persons of the wicked and condemning the persons of the righteous (Psa. 82:2-4); bereft of true knowledge or understanding, they walk on in darkness, whereby they turn the moral foundations of all mankind out of course (Psa. 82:5 ); human judges are under a special curse of God for their obstinacy and arrogance (Psa. 82:6-8); they neither speak righteousness nor judge uprightly in their solemn decrees, but on the contrary, work wickedness, whereby they trigger all the violence in the earth (Psa. 58:1-2); human judges are a special breed of evildoers, estranged from God from the womb, speaking lies by nature, and whose malice and obstinacy is likened unto venomous serpents infecting all mankind with the fatal poison of their perverse judgments (Psa. 58:3-5); "who turn judgments to wormwood (poison hemlock)" (Amos 5:7); human judges are the subject of the fervent prayers of God's humble servants, that God would deliver them from their devouring teeth and malignant arrows of the judges' bow (Psa. 58:7); and each time a judge is taken away in God's wrath and in vengeance, it is a refreshing time of great joy (e.g., Chief United States District Judge Earl O'Connor), that God has answered the prayers of His people, who then proclaim: "Verily there is a reward for the righteous; verily he is a God that judgeth in the earth." (Psa. 58:9-11)  Like the evil judge who presided over the trial and execution of the righteous Faithful in The Pilgrim's Progress, Judge O'Connor never missed an opportunity to treat the Lord's servants with great cruelty. The Judge's name in Pilgrim's Progress was Lord Hate-Good. In punishment for his outrageous mistreatment of the Lord's people, God sent an evil spirit upon Judge O'Connor on Sat., Nov. 28, 1998, under the malevolent influence of whom he murdered his wife with a government gun and then turned the gun on himself to ape the suicidal Saul, also demon-possessed. 1 Sam. 31:4. When the news of the double killing reached the humble, longsuffering WBC, there was a prayer meeting of rejoicing. Psa. 58:10. I love you. Amen.  
