Sunday, March 31, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 1  The Compendium of Bible Truth on Fags was first published by WBC in 1991:  Sodomites are wicked and sinners before the Lord exceedingly (Gen. 13:13), are violent and doom nations (Gen. 19:1-25 and Judges 19-21), are abominable to God (Lev. 18:22), are worthy of death for their vile sex practices (Lev. 20:13; Rom. 1:32), are called dogs as filthy, impudent and libidinous (e.g. "There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a sodomite of the sons of Israel. Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog, into the house of the Lord thy God for any vow; for even both of these are abomination unto the Lord thy God." [Deut. 23:17,18] see also "Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you." [Matt. 7:6.]; and "Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision." [Phil. 3:2.],) produce in society mass intoxication from their wine made from grapes of gall from the vine of Sodom and fields of Gomorrah, poisoning society's mores with the poison of dragons and the cruel venom of asps (Deut. 32:32, 33), show their sin and shame on their countenance (Isa. 3:9), are shameless and unable to blush (Jer. 6:15), workers of iniquity (Psa. 5:5), liars and murderers (Jn. 8:44), filthy and lawless (2 Pet. 2:7,8), natural brute beasts (2 Pet. 2:12), are likened unto dogs eating their own vomit, sows wallowing in their own feces (2 Pet. 2:22), have been finally given up by God to uncleanness to dishonor their own bodies, to vile affections, and to a reprobate mind such that they cannot think straight about anything (Rom. 1:23-28); and, unable to blush, be ashamed, or repent (Jer. 6:15), they have no hope of Heaven; "For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie." (Rev. 22:15.). The Roman Emperor who approved the Crucifixion of Jesus Christ, the Roman judge who ordered it, and the Roman soldier who thrust the spear in his side ­ all fags ­ the power of the dog. "Deliver my soul from the sword; my darling from the power of the dog." (Ps. 23:20.) "It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God." (Heb. 10:31.)  And for us today, sodomites will proliferate at the end of the world bringing final judgment on mankind; "Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed." (Lk. 17:28-30.) To that end, let us look at the "Homosexual Manifesto" Reprinted from the US Congressional Record. "Homosexual Activist Outlines Goals of Homosexual Movement" By Michael Swift, "Gay Revolutionary" (from the Gay Community News, Feb. 15-21, 1987, reprinted from The Congressional Record.) "We shall sodomize your sons, emblems of your feeble masculinity, of your shallow dreams and vulgar lies. We shall seduce them in your schools, in your dormitories, in your gymnasiums, in your locker rooms, in your sports arenas, in your seminaries, in your youth groups, in your movie theater bathrooms, in your army bunkhouses, in your truck stops, in your all male clubs, in your houses of Congress, wherever men are with men together. Your sons shall become our minions and do our bidding. They will be recast in our image. They will come to crave and adore us. Women, you cry for freedom. You say you are no longer satisfied with men; they make you unhappy. We, connoisseurs of the masculine face, the masculine physique, shall take your men from you then. We will amuse them; we will instruct them; we will embrace them when they weep. Women you say you wish to live with each other instead of with men. Then go and be with each other. We shall give your men pleasures they have never known because we are foremost men too, and only one man knows how to truly please another man; only one man can understand the depth and feeling, the mind and  Sunday, March 31, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 2  body of another man. All laws banning homosexual activity will be revoked. Instead,  legislation shall be passed which engenders love between men. All homosexuals must stand  together as brothers; we must be united artistically, philosophically, socially, politically and  financially. We will triumph only when we present a common face to the vicious heterosexual  enemy. If you dare to cry faggot, fairy, queer, at us, we will stab you in your cowardly hearts  and defile your dead, puny bodies. We shall write poems of the love between men; we shall  stage plays in which man openly caresses man; we shall make films about the love between  heroic men which will replace the cheap, superficial, sentimental, insipid, juvenile,  heterosexual infatuations presently dominating your cinema screens. We shall sculpt statues  of beautiful young men, of bold athletes which will be placed in your parks, your squares,  your plazas. The museums of the world will be filled only with paintings of graceful, naked  lads. Our writers and artists will make love between men fashionable and de rigueur, and we  will succeed because we are adept at setting styles. We will eliminate heterosexual liaisons  through usage of the devices of wit and ridicule, devices which we are skilled in employing.  We will unmask the powerful homosexuals who masquerade as heterosexuals. You will be  shocked and frightened when you find that your presidents and their sons, your industrialists,  your senators, your mayors, your generals, your athletes, your film stars, your television  personalities, your civic leaders, your priests are not the safe, familiar, bourgeois,  heterosexual figures you assumed them to be. We are everywhere; we have infiltrated your  ranks. Be careful when you speak of homosexuals because we are always among you; we  may be sitting across the desk from you; we may be sleeping in the same bed with you. There  will be no compromises. We are not middle-class weaklings. Highly intelligent, we are the  natural aristocrats of the human race, and steely-minded aristocrats never settle for less.  Those who oppose us will be exiled. We shall raise vast private armies, as Mishima did, to  defeat you. We shall conquer the world because warriors inspired by and banded together by  homosexual love and honor are invincible as were the ancient Greek soldiers. The family unit-spawning ground of lies, betrayals, mediocrity, hypocrisy and violence ­ will be  abolished. The family unit, which only dampens imagination and curbs free will, must be  eliminated. Perfect boys will be conceived and grown in the genetic laboratory. They will be  bonded together in communal setting, under the control and instruction of homosexual  savants. All churches who condemn us will be closed. Our only gods are handsome young  men. We adhere to a cult of beauty, moral and aesthetic. All that is ugly and vulgar and  banal will be annihilated. Since we are alienated from middle-class heterosexual  conventions, we are free to live our lives according to the dictates of the pure imagination.  For us too much is not enough. The exquisite society to emerge will be governed by an elite  comprised of gay poets. One of the major requirements for a position of power in the new  society of homoeroticism will be indulgence in the Greek passion. Any man contaminated  with heterosexual lust will be automatically barred from a position of influence. All males  who insist on remaining stupidly heterosexual will be tried in homosexual courts of justice  and will become invisible men. We shall rewrite history, history filled and debased with your  heterosexual lies and distortions. We shall portray the homosexuality of the great leaders  and thinkers who have shaped the world. We will demonstrate that homosexuality and  intelligence and imagination are inextricably linked, and that homosexuality is a requirement  for true nobility, true beauty in a man. We shall be victorious because we are fueled with the  ferocious bitterness of the oppressed, who have been forced to play seemingly bit parts in  your dumb, heterosexual shows throughout the ages. We too are capable of firing guns and  manning the barricades of the ultimate revolution. Tremble, hetero swine, when we appear before you without our masks."  I love you. Amen.  Sunday, March 31, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 3  Since the first time I read Luther's De Servo Arbitrio, I've wondered why it's title has been translated as The Bondage of the Will, when over the years as I've read it, I have never had the strong sense that Luther saw our will as something under bondage. I'm certainly no latin scholar, but using what resources I've been able to find to translate the title De Servo Arbitrio, and looking at the overall context of Luther's answer to Erasmus, I am left with more of a sense of servitude, not bondage. That our wills are the servants of God's Will, not His chained, bound slave. Luther explains it when discussing the use of the term "necessity" with Erasmus. Luther doesn't like the word, as "it suggests some sort of compulsion, and something that is against one's will, which is no part of the view under debate" (De Servo Arbitrio p 81). Our will is in service to God's Will, unable to perform anything that is not in strict accordance with His, making a better translation probably the Un-Free Will. This is perhaps a subtle distinction. God's Elect are not bound slaves but willing servants. The willing servant gladly endures the brief pain of having their ear pierced with an aul at the doorpost (see Exodus 21:6), while a bound slave constantly chafes at their chains, seeking escape and vengeance against the captivity imposed upon them by their master. This may all be a silly intellectual question to ponder, but in looking at these ideas I spent time exploring the notion of being a servant. In other words, I told you all that to tell you something else.  I start with this premise, that the Elect of God are willing servants. We serve our King, and our Creator. The worship of God is directly tied to serving Him. When Moses was sent to Pharaoh delivering God's message of deliverance for His people, Pharaoh was told to let His people go so that they could serve Him, not worship Him (See Exodus 10:3). If you are in service to God or any false idol, you will worship them. The two are inextricably linked, as is shown by the many admonitions given by God NOT to worship false gods or idols. For example: "Take heed to yourselves, that your heart be not deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them;" (Deuteronomy 11:16) Worshiping God involves work. It involves getting off the couch and actively going about to follow His commandments. Service is an action word, in its simplest form it is defined as "an act of helpful activity." Service to God is not calling the Joel Osteen prayer line, or making a pledge to the 700 club.  You cannot worship Him without serving. The LORD God is not interested in some rote attendance at a social gathering trying to pass itself off as a church. Just as importantly, He isn't interested in you sitting in a pew at WBC if you're not willing to serve Him. Anyone with a mind to truly worship God is going to get to the bottom of this question ­ "How do I serve God?"  I submit to you that you serve God by proactively conducting your affairs in such a manner that you are consumed with service to mankind and service to your fellow Elect.  Sunday, March 31, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 4  Serving mankind is no easy task. We are vilified daily, held out to be hatemongers, lunatics, fanatics, evil, etc., etc. Just because those whom we serve don't understand the service we do does not ameliorate the obligation we have to conduct that service. See Ezekiel 33:1-9.  We are directed by our Master, whom we willingly serve, to go out and warn those amongst whom we live of impending danger when we see it. The watchmen referenced in Ezekiel was a man who lived amongst the people, who was well known for his ability to observe, who had good eyesight, good judgment, and perhaps most importantly, actively cared about the inhabitants of the city. In other words, you don't put a stranger on your city walls to watch out for your well-being while you sleep.  You put a person on the city walls who has a stake in the game, as they say. But for what are we watching, and whom are we warning if these hard-hearted haters of God don't listen? We watch for the return of our King, and for those sheep that most assuredly remain wandering in this wilderness. "Therefore I endure all things for the elect's sakes, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory." (2 Timothy 2:10)  We are waiting patiently, enduring these mockings and scoffings, the affliction, persecution and hatred of the world, waiting for that last sheep to "obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus"! Which brings us to our last reasonable service before God, that of serving one another. "And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward." (Matthew 10:42) Just delivering a cup of water to one of Christ's servants simply because they are Christ's servant is an action of great import to Jesus. This makes our service to one another more remarkable and all the more necessary. It shows us as standing out from the crowded mass of humanity who won't even provide an unasked cup of cold water to His servants. Our service cannot be partial or half-hearted, but our whole body is our sacrifice in service (Romans 12:1).  A proud or self-centered individual cannot look beyond their own desires to think of another person. Service to God requires this. Serving His people, from a worldly point of view, is a debasing thing, something that diminishes your so-called "self-esteem", that requires you to put aside ­ if even for one brief moment ­ pursuing your own fleshly lusts to consider the needs of another person. Then, doing whatever you can to help that person, whether that is the comfort of words, physically laboring with that person in their home, helping them to carry a burden, laboring in the ministry, etc. Those who have departed cannot handle that, if even for a brief moment, and that eventually demonstrates itself in some way. Our service will not be forgotten by our Master and Friend. "For God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labour of love, which ye have shewed toward his name, in that ye have ministered to the saints, and do minister." (Hebrews 6:10) I love you all. Amen.  Sunday, March 31, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 5  The ear pierced with an aul (awl) is a sign of love, devotion and permanent obedience to the Master under the Mosaic code.  Ancient awls (auls)  Modern awls Exodus 21:6 "Then his master shall bring him unto the judges; he shall also bring him to the door, or unto the door post; and his master shall bore his ear through with an aul; and he shall serve him for ever." Ps. 40:6 "Sacrifice and offering thou didst not desire; mine ears hast thou opened: burnt offering and sin offering hast thou not required." Isaiah 50:5 "The Lord GOD hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned away back." Hebrews 10:5 "Wherefore when he cometh into the world, he saith, Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not, but a body hast thou prepared me" Christ submitting to taking the form of man was the fulfillment of the type represented by the hole bored in the servant's ear with the awl.  
