Sunday, March 3, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. For by it the elders obtained a good report. Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear. By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts: and by it he being dead yet speaketh. By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death; and was not found, because God had translated him: for before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God. But without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. By faith Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house; by the which he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith. By faith Abraham, when he was called to go out into a place which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed; and he went out, not knowing whither he went. By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange country, dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise: For he looked for a city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God. Through faith also Sara herself received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judged him faithful who had promised. Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, so many as the stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand which is by the sea shore innumerable. These all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth. For they that say such things declare plainly that they seek a country. And truly, if they had been mindful of that country from whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned. But now they desire a better country, that is, an heavenly: wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God: for he hath prepared for them a city. By faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac: and he that had received the promises offered up his only begotten son, Of whom it was said, That in Isaac shall thy seed be called: Accounting that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead; from whence also he received him in a figure. By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come. By faith Jacob, when he was a dying, blessed both the sons of Joseph; and worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff. By faith Joseph, when he died, made mention of the departing of the children of Israel; and gave commandment concerning his bones. By faith Moses, when he was born, was hid three months of his parents, because they saw he was a proper child; and they were not afraid of the king's commandment. By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompence of the reward. By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king: for he endured, as seeing him who is invisible. Through faith he kept the passover, and the sprinkling of blood, lest he that destroyed the firstborn should touch them. By faith they passed through the Red sea as by dry land: which the Egyptians assaying to do were drowned. By faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after they were compassed about seven days. By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with  Sunday, March 3, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 2  them that believed not, when she had received the spies with peace. And what  shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of  Samson, and of Jephthae; of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets: Who  through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises,  stopped the mouths of lions, Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of  the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to  flight the armies of the aliens. Women received their dead raised to life again:  and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a  better resurrection: And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea,  moreover of bonds and imprisonment: They were stoned, they were sawn  asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in  sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented; (Of whom the  world was not worthy:) they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens  and caves of the earth. And these all, having obtained a good report through  faith, received not the promise: God having provided some better thing for us,  that they without us should not be made perfect." (Heb. 11:1-40.)  Paul said he was accorded his holy calling as a humble preacher in Christ Jesus "before the  world began... Who hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our  works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began... Whereunto I am appointed a PREACHER." (2 Tim. 1:9-11.) It is  true that Paul was endowed with many spiritual gifts and titles, but the one that seems to have  pleased him most, was that of the humble PREACHER. While he plied his trade as a lowly  tentmaker with Priscilla and Aquila:  "After these things Paul departed from Athens, and came to Corinth; and found a certain Jew named Aquila, born in Pontus, lately come from Italy, with his wife Priscilla (because that Claudius had commanded all Jews to depart from Rome;) and came unto them. And because he was of the same craft, he abode with them, and wrought; for by their occupation they were tentmakers. And he reasoned in the synagogue every sabbath, and persuaded the Jews and the Greeks." (Acts 18:1-4)  "Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, Make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen." (Heb. 13:20-21)  "Keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life...Now unto Him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, to the only wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now & ever. Amen." (Jude 1:21-25)  "Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free course, and be glorified, even as it is with you: And that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men; for all men have not faith. But the Lord is faithful who shall stablish you, and keep you from evil. And we have confidence in the Lord touching you, that ye both do and will do the things which we command you. And the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the patient waiting for Christ." (2 Thess. 3:1-5) I love you. Amen.  Sunday, March 3, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 3  "For who maketh thee to differ from another? and what hast thou  that thou didst not receive? now if thou didst receive it, why dost  thou glory, as if thou hadst not received it?" (1 Cor. 4:7.)  Westboro Baptist Church is in the business of exalting Christ; that is our prime directive. In that pursuit, we eschew evil. Job 1:1: "There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job; and that man was perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil." The Hebrew word means "to cause to turn aside, cause to depart, remove, take away, put away; to put aside, reject, abolish." God emphatically hates pride! The antonyms of Pride are Humility, Lowliness, Meekness, & Submissiveness. Those words describe the sheep on the right hand of our Lord Jesus Christ on that great day of judgment. (Mt. 25:33.) "I wisdom dwell with prudence, and find out knowledge of witty inventions. The fear of the LORD is to hate evil: pride, and arrogancy, and the evil way, and the froward mouth, do I hate." (Prov. 8:12-13) Gill: "These are the particulars of evil, which Wisdom, or Christ, declares his hatred of. `Pride,' which appears in men in thinking too highly of themselves, in speaking too well of themselves, in despising others, in setting up and trusting to their own righteousness for salvation, and in crying up the purity and power of human nature; this is very contrary to the spirit of the meek and lowly Jesus, and must be hateful to him; it is an ascribing that to a man's self which does not belong to him, whether in things natural, civil, or spiritual; when men attribute their justification and salvation to their own works, it is arrogancy, and must be hateful to Christ; it is the height of arrogancy in a man to conceit he has a power to regenerate, renew, and convert himself, and, with the haughty Arminian to say, he has made himself to differ from others; this must be hateful to Christ, by whose Spirit and grace this only is done."  In these last days of total apostasy, pride in the heart of the reprobate creates a zeitgeist of "perilous times;" of which we have first-hand view in 2013. "This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be...proud." (2 Tim. 3:1-2.) For 22 years we have been eye-witness to man's insistence upon reaching the bottom rung of the ladder of human depravity, as we picket daily on the mean streets the non-stop "gay pride parade" in America; staring down the grinning fag; as we hear in our ear: "And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient; Being filled with...pride." (Rom. 1:28-30.) "Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the LORD: though hand join in hand, he shall not be unpunished." (Prov. 16:5.) Philpot: "Of all sins pride seems most deeply imbedded in the very heart of man; it is the Mother and Mistress of all the sins; for where she does not conceive them in her ever-teeming womb, she instigates their movements, and compels them to pay tribute to her glory. ...It is the devil's own sin; it is the sin which hurled him from heaven and transformed him from a bright and holy seraph into a foul and hideous demon. How subtle, then, and potent must that poison be, which could in a moment change an angel into a devil!" "You shall be as gods," was the lying declaration of the father of lies. That lie was believed; the bait for pride. The woman tempted the man, as the serpent had tempted the woman; and thus, "by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned." (Rom. 5:12.) But among all the evils which lie naked and open before the eyes of Him with whom we have to do, pride seems especially to incur His holy abhorrence: "And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low; and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day." (Isa. 2:17.)  Sunday, March 3, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 4  It is the only source of contention (Prov. 13:10); the certain forerunner of a fall (Prov. 16:18);  the instigator of persecution of the elect (Psa. 10:2); a snare for the feet (Psa. 59:12); a chain to  compass the whole body (Psa. 73:6); the main element of deceitfulness (Jer. 49:16); and, "Behold, his soul which is lifted up is not upright in him." (Hab. 2:4.) It is a sin which God  especially abhors, (Prov. 8:13, 16:5,) and one of the seven things which he abominates (Prov.  6:16-17); a sin against which he has pronounced a special woe (Isa. 28:1); and has determined  to stain it (Isa. 23:9); to abase it (Dan. 4:37); to mar it (Jer. 13:9); to cut it off (Zech. 9:6); to  bring it down (Isa. 25:11); and lay it low (Prov. 29:23).  Pride was one of the crying sins of Sodom (Eze. 16:49), desolated Moab (Isa. 16:6, 14,) and turned Edom, with Petra, its metropolis, into a land where no man should dwell, and which no man should pass through. (Obad. 3, 4, 9, 10; Jer. 49:16-18.) The very opposite to charity, pride is not patient, and is never kind. She always envies, and ever boasts of herself. She is continually puffed up, always behaves herself rudely, is ever self-seeking, is easily provoked, perpetually thinks evil of others, rejoices in the iniquity of others, but never rejoices in the truth. She never bears with others, believes nothing good in a brother, hopes nothing good for others, and endures nothing. (See 1 Cor. 13:4-8.) She is ever restless and ever miserable, tormenting herself and tormenting others, the fomentor of strife, and the extinguisher of love. Westboro Baptist Church has declared war on pride. The mighty fire which has filled hell with sulphurous flame, and will one day involve earth and its inhabitants in the general conflagration, was first sparked by pride! We have received our bellies full of evil that comes from the proud: "The proud have had me greatly in derision: yet have I not declined from thy law." (Psa. 119:51) "The proud have forged a lie against me: but I will keep thy precepts with my whole heart." (Psa. 119:69) "Let the proud be ashamed; for they dealt perversely with me without a cause: but I will meditate in thy precepts." (Psa. 119:78) "The proud have digged pits for me, which are not after thy law." (Psa. 119:85) "Be surety for thy servant for good: let not the proud oppress me." (Psa.119:122) In the Church, we sing of these proud ones; for example from "The Sands of Time:" "I have borne scorn and hatred, I have borne wrong and shame, Earth's proud ones have reproached me for Christ's thrice blessed Name: Where God His seal set fairest they've stamped the foulest brand, But judgment shines like noonday in Immanuel's land." We know that the "proud" = our enemy. "O LORD God, to whom vengeance belongeth; O God, to whom vengeance belongeth, shew thyself. Lift up thyself, thou Judge of the earth: render a reward to the proud." (Psa. 94:1-2). We desire the blessings of the Lord. "Blessed is that man that maketh the LORD his trust, and respecteth not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies." (Psa. 40:4.) The fruit of the Lord's grace renders in his elect the opposite of pride. "The LORD is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart; and saveth such as be of a contrite spirit." (Psa. 34:18.) "The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise." (Ps. 51:17.) "For thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones." (Isa. 57:15.) "For all those things hath mine hand made, and all those things have been, saith the LORD: but to this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word." (Isa. 66:2.) "Wherefore, he sayeth, God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble. Submit yourselves therefore to God." (Jas. 4:6)  May it be our wisdom to see & our grace to abhor pride! I love you. Amen.  
