Sunday, January 20, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 1  This is the final installment of Jonathan Edward's work, "Sinners in the Hands of an Angry  God," Part 3 of 3, taking back up where we left off:  "And consider here more particularly, 1. Whose wrath it is: it is the wrath of the infinite God. If it were only the wrath of man, though it were of the most potent prince, it would be comparatively little to be regarded. The wrath of kings is very much dreaded, especially of absolute monarchs, who have the possessions and lives of their subjects wholly in their power, to be disposed of at their mere will. Prov. 20:2. `The fear of a king is as the roaring of a lion: Whoso provoketh him to anger, sinneth against his own soul.' The subject that very much enrages an arbitrary prince, is liable to suffer the most extreme torments that human art can invent, or human power can inflict. But the greatest earthly potentates in their greatest majesty and strength, and when clothed in their greatest terrors, are but feeble, despicable worms of the dust, in comparison of the great and almighty Creator and King of heaven and earth. It is but little that they can do, when most enraged, and when they have exerted the utmost of their fury. All the kings of the earth, before God, are as grasshoppers; they are nothing, and less than nothing: both their love and their hatred is to be despised. The wrath of the great King of kings, is as much more terrible than theirs, as his majesty is greater. Luke 12:4,5. `And I say unto you, my friends, Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that, have no more that they can do. But I will forewarn you whom you shall fear: fear him, which after he hath killed, hath power to cast into hell: yea, I say unto you, Fear him.'  2. It is the fierceness of his wrath that you are exposed to. We often read of the fury of God; as in Isa. 59:18. `According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay fury to his adversaries.' So Isa. 66:15. `For behold, the Lord will come with fire, and with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire.' And in many other places. So, Rev. 19:15, we read of `the wine press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God.' The words are exceeding terrible. If it had only been said, `the wrath of God,' the words would have implied that which is infinitely dreadful: but it is `the fierceness and wrath of God.' The fury of God! the fierceness of Jehovah! Oh, how dreadful that must be! Who can utter or conceive what such expressions carry in them! But it is also `the fierceness and wrath of almighty God.' As though there would be a very great manifestation of his almighty power in what the fierceness of his wrath should inflict, as though omnipotence should be as it were enraged, and exerted, as men are wont to exert their strength in the fierceness of their wrath. Oh! then, what will be the consequence! What will become of the poor worms that shall suffer it! Whose hands can be strong? And whose heart can endure? To what a dreadful, inexpressible, inconceivable depth of misery must the poor creature be sunk who shall be the subject of this! Consider this, you that are here present, that yet remain in an unregenerate state. That God will execute the fierceness of his anger, implies, that he will inflict wrath without any pity. When God beholds the ineffable extremity of your case, and sees your torment to be so vastly disproportioned to your strength, and sees how your poor soul is crushed, and sinks down, as it were, into an infinite gloom; he will have no compassion upon you, he will not forbear the executions of his wrath, or in the least lighten his hand; there shall be no  Sunday, January 20, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 2  moderation or mercy, nor will God then at all stay his rough wind; he will have no regard  to your welfare, nor be at all careful lest you should suffer too much in any other sense,  than only that you shall not suffer beyond what strict justice requires. Nothing shall be withheld, because it is so hard for you to bear. Ezek. 8:18. `Therefore will I also deal in  fury: mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity; and though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet I will not hear them.' Now God stands ready to pity you; this is a  day of mercy; you may cry now with some encouragement of obtaining mercy. But when  once the day of mercy is past, your most lamentable and dolorous cries and shrieks will be  in vain; you will be wholly lost and thrown away of God, as to any regard to your welfare.  God will have no other use to put you to, but to suffer misery; you shall be continued in  being to no other end; for you will be a vessel of wrath fitted to destruction; and there will  be no other use of this vessel, but to be filled full of wrath. God will be so far from pitying you when you cry to him, that it is said he will only `laugh and mock,' Prov. 1:25,26, etc. How awful are those words, Isa. 63:3, which are the words of the great God. `I will tread  them in mine anger, and will trample them in my fury, and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment.' It is perhaps impossible to conceive  of words that carry in them greater manifestations of these three things, viz. contempt, and  hatred, and fierceness of indignation. If you cry to God to pity you, he will be so far from  pitying you in your doleful case, or showing you the least regard or favour, that instead of  that, he will only tread you under foot. And though he will know that you cannot bear the  weight of omnipotence treading upon you, yet he will not regard that, but he will crush you  under his feet without mercy; he will crush out your blood, and make it fly, and it shall be  sprinkled on his garments, so as to stain all his raiment. He will not only hate you, but he  will have you in the utmost contempt: no place shall be thought fit for you, but under his  feet to be trodden down as the mire of the streets.  3. The misery you are exposed to is that which God will inflict to that end, that he might show what that wrath of Jehovah is. God hath had it on his heart to show to angels and men, both how excellent his love is, and also how terrible his wrath is. Sometimes earthly kings have a mind to show how terrible their wrath is, by the extreme punishments they would execute on those that would provoke them. Nebuchadnezzar, that mighty and haughty monarch of the Chaldean empire, was willing to show his wrath when enraged with Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego; and accordingly gave orders that the burning fiery furnace should be heated seven times hotter than it was before; doubtless, it was raised to the utmost degree of fierceness that human art could raise it. But the great God is also willing to show his wrath, and magnify his awful majesty and mighty power in the extreme sufferings of his enemies. Rom. 9:22. `What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction?' And seeing this is his design, and what he has determined, even to show how terrible the unrestrained wrath, the fury and fierceness of Jehovah is, he will do it to effect. There will be something accomplished and brought to pass that will be dreadful with a witness. When the great and angry God hath risen up and executed his awful vengeance on the poor sinner, and the wretch is actually suffering the infinite weight and power of his indignation, then will God call upon the whole universe to behold that awful  Sunday, January 20, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 3  majesty and mighty power that is to be seen in it. `And the people shall be as the burnings  of lime: as thorns cut up shall they be burned in the fire. Hear, ye that are far off, what I  have done; and, ye that are near, acknowledge my might. The sinners in Zion are afraid;  fearfulness hath surprised the hypocrites. Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?' Isa. 33:12-14. Thus it will be  with you that are in an unconverted state, if you continue in it; the infinite might, and  majesty, and terribleness of the omnipotent God shall be magnified upon you, in the  ineffable strength of your torments. You shall be tormented in the presence of the holy  angels, and in the presence of the Lamb; and when you shall be in this state of suffering,  the glorious inhabitants of heaven shall go forth and look on the awful spectacle, that they  may see what the wrath and fierceness of the Almighty is. When they have seen it, they will fall down and adore that great power and majesty. Isa. 66:23,24. `And it shall come to  pass, that from one new moon to another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all  flesh come to worship before me, saith the Lord. And they shall go forth and look upon  the carcasses of the men that have transgressed against me; for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh.'  4. It is everlasting wrath. It would be dreadful to suffer this fierceness and wrath of Almighty God one moment; but you must suffer it to all eternity. There will be no end to this exquisite horrible misery. When you look forward, you shall see a long for ever, a boundless duration before you, which will swallow up your thoughts, and amaze your soul; and you will absolutely despair of ever having any deliverance, any end, any mitigation, any rest at all. You will know certainly that you must wear out long ages, millions of millions of ages, in wrestling and conflicting with this almighty merciless vengeance; and then when you have so done, when so many ages have actually been spent by you in this manner, you will know that all is but a point to what remains. So that your punishment will indeed be infinite. Oh, who can express what the state of a soul in such circumstances is! All that we can possibly say about it, gives but a very feeble, faint representation of it; it is inexpressible and inconceivable: For `who knows the power of God's anger?' How dreadful is the state of those that are daily and hourly in the danger of this great wrath and infinite misery! But this is the dismal case of every soul in this congregation that has not been born again, however moral and strict, sober and religious, they may otherwise be. Oh that you would consider it, whether you be young or old! There is reason to think, that there are many in this congregation now hearing this discourse, that will actually be the subjects of this very misery to all eternity. We know not who they are, or in what seats they sit, or what thoughts they now have. It may be they are now at ease, and hear all these things without much disturbance, and are now flattering themselves that they are not the persons, promising themselves that they shall escape. If we knew that there was one person, and but one, in the whole congregation, that was to be the subject of this misery, what an awful thing would it be to think of! If we knew who it was, what an awful sight would it be to see such a person! How might all the rest of the congregation lift up a lamentable and bitter cry over him! But, alas! instead of one, how many is it likely will remember this discourse in hell? And it would be a wonder, if some that are now present should not be in hell in a very short time, even before this year is out. And it would be no  Sunday, January 20, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 4  wonder if some persons, that now sit here, in some seats of this meeting-house, in health,  quiet and secure, should be there before tomorrow morning. Those of you that finally  continue in a natural condition, that shall keep out of hell longest will be there in a little  time! your damnation does not slumber; it will come swiftly, and, in all probability, very  suddenly upon many of you. You have reason to wonder that you are not already in hell. It  is doubtless the case of some whom you have seen and known, that never deserved hell  more than you, and that heretofore appeared as likely to have been now alive as you. Their  case is past all hope; they are crying in extreme misery and perfect despair; but here you  are in the land of the living and in the house of God, and have an opportunity to obtain  salvation. What would not those poor damned hopeless souls give for one day's opportunity  such as you now enjoy! And now you have an extraordinary opportunity, a day wherein  Christ has thrown the door of mercy wide open, and stands in calling and crying with a  loud voice to poor sinners; a day wherein many are flocking to him, and pressing into the  kingdom of God. Many are daily coming from the east, west, north and south; many that  were very lately in the same miserable condition that you are in, are now in a happy state,  with their hearts filled with love to him who has loved them, and washed them from their  sins in his own blood, and rejoicing in hope of the glory of God. How awful is it to be left  behind at such a day! To see so many others feasting, while you are pining and perishing!  To see so many rejoicing and singing for joy of heart, while you have cause to mourn for  sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of spirit! How can you rest one moment in such a  condition? Are not your souls as precious as the souls of the people at Suffield, where they  are flocking from day to day to Christ? You cannot bear the fierceness and wrath of the infinite God. ­ And let every one that is yet out of Christ, and hanging over the pit of hell,  whether they be old men and women, or middle aged, or young people, or little children,  now hearken to the loud calls of God's word and providence. This acceptable year of the  Lord, a day of such great favour to some, will doubtless be a day of as remarkable  vengeance to others. Men's hearts harden, and their guilt increases apace at such a day as  this, if they neglect their souls; and never was there so great danger of such persons being  given up to hardness of heart and blindness of mind. God seems now to be hastily  gathering in his elect in all parts of the land; and probably the greater part of adult  persons that ever shall be saved, will be brought in now in a little time, and that it will be  as it was on the great out-pouring of the Spirit upon the Jews in the apostles' days; the  election will obtain, and the rest will be blinded. If this should be the case with you, you  will eternally curse this day, and will curse the day that ever you was born, to see such a  season of the pouring out of God's Spirit, and will wish that you had died and gone to hell  before you had seen it. Now undoubtedly it is, as it was in the days of John the Baptist, the  axe is in an extraordinary manner laid at the root of the trees, that every tree which brings  not forth good fruit, may be hewn down and cast into the fire. Therefore, let every one that  is out of Christ, now awake and fly from the wrath to come. The wrath of Almighty God is  now undoubtedly hanging over a great part of this congregation. Let every one fly out of Sodom: `Haste and escape for your lives, look not behind you, escape to the mountain, lest you be consumed.'"  I love you. Amen.  
