Sunday, May 13, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty  works were done, because they repented not; Woe unto thee,  Chorazin! Woe unto thee, Bethsaida! For if the mighty works,  which were done in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they  would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. But I say  unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day  of Judgment, than for you. And thou, Capernaum, which art  exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to Hell; for if the  mighty works, which have been done in thee, had been done in  Sodom, it would have remained until this day. But I say unto you,  That it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of  judgment, than for thee. At that time Jesus answered and said, I  thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou  hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast  revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father; for so it seemed  good in thy sight. All things are delivered unto me of my Father;  and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father, save the Son, and  he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. COME UNTO ME, ALL  YE THAT LABOR AND ARE HEAVY LADEN, AND I WILL GIVE  YOU REST. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am  meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls.  For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matt. 11:20-30.)  The father of the Lord Chancellor Farrer Herschell, before their fortunes improved as poor Jewish immigrants in London, told the world how, when he was a poor Jewish lad in London, and in great sorrow, over the death of his mother, he bought some groceries, which were wrapped up in a leaf of the New Testament. On the creased, soiled page he read, "Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted." Those and other words like them on the same precious page, went to his heart, and comforted his troubled mourning spirit. He purchased a copy of the New Testament, read its contents, found peace and forgiveness of sins through Christ, and was afterwards the means of leading five of his brothers to accept the Lord Jesus Christ as the Jewish Messiah.  Yes, Beloved, at various times during the history of this dispensation, there has been genuine repentance and forgiveness. But those blessed years are not now, even as the prophets foretold for the last of the last days. We are thankful for such times that have sponsored such beautiful poetry as this, and for the music that followed it. Yes, it has been truly written; to wit: "The Bible is a Lamp for the feet, that in byways have wandered; Guide for the youth that would otherwise fall; Hope for the sinner, whose life has been squandered; Staff for the aged, and best Book for all !" Beloved, how thankful we should be for our blessed lot in life, that we may glorify God with one mind and one mouth with the saints on earth at Westboro Baptist Church; to wit: "Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be likeminded one toward another according to Christ Jesus; that ye may with ONE MIND AND ONE MOUTH GLORIFY God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to the glory of God." (Rom. 15:5-7)  Sunday, May 13, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  "Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the SAME JUDGMENT." (1 Cor. 1:10)  Yes, and even Napoleon Bonaparte seems to be among God's Elect, pursuant to the good thief on  the cross, to whom the Lord Jesus said, "Verily I say unto thee, Today shalt thou be with me in  Paradise." (Lk. 23:43.) See also the conversion of Nebuchadnezzar, at Dan. 4:34-37; to wit:  "And at the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes unto heaven, and mine understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the most High, and I praised and honored him that liveth forever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation to generation; and all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing; and he doeth according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou? At the same time my reason returned unto me; and for the glory of my kingdom, mine honor and brightness returned unto me; and I was established in my kingdom, and excellent majesty was added unto me. Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honor the king of heaven, all whose works are truth, and his ways judgment; and those that walk in pride he is able to abase." (Dan. 4:34-37)  And now, Beloved, let us return to Napoleon Bonaparte ­ a lesser absolute ruler than Nebuchadnezzar, no doubt ­ but one with a glowing testimony of saving faith as God's Elect. He must have spent much time ­ especially in his later years ­ reading the Bible; for it is recorded how on one occasion, in the presence of three General Officers, he said: "That Bible on the table is a book to you. It is far more than a book to me; it speaks to me; IT IS, AS IT WERE, A PERSON."  And when confined to the rock of St. Helena, he turned to Count Montholon with the inquiry, "Can you tell me who Jesus Christ was?" The question being declined, Napoleon said: "Well then, I will tell you. Alexander, Caesar, Charlemagne, and I myself have founded great empires ­ upon force. Jesus alone founded His empire upon love. I tell you all these were men; none else is like Him; Jesus Christ was more than man...He asks for the human heart. He demands it. Unconditionally; and forthwith His demand is granted. Wonderful ! All who sincerely believe in Him experience that remarkable supernatural love towards Him. Time, the great destroyer, is powerless to extinguish this sacred flame. This it is which proves to me, quite convincingly, the divinity of Jesus Christ!"  Beloved, this testimony of Bonaparte is among the grandest I have ever come across, and I heartily recommend it for your private study. Daniel Webster was one of very few truly great American statesmen, and who for the most part have joined the great cloud of witnesses looking on to urge us ever Heavenward; to wit: "Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith; who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God." (Heb. 12:1,2)  Daniel Webster said: "If we abide by the principles taught in the Bible, our country will go on prospering; but if we and our posterity neglect its instructions and authority, no man can tell how sudden a catastrophe may overwhelm us and bury all our glory in profound obscurity !"  Sunday, May 13, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  You may remember that a short while back I visited Iraq, and saw how the desert sand had gobbled up the glories of ancient Babylon, Persia, and other magnificent monarchies of days gone by. What makes anybody think that the United States of America is immune from such a fate ­ and soon? You Bible-dumb Sons of Belial have declared Satanic war upon the Lord ­ His word and His people. The horrific catastrophe ­ predicted by Daniel Webster ­ cannot be far off, and anybody who has even a modicum of Bible knowledge, knows that it's true. To wit: "He suffered no man to do them wrong; yea, he reproved kings for their sakes; Saying, touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm. Moreover he called for a famine upon the land; he brake the whole staff of bread." (Psa. 105:14-16) Today, England is wallowing in the swine swill of rank apostasy; but it was not always so. Anciently, England demanded as a part of the coronation ceremony full allegiance to the Bible. "True also were the words which, according to ancient custom, were addressed to the King on the occasion of his coronation. After the ring of kingly dignity had been put on his finger, the sceptre of equity and mercy delivered into his hand, and the royal crown placed upon his head, the Archbishop of Canterbury presented a Bible to His Majesty, saying, Our gracious King, we present you with this Book, the most valuable thing that this world affords. Here is wisdom; this is the Royal Law; these are the lively oracles of God."  It is also a matter of history how Sir Walter Scott, when dying, asked his friend Lockhart to read to him; and Lockhart, looking at the twenty thousand volumes covering the walls of Scott's costly library, said, "What book would you like?" "Need you ask?" said Sir Walter; "there is but one." And so Lockhart read to him from that one Book ­ the Bible ­ the words of eternal life.  Beloved, remember what the Archbishop of Canterbury says to the English king upon giving him a Bible at his coronation; to wit: "Our Gracious King: we present you with this Book, the most valuable thing that this world affords. Here is Wisdom; this is the Royal Law; these are the lively oracles of God."  We at Westboro Baptist Church would add a thought or two that would make those lively oracles of God effectual in the life of the King (or Queen, as the case may be.) First, the monstrous sin of PRIDE will keep you from reading the Bible, and without actually reading the Bible it will do you no good ­ in fact you are branding yourself as a Royal Hypocrite. Second, you must read the Bible and study as you go; to wit: "Study to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of truth." (2 Tim. 2:15)  Third, watch out for the soul-destroying sin of PRIDE. Queen Elizabeth II is on dangerous ground, and it is probably too late for her ever to reach Heaven, in that she has gone way too far in supporting the evil, lawless, sodomite agenda.  Pride is to be feared above all sins except sodomy and sins of the flesh; to wit: "It must be admitted that if there is one sin more than another that God has singled out as being peculiarly detestable in His sight, it is this sin of pride." "Pride, arrogancy, and the evil way do I hate." (Prov. 8:13.) Moreover, many of the passages dealing with pride seem, to have a peculiar and designed reference to that being (Satan) in whose mysterious nature pride was first conceived. Indeed in 1st Tim. 3:6, pride was specifically called "the condemnation of the devil."  Sunday, May 13, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  And the solemn warning given in Prov. 16:18, "`Pride goeth before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall,' and so needed by us in this life, may have had its first application to, as it certainly found its first fulfilment in, him whose heart was lifted up (Satan) because of his beauty."  May we not, therefore, see here sufficient cause, to account, not only for the downfall of Satan and his angels, but also for that wider and more terrible destruction which evidently overtook this oncefair earth in pre-Adamic times? ­ just as in the days of Noah "the world that then was, being overflowed with water, perished." (2nd Pet. 3:6.). As a result of man's wickedness (Gen. 6:5-7) ­ which wickedness in its final culmination, in the future, will bring about a far more awful destruction still, when "the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up." (2nd Pet. 3:10.)  The Lord Jesus said that He saw Satan, as lightening, fall from Heaven (Lk. 10:18.). Satan and his dark, rebellious, prideful, angels fell from earth to Hell, and the story is told by the Holy Ghost in large measure in Isaiah, chapter 14: to wit: "Hell from beneath is moved for thee (Satan) to meet thee at thy coming; it stirreth up the dead for thee, even all the chief ones (i.e., he-goats) of the earth; it hath raised up from their thrones all the kings of the nations. All they shall speak and say unto thee, Art thou also become weak as we? art thou become like unto us? Thy pomp is brought down to the grave, and the noise of thy viols; the worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer (i.e., another name for Satan) son of the morning! How art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God..." Isaiah 14:9-13.  Beloved, was ever a more prideful statement made, or attempted to be made? Pride!!! The greatest of all sins? It led, inevitably, to same-sex marriage, when brought to full bloom. Track it through Romans, chapter one. But to continue the diatribe of the Devil (as recorded faithfully by the Holy Ones and the Watchers); to wit: Quoth the rebellious Devil: "I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north." (This seems to me to be a flagrant declaration by Satan that he will in the fullness of time usurp full control and power over the very Bride of Christ, the Church of the living God ­ His most prized possession. The sides of the north refers to that location of the Tabernacle and Temple where the Holy of Holies was situated, and hence where the church was logically situated as the church of the Firstborn whose names are written in Heaven, as located in Hebrews, chapter 12.) "I will ascend above the heights of the clouds, I will be like the most High. Yet thou shalt be brought down to Hell, to the sides of the pit. They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider thee, saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms; that made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities thereof; that opened not the house of his prisoners? All the kings of the nations, even all of them, lie in glory, every one in his own house (i.e., grave, thereby belittling every last one of them; as much as if to say, mocking, the grave is where every last one of you tyrants is headed, and where you will dominate no more than six feet of earth; have a happy eternity you Christ-rejecting fools.)." (Isa. 14:13-18.)  I love you.  Amen.  
