Sunday, April 22, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power  of his might. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be  able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle  not against mere flesh and blood, (i.e., only with human  beings), but against principalities, against powers, against  the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual  wickedness in high places. Wherefore take unto you the  whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the  evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore,  having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the  breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod with the  preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the  shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the  fiery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of salvation,  and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God; praying  always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and  watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication  for all saints; and for me, that utterance may be given unto  me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known the  mystery of the gospel, for which I am an ambassador in  bonds; that therein I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak."  (Eph. 6:10-20.)  In many ways, the Lord has a ragtag army, on earth, composed of foolish, weak, base, despised  nobodies; and such is expressly declared to be the case; to wit:  "For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called; But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty; and base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are; that no flesh should glory in his presence. But of Him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption; that, according as it is written, He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord." (1 Cor. 1:26-31)  Set that over against Song of Solomon 6:10, for another description of the church militant; to wit:  "Who is she that looketh forth as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners?" (Song of Solomon 6:10) "And the God of peace shall bruise (crush) Satan under your feet shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen." (Rom. 16:20)  Sunday, April 22, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  "Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour; whom resist stedfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world." (1 Pet. 5:8,9)  "For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh; (for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds;) casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ; and having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled." (2 Cor. 10:3-6)  Military discipline, on steroids: to wit: "Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same (exactly the same!) commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. (Is this true Chain Link Succession? for the genuine perpetuation of our most holy faith in every generation?) Thou therefore endure hardships with me, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. (2 Tim. 2:1-4.)  David was a type of the Lord Jesus Christ, generally; but especially in his wanderings and flights from King Saul, as he gathered a mighty army for final victory over the Philistines after the death of Saul. Therefore, a study of the attributes of David's mighty men could be very valuable to us as we make our way through the wilderness from the inhospitable Cave Adullam to the glories of Mount Zion and the Promised Land. To wit: "David therefore departed thence, and escaped to the cave Adullam; and when his brethren and all his father's house heard it, they went down thither to him. And every one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented gathered themselves unto him; and he became a captain over them; and there were with him about four hundred men." (1 Sam. 22:1,2) Here is an example of the danger that David faced continually, and which all God's Elect should follow as a pattern of sanctified courage; to wit: "Now the Philistines gathered together their armies to battle, and were gathered together at Shochoh, which belongeth to Judah, and pitched between Shochoh and Azekah in Ephes-dammim. And Saul and the men of Israel were gathered together, and pitched by the valley of Elah, and set the battle in array against the Philistines. And the Philistines stood on a mountain on the one side, and Israel stood on a mountain on the other side; and there was a valley between them. And there went out a champion out of the camp of the Philistines, named Goliath, of Gath, whose height was six cubits and a span. And he had an helmet of brass upon his head, and he was armed with a coat of mail; and the weight of the coat was five thousand shekels of brass. And he had greaves of brass upon his legs, and a target of brass between his shoulders. And the staff of his spear was like a weaver's beam; and his spear's head weighed six hundred shekels of iron; and one bearing a shield went before him. And he stood and cried unto the armies of Israel, and said unto them, Why are ye come out  Sunday, April 22, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  to set your battle in array? am not I a Philistine, and ye servants to Saul? choose you a  man for you, and let him come down to me. If he be able to fight with me, and to kill  me, then will we be your servants; but if I prevail against him, and kill him, then shall  ye be our servants, and serve us. And the Philistine said, I defy the armies of Israel  this day; give me a man, that we may fight together. When Saul and all Israel heard  those words of the Philistine, they were dismayed, and greatly afraid. Now David was  the son of that Ephrathite of Bethlehemjudah, whose name was Jesse; and he had  eight sons; and the man went among men for an old man in the days of Saul. And the  three eldest sons of Jesse went and followed Saul to the battle; and the names of his  three sons that went to the battle were Eliab the firstborn, and next unto him  Abinadab, and the third Shammah. And David was the youngest; and the three eldest  followed Saul. But David went and returned from Saul to feed his father's sheep at  Bethlehem. And the Philistine drew near morning and evening, and presented himself  forty days. And Jesse said unto David his son, Take now for thy brethren an ephah of  this parched corn, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp to thy brethren; And  carry these ten cheeses unto the captain of their thousand, and look how thy brethren  fare, and take their pledge. Now Saul, and they, and all the men of Israel, were in the  valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines. And David rose up early in the morning, and  left the sheep with a keeper, and took, and went, as Jesse had commanded him; and  he came to the trench, as the host was going forth to the fight, and shouted for the  battle. For Israel and the Philistines had put the battle in array, army against army.  And David left his carriage in the hand of the keeper of the carriage, and ran into the  army, and came and saluted his brethren. And as he talked with them, behold, there  came up the champion, the Philistine of Gath, Goliath by name, out of the armies of  the Philistines, and spake according to the same words; and David heard them. And  all the men of Israel, when they saw the man, fled from him, and were sore afraid. And  the men of Israel said, Have ye seen this man that is come up? surely to defy Israel is  he come up; and it shall be, that the man who killeth him, the king will enrich him with  great riches, and will give him his daughter, and make his father's house free in Israel.  And David spake to the men that stood by him, saying, What shall be done to the man  that killeth this Philistine, and taketh away the reproach from Israel? for who is this  uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy the armies of the living God? And the  people answered him after this manner, saying, So shall it be done to the man that  killeth him. And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spake unto the men; and  Eliab's anger was kindled against David, and he said, Why camest thou down hither?  and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride,  and the naughtiness of thine heart; for thou art come down that thou mightest see the  battle. And David said, What have I now done? Is there not a cause? And he turned  from him toward another, and spake after the same manner; and the people  answered him again after the former manner. And when the words were heard which  David spake, they rehearsed them before Saul; and he sent for him. And David said to  Saul, Let no man's heart fail because of him; thy servant will go and fight with this  Philistine. And Saul said to David, Thou art not able to go against this Philistine to fight  with him; for thou art but a youth, and he a man of war from his youth. And David said  unto Saul, Thy servant kept his father's sheep, and there came a lion, and a bear, and  took a lamb out of the flock; And I went out after him, and smote him, and delivered it  out of his mouth; and when he arose against me, I caught him by his beard, and smote  Sunday, April 22, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  him, and slew him. Thy servant slew both the lion and the bear; and this  uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he hath defied the armies of  the living God. David said moreover, the Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the  lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine.  And Saul said unto David, Go, and the Lord be with thee. And Saul armed David with  his armour, and he put an helmet of brass upon his head; also he armed him with a  coat of mail. And David girded his sword upon his armour, and he assayed to go; for  he had not proved it. And David said unto Saul, I cannot go with these; for I have not  proved them. And David put them off him. And he took his staff in his hand, and chose  him five smooth stones out of the brook, and put them in a shepherd's bag which he  had, even in a scrip; and his sling was in his hand; and he drew near to the Philistine.  And the Philistine came on and drew near unto David; and the man that bare the  shield went before him. And when the Philistine looked about, and saw David, he  disdained him; for he was but a youth, and ruddy, and of a fair countenance. And the  Philistine said unto David, Am I a dog, that thou comest to me with staves? And the  Philistine cursed David by his gods. And the Philistine said to David, Come to me, and I  will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field. Then said  David to the Philistine, Thou comest to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a  shield; but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the armies of  Israel, whom thou hast defied. This day will the Lord deliver thee into mine hand; and I  will smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and I will give the carcases of the host  of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the air, and to the wild beasts of the earth;  that all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel. And all this assembly shall  know that the Lord saveth not with sword and spear; for the battle is the Lord's, and  he will give you into our hands. And it came to pass, when the Philistine arose, and  came and drew nigh to meet David, that David hasted, and ran toward the army to  meet the Philistine. And David put his hand in his bag, and took thence a stone, and  slang it, and smote the Philistine in his forehead, that the stone sunk into his  forehead; and he fell upon his face to the earth. So David prevailed over the Philistine  with a sling and with a stone, and smote the Philistine, and slew him; but there was  no sword in the hand of David. Therefore David ran, and stood upon the Philistine, and  took his sword, and drew it out of the sheath thereof, and slew him, and cut off his  head therewith. And when the Philistines saw their champion was dead, they fled.  And the men of Israel and of Judah arose, and shouted, and pursued the Philistines,  until thou come to the valley, and to the gates of Ekron. And the wounded of the  Philistines fell down by the way to Shaaraim, even unto Gath, and unto Ekron. And the  children of Israel returned from chasing after the Philistines, and they spoiled their  tents. And David took the head of the Philistine, and brought it to Jerusalem; but he  put his armor in his tent. And when Saul saw David go forth against the Philistine, he  said unto Abner, the captain of the host, Abner, whose son is this youth? And Abner  said, as thy soul liveth, O king, I cannot tell. And the king said, enquire thou whose  son the stripling is. And as David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, Abner  took him, and brought him before Saul with the head of the Philistine in his hand. And  Saul said to him, whose son art thou, thou young man? And David answered, I am the  son of thy servant Jesse the Bethlehemite." (1 Sam. 17:1-58)  David, God's pattern of sanctified courage. I love you. Amen.  
