Sunday, February 17, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Son of man, prophesy against the prophets."  Eze. 13:2.  Ezekiel Chapter 13 is a treasure trove of vital information about the false prophets. This generation has the capacity to put their lying words all over the world. "Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed." (Luke 17:28-30)  So Westboro Baptist Church goes forth knowing there are Heretics like Billy Graham and his ilk, whose mouths must be stopped. "Holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers. For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, specially they of the circumcision: Whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake." (Titus 1:9-11.) So let us look at some of the lessons from Ziklag. "And David said to Abiathar the priest, Ahimelech's son, I pray thee, bring me hither the ephod. And Abiathar brought thither the ephod to David. And David enquired at the Lord, saying, Shall I pursue after this troop? Shall I overtake them? And he answered him, Pursue: for thou shalt surely overtake them, and without fail recover all." (1 Sam. 30:7-8.)  "Seeing then that we have a great high priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession. For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need." (Heb 4:14-16) Two persons of the Godhead are continuously praying for us. "Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints according to the will of God. ...Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us." (Rom. 8:26-27 and 34.) "Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God. And the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus." (Phil. 4:67.) Filling up that which is behind of Christ's afflictions (Col., 1:24.); rejoice! "But rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that, when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy." (1 Pet. 4:13.) "They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but abideth for ever. As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people from henceforth even for ever. For the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous; lest the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity." (Psa. 125:1-3) "Our fathers trusted in thee: they trusted, and thou didst deliver them. They cried unto thee, and were delivered: they trusted in thee, and were not confounded." (Psa. 22:4-5)  Sunday, February 17, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 2  "Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust also in him; and he shall bring it to pass.  ...The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord: and he delighteth in his way."  (Psa. 37:5 & 23)  "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths." (Prov. 3:5-6)  Now let us look at some lessons from Ziklag. David was compelled to flee for his life to live among and make common cause with the despised Philistines ­ because the government was Hellbent to kill him, and the circumstances he faced then and there on the ground seemed to him to afford him no other refuge: "And David said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul: there is nothing better for me than that I should speedily escape into the land of the Philistines; and Saul shall despair of me, to seek me any more in the coast of Israel: so shall I escape out of his hand." (1 Sam. 27:1) Achish, Philistine King of Gath ­ strangely ­ befriended David and his 600 men with families, and gave them a city ­ Ziklag ­ as a permanent dwelling place. So cleverly did David deceive Achish into believing his loyalties were now with the Philistines and his break with Israel was complete and final. "And Achish believed David, saying, He hath made his people Israel utterly to abhor him; therefore he shall be my servant for ever." (1 Sam. 27:12.) "And David said to Achish, Surely thou shalt know what thy servant can do. And Achish said to David, Therefore will I make thee keeper of mine head for ever." (1 Sam. 28:2.) The predicament David found himself in was desperate.  "For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope. ...Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost. And I myself also am persuaded of you, my brethren, that ye also are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another." (Rom. 15:4 & 13-14) The sudden, peculiar hostility of the Philistine war lords ­ after David had proven himself over and over during his time. "And the time that David dwelt in the country of the Philistines was a full year and four months." (1 Sam. 27:7.) ­ saved David from a full scale bloody war against Israel AND, in the aftermath, saved David from a devastating defeat at the hands of the Amalekites who in David's absence sacked Ziklag and made off with the families of his 600 men.  "And it came to pass, when David and his men were come to Ziklag on the third day, that the Amalekites had invaded the south, and Ziklag, and smitten Ziklag, and burned it with fire; And had taken the women captives, that were therein: they slew not any, either great or small, but carried them away, and went on their way. So David and his men came to the city, and, behold it was burned with fire; and their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, were taken captives. Then David and the people that were with him lifted up their voice and wept, until they had no more power to weep. And David's two wives were taken captives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite. And David was greatly distressed; for the people spake of stoning him, because the soul of all the people was grieved, every man for his sons and for his daughters: but David encouraged himself in the Lord his God. And David said to Abiathar the priest, Ahimelech's son, I pray thee, bring me hither the ephod. And Abiathar brought thither the ephod to David. And David enquired at the Lord saying, Shall I pursue after this troop? Shall I overtake them? And he answered him, Pursue: for thou shalt surely overtake them, and without fail recover all." (1 Sam. 30:1-8)  Sunday, February 17, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 3  So, Westboro Baptist Church declares forensic, never-ending war against same-sex marriage -- in the cause of God and truth in the earth. The huge sign and all our signs blare the following text: "God Hates fags and Same-Sex Marriage, and God Dooms America and Other Guilty Sodomite Nations. "And as it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man. They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and the flood came, and destroyed them all. Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed." (Luke 17:26-30) Look at the awkward interpretation in verse 27. The same clause is repeated two times. "They married wives..." "They were given in marriage..." It is obvious that two things have happened there. One of them is lately published. First they married wives. Second, they were given in marriage. That is, same-sex marriage. Any other interpretation does not explain the words. God trusts Westboro Baptist Church. "But as we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the gospel, even so we speak; not as pleasing men, but God, which trieth our hearts." (1 Thess. 2:4.)  We are the only voice on earth speaking right words about same-sex marriage. We are in the employment of the Lord our God, and he has entrusted this ministry to us, and trusted us with it, as we hasten to the coming of our Lord. There is a book of life. "And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works." (Rev. 20:12.)  The book of life is the book of all those that were elected and redeemed to life through Christ Jesus. God does not need or use books to judge by, but this is spoken to accommodate our finite minds. This book of life contains a register of all particular persons in whose salvation God, from all eternity determined to have his mercy glorified, and for whom Christ merited faith, repentance, and perseverance, that they should repent, believe, and be finally saved. The book of life shall be opened; that is to say, the decrees of God will be then published and made known, which now are sealed up in his breast and locked up in his archives. Then it will be seen who are appointed to life for the glorifying of God's free, rich, and sovereign grace, and whom he purposed to leave in their sins, and to perish for ever, for the exaltation of his justice. It is called "a book of life." It is not that God needs a book, but it notes the certainty of predestination. That is, God knows all and every of his elect, even as men know a thing which, for memory's sake, they put down in writing. This book of life shall be opened in that great day, because then it shall appear who were elect, and who reprobates; who truly believed in Christ and who not; who worshipped God in spirit and in truth, and who not; who walked with God as Noah, and who not; who set up God as the object of their fear, and who not; who followed the Lamb whither so ever he went, and who not; who were sincere, and who not; who preferred Christ above ten thousand worlds, and who preferred Barabbas before Jesus, and their farms, and their oxen, and their swine, yea, their very lusts, before a Saviour, a Redeemer; who are sheep, and who are goats. "When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: And before him shall be gathered all nations: and he shall separate them one from another; as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats: And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left." (Matt. 25:31-33)  Sunday, February 17, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 4  It will be clear who are sons and who are slaves; who have mourned for their own sins and the sins of the time, and who they are that have made a sport of sin. "Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another: and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name. And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth his own son that serveth him. Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that serveth him not." (Mal. 3:16-18.) "And the Lord said unto him, Go through the midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and that cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst thereof. And to the others he said in mine hearing, Go ye after him through the city, and smite: let not your eye spare, neither have ye pity; Slay utterly old and young, both maids, and little children, and women: but come not near any man upon whom is the mark; and begin at my sanctuary. Then they began at the ancient men which were before the house." (Ezek 9:4-6) We read much about this book of life in scripture. E.g.: "And I intreat thee also, true yokefellow, help those women which laboured with me in the gospel, with Clement also, and with other my fellowlabourers, whose names are in the book of life." (Phil. 4:3.) Vorsitus thinks it a speech taken from the custom of soldiers or cities, in which the chosen soldiers or citizens are by name written in a certain book or roll. Here, that book or roll is called "the book of life," because therein are written all the elect of God who are ordained to eternal life. "He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white raiment; and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life, but I will confess his name before my Father, and before his angels." (Rev. 3:5.) In this book of life, all "the just, that live by faith," are written. They are certain of eternal life, they shall never perish, and none can ever be plucked out of the Father's hand, nor out of Christ's hand. "My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: And I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My Father, which gave them me, is greater than all; and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father's hand. I and my Father are one." (John 10:27-30) God is said to have books metaphorically, as he does not need books to help his memory. He does all things by his infinite wisdom, eternal foreknowledge, counsel, government and judgment. Not so with men. For memory's sake, all important acts and decrees done in their contracts, council's, governments, etc, must be reduced to writing. And note that to not have our names blotted out of the book of life is to have them always remain therein; that is to say, they will enjoy eternal life and will enjoy eternal glory. I ask you beloved, what more can a soul desire? The names of the elect are written in the book of life. They do not obtain salvation by chance, but were elected of God to life and happiness before the foundation of the world. Now their names being once written in the book of life, they shall never, ever be blotted out of that book. In that book there is not one blot, as the salvation of the elect, are most sure and fixed and certain. "The beast that thou sawest was, and is not; and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition: and they that dwell on the earth shall wonder, whose names were not written in the book of life from the foundation of the world, when they behold the beast that was, and is not and yet is." (Rev. 17:8.) So our dear Lord Jesus Christ told us: "Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven." (Luke 10:20) I love you. Amen.  
