Sunday, April 29, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  America is going the way of ancient Israel, and of modern Israel. Just as the Lord God raised up prophets to warn them, even so it is today; to wit:  "But this thing commanded I them, saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people; and walk ye in all the ways that I have commanded you, that it may be well unto you. But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, but walked in the counsels and in the imagination of their evil heart, and went backward, and not forward. Since the day that your fathers came forth out of the land of Egypt unto this day I have even sent unto you all my servants the prophets, daily rising up early and sending them; Yet they hearkened not unto me, nor inclined their ear, but hardened their neck; they did worse than their fathers. Therefore thou shalt speak all these words unto them; but they will not hearken to thee; thou shalt also call unto them; but they will not answer thee. But thou shalt say unto them, This is a nation that obeyeth not the voice of the Lord their God, nor receiveth correction; truth is perished, and is cut off from their mouth." (Jer. 7:23-28.)  Beloved, the atrocities of the Babylonian Captivity may not have been adequately told and described; primarily because the preachers, whose job it is to fairly tell it, are too busy spinning ecclesiastical lies a/k/a "cunningly devised fables." (2 Pet. 1:16.) Moses and the prophets foretold the days to come when Jerusalem would be surrounded by merciless enemy troops, cutting off food to such a degree that parents would literally cook and eat their children and fight over who got the largest piece (chunk) of cooked child.  Nothing angers crowds on the street quite as much as our large signs declaring, "YOU WILL EAT YOUR CHILDREN." Jer. 19:9. To wit: (get the context: the Hellish, dooms day, environment) to wit: "Thus saith the Lord, Go and get a potter's earthen bottle. And take of the ancients of the people, and of the ancients of the priests; And go forth unto the valley of the son of Hinnom, which is by the entry of the east gate, and proclaim there the words that I shall tell thee, and say, Hear ye the word of the Lord, O kings of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem; Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, the which whosoever heareth, his ears shall tingle. Because they have forsaken me, and have estranged this place, and have burned incense in it unto other gods, whom neither they nor their fathers have known, nor the kings of Judah, and have filled this place with the blood of innocents; (think, abortion on demand, by law, some 50 million souls to date, and a president Obama, who calls himself a fierce advocate for all, paid for by the taxpayers, if needed, and his own teenage daughters if circumstances should ever require.); They have built also the high places of Baal, to burn their sons with fire for burnt offerings unto Baal, WHICH I COMMANDED NOT, NOR SPAKE IT, NEITHER CAME IT INTO MY MIND; (think Christmas, and all such extra-Scripture religious activities and ceremonies, not plainly taught and sanctioned in the Bible); Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that this place shall no more be called Tophet, nor The Valley of the Son of Hinnom, but the Valley of Slaughter. And I will make void the counsel of Judah and Jerusalem in this place; (i.e., roughly, I will make void the best advice and wisdom this or that society of people can afford to collectively live by ­ laws and mores of a culture); and I will cause them to fall by the sword before their enemies, and by the hands of them that seek their lives; and their carcases will I give to be meat for the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of the earth. And I will make this city desolate, and an hissing; every one that passeth thereby shall be  Sunday, April 29, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  astonished and hiss because of all the plagues thereof. AND I WILL CAUSE THEM TO EAT  THE FLESH OF THEIR SONS AND THE FLESH OF THEIR DAUGHTERS, AND THEY  SHALL EAT EVERYONE THE FLESH OF HIS FRIEND IN THE SIEGE AND  STRAITNESS, WHEREWITH THEIR ENEMIES, AND THEY THAT SEEK THEIR LIVES,  SHALL STRAITEN THEM." (Jer. 19:1-9.)  Beloved. The above passage from the prophet Jeremiah establishes beyond a doubt that Jeremiah believed and preached ­ with great plainness and boldness ­ that those who reject the Lord and His commandments, and who worship and serve other and strange gods ­ are apt to find themselves among "the pitiful women who have sodden their own children; they were their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my people." (Lam. 4:10.)  After the fact of the Siege of Jerusalem, Jeremiah had more to say ­ in the mode of "I told you so, and I warned you for many years. The false prophets ganged up with the government, and they all beat me and jailed me. Now that my warnings have come to pass, it is just and proper that I continue to preach these things to you lest worse things come to pass. I told you that you would eat your babies, and you ate them;" to wit: "Even the sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their young ones; the daughter of my people is become cruel, like the ostriches in the wilderness. The tongue of the sucking child cleaveth to the roof of his mouth for thirst; the young children ask bread, and no man breaketh it unto them. They that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets; they that were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghills. For the punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people is greater than the punishment of the sin of Sodom, that was overthrown as in a moment, and no hands stayed on her. Their visage is blacker than coal; they are not known in the streets; their skin cleaveth to their bones; it is withered, it is become like a stick. They that be slain with the sword are better than they that be slain with hunger; for these pine away, stricken through for want of the fruit of the field. The hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own children; they were their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my people. THE LORD HATH ACCOMPLISHED HIS FURY; he hath poured out his fierce anger, and hath kindled a fire in Zion, and it hath devoured the foundations thereof. The kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world, would not have believed that the adversary and the enemy should have entered into the gates of Jerusalem. For the sins of her prophets, and the iniquities of her priests, that have shed the blood of the just in the midst of her, They have wandered as blind men in the streets, they have polluted themselves with blood, so that men could not touch their garments. They cried unto them, Depart ye; it is unclean; Depart, depart, touch not; when they fled away and wandered, they said among the heathen, They shall no more sojourn there. The anger of the Lord hath divided them; he will no more regard them; they respected not the persons of the priests, they favored not the elders. As for us, our eyes have yet failed for our vain help; IN OUR WATCHING, WE HAVE WATCHED FOR A NATION THAT COULD NOT SAVE US. They hunt our steps, that we cannot go in our streets; our end is near, our days are fulfilled; for our end is come. Our persecutors are swifter than the eagles of the heaven; they pursued us upon the mountains, they laid wait for us in the wilderness." (Lam. 4:3-19)  Now let us consider the genesis (beginning) of the warning of God as to reducing mankind to cannibalistic practices as punishment for sin. We have seen that God sometimes punishes one sin by inflicting the incorrigible sinner with another and worse sin.  Sunday, April 29, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  For example, the first chapter of Romans plainly shows that gross idolatry has been mightily punished by God by the dreadful curse of sodomy. What could be worse? The doom of the sodomite shows upon his brow; to wit: "The show of their countenance doth witness against them; and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their soul (!) For they have rewarded evil unto themselves." (Isa. 3:9.) You must first see that the sodomite is branded by God as a GROSS IDOLATER; to wit: "When they had some little knowledge of God, they glorified Him not as God, neither were thankful (these brute beasts are ingrates); but became vain in their imaginations, (the well springs of images for idol worship) and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, and changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things." (Rom. 1:21-23.) That, Beloved, is God's own definition of soul-damning idolatry. And that, Beloved, is the only true word-picture of every sodomite ­ male or female ­ living or dead ­ and certainly in Hell. In addition, and because of their specially egregious idol worship and insult to the God-Head, "Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonour their own bodies between themselves (which brands them forever as filthy, leper-like sodomites who must call and cry out UNCLEAN, UNCLEAN, upon the approach of any and all mankind)." (Rom. 1:24.) "Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen. For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections; for even their women did change the natural use into that which is against nature; And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust one toward another; men with men working that which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves that recompence of their error which was meet. And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient... Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them." (Rom. 1:25-32) Well, in the economy of God, He punishes backslidden parents by creating conditions leading to their cannibalizing of their sons and daughters; to wit: "And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary unto me; then I will walk contrary unto you also in fury; and I, even I, will chastise you seven times for your sins. AND YE SHALL EAT THE FLESH OF YOUR SONS, AND THE FLESH OF YOUR DAUGHTERS SHALL YE EAT." (Lev. 26:27-29) Moreover, as we have seen abundantly in the Scriptures, sodomy incurred the death penalty in the economy of God; to wit: "If a man also lie with mankind as he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination; they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them." (Lev. 20:13) Those who fear God, Beloved, will say, The secret things belong to the Lord our God, but those things that are revealed belong to us and to our children that we may keep the ways of the Lord; all pursuant to the principle articulated in Isaiah, chapter 55: to wit:  Sunday, April 29, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  "For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. For as the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater; so shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth; it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it." (Isa. 55:8-11) Beloved, we must adjust our thinking to conform our thoughts to God's thoughts; as Luther said to Erasmus in "Bondage of the Will;" to wit: "Your thoughts of God ­ my dear Erasmus ­ are too human."  In the estimation of God, it is altogether appropriate, right, and just to punish rebels against the King by starving them to the point of eating the flesh of their sons and daughters; to wit: (You may not like what the Lord God Almighty says herein; but I assure you the trouble lies with you ­ not with God. And, you are with a long line of rebels who are kicking against the pricks, and heading for Hell. Moreover, you are probably in a long line of hypocrites ­ where the United States of America kills a baby every 24 seconds, aborts 31 percent of all babies, and has now aborted 50+ million babies since Roe v. Wade ­ and you squeamish hypocrites have got the unmitigated temerity to squawk at God, calling Him names ­ Norman Vincent Peale called Him a Dirty Bully for killing innocent, helpless people.) To wit: "The Lord shall bring a nation against thee from far, from the end of the earth, as swift as the eagle flieth; a nation whose tongue thou shalt not understand; A nation of fierce countenance, which shall not regard the person of the old, nor show favour to the young; And he shall besiege thee in all of thy gates, until thy high and fenced walls, come down, wherein thou trustedst, throughout all thy land; and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates throughout all thy land, which the Lord thy God hath given thee. AND THOU SHALT EAT THE FRUIT OF THINE OWN BODY, THE FLESH OF THY SONS AND OF THY DAUGHTERS, which the Lord thy God hath given thee, in the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee; so that the man that is tender among you, and very delicate, his eye shall be evil toward his brother, and toward the wife of his bosom, and toward the remnant of his children which he shall leave; So that he will not give to any of them of the flesh of his children whom he shall eat; because he hath nothing left him in the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee in all thy gates. The tender and delicate woman among you, which would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom, and toward her son, and toward her daughter, and toward her young one that cometh out from between her feet, and toward her children which she shall bear; FOR SHE SHALL EAT THEM FOR WANT OF ALL THINGS SECRETLY IN THE SIEGE AND STRAITNESS, WHEREWITH THINE ENEMY SHALL DISTRESS THEE IN THY GATES. If thou wilt not observe to do all the words of this law that are written in this book, that thou mayest fear this glorious and fearful Name, THE LORD THY GOD." (Deut. 28:49-58)  I love you. Amen.  
