Sunday, October 9, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean; from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse you. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them...and ye shall be my people, and I will be your God. I will also save you from all your uncleannesses...Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall loathe yourselves in your own sight for your iniquities and for your abominations. Not for your sakes do I this, saith the Lord God, be it known unto you; be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of Israel." Ezek. 36:25-32.  "Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy lovingkindness; according unto the multitude of  thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions. Wash me throughly from mine iniquity, and  cleanse me from my sin. For I acknowledge my transgressions; and my sin is ever before me.  Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight; that thou mightest be  justified when thou speakest, and be clear when thou judgest. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity;  and in sin did my mother conceive me. Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward parts; and in the  hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdom. Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean;  wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. Make me to hear joy and gladness; that the bones  which thou hast broken may rejoice. Hide thy face from my sins, and blot all my iniquities.  Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from  thy presence; and take not thy Holy Spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation; and  uphold me with thy free spirit. Then will I teach transgressors thy ways; and sinners shall be  converted unto thee. Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation, and my  tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness. O Lord, open thou my lips; and my mouth shall  show forth thy praise. For thou desirest not sacrifice; else would I give it; thou delightest not in  burnt offering. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O God,  thou wilt not despise. Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion; build thou the walls of Jerusalem.  Then shalt thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness, with burnt offering and whole burnt offering; then shall they offer bullocks upon thine altar." (Psalm 51:1-19).  Psalm 51, which is said to be a psalm and prayer of David when the prophet Nathan boldly confronted the guilty King David about his adultery and subsequent murder in the matter of Bathsheba ­ and David repented; to wit: "But the thing that David had done displeased the Lord. And the Lord sent Nathan unto David. And he came unto him, and said unto him, There were two men in one city; the one rich, and the other poor. The rich man had exceeding many flocks and herds; but the poor man had nothing, save, one little ewe lamb, which he had bought and nourished up; and it grew up together with him, and with his children; it did eat of his own meat, and drank of his own cup, and lay in his bosom, and was unto him as a daughter. And there came a traveller unto the rich man, and he spared to take of his own flock and of his own herd, to dress for the wayfaring man that was come unto him; but took the poor man's lamb, and dressed it for the man that was come to him. And David's anger was greatly kindled against the man; and he said to Nathan, As the Lord liveth, the man that hath done this thing shall surely die. And he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing, and because he had no pity. And Nathan said to David, THOU ART THE MAN. THUS SAITH THE LORD GOD OF ISRAEL, I anointed thee king over Israel, and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul; And I gave thee thy master's house, and thy master's wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and of Judah; and if that had been too little, I would moreover have given unto thee such  Sunday, October 9, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  and such things. Wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his  sight? Thou hast killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and hast taken his wife to be thy wife,  and hast slain him with the sword of Ammon. Now therefore the sword shall never depart from  thine house; because thou hast despised me, and hast taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be thy  wife. Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house, and I  will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbor, and he shall lie with thy  wives in the sight of this sun. For thou didst it secretly; but I will do this thing before all Israel,  and before the sun. And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord. And Nathan  said unto David, The Lord also hath put away thy sin; thou shalt not die. Howbeit, because by  this deed thou hast given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child also  that is born unto thee shall surely die. And Nathan departed unto his house. And the Lord struck the child that Uriah's wife bare unto David, and it was very sick. David therefore besought God  for the child; and David fasted, and went in, and lay all night upon the earth. And the elders of his house arose, and went to him, to raise him up from the earth; but he would not, neither did he eat bread with them. And it came to pass on the seventh day, THAT THE CHILD DIED." (2 Sam. 12:1-18).  "And that," thundered old Dr. Bob Schuler, many years ago during a famous sermon delivered at Bob Jones University, Greenville, South Carolina ­ "and that, was the First Crop of David's great sin, safely in the barn." I think I shall never forget that sermon of some 60+ years ago. It was of special interest to me, because one of Dr. Schuler's seven sons (Phil Schuler) was a friend and  fellow student with me at Bob Jones; and another of his sons (Jack Schuler, a very successful evangelist) paid my tuition for me at Bob Jones. Dr. Bob Schuler was pastor of the large First Methodist Church of Los Angeles, California; but remember this was many years before the Methodists had totally fallen away from every ounce of Gospel faith and practice. Dr. Bob Schuler was probably the last of the Old Time Gospel- preaching Methodists ­ and he died many years ago.  In any case, Dr. Bob was in his prime when he took his text and began to show us 1947 preacherboys at Bob Jones University exactly how the old Master Gospel Preacher plies His Trade. He opened with an anecdote about a bull dog, the kind with his legs fastened to his side ­ not his belly. It seems the dog was jogging at a comfortable pace down the middle of the street, when all of a sudden every feisty dog in the quiet neighborhood came out of nowhere and began to bark and yap at the bull dog, making runs at him to nip at his heels, and otherwise to harass him. The bull dog, undisturbed, continued at his leisurely jog down the middle of the street, looking neither to the right or to the left, as though there was not a feisty, barking, yapping, dog in the universe of God. Well, said Dr. Bob; I watched that educational and inspirational scene for a while, and then went inside, got on my knees, and prayed fervently; to wit: Dear God. Whatever that bull dog's got, I want. Amen. Gentlemen, when you are preaching the best you know how, and every feisty dog in town is yapping at your heels, led by the board of stewards, the women's missionary society, the building committee, etc., and they are all about to get you down; I say, maybe you will remember this little story about the bull dog, and keep on jogging down the middle of the street, turning neither to the right hand or the left.  And, with that, Dr. Bob read his text from the Galatians 6:7-9, preaching boldly against the outrageous sins of the theretofore impenitent King David; and extolling the courage of Nathan the prophet for warning the great king that he must repay fourfold for the four crops of David's sins of the flesh and corruption which David had sown, pursuant to the law of sowing and reaping; to wit: "For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption" Gal. 6:8. "And be not deceived; God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." (Gal. 6:7)  Sunday, October 9, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  "And David's anger was greatly kindled against the man; and he said to Nathan, As  the Lord liveth, the man that hath done this thing shall surely die; and he shall restore  the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing, and because he had no pity. And Nathan  said to David, THOU ART THE MAN. (2 Sam. 12:5-7)  Beloved. David sowed to his flesh in a string of events worthy of death, beginning one evening when he should have been commanding his troops in battle, and instead was up on his roof playing a little Peeping Tom with the good-looking woman next door, whose husband is off fighting David's wars for him. David has a cheap, tawdry affair with Bathsheba. One thing leads to another. It always does. The metaphor is elegant. What David did was sow to the flesh in despite to God and His Word, in brazen defiance of what he well knew to be the truth at each step of the way of his backslidden condition. Now it's harvest time, and be not deceived, God is not mocked. David mightily loved his illegitimate child born to Bathsheba. But "God struck the child...and it was very sick." 2 Sam. 12:15. Whereupon David threw himself upon the earth and fasted and prayed; and the seventh day the child died. When David saw the servants whispering he perceived that the child was dead; therefore David said unto his servants, Is the child dead? And they said, HE IS DEAD. BANG (!) THE FIRST CROP IS IN THE BARN (!)  "And be not deceived; God is not mocked. Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." (Gal. 6:7)  "And it came to pass after this, that Absalom the son of David had a fair sister, whose name was Tamar; and Amnon the son of David loved her. And Amnon was so vexed that he fell sick for his sister Tamar; for she was a virgin; and Amnon thought it hard for him to do anything to her. But Amnon had a friend, whose name was Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David's brother; and Jonadab was a very subtle man (not above plotting a little raping and incest now and again. And so it was that these two clowns cooked up a scheme for Amnon to rape Tamar, and involve David in the criminal plot between David's son and nephew.) Then David sent home to Tamar, saying, Go now to thy brother Amnon's house, and dress him meat. So Tamar went to her brother Amnon's house; and he was laid down. And she took flour, and kneaded it, and made cakes in his sight, and did bake the cakes. And she took a pan, and poured them out before him; but he refused to eat. And Amnon said, Have out all men from me. And they went out every man from him. (Then he tricked her into getting in bed with him and said), Come lie with me, my sister. And she answered him, Nay, my brother, do not force me; for no such thing ought to be done in Israel; do not thou this folly. And I, whither shall I cause my shame to go? And as for thee, thou shalt be as one of the fools in Israel. Now therefore, I pray thee, speak unto the king; for he will not withhold me from thee. HOWBEIT, HE WOULD NOT HEARKEN UNTO HER VOICE; BUT, BEING STRONGER THAN SHE, FORCED HER, AND LAY WITH HER." 2 Sam. 13:1-14. BANG (!) THE SECOND CROP IS IN THE BARN (!)  "And be not deceived; God is not mocked. Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." (Gal. 6:7)  Then the little weasel Amnon ­ having just committed the crimes of aggravated rape and incest upon his sister Tamar ­ turned on her like a mangy dog, hating her, and ordering her out of his house he had tricked her into for the perpetration of his crimes upon her; to wit: "Then Amnon hated her exceedingly; so that the hatred wherewith he hated her was greater than the love wherewith he had loved her. And Amnon said unto her, Arise, be gone. And she said unto him, There is no cause; this evil in sending me away is greater than the other that thou didst unto me. But he would not hearken unto her. Then he called his servant that ministered unto him, and said, Put now this woman out from me, and bolt the door after her. And she had a garment of divers colors upon her; for with such robes were the king's daughters that were virgins apparelled. Then his servant brought her out, and bolted the door after her. And Tamar put  Sunday, October 9, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  ashes on her head, and rent her garment of divers colors that was on her, and laid her hand on  her head, and went on crying. And Absalom her brother said unto her, Hath Amnon thy brother  been with thee? But hold now thy peace, my sister; he is thy brother; regard not this thing. So Tamar remained desolate in her brother Absalom's house. But when king David heard of all  these things, he was very wroth. And Absalom spake unto his brother Amnon neither good nor bad; for ABSALOM HATED AMNON, BECAUSE HE HAD FORCED HIS SISTER TAMAR. And it came to pass after two full years, that Absalom had sheepshearers in Baalhazor, which is beside Ephraim; and Absalom invited all the king's sons. And Absalom came to the king, and said, Behold now, thy servant hath sheepshearers; let the king, I beseech thee, and his servants go with thy servant. And the king said to Absalom, Nay, my son, let us not all now go, lest we be chargeable now unto thee. And he pressed him; howbeit he would not go, but blessed him. Then said Absalom, If not, I pray thee, let my brother Amnon go with us. And the king said unto him, Why should he go with thee? (You up to something??) But Absalom pressed him, that he let Amnon and all the king's sons go with him. Now Absalom had commanded his servants, saying, Mark ye now when Amnon's heart is merry with wine, and when I say unto you, Smite Amnon;  THEN KILL HIM, FEAR NOT; HAVE NOT I COMMANDED YOU? BE COURAGEOUS, AND BE VALIANT. AND THE SERVANTS OF ABSALOM DID UNTO AMNON AS ABSALOM HAD COMMANDED." 2 Sam. 13:15-29. BANG (!) THE THIRD CROP IS IN THE BARN (!)  "And be not deceived; God is not mocked. Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." (Gal. 6:7)  "Then all the king's sons arose, and every man gat him up upon his mule, and fled. And it came  to pass, while they were in the way, that tidings came to David, saying, Absalom hath slain all the king's sons, and there is not one of them left. Then the king arose, and tare his garments, and lay on the earth; and all his servants stood by with their clothes rent." (The so-called "tidings" that evoked such bitter grief and lamentations in David and his servants were utterly and completely false and fraudulent; and probably were the malicious work of Jonadab, the "friend" of Amnon who cooked up the scheme that got Tamar raped.) 2 Sam. 13:29-31.  Nevertheless, David's favored son Absalom killed another of David's sons because he raped David's daughter Tamar; and Absalom was forced to flee into the protection of his father-in-law for three years, and we read that David mourned for his son every day, and the soul of king David longed to go forth unto Absalom; for he was comforted concerning Amnon, seeing he was dead. David's inordinate love for his son Absalom was no doubt sinful; and the old Puritans had a saying,  that God often punishes one sin in his people by allowing them to fall and yield to other and worse sins. David loved Absalom too much, even after it was clear that Absalom was plotting to violently take over David's throne and kill David; to wit: "And the conspiracy was strong; for the people increased continually with Absalom. And there came a messenger to David, saying, The hearts of the men of Israel are after Absalom. And David said unto all his servants that were with him at Jerusalem, Arise, and let us flee; for we shall not else escape from Absalom; make speed to depart, lest he overtake us suddenly, and bring evil upon us, and smite the city with the edge of the sword." 2 Sam. 15:12-14. BANG (!) THE FOURTH CROP IS IN THE BARN (!)  "And be not deceived; God is not mocked. Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." (Gal. 6:7)  Nonetheless, "Now these be the last words of David...The Spirit of the Lord spake by me, and his word was in my tongue...Although my house be not so with God; yet he hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my salvation, and all my desire." 2 Sam. 23:1,2,5. I love you. Amen.  
