Sunday, October 16, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming; it stirreth up  the dead for thee, even all the chief ones (i.e., leaders at all levels of society) of  the earth; it hath raised up from their thrones ­ (i.e., a sarcastic reference to  their tomb stones, sepulchres) ­ all the kings of the nations. All they shall speak  and say unto thee, Art thou also become weak as we? Art thou become like  unto us? Thy pomp is brought down to the grave, and the noise of thy viols; the worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee. How art thou fallen from  Heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! How art thou cut down to the ground,  which didst weaken the nations! For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend  into Heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God; I will sit also upon the  mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north; I will ascend above the  heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High. Yet thou shalt be brought  down to Hell, to the sides of the pit. They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider thee, saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble,  that did shake kingdoms; That made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed  the cities thereof; that opened not the house of his prisoners?" Isa. 14:9-17.  These are the words of the dead, speaking of and to the living, who, when they see the carcass of the king of Babylon lying on the ground ­ (i.e., "In that night was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans slain. And Darius the Median took the kingdom, being about threescore and two years old." Dan. 5:30,31.) ­ crowds gather around, not quite sure it is the carcass of the mighty king of Babylon or not. He has until just recently held the power of life and death lightly in his hands. Now he looks like death itself, cast to the earth in lifeless fashion, besmeared with blood, and so disfigured as scarcely to be recognized. And the questioning is done in an insulting manner. Is this the man who made the whole world to tremble? Look at him now. How close are the ties that connect this world and the world to come! The hateful, one-sided inquisition continues: "All the kings of the nations, even all of them, lie in glory, every one in his own house. But thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch, and as the raiment of those that are slain, thrust through with a sword, that go down to the stones of the pit; as a carcase trodden under feet. Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou hast destroyed thy land, and slain thy people; the seed of evildoers shall never be renowned. Prepare slaughter for his children for the iniquity of their fathers; that they do not rise, nor possess the land, nor fiIl the face of the world with cities. For I will rise up against them, saith the Lord of hosts, and cut off from Babylon the name, and remnant, and son, and nephew, saith the Lord. I will also make it a possession for the bittern, and pools of water; and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction, saith the Lord of hosts. THE LORD OF HOSTS HATH SWORN, SAYING, SURELY AS I HAVE THOUGHT, SO SHALL IT COME TO PASS; AND AS I HAVE PURPOSED, SO SHALL IT STAND...This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth; and this is the hand that is stretched out upon all the nations. For the Lord of hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul it? and his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?" (Isa. 14:18-27)  If anything is certain among the affairs of the peoples gathered together as nations and determined to reject God and do societal mischief ­ ever since the Tower of Babel and the murderous tyrant Nimrod. Gen. 10:9 and 11:1, et seq; to wit: "And the whole earth was of one language, and one speech. And it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt there (probably the Euphrates River valley). And they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and burn them throughly. And they had brick for stone, and slime they had for morter. And they said, GO TO, LET US BUILD US A CITY AND A TOWER, WHOSE TOP MAY REACH UNTO HEAVEN; AND LET US MAKE US A NAME, LEST WE  Sunday, October 16, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  BE SCATTERED ABROAD UPON THE FACE OF THE WHOLE EARTH." Gen. 11:1-4.  (NOTE: Beloved. Was this not in bold defiance by the then-population of the whole earth, of the  express renewal of God's command to "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth?" Gen.  1:28 ­ "And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth" ­ Gen. 9:1.)  You see how quickly the masses of mankind totally and unabashedly rebel against their Creator. According to an Eastern tradition the mad project had progressed about 40 years when the Lord God radically interrupted it. Think of it. The entire population joined eagerly in contributing all their energies and their resources ­ driven by anger and fear ­ lest God send another world-wide flood. Nimrod kept the people whipped into a frenzy, with a constant harangue to the effect that the only way to make themselves secure from another such flood would be the City/Tower undertaking. Sheer madness. But it reflects what a powerful fear and dread the Flood left upon those nearest its actual occurrence. The preparation of the locally-available building materials, including the bricks and the pitch (i.e., the bitumen, or, asphaltos, according to the Septuagint version).  As an aside, from the very earliest of times, that region of Shinar (Babylon) has been (and is today) awash with oil and bitumen. It is no coincidence that the reference to fire, and burning, in Scripture, is usually associated with Shinar (Babylon). E.g., "For Tophet is ordained of old; yea, for the king it is prepared; he hath made it deep and large; the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone doth kindle it." Isa. 30:33. "The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the nations that forget God." (Psa. 9:17) "I made the nations to shake at the sound of his fall, when I cast him down to Hell with them that descend into the pit; and all the trees of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon, all that drink water, shall be comforted in the nether parts of the earth. They also went down into Hell with him unto them that be slain with the sword; and they that were his arm, that dwelt under his shadow in the midst of the heathen. To whom art thou thus like in glory and in greatness among the trees in Eden? Yet shalt thou be brought down with the trees of Eden unto the nether parts of the earth; thou shalt lie in the midst of the uncircumcized with them that be slain by the sword. This is Pharaoh and all his multitude, saith the Lord God." (Ezek. 31:16-18) These and many similar passages provide strong evidence that God's Elect children have ongoing correspondence with the reprobate damned in Hell ­ about substantive matters ­ and said correspondence continues throughout eternity. Upon reflection, we are everywhere identified as the judicial officers whose duties include judging angels and men ­ thus mandating that we deal with these miserable creatures on a regular basis throughout eternity. Beloved. This is no small matter; and it is a source of great comfort to the longsuffering saints, who suffered immeasurably at their hands when they dwelt in the world below; to wit: "Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world? And if the world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters? Know ye not that we shall judge angels? How much more things that pertain to this life?" (1 Cor. 6:2-3)  This has been a most important doctrine to our faith since the very beginning of the world; to, wit: "And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, To execute judgment upon all, and to convince (i.e., CONVICT) all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of ALL THEIR HARD SPEECHES, WHICH UNGODLY SINNERS HAVE SPOKEN AGAINST HIM." Jude 14,15. As I say, Beloved, this is no small matter. The prophet Jeremiah complained:  Sunday, October 16, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  "I am in derision daily, everyone mocketh me. For since I spake, I cried out, I cried violence and spoil; because the word of the Lord was a reproach unto me, and a derision, daily. Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name. But His word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay. For I heard the defaming of many, fear on every side. Report, say they, and we will report it. All my familiars watched for my halting, saying, Peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our revenge on him." (Jer. 20:7-10)  That, Beloved, constitutes articulation of a diabolical plot to destroy Jeremiah and silence his powerful prophetic message to the population of his day. We have experienced the same satanic treatment at Westboro Baptist Church, especially the last 20 years. Hence the colorful sign at the front of our sanctuary; to wit: FAG MEDIA SHAME (!). Look closer at the passage (Jer. 20:7-10); to wit:  1. So shocking was the experience to Jeremiah that he, at first, analyzed the situation imprudently, and charged the Lord foolishly; to wit: "O Lord, thou hast deceived me, and I was deceived; thou art stronger than I, and hast prevailed;" which is testimony to how viciously and virulently the verbal attack upon the young prophet Jeremiah really was. 2. "For since I spake," defines the time limit as being the beginning of hostilities coinciding with the first time Jeremiah opened his mouth to preach God Almighty's truth about the sins of the Jews harbingering ­ a/k/a adumbrating ­ the imminent outpouring of God's wrath. Even so, ever since Westboro Baptist Church began warning America and the world ­ some 20 years ago ­ that the surrender to the fags ­ heading up to same-sex marriage ­ signaled the final Judgment Day and the End of the World ­ we have been "in derision daily" and, "every one mocketh me," is our experience. 3. "I cried out, I cried violence and spoil," which is the only message of truth for this doomed society. Those preaching any other message are false prophets. Those who come with any other message are headed for Hell, and those who receive them are partaker of their evil deeds, and, logically, are likewise headed for Hell. Characteristically, The false prophets bring a message of peace, peace, when there is no peace. "They have healed also the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when there is no peace." Jer. 6:14. See, also, Jer. 8:11, and, "Think not that I am come to send peace on earth; I came not to send peace, but a sword." (Mat. 10:34) 4. "The word of the Lord was made a reproach unto me, and a derision, daily." The severe warnings of God unto all false teachers of religion, whether prophets, priests, rabbis, seers, muslims, imams, etc., are enough to frighten the hardest of hearts and dullest of minds. It is left to the Westboro Baptist Church to warn them ­ in effect and precisely ­ to PROPHESY AGAINST THE PROPHETS (!); To wit: "And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, PROPHESY AGAINST THE PROPHETS OF ISRAEL that prophesy and say thou unto them that prophesy out of their own hearts, Hear ye the word of the Lord; Thus saith the Lord God; WOE UNTO THE FOOLISH PROPHETS, THAT FOLLOW THEIR OWN SPIRIT, AND HAVE SEEN NOTHING (!) Because, even because, they have seduced my people, saying, Peace; and there was no peace." Ezek. 13:1-4,10. And even those preachers who claim to believe in Hell, preach on the subject very rarely, and timidly, and as though they were apologizing for God! E.g., Isaac Watts (1674-1748), in his book entitled, "The World To Come," promoted some very dangerous speculations about the everlasting nature of the sufferings of the damned in Hell ­ all couched in pious language.  Sunday, October 16, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  I will give you his verbatim account, but the short of his position is that he (Watts) is so tenderhearted, that he really wishes at some future time, God will change His mind and open the prison doors of Hell and let all the poor sinners out. That, Beloved, is nothing but Pure, Arminian, Warm-Spit heresy ! In the first place, those so-called poor sinners in Hell still hate God, and curse and blaspheme God every minute and every hour of every day; and no one of them has the least intention of repenting of their filthy sins; to wit: "And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God, which hath power over these plagues; and they repented not to give him glory. And the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast; and his kingdom was full of darkness; and they gnawed their tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their sores, AND REPENTED NOT OF THEIR DEEDS." (Rev. 16:9-11)  By one fell swoop, Watts would destroy the credibility of the Holy Scriptures, all the holy prophets since the world began, and the credibility of the Lord God Himself; to wit: "Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; (Note: The punishment of the rebels in Hell throughout all eternity is recompense which God promised to His servants, and this verse says it is a righteous thing for keeping this promise to His faithful and longsuffering servants ­ FOREVER.) And to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with His mighty angels, In flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; WHO SHALL be punished with EVERLASTING DESTRUCTION FROM THE PRESENCE OF THE LORD AND FROM THE GLORY OF HIS POWER." 2 Thes. 1:6-9.  Here are the heretical words, verbatim, of Isaac Watts himself, so that the church may be wise to the ways of the entrance of heresy; to wit: "The last Discourses of this book, especially ,,The Eternity of the Punishments of Hell, have been in latter and former years made a matter of dispute. Were I to pursue my inquiries into this doctrine only by the aids of the light of nature and reason, I fear my natural tenderness might warp me aside from the rules and the demands of strict justice, and the wise and holy government of the great God. But as I confine myself almost entirely to the revelation of Scripture, I am constrained to forget or to lay aside that softness and tenderness of animal nature, which might lead me astray, and to follow the unerring dictates of the Word of God." Now, Beloved, listen to the braying of an ugly jackass; to wit: "I must confess here, that if it were possible for the great and blessed God any other way to vindicate His own eternal and unchangeable hatred of sin, the inflexible justice of his government, and the wisdom of His severe threatenings; if it were also possible for Him, without this terrible execution (i.e., eternal Hellfire and damnation) to vindicate the veracity, sincerity and wisdom of the prophets and apostles, and Jesus Christ, chiefest of the Fathers Messengers; AND THEN, if the blessed God should at any time, consistent with His glorious perfections, RELEASE THOSE WRETCHED CREATURES FROM THEIR ACUTE PAINS, AND LONG IMPRISONMENT IN HELL, either by annihilation or (exile) to some unknown world upon a new foot of trial, I think I ought cheerfully and joyfully to accept of this appointment of God, for the good of millions of my fellow creatures, and add my joys and praises to all the songs and triumphs of the heavenly world in the day of such a divine and glorious release of these prisoners. ... This would be indeed such a new, such an astonishing and universal Jubilee, both for devils and wicked men, as would fill Heaven, earth, and Hell with hallelujahs and joy. The ways indeed of the great God and His thoughts are above our thoughts and our ways, as the heavens are above the earth." Isa. 55:8-11. Another verse mangled.  I love you. Amen.  
