Sunday, October 2, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in  pieces, and there be none to deliver. Whoso offereth praise  glorifieth me; and to him that ordereth his conversation aright  will I show the salvation of God." Psa. 50:22,23.  All other human talk is nothing but MISCHIEVOUS MADNESS. Eccl. 10:13. Thus, all Arminian argumentation should be classified as mischievous madness ­ however cleverly it may be dressed as legitimate Bible exposition. Just please remember all the while you may be reading in the Koran or the Book of Mormon, that the idiots who pretended to have written those kiddy-porn books under divine inspiration checked their brains at the door ­ hence, mad men escapees from the funny farm ­ who produced MISCHIEVOUS MADNESS. The wonder is that their followers can keep a straight face when they belch out that stuff. I'm talking about the paedophile Mohammed (who claimed he married a three-year-old girl to make an honest woman out of her!); and the juvenile delinquent Joseph Smith (who built a whole religion based on endless fornication and the clever use of beautiful King James Bible language as used extensively by Primitive Baptists who abounded where Smith grew up). And you take all this nonsensical Muslim stuff seriously?! How do you keep from laughing? The idiot Mohammed is in Hell, and has been there some 1,400 years, in torment, suffering in fire and brimstone. Furthermore, he set in motion a blasphemous religious system, which today numbers some 1.4 billion souls ­ every last one of whom is irreversibly bound for the same Hell-fire and damnation that Mohammed himself suffers in.  The same is true ­ only on a smaller scale ­ of Joseph Smith and the several millions of his erstwhile, polygamous, holy fornicating Mormon stud farm for jackasses ­ talk about MISCHIEVOUS MADNESS ­ talk about checking your brains at the door! This nation ­ nay, this world ­ is wallowing in stupidity. Wake up. Heaven is real. Hell is real. Consider what it is to die, and what the State and condition of the other World is. Forget the ship of fools, the arguments of fools, the nonsense of all but the King James Bible, 1611 edition, available virtually anywhere in the inhabited world. Stop your silly excuses. I say, CONSIDER WHAT IT IS TO DIE, AND WHAT THE STATE AND CONDITION OF THE OTHER WORLD IS. Listen up! It is to have to do with God immediately, either in WRATH or LOVE; and from His own hands, as well as from the immediate SENTENCE of HIS HOLY MOUTH, to receive thy WEAL or WOE. ­ That we come naked into this World, and go as naked out of it, was Job's Meditation first; after that David's; to wit: "But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave; for he shall receive me. Selah." (Psa. 49:15)  We shall carry nothing away, that is, of what belongs to this world; then after him Solomon the Son, Eccl. 5:15. "As he came forth of his mother's womb, naked shall he return to go as he came, and shall take nothing of his Labor, which he may carry away in his hand." The effect of which divine meditation comes to this, To put secure and careless man upon the consideration of his immortal SOUL'S condition, which first cometh into the World naked (AS WELL AS HIS BODY); And poor thing! the meaning of its first cry (if the soul itself could then speak out its mind) is, I am AN EMPTY THING, AND HAVE BROUGHT NOTHING WITH ME; WHO WILL SHOW ME ANY GOOD? But after its being grown up, it begins to find a World richly furnished with all things to enjoy, as the apostle's phrase is, "Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not highminded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who giveth us richly all things to enjoy." (1 Tim. 6:17) But yet again when he goes out of this world, he is then turned out of House and Home, as perfectly naked as he came into it; and as Rev. 18:14.  Sunday, October 2, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  "The fruits that THY SOUL lusted after are departed from thee, and all things which are dainty and goodly, are departed from thee, and thou shalt find them no more at all." (Rev. 18:14)  Death is therefore compared unto the breaking or failing of a Merchant or Tradesman proving Bankrupt; Lk. 16:9; to wit: "And I (i.e., the Lord Jesus) say unto you, Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness; that, when ye fail (i.e., go into bankruptcy when the soul has lost all at death), they may receive you into everlasting habitations (i.e., eternal wealth and honor and glory)." (Lk. 16:9). Never was a more elegant and poetic word-picture of death and dying drawn than that of Solomon's in the last chapter of Ecclesiastes; to wit:  "Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them; While the sun, or the light, or the moon, or the stars, be not darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain; In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are few, and those that look out of the windows be darkened, And the doors shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the grinding is low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of musick shall be brought low; Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall be in the way, and the almond tree shall flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall fail; because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets; Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the cistern. THEN SHALL THE DUST RETURN TO THE EARTH AS IT WAS; AND THE SPIRIT SHALL RETURN UNTO GOD WHO GAVE IT. ...Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter; Fear God, and keep His commandments; for this is the whole duty of man. For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil." (Eccl. 12:1-7,13,14) All of which brings us to the fourth point of the five points of Calvinism ­ to wit: IRRESISTIBLE GRACE ­ which supplies the "I" of the "TULIP" ACRONYM. This blessed doctrine teaches us that when the Holy Ghost sets out to bring a man to Christ, that man, sooner or later, is drawn ­ IRRESISTIBLY ­ to fear the Lord, to fear the fires of Hell, to repent of all his sins, to earnestly seek the Lord until he finds Him and becomes a true disciple of Jesus Christ, and thereupon takes up his cross and forsakes all to follow Him, bringing forth fruits of repentance day by day. And, I repeat, this whole procedure is quite IRRESTIBLE on the part of the awakened sinner, who happily sings, "Need I that a law should bind me captive unto Thee? Captive is my heart, rejoicing never to be free!"  The conversion of Paul on the road to Damascus is one of the most dramatic such events in sacred Christian history. See if you think Paul's response to the Lord's entreaty was resistible; to wit: "And Saul, yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, went unto the high priest, And desired of him letters to Damascus to the synagogues, that if he found any of this way, whether they were men or women, he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem. And as he journeyed, he came near Damascus: and suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven: And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. And he trembling and astonished said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do. And the men  Sunday, October 2, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  which journeyed with him stood speechless, hearing a voice, but seeing no man. And  Saul arose from the earth; and when his eyes were opened, he saw no man: but they  led him by the hand, and brought him into Damascus. And he was three days without  sight, and neither did eat nor drink. And there was a certain disciple at Damascus,  named Ananias; and to him said the Lord in a vision, Ananias. And he said, Behold, I  am here, Lord. And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the street which is  called Straight, and enquire in the house of Judas for one called Saul, of Tarsus: for,  behold, he prayeth, And hath seen in a vision a man named Ananias coming in, and  putting his hand on him, that he might receive his sight. Then Ananias answered,  Lord, I have heard by many of this man, how much evil he hath done to thy saints at  Jerusalem: And here he hath authority from the chief priests to bind all that call on thy  name. But the Lord said unto him, Go thy way: for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to  bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel: For I will  shew him how great things he must suffer for my name's sake. And Ananias went his  way, and entered into the house; and putting his hands on him said, Brother Saul, the  Lord, even Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way as thou camest, hath sent me,  that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost. And  immediately there fell from his eyes as it had been scales: and he received sight  forthwith, and arose, and was baptized. And when he had received meat, he was  strengthened. Then was Saul certain days with the disciples which were at  Damascus. And straightway he preached Christ in the synagogues, that he is the Son  of God. But all that heard him were amazed, and said; Is not this he that destroyed  them which called on this name in Jerusalem, and came hither for that intent, that he  might bring them bound unto the chief priests? But Saul increased the more in  strength, and confounded the Jews which dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is  very Christ. And after that many days were fulfilled, the Jews took counsel to kill him:  But their laying await was known of Saul. And they watched the gates day and night  to kill him. Then the disciples took him by night, and let him down by the wall in a  basket. And when Saul was come to Jerusalem, he assayed to join himself to the  disciples: but they were all afraid of him, and believed not that he was a disciple. But  Barnabas took him, and brought him to the apostles, and declared unto them how he  had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him, and how he had  preached boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus. And he was with them coming in  and going out at Jerusalem. And he spake boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus, and  disputed against the Grecians; but they went about to slay him." (Acts 9:1-29)  Now, Beloved, when Paul set out that day to travel from Jerusalem to Damascus, the very last thing in the world he had on his mind was converting to Christianity before nightfall. In fact, judging by his conduct of persecuting Christians, he was probably the last citizen of the Roman Empire likely ever to be converted to Christianity. He would probably have resisted such a thing with all his will and might; even at that very moment breathing out threatenings and slaughter to snuff out Christianity. (Acts 9:1) But something happened. We read that as Saul traveled and came near Damascus, "suddenly" a great light from Heaven knocked him down; and, from that moment to the end of an amazing life of service to the risen Savior, Paul was the world's first and foremost example of IRRESISTIBLE GRACE, the Fourth of the Five Points of Five-Point Calvinism.  Beloved, the conversion of the apostle Paul was nailed down once and for all on the Damascus road when ­ as Paul witnessed to the Roman king; to wit: "Whereupon, O king Agrippa, I WAS NOT DISOBEDIENT UNTO THE HEAVENLY VISION" ­ that, or some version of that, being the experience of all God's Elect. (Acts 26:19).  Sunday, October 2, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  "All we LIKE SHEEP have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity OF ALL US (SHEEP)." (Isa. 53:6)  Listen. God's Elect ­ His sheep ­ go astray in a manner entirely unlike Satan's goats. "I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine." (Jn. 10:14).  "But ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto you. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me; and I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My Father, which gave them me, is greater than all; and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father's hand." (Jn. 10:26-29) Our Lord Jesus speaks of certain men of Adam's race who lovingly belonged to the Father from before the foundation of the world, and who were given to the Son for divine education and safekeeping; and for whom ­ EXCLUSIVELY ­ and AMAZINGLY ­ JESUS PRAYED (!)(!)(!) To wit:  "I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the world; thine they were, and thou gavest them me; and they have kept thy word (are they not God's Everlastingly Elect? whose names are written in Heaven?)! Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given me are of thee. For I have given unto them the words which thou gavest me; and they have received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me. I PRAY FOR THEM: I PRAY NOT FOR THE WORLD, BUT FOR THEM WHICH THOU HAST GIVEN ME; FOR THEY ARE THINE." (Jn. 17:6-9)  Beloved. How could it be plainer? This matter of who is to be saved and who is to be lost was thoroughly and completely settled in the dim and distant eternal ages past. So much so that the Lord Jesus refused to even pray for those who are absolutely predestinated to be lost; to wit: "I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me; for they are thine." (Jn. 17:9). Who are these but God's Elect? A great multitude that no man could number out of every nation; whose names are written in Heaven; who are subsequently born and live victorious lives of tribulation for the glory of the Lamb; and are each and every one of them in Heaven at last; to wit:  "After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands; and cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb. And all the angels stood round about the throne, and about the elders and the four beasts, and fell before the throne on their faces, and worshipped God, saying, Amen; Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen. And one of the Elders answered, saying unto me, What are these which are arrayed in white robes? and whence came they? And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said to me, These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in His temple; and He that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters; and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes." (Rev. 7:9-17)  I love you. Amen.  
