Sunday, December 4, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 1  "And thus did Hezekiah throughout all Judah, and wrought that which was good, and right, and truth before the Lord his God. And in every work that he began in the service of the house of God, and in the law, and in the commandments, to seek his God, he did it with all his heart, and prospered." 2 Chron. 31:20,21.  These are the words chosen by the Holy Ghost about Hezekiah, in what may be called a short biographical sketch about one king of ancient Judah, whom the Lord his God chose to "carry forth the filthiness out of the holy place, for our fathers have trespassed, and done that which was evil in the eyes of the Lord our God, and have forsaken him, and have turned away their faces from the habitation of the Lord, and turned their backs." 2 Chron. 29:5,6.  Further, Hezekiah wasted no time in seeking to serve the Lord after his inauguration as king of Judah; to wit: "Hezekiah began to reign when he was five, and twenty years old, and he reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem. And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that David his father had done. HE, IN THE FIRST YEAR OF HIS REIGN, IN THE FIRST MONTH, OPENED THE DOORS OF THE HOUSE OF THE LORD, AND REPAIRED THEM. And he brought in the priests and the Levites, and gathered them together into the east street, And said unto them, Hear me, ye Levites, sanctify now yourselves, and sanctify the house of the Lord God of your fathers, AND CARRY FORTH THE FILTHINESS OUT OF THE HOLY PLACE. For our fathers have trespassed, and done that which was evil in the eyes of the Lord our God, and have forsaken him, and have turned away their faces from the habitation of the Lord, and turned their backs." 2 Chron. 29:1-6.  It is the uttermost mark of contempt and disrespect for the creatures to turn their backs upon their Creator. Especially is this true when the ungrateful, brute of a creature performs his act of ingratitude openly and notoriously, while the Creator is engaged in warning the sinful brute creature ­ through His prophets ­ to flee from the wrath to come ­ which is the kindest act of genuine love in the universe of man; to wit: To repent and flee from the wrath to come. See: Matt. 3:7; Lk.3:7. "Then said he to the multitude that came forth to be baptized of him, O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come?" Lk. 3:7. And see, Lev. 19:17,18; to wit: "Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart; thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself; I am the Lord." (Lev. 19:17,18)  And so you see, Beloved, according to Lev., chapter 19:17,18, NOT TO REBUKE AND WARN A NEIGHBOR THAT HIS SIN IS TAKING HIM TO HELL, IS THE WORST KIND OF HATRED. TRUE LOVE IS TO WARN HIM, AND THE TRUE MEANING OF "THOU SHALT LOVE THY NEIGHBOR AS THYSELF." Lev. 19:18(b). The old preachers have died off, and I believe that this fact is largely to blame for the deep apostacy that has settled upon this nation and the world. And I do not believe there is any cure for our predicament. It takes at least a generation to effect such a cure, and we are going in the opposite direction. That is to say, the apostacy that engulfs this evil world is rapidly getting worse.  Old Dr. Bob Jones warned his generation (c. 1947) that this nation needs about 50 Jonathan Edwardses turned loose in it. Jonathan Edwards is famous for his sermon, "Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God," that sparked the so-called Great Awakening in 18th Century America ­ which was a revival of Calvinism that swept New England. Our dear Lord Jesus was the greatest preacher ­ and the greatest TEACHER of preachers ­ who ever lived. He chose twelve; to wit:  Sunday, December 4, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 2  "And he goeth up into a mountain, and calleth unto him whom he would; and they came unto him. And he ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he might send them forth TO PREACH...and Simon he surnamed Peter; and James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James; HE SURNAMED THEM BOANERGES, which is, The Sons of Thunder." (Mark 3:13-17) There is a good and proper sense in which all true Gospel Preachers are ,,The Sons of Thunder. Verily, God anointed, "Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression; and the house of Jacob their sins." Isa. 58:1. Gill: "These words were directed to the prophet, and so the Targum expresses it, ,,O prophet, cry with thy throat, and so it is in the original, cry with the throat; which is an instrument of speech; and it denotes a loud, strong, vehement cry, when a man exerts his voice, that he may be heard, when as it were, he rends his throat, when, also, it shows the intenseness of his spirit, and the vehemence of his affections, and the importance of what he delivers; and this the prophet is encouraged to do; and spare not ­ the voice, throat, lungs ­ nor the people he was sent to, neither cause not, cease not from crying, refrain not from speaking; lift up thy voice like a trumpet ­ like the voice or sound of a trumpet when it may be heard afar off, and gives an alarm, AND TO WHICH THE GOSPEL MINISTRY IS SOMETIMES COMPARED. Isa. 27:13 (,,And it shall come to pass in that day, that the great trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come which were ready to perish in the land of Assyria, and the outcasts in the land of Egypt, and shall worship the Lord in the holy mount at Jerusalem.) All which shows the manner in which the ministers in the word should deliver it, publicly, boldly, with ardor and affection; and, also, the deafness and stupidity of the people which require it!" Isaiah is said to have preached the Gospel more than 75 years; and he certainly must have given much attention to how he ought to have perfected the art; to wit:  "Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins." (Isa. 58:1) Beloved. Look at the context. Behold the grievous sins that must be identified and rooted out ­ even as in the ministries of John the Baptist and the dear Lord Jesus; to wit:  "The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart; and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come; He shall enter into peace; they shall rest in their beds; each one walking in his uprightness. BUT DRAW NEAR HITHER, YE SONS OF THE SORCERESS, THE SEED OF THE ADULTERER AND THE WHORE. Against whom do ye sport yourselves? against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? are ye not children of transgression? a seed of falsehood, Enflaming yourselves with idols under every green tree, slaying the children in the valleys under the clifts of the rocks? Among the smooth stones of the stream is thy portion; they, THEY are thy lot; even to them hast thou poured a drink offering, thou hast offered a meat offering. Should I receive comfort in these? Upon a lofty and high mountain hast thou set thy bed; even thither wentest thou up to offer sacrifice. Behind the doors also, and the posts hast thou set up thy remembrance; for thou hast discovered thyself to another than me, and art gone up; thou hast enlarged thy bed, and made thee a covenant with them; thou lovest thy bed where thou sawest it." (Isaiah 57:1-8)  Beloved, the prophet is here exposing the filthy bed of the prostitute at the time and place signified by this verse; to wit:  "And thou wentest to the king with ointment, and didst increase thy perfumes, and didst send thy messengers far off, AND DIDST DEBASE THYSELF EVEN UNTO HELL." (Isa. 57:9)  Sunday, December 4, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 3  The whore's bed is for the king, and she keeps it as a place of grand and happy "remembrances" thereby to attract and keep a well-heeled clientele ­ to worship with her upon the mountain tops and under every green tree; to wit: Temples and altars, which are usually built on high places, where they commit spiritual adultery; that is; Idolatry, in imitation of the heathen. Nowadays, sadly, there is no need to construct temples and plant trees and groves to commit SPIRITUAL adultery and fornication; as there are hotels and motels aplenty for the commission of PHYSICAL AND LITERAL ADULTERY AND FORNICATION.  Yes, Beloved, there is great need for God's true preachers and prophets today, on all street corners and in every park and public square, to, "Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins." Isa. 58:1. Furthermore, the conditions of our day are far worse than in the Bible days ­ New Testament as well as Old. Jeremiah cried out in desperation; to wit:  "Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that executeth judgment, that SEEKETH THE TRUTH; and I will pardon it." (Jer. 5:1)  "They profess that they know God; but in works they deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate." (Titus 1:16)  "O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou hast stricken them, but they have not grieved (i.e., for their sins); thou hast consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction; they have made their faces harder than a rock; they have refused to return." Jer. 5:3. Faced with such rebellion and hard-hearted stubborn Jews, the young prophet Jeremiah thought within himself, I must be preaching to poor, uneducated people, unsophisticated in the ways of the higher classes. "I will get me unto the great men, and will speak unto them; for they have known the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God." Jer. 5:5. "I WILL GET ME UNTO THE GREAT MEN," INDEED. Bad mistake, Jeremiah. On the face of things, with the benefit of the wisdom of James, the truth of God is eternal. Ergo, "My brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect of persons. For if there come unto your assembly a man with a gold ring, in goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment; And ye have respect to him that weareth the gay clothing, and say unto him, Sit thou here in a good place; and say to the poor, Stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool; Are ye not then partial in yourselves, and are become judges of evil thoughts? Hearken, my beloved brethren, Hath not God chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised to them that love him? But ye have despised the poor. Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you before the judgment seats? Do not they blaspheme that worthy name by the which ye are called?" Jas. 2:1-7. "I WILL GET ME UNTO THE GREAT MEN," INDEED. Bad mistake, Jeremiah. Jer. 5:5.  How to preach and teach is further elucidated at 1Cor. 2:1, et seq.; to wit: "And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of God. For I determined not to know any thing among you save Jesus Christ, and Him crucified. And I was with you in weakness and in fear, and in much trembling. And my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of mans wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power; That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God." 1 Cor. 2:1-5. There is a powerful sense in which a true New Testament church is a wonderful preaching machine; prophesying and preaching to the whole world rather continuously, with each part functioning as it ought; to wit:  ",,Who is she that looketh forth as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners?" (Song of Solomon 6:10)  Sunday, December 4, 2011  Sermon Outline...page 4  Take, for example, the verse at Micah 6:9; to wit: "The Lords voice crieth unto the city, and the  man of wisdom shall see thy name; hear ye the rod, and who hath appointed it." Mic. 6:9. Here  the Lord God is so clearly and so personally involved ­ immediately ­ that all mankind might  expect to experience the supernatural and bone-chilling and mountain-shaking voice of God Himself; to-wit: "THE LORDS VOICE CRIETH UNTO THE CITY(!)(!)(!)." Micah 6:9.  Now compare this passage in Micah 6:9 with the passage in 2 Timothy 4:1-4; to wit: "I CHARGE THEE THEREFORE BEFORE GOD AND THE LORD JESUS CHRIST, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom: PREACH THE WORD; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine. For the time will come" ­ (Beloved, that time has most certainly come upon us, by all vital indicia.) ­ "when they will not endure sound doctrine" ­ (There has been a wholesale rejection of the Five Points of Calvinism ­ world-wide ­ in favor of rank Arminianism, i.e., Free-Willism.) ­ "but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, AND SHALL BE TURNED UNTO FABLES." 2 Timothy 4:1-4.  Beloved. You have seen how Westboro Baptist Church is a glorious body of believers in Christ Jesus, existing to wage spiritual warfare against Satan and his demon spirits; and that pursuant to this beautiful metaphor, our Father has not given us a spirit of fear, but of power, and love, and a disciplined mind; and that no weapon that is formed against us will ever prosper; and that we go forth to battle with profound confidence, "even as Zebulun and Naphtali, a people that jeoparded their lives unto the death in the high places of the field." Judges 5:18. Further, WBC is required, as the Sons of Thunder of God, Boanerges, to cause the sinners of the sodomites to know and understand their filthy, soul-damning abominations. Not merely to have a scant head knowledge such as may be contemplated by such verses as Isa. 58:1. Call it at least a step above ordinarily preaching; to wit: "Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations." Ezek. 16:1,2. I say, compare Isa. 58:1 to Ezek. 16:2; to wit: "Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins." Isa. 58:1.  It seems to have been immaterial to the apostle whether you called what he did preaching or testifying or simply the word, or any number of other things ­ just so one got the message. For example, Paul is writing some elders of the church at Ephesus where Paul had preached for three years, in which he called his ministry there testifying at one place, and preaching at another; to wit: "And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the elders of the church. And when they were come to him, he said unto them, Ye know, from the first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with you at all seasons, Serving the Lord with all humility of mind, and with many tears, and temptations, which befell me by the lying in wait of the Jews: And how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have shewed you, and have taught you publickly, and from house to house, Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. And now, behold, I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there: Save that the Holy Ghost witnesseth in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions abide me. But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God. And now, behold I know that ye all among whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of God, shall see my face no more. Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men. For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God." (Acts 20:17-27) I love you. Amen.  
