Sunday, April 14, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another,  love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous: Not rendering evil for evil,  or railing for railing: but contrariwise blessing; knowing that ye are  thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing. For he that will  love life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and  his lips that he speak no guile. But sanctify the Lord God in your  hearts: and be ready always to give an answer to every man that  asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you with meekness and  fear: having a good conscience; that, whereas they speak evil of you,  as evildoers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good  conversation in Christ." 1 Pet. 3:8-16.  The universal evil of mankind had reached its zenith, with none but righteous Noah, and his family morally fit to remain alive on the earth. The Holy Ghost records the ungodly condition of affairs, and God's determination to destroy the earth and all living things as follows; to wit:  "And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. And it repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart. And the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the earth both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the air, for it repenteth me that I have made them. But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord. These are the generations of Noah: Noah was a just man and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God. And Noah begat three sons, Shem, Ham and Japheth. The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence. And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth. And God said unto Noah The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence through them; and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth. Make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make to the ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch. A window shalt thou make to the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou finish it above; and the door of the ark shalt thou set in the side thereof; with lower, second, and third stories shalt thou make it. And, behold I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life, from under heaven; and every thing that is in the earth shall die. But with thee will I establish my covenant; and thou shalt come into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons' wives with thee. And take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and thou shalt gather it to thee; and it shall be for food for thee. Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded him, so did he. And the Lord said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house into the ark; for thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation. Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male and his female: and of beasts that are not clean by two, the male and his female. Of fouls also of the air by sevens, the male and the female; to keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth. For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights; and every living substance that I have made will I destroy from off the face of the earth. And Noah did according unto all that the Lord commanded him. And Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth. And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him, into the ark, because of the waters of the flood. Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are  Sunday, April 14, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 2  not clean, and of fowls, and of every thing that creepeth upon the earth, There  went in two and two unto Noah into the ark, and male and the female, as God had  commanded Noah. And it came to pass after seven days, that the waters of the  flood were upon the earth. In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second  month, the seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the fountains of  the great deep broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened. And the rain  was upon the earth forty days and forty nights. In the selfsame day entered Noah  and Shem and Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah and Noah's wife and the three  wives of his sons with them, into the ark... And they went in unto Noah into the  ark, two and two of all flesh, wherein is the breath of life. And they that went in,  went in male and female of all flesh, as God had commanded him; and the Lord  shut him in. And the flood was forty days upon the earth; and the waters  increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lifted up above the earth. And the  waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the earth; and the ark went  upon the face of the waters. And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth;  and all the high hills, that were under the whole heaven, were covered. Fifteen  cubits upward did the waters prevail; and the mountains were covered. And all  flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast, and  of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, and every man: All in whose  nostrils was the breath of life, of all that was in the dry land, died. And every living  substance was destroyed which was upon the face of the ground, both man, and  cattle, and the creeping things, and the fowl of the heaven; and they were  destroyed from the earth: and Noah only remained alive, and they that were with  him in the ark." (Gen. 6:5-7:23)  In these last hours of the very last days of all, we are comforted by the words of several credible expositors, as our experiences living in this wicked and sinful generation bear witness to it all. Look at these words: "The LORD shut him in." Gill says "or shut the door after him, he being the last that entered; and which he could not so well shut himself, at least so close, as was done by the Lord, or by the angels; and this was done to keep out the waters, and all within in safety; and to shut out others, and preserve Noah from the rage of wicked men, as well as the violence of the waters. Some have thought that not so much the door of the ark is meant, as the way to it, the pensile bridge which was necessary for the creatures to enter the ark; which being carried away by the force of the waters near the ark, that not being joined to it, precluded all access of the scoffers, whose scoffs were soon turned to lamentation and howling." Matthew Henry says: "As Noah continued his obedience to God, so God continued his care of Noah; and here it appeared to be a very distinguishing care; for the shutting of this door set up a partition wall between him and all the world besides. God shut the door, 1. To secure him, and keep him safe in the ark. The door must be shut, lest the waters should break in and sink the ark, and very fast, lest any without should break it down. 2. To exclude all others, and keep them forever out." Matthew Poole says: "Shut the door after, or upon him, for his good and safety, against the fury either of the waters or of the people. This God did in some extraordinary manner." Adam Clarke says: "This seems to imply that God took him under his especial protection, and as he shut HIM in, so he shut the OTHERS out. God had waited 120 years upon that generation; they did not repent; they filled up the measure of their iniquities, and then wrath came upon them to the uttermost." JFB says: "The `shutting him in' intimated that Noah had become the special object of divine care and protection, and that to those without, the season of grace was over."  I love you. Amen.  Sunday, April 14, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 3  "And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as God had commanded him: and the Lord shut him in." (Gen. 7:16.)  God saved the lives of Noah and his family from the raging, howling mob. "Which sometime (beforetime or afore time) were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water." (1 Pet. 3:20.) Beloved that looks a lot like what Westboro Baptist Church sees in this last generation, that is, in these very last of the last days of all. An increasing rage of the rebellious mob. Can we not say that these things that the Holy Ghost quietly said concerning the conditions that Noah and his family were under before God saved them with the water, could also be said of Lot and Enoch?  "And they said, Stand back. And they said again, This one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge: now will we deal worse with thee, than with them. And they pressed sore upon the man, even Lot, and came near to break the door. But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the house to them, and shut the door. And they smote the men that were at the door of the house with blindness, both small and great: so that they wearied themselves to find the door." (Gen. 19:9-11)  "By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death; and WAS NOT FOUND, because God had translated him: for before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God." (Heb. 11:5)  Beloved. In at least three instances Enoch, Lot, Noah -- society had grown so depraved and perverted that the prophet and his family were threatened with death at the murderous hands of unruly mobs. Which was a sign that such a society was doomed. Those who threaten Westboro with death and destruction should beware! Those who would be admonished by the words of the dear Lord Jesus, Beware! Listen!  "And as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of the son of man, they did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark, and the flood came, and destroyed them all." (Lk. 17:26,27)  Otherwise said: "But as the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.  For as in the days that were before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and  giving in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, And knew not until the flood came, and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be." (Matt. 24:37-  39.) And so Noah was delivered from a murderous death at the hands of the society he lived in. Otherwise said: "By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death; AND WAS NOT  FOUND, because God had translated him: for before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God." (Heb. 11:5.) So a faithful God delivered Enoch, his faithful servant by hiding  him from the murderous society in which he lived and preached. Through these intervening  centuries since Adam, in multitudinous ways, soul satisfying relief has been revealed, following  the same pattern, to wit; by the time that society has passed beyond hope, such that the whole  society is after the blood of the preacher, and it is the bloody determination of all mankind to  destroy the Church of the Lord Jesus, and to murder His servants; I say, by that time, God will employ some glorious, intricate miracle to deliver God's Elect. Put like this; Enoch was not, because God took him and hid him, and "he was not found." Never fear, beloved pilgrim, the  way, or ways of your deliverance has already been prepared by your faithful Creator.  Sunday, April 14, 2013  Sermon Outline...page 4  However many times, however many ways ­ wherever, whenever ­ the way has been prepared.  The integrity of the God-head is at risk here! And make no mistake, our Father is faithful to remember your work of faith and labor of love; your reasonable service, and these matters will all be resolved in favor of the God-head. Again, and in other words, Noah and his little family were in mortal danger of being murdered by the society he preached to -- simply because they did not like his preaching. And again, otherwise said, get the picture beloved, outside of Lot's house.  "Before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of Sodom, compassed the house round, both old and young, all the people from every quarter: And they called unto Lot, and said unto him, Where are the men which came in to thee this night? Bring them out unto us, that we may know them. And Lot went out at the door unto them, and shut the door after him, And said, I pray you, brethren, do not so wickedly. Behold now, I have two daughters which have not known man; let me, I pray you, bring them out unto you, and do ye to them as is good in your eyes: only unto these men do nothing; for therefore came they under the shadow of my roof. And they said, Stand back, And they said again, This one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge: now will we deal worse with thee, than with them. And they pressed sore upon the man, even Lot, and came near to break the door. But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the house to them, and shut to the door. And they smote the men that were at the door of the house with blindness, both small and great: so that they wearied themselves to find the door." (Gen. 19:4-11)  "Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire." (Jude 7)  "And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes condemned them with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto those that after should live ungodly; And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked; (For that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds;) The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished:" (2 Pet. 2:6-9)  Gill says: "and thus they rescued Lot from the fury and rage of the men of Sodom, and prevented his daughters being exposed unto them, as he had offered." Matthew Henry says: "They threaten him, and lay violent hands upon him; and the good man is in danger of being pulled in pieces by this outrageous rabble." Make no mistake, thou child of God, these men will kill you, if they get half a chance. That scenario has been repeated throughout history, Lot, Enoch and Noah being famous examples, right down to the present, in the experience of Westboro Baptist Church. Look at the language. "And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as God had commanded him: and the Lord shut him in." (Gen. 7:16) Gill says: "or shut the door after him, he being the last that entered; and which he could not so well shut himself, at least so close, as was done by the Lord, or by the angels; and this was done to keep out the waters, and all within in safety; and to shut out others, AND PRESERVE NOAH FROM THE RAGE OF WICKED MEN, as well as the violence of the waters. Some have thought that not so much the door of the ark is meant, as the way to it, the pensile bridge which was necessary for the creatures to enter the ark; which being carried away by the force of the waters near the ark, that not being joined to it, PRECLUDED ALL ACCESS OF THE SCOFFERS, whose scoffs were soon turned to lamentation and howling." The pensile bridge was used to save Noah and his family from the raging mob. I love you. Amen.  
