Sunday, February 12, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  "Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun. But if a man live many years, and rejoice in them all; yet let him remember the days of darkness; for they shall be many. All that cometh is vanity. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment. Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from thy flesh; for childhood and youth are vanity. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them; While the sun, or the light, or the moon, or the stars, be not darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain; in the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are few, and those that look out of the windows be darkened, and the doors shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the grinding is low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all of the daughters of musick shall be brought low; Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall be in the way, and the almond tree shall flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall fail; because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets; Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the cistern. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was; and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it. Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher; all is vanity. And moreover, because the preacher was wise, he still taught the people knowledge; yea, he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in order many proverbs. The preacher sought to find out acceptable words; and that which was written was upright, even words of truth. The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by the masters of assemblies, which are given from one shepherd. And further, by these, my son, be admonished; of making many books there is no end; and much study is a weariness of the flesh. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter; Fear God, and keep his commandments; for this is the whole duty of man. For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil." (Eccl. 11:7-10;12:1-14.)  Such beautiful metaphoric language should be read and re-read by all ­ especially the young ­ people in the church. Who could ever forget the practicable advice to preachers. The dear Lord Jesus nicknamed Gospel preachers, Sons of Thunder, strongly suggesting proper Hell-fire and damnation preaching style. And the dying apostle Paul gave no let-up just because he happened to have an appointment with the wicked Neros executioner; to wit: "I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom; Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine. For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables." (2 Tim. 4:1-4) And many more passages of advice for preachers on how to preach; but none more valuable than that in Ecclesiastes; it covers all the bases, as they say; to wit: "Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher; all is vanity. And moreover, because the preacher was wise, he still taught the people knowledge; yea, he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in order many proverbs. The preacher sought to find out acceptable words; and that which was written was upright, even words of truth. The words of the wise are as goads (i.e., goad. A strong, sharp-pointed stick used for driving tough-skinned domestic animals, as oxen); and as nails fastened by the masters of assemblies, which are given from one shepherd. And further, by these, my son, be admonished; of making many books there is no end;  Sunday, February 12, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  and much study is a weariness of the flesh. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole  matter; fear God, and keep His commandments; for this is the whole duty of man.  For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil." Ecc. 12:8-14.  Beloved, I repeated that short section, because it contains for the first and only time, ­ I believe ­ four valuable metaphors; to wit: 1) the preachers words of truth are words of  the wise; and, 2) are as goads; and, 3) are as nails fastened by masters of assemblies;  and, 4) are all given from one Shepherd. ("We are not divided; all one body we." Verse from "Onward Christian Soldiers," All true Gospel preachers are ONE.) One Lord.  One Faith. One Baptism. One Body. One Mind. One Judgment. And we can hardly  expect ever to find these words arranged and put together better to instruct us in our duty in light of our final discovery that ALL IS VANITY; to wit: "Vanity of vanities,  saith the preacher; all is vanity. And moreover, because the preacher was wise, he  still taught the people knowledge; yea, he gave good heed (diligence and dispatch),  and sought out, and set in order many proverbs. The preacher sought to find out  acceptable words; and that which was written was upright, even words of truth. The  words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by the masters of assemblies,  which are given from one shepherd." (Eccl. 12:8-11) And in his diligent search for  good words to combat the soul-chilling, "Vanity of vanities; all is vanity,"  The Preacher, no doubt, came early upon The Psalms, and began reading ­ SOUL-  THRILLING vis-a-vis SOUL-CHILLING words of life; to wit: "Blessed is the man  that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners,  nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful." (Psa. 1:1.) BANG (!) Right out of the chute.  Blessed (i.e., Happy) is the man that walketh not in the counsel (i.e., Advice) of the  ungodly. Now, Beloved, let us examine the first verse of the First Psalm. Do you want  genuine happiness that will stand the tests of time and eternity, having promise of the  life that now is and that which is to come? (1 Tim. 4:8.)  There is a necessary inference in Psalm 1:1, to the effect that, Cursed is the man that  DOES WALK in the counsel of the ungodly, or that DOES STAND in the way of  sinners; or that DOES SIT IN THE SEAT OF THE SCORNFUL. Over the years, we  have seen many of our young people, sadly, walk in the counsel of the ungodly, stand  in the way of sinners, and sit in the seat of the scornful. Today, they are headed for Hell ­ without hope and without God in the world. AND, without any real happiness.  Sodomites control the counseling and institutionalized scorn of God in the public schools and universities of Kansas. These goofy kids who are not Gods elect fall into Satans gins, traps and snares as soon as they hit college or sooner. The Beast comes up  out of the sea in Rev. 13, and heads straight for Topeka to gobble up our traitorous  children who bid for the highest offers with biggest lies. But there is no happiness, and  as the years roll by, you will look more and more like your father the Devil and Mrs. Judas Iscariot. But take a look at Gods elect, "whose delight is in the law of the Lord;  and in His law doth he meditate day and night. And he shall be like a tree planted by  the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not  wither; that for  and the  whatsoever he doeth shall inheritance of Gods elect?  p"rTohsepeurn."goHdolywairsethnaott fsoor;hbauptpilnikeesst?h(eHcohwafsf  which the wind driveth away." "The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of  temptations [i.e., testings], and to reserve [i.e., preserve, pickle] the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished [i.e., in Hell-fire and damnation forever] (!)." 2 Peter  2:9.)  S"uTnhdeayr,eFfeobrreuatrhye12u, 2n0g12odly  shall  not  stand  in  the  judgment,"  ­  Sermon Outline...page 3 (i.e., but will be cast  forthwith into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone) ­ "nor sinners in the  cwoanygorfegthaetiounngoofdtlhyeshriaglhl tpeeoruissh. .F"o(rPtshae.  Lord loveth 1:1-6.)  the  way  of  the  righteous;  but  the  "Nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful." Institutionalized scorn is a fearful thing. But that is exactly what sitting in the seat of the scornful is; ­ and I shall try to explain it for you. Think, Prof. So-and-so, with a doctorate in theology, now occupying an endowed seat of higher learning at Harvard. With respect to the term ,,seat, to sit in the seat is to teach, to act the instructor and teacher; as in Matt. 23:1-2; to wit: "Then spake Jesus to the multitude, and to his disciples, saying, The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses' seat; All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their works; for they say, and do not." (Matt. 23:1-2) Beloved, cant you just imagine with what powerful prestige and authority Prof. Soand-so spreads his theological poison throughout the academic and religious and all other professional monkey see, monkey do worlds. "Sitteth in the seat of the scornful." Institutionalized scorn (!) I tell you, Beloved, the apostles and prophets, for the most part, held these willingly ignorant false prophets in nothing but universal contempt. And the Apostles warned that their pernicious influence would saturate the world in the last of the last days; to wit:  "This second epistle, beloved, I now write unto you; in both which I stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance; that ye may be mindful of the words which were  spoken before by the holy prophets, and of the commandment of us the apostles of the Lord and Savior; KNOWING THIS FIRST, that there shall come in the last days  scoffers, walking after their own lusts." (2 Peter 3:1-3)  Now, there have always been scoffers, and mockers, and scorners. But now it is different in the last days; or even, the last of the last days. Now the scoffers and mockers and scorners are filling all the prestigious seats of higher learning. I tell you, Beloved, it is huge. A spiritual and moral tsunami has broken loose from the bowels of the earth and will soon strike planet Earth with full force. Look for it with the Beast  from the sea in Rev. 13. I call one result, Institutionalization of mocking, scoffing and scorning of the Gospel and Gospel preachers. Take his mark or starve (!); to wit: "And  I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out of the sea, having seven  hofeabdlassapnhdemteyn."h(oRrenvs.,  and upon his horns 13:1.) Whatever else  ten the  crowns, and introduction  upon of the  his heads horns and  the name crowns in  describing the Beast may mean; it is now crystal clear that the gloves are off. The  Westboro Baptist Church is now engaged in all out spiritual war with the political powers of Earth. And the weapons of our warfare are not carnal ­ but mighty. To wit:  "For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh; (for the weapons of  our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong  holds;) Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against  the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of  Christ." (2 Cor. 10:3-5.)  Furthermore, we at Westboro Baptist Church rejoice and praise the Lord that He has called us into this grand spiritual battle with the heavenly guarantee that we will triumph gloriously in it; and that we are more than conquerors through Him that loved us; to wit: "Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us.  Sunday, February 12, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress? or  persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it is written, For thy  sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.  NAY, IN ALL THESE THINGS, WE ARE MORE THAN CONQUERORS through  Him that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor  principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor  depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God,  which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." (Rom. 8:33-39) What a long and exhaustive list  of eternal blessings from our Father. Whereby we are MORE THAN CONQUERORS.  Beloved. These are more than mere words on paper. They are solid, rock-ribbed promises, made to us from Him who cannot lie; and sealed to us by two immutable things in which it was impossible for God to lie. I tell you, Beloved, we must close with Almighty God on these matters of vital religion. We must pray, and we must expect our prayers to be answered; and then we must express our profoundest thanksgiving to our Father for answering our prayers. And we must humble ourselves under the mighty hand of God, that He may exalt us in due season; or else we may expect God to resist us in our ways ­ a thing not to be experienced; to wit:  "Likewise, ye younger, submit yourselves unto the elder. Yea, all of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility; for God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble. Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time." (1 Pet. 5:5,6)  Beloved, our Father has given us a specific cause for thanksgiving, and it is because He ALWAYS CAUSES US TO TRIUMPH IN CHRIST. We cannot make too much of this spiritual asset, in the midst of our constant, deadly, spiritual warfare and travels; to wit: "Furthermore, when I came to Troas to preach Christ's gospel, and a door was opened unto me of the Lord, I had no rest in my spirit, because I found not Titus my brother; but taking my leave of them, I went from thence unto Macedonia. NOW THANKS BE UNTO GOD, WHICH ALWAYS CAUSETH US TO TRIUMPH IN CHRIST.'" (2 Cor. 2:12-14)  Beloved, we must strive to maintain the spirit of thanksgiving and conquest; which, after all, is the fact of the matter. "Speaking to each other in psalms, and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord; Giving thanks asulwbamyisttfinorg ayloluthrsienlgvsesuonntoe GtoodanaontdhetrheinFtahteheferairn othf eGnoadm."e(Eofpohu. r5:L1o9r-d2lJ.)esTuhseCphroripset;r note is struck in Psalm 47; to wit: "O clap your hands, all ye people; shout unto God with the voice of triumph. For the Lord most high is terrible; he is a great king over all the earth. He shall subdue the people under us, and the nations under our feet. He shall choose our inheritance for us, the excellency of Jacob whom he loved. Selah. God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a trumpet. Sing praises to God, sing praises; sing praises unto our King, sing praises. For God is the king of all the earth; sing ye praises with understanding. God reigneth over the heathen; God sitteth upon the throne of his holiness. The princes of the people are gathered together, even the people of the God of Abraham; for the shields of the earth belong unto God; he is greatly exalted." (Psa. 47:1-9)  I love you. Amen.  
