Sunday, March 25, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 1  Westboro Baptist Church in Topeka is an Old School or Primitive Baptist Church. It has existed in this Godforsaken place known as Topeka, KS, for fifty-seven years now; conducting public worship and preaching services every Sunday, year in and year out. Listen: "But Esaias is very bold, and saith ...All day long I have stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying people." Rom. 10:20-21. "Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; but ye have set at nought all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear cometh; when your fear cometh as desolation, and your destruction cometh as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish cometh upon you. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me: for that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the LORD: ...Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices. For the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them." Prov. 1:24-32.  I do not know for sure exactly when God Almighty wrote "Ichabod" over this evil place and its evil people, but it is abundantly clear that he has done so. The term "Ichabod" in the scripture means the glory of God has departed from this place. The significance of God, in this figure, writing "Ichabod" over a society is that God has abandoned that society because they have repeatedly sinned against great light. 1 Sam. 4:21. Further, some powerful external evidence is given from God himself that he has abandoned that society and has given them over to a reprobate mind and to vile affections. Rom. 1:24,26. Some historical landmarks and signposts are obvious.  This evil town was established Dec. 5, 1854, by Cyrus K. Holiday and eight other men. About thirty-one years later, in 1885, a young preacher, fresh out of Amherst College in MA, came here to teach Greek at what was then known as Lincoln College. And that young preacher was one of my kin, also named Fred Phelps. He was a professor of New Testament Greek at Lincoln College in Topeka from 1885 to 1892. No one dared call themselves "Ichabods" at that time. At least some fear of God and at least some knowledge of the scriptures obtained in Topeka in those days. At least in its early years, it appears that Topeka and KS may have been God-fearing. But no more. "Ichabod" is written here now, and the people gladly and freely arrogate unto themselves, and with pride, the fearful appellation of "Ichabod": "The glory of God has departed from this place and we are proud of it."  As I say, I do not know for sure exactly when God Almighty abandoned this evil place to its sins and finally wrote "Ichabod" over this city, but the evidence is overwhelming that he has done so. At some time prior to July 1, 1963, the decision was made, in the providence of God, to brand Topeka with the mark of the beast: 666. Rev. 13:18. And it was at that time, that is July 1, 1963, that every piece of mail entering and leaving Topeka was decreed to be stamped or imprinted with the number, 666. And, at this time the year round average of such pieces of mail comes to about ten million per week.  Sunday, March 25, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 2  Think of it: about ten million times each week on the average, this evil city is publicly and officially branded with the mark of the beast: 666. And, think of it: throughout America this evil city is known as the home of the "Ichabods."  And think of it: throughout the world this evil city is known as the world capital of modern psychiatry; that satanic system of pseudo-science or "science falsely so called" as it is referred to in the Bible (1 Tim. 6:20); otherwise identified in the Bible as that certain system of sorcery (Rev. 18:23); pretending to usurp the prerogatives of God himself as the exclusive searcher of the human mind (Jer. 17:10). And think of it: this city calls itself the Golden City, knowing that God had stamped ancient Babylon as the Golden City. And, of no other place on earth can these four things be said than Topeka, KS.  1. The home of the "Ichabods."  2. The city officially identified as to locatability with the zip code of 666, the mark of the beast.  3. The world capital of modern psychiatry.  4. Topeka calls itself, officially, the Golden City.  On every piece of literature, on every vehicle, including every police car that continually patrols the city; well-knowing that God had stamped ancient Babylon ­ the standing symbol of the enemy of Jerusalem ­ as The Golden City; to wit: "That thou shalt take up this proverb against the king of Babylon, and say, How hath the oppressor ceased! The Golden City ceased!" (Isa. 14:4) "The LORD hath sworn ... Surely I will never forget any of their works. Shall not the land tremble for this, and everyone mourn that dwelleth therein? And it shall rise up wholly as a flood; and it shall be cast out and drowned, as by the flood of Egypt. ...And I will turn your feasts into mourning, and all your songs into lamentation; and I will bring up sackcloth upon ...every head; and I will make it as [when one mourns for the death] of an only son, and the end thereof as a bitter day." (Amos 8:7-10) Certain unmistakable signs accompany the abandonment of a society by God Almighty. And, they include the following:  1. God gives them up to uncleanness through the lust of their own minds.  2. God gives them up unto vile affections, so that the natural order of family life breaks down.  3. God gives them over to a reprobate mind to do those things which are not decent or fitting such that they become a notoriously indecent, trashy, low-life kind of people. Rom. 1:24,26, & 28.  Further, when God Almighty abandons a society of people he appoints over them governmental and political leaders who are base. Dan. 4:17. And, religious leaders who are low. 1 Kgs. 13:33. And all of these things perfectly describe the present situation in this world. I believe I know many of the political and religious leaders in America; and I am satisfied that those now listening to my voice know many of them. Without any question they are one and all the basest of the base and the lowest of the low. That word, "base," as used in the scriptures, means: morally inferior, unworthy, ignoble, mean, and low-down.  Sunday, March 25, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 3  And that word, "low," as used in the scriptures, means and signifies in the extreme at the uttermost end, and means simply: the lowest of the low, the low-downdest of the low-down. And such, my friend, are the political and religious leaders of this world. They are the most inferior, the most morally corrupt, the meanest, the most ignoble, the low-downdest human scum in the barrel of human scum.  Mark Twain said of Congress, that it was a stud farm for jackasses. What would Mark Twain say of the political and religious leaders of this Godforsaken world if he could come back and behold them as they exist in 2012? When President Coolidge asked Will Rogers to tell him the latest jokes, Will Rogers said he didn't need to because Coolidge had most of the latest jokes in his Cabinet and in the Congress. What would Will Rogers say about the bad jokes that have been variously elected or appointed to run the government and the churches in this evil generation? Well, whatever they might or might not say, I can tell you with great plainness of speech what God Almighty has said. Listen: "This matter is by the decree of the watchers, and the demand by the word of the holy ones: to the intent that the living may know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will, and setteth up over it the basest of men." (Dan. 4:17)  My friend, if you know nothing else about the Bible, you should know Dan. 4:17. The most High God rules and controls all human government, and gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the basest of men. Hear that. Every officeholder and governmental official on earth, was set in his position by God Almighty. Every king, president, judge, legislator, kick off all the names and titles; the most High rules over all human government, and gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the basest of men. Dan. 4:17. The basest of men, in the vernacular of our day, means: morally inferior, mean, low-down human scum. The low-downdest human slime available for the job.  The meaning is crystal clear: God Almighty as an absolute sovereign has and exercises the royal prerogative to install governmental leaders over a reprobate society of people who are nothing but human scum, as one way of punishing that society for their sins. And such, I submit to you, is the case in this Godless world. In accordance with Dan. 4:17, and the grand old doctrine of the absolute sovereignty of God, this evil world have got just what they deserve; in the fact that, without exception, the officeholders; from the presidents, to the legislature, to the judges; are a bunch of human scum, the lowest of the low; which is the literal meaning of the term, "the basest of men." And if you ever claimed to believe the Bible in all of your miserable life you should hear and heed Dan. 4:17. Because it is written: "This matter is by the decree of the watchers, and the demand by the word of the holy ones: to the intent that the living may know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will, and setteth up over it the basest of men." (Dan. 4:17)  Hear that. He sets up over it the basest of men; the low-downdest scum available in the population. Just look at the collection of cowards and sodomites and adulterers and fornicators and idolaters who make up the Congress and who constitute the President's appointees, and who occupy the judicial benches of this nation.  Sunday, March 25, 2012  Sermon Outline...page 4  I know them, and you know them; they are living proof of this passage of scripture. They manifestly ratify and verify this pronouncement of the Almighty. They are indeed the basest of men. And you fine people who make up the population of this apostate world fully deserve such scum to rule over you. They are intellectually weak, morally perverted, and spiritually depraved. Thus they are helpless to cope with the grave issues facing us in these last days before the coming of Jesus Christ. And, rather than intelligently and courageously addressing the weighty issues of AIDS, sodomy, wholesale murder of unborn babies, judicial bribery and the fact that our courts have now been closed to the poor; they are even now scheming as to how they can silence this preacher and close the doors of the Westboro Baptist Church. Fat chance!  Human government in its bald depravity is nothing other than the scarlet colored beast of Rev. 12 and 17; which postures itself continually in opposition to the Church of Jesus Christ, with the stated intention of destroying the elect of God in the earth. Rev. 12:4. And upon which the great whore of false religious systems rides in mock and fleeting triumph. Rev. 17:3. Listen to these words from the final sermon of the martyr Stephen: "Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye. Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and they have slain them which shewed before of the coming of the Just One; of whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers: Who have received the law by the disposition of angels, and have not kept it. When they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed on Stephen with their teeth." (Acts 7:51-54)  I now turn attention to the religious leaders of this world. In addition to God sending to you the basest of mankind to be your political leaders, he has sworn also to send the lowest of mankind to be your religious leaders. Listen: "After this thing Jeroboam returned not from his evil way, but made again of the lowest of the people priests of the high places: whosoever would, he consecrated him, and he became one of the priests of the high places. And this thing became sin unto the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to destroy it from off the face of the earth." (1 Kgs. 13:33-34) You should understand that the days of Jeroboam, in the 9th Century B.C., were days of declension and apostasy very like the days in which we live. Jeroboam was a weak ruler and an opportunistic politician, who led the people further down the road of departure from God to shore up his flagging economy. And, since it is always the leaders of any people who dictate and control public dialogue, and who set the public agenda; including those who control the press and the news media; it was very easy for Jeroboam to powerfully influence the selection of the religious leaders, and he used that influence to assure that the religious leaders were the lowest of the people. That word "lowest" is the operative word in that passage of scripture. It signifies the outer edge or extremity of a thing; that is, the lowest possible, or the lowest of the low; in moral character.  The lesson is crystal clear: the religious leaders, in days of apostasy, are always the lowest human scum in the population. They are intellectually weak and servile; and they are morally corrupt and timid. And that description, my friend, perfectly fits the preachers, imams, priests and the rabbis that control the religious institutions of this world.  I love you. Amen.  
